The state Senate dear president
pro tem Stewart and members of
the Senate I have signed the
state Senate bill forty seven as
twenty three respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham.
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth states that next
order of business I thank you Mr
president Nixon we go that our
business committee reports on
that order of business committee
reports the reader to read Mr
submitted senator George moon
Jooss chairman.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president him sent
it three to be allowed to read
amended to pass.
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty seven as
amended do pass.
Senator Wirth.
move adoption committee reports
we have a motion to death
Committee reports all those in
favor signify by saying aye
Mr president George Disher
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one twenty
as amended Senate bill three oh
seven as amended has had them
under consideration and reports
cliff R. Pirtle co chairs
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report we have a
motion to have the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
bill one twenty as amended and
Senate bill three oh seven as
amended.
The reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate memorial fifty
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report we have a
body that the officer the Senate
have signed an open session
central moral fifty two.
The reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one eighty
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
announce to the members of the
body that the this is the Senate
sign in open session Senate bill
one eighty two as amended.
The reader to read.
under consideration reports that
same have been and duly and
rolled and then grossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
the committee report we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Of those propose nay the eyes
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill nine.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go their business
the Senate will come to order.
Mr president Nancy is concerned
that the rules this is been of
the eternal show all those
present in this morning session
are present in this afternoon
Committee.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president having eleven fifty
nine AM movie journal to twelve
session there's no objection it
is so ordered Mr president
accidents consent that the rules
we suspended the record show
that the journals and read in
full and approve subject to
Gonzalez until they return to
the chamber hearing no objection
so ordered.
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Wirth tickets the next order of
business thank you Mr president
so couple of things that we're
let me give a road map for what
we're gonna do tonight we can do
the concurrence counters a
little later if we need to get
everyone here I'm happy to work
with folks on the other side
we're going to go first on third
back to our calendar from the
today and we're going to do ten
items starting with number
twenty one is going to go
through them so folks have a
there number two will be house
number twenty two house bill one
ninety seven senator Neville
number three will be number
twenty three house bill three oh
four Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
committee substitute for house
Bill fifty three that Senator
Rodriguez.
Item number six will be numbers
twenty six that's house bill one
Item eight is House Bill three
eighty nine number to it twenty
eight that'll be center Hamblen
item nine is house bill four
eleven number twenty nine
souls so that's the plan and
again I really what we'll see
how we're doing again I don't
want to keep us here super late
tonight and I'll certainly work
Mr president.
for unanimous consent that we
seen eighteen a and I didn't
hear anyone object.
So I was on my way home and so
until then to come back so I'm a
jumping up and down doing
jumping jacks objecting so we
weren't able to do it and
unanimous consent.
Is present you know I I Senator
confused
No so should I make the motion
again so we can all go home when
we were done the budgets done
that house Concord.
Honestly we can go home I do
just go home this one really
important bill over there but
thank thank you Mr president and
I I hope we have a wonderful
evening tonight having fun and
getting the work done so
majority floor leader Peter
Wirth thank you Mr is what we're
gonna do is we're going to to to
concurrence calendars and then I
think what we'll do a few house
bill's first before we go to the
Ortiz Pino we're going to do
those those house bill's after
we get done with the concurrence
of property three house built in
the jump over the tax bill so
with that Mr present Ms that we
percent of bills to fifteen as
amended Senator McKenna those
are watching on the webcast we
president I move that the Senate
conquer in house amendments to
Senate bill two one.
Two one five as amended.
Committee substitute Senate bill
two one five as amended.
Hearing no objection Center
mechanical explain to us what
And Mister president we struck
comment our concurrence this was
just a drafting error so we're
good with this amendment.
Is there any debate and a
discussion on the inbound the
concurrence.
See none Senator Canada close.
I move we can Kerr Mr president
all those in favor of this
motion.
Sorry about that Mister
president.
for Senate bill two fifteen as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
is concurrence counter number
six Senate bill one sixty the
transfer transportation
functions from the PRC and ideal
Senator Neville senator bill
thank you Mr president Mr
explain what those amendments
were Mr president we just felt
as time with as we went through
the committee process that the
time was not adequate to
accomplish the transition of
a year and a half from now and
it is a temporary provision to
allow them to adopt rules during
that time frame that's what it
does Mr president thank you
senator Neville is there any
amendment to Senate bill one six
is amended.
Thank you senator bill and just
renew its consent.
A request for unanimous consent
nobody objected the Senate has
adopted the amendments to Senate
bill one sixty as amended thank
you senator Neville.
Senator Senator was ready to
Senate Majority forty feet or to
think is that next order of
business thank you Mr president
unanimous consent within a
business announcements and
miscellaneous around that order
business announces miscellaneous
amendments and and something we
might change on that so we're
gonna start with a number to
that of the Center novella will
do a couple House Bills and then
Centerville thank you Mr
president Mr president as mask
unanimous consent that the
record showed all action for
placing house bill one ninety
seven final passage is been
pages of two words to word
amendment to were change I have
the whole department of of you
and Ms biology department
outside as expert witnesses are
brought in the wildlife section
Thank you senator Neville.
Centerville's you wish to have
your expert witnesses come into
the chamber of the bus has not
pulled into the parking lot yet
bill one ninety seven and one
which is debate.
Senator Baca did you wish to
debate.
No Mr present I've all I'll be a
withdrawal I was gonna ask that
thank you Mr president senator
bill yield set avail Jio Mr
president I would but the bus is
not quite a loaded I don't know
if I can handle any have a
question questions Mister
idea that you came up with when
you were knocking doors and
somebody said Gee we need an
extra day.
Yes it was after some extensive
He's got me I just can't come
back after that one.
That
You really got to have a strong
imagination to get there thank
president Senator Senator for
the units consent to excuse a
Senator Hemphill inTaos returns
the chamber hearing no objection
senator bill to close Mr
president I wish you wouldn't do
present voted in the furnace of
those voting the negative I show
hands.
That's house bill one ninety
seven is amended.
Senator CSCs please where
By a vote of thirty five the
Fuhrman is in the negative house
bill one ninety seven has duly
passed the Senate senator
Neville thank you Mr president
my experts have diverted to
house bill one three oh four you
know you'll to Senator Ortiz if
you know.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show all action
Senator is a federal explained
about Mr president House Bill
three oh four makes it possible
needs trust the way it is now
it's it's it's a spouse and this
would make it possible for
somebody to set up a trust and
be able to continue to that
child who is the a of special
needs person.
And if that'll send for
questions thank you senator
anticipate a Senators we're
debating house bill three oh
Bill three oh four do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate the records show the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
if you know thank you very much
Mr president members of the
Senate will go on on the next
item on the calendar that's
going to be item number twenty
four for house bill one seventy
five and you'll to Santonio
one seventy five as amended be
put on final passage has been
taken in that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
Here no objection Senator
and all thirteen of our judicial
districts across the state for
if two thousand twenty three for
example the sentencing
commission awarded two point
three million in crime reduction
requests to introduce
that stand for questions thank
you senator nail Senators
remaining house bill one seventy
five is amended.
Say no debate center near close
that the record show that the
roll then called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in a
negative by a show of hands
By a vote of thirty six in the
going to be house bill fifty
three and you'll to center the
biggest.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent to this.
Bill fifty three as amended on
be put on final passage has or
has been taken and that is now
so we should debate amendment or
people who have diabetes as are
actually able to access services
and equipment delivery as
necessary it clarifies coverage
adequate for this terrible
disease that is time sensitive
and people don't get the
services and the equipment they
need that their life depends on
Rodriguez to close Mr president
I move that house health and
Human Services Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty three is amended do
voting all Senator seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty seven a for
manager on the negative health.
Human Services Committee subs
six that's house bill one eighty
six you know you'll to Senator
Brandt.
As soon as the Senate the record
show that the actions for
placing.
Senate House Bill sorry one
I
see no objections Senator Brandt
to explain.
times it but this one act we
actually mean it
our constitution says that if
you're a hundred percent
disabled that are and you do not
have to pay property taxes in
the state of New Mexico.
We have a little bit of a
This actually happened to me a
couple years ago and since I'm
not planning on buying any new
properties in New Mexico
planning stay in the house that
I meant until I as long as I'm
in New Mexico.
This won't actually apply to me.
percent disabled you do not have
to pay property taxes this bill
clarifies that make sure the
veterans will no longer be
charge property taxes even our
constitution says it's
constitutionally
unconstitutional to charge
I see no debate Senator Brandt
to close.
the record show that the rules
been called all those present
voted informative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands Senators tier seats
we're voting.
I have a lot of thirty six
informative on the negative
house bill one eighty six as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Brandt.
Thank you members of the Senate
we're gonna go on to item number
twenty seven that's house bill
two twenty nine.
And I yield to center how to
mail Mr president ask unanimous
seeing no objection center how
to mail Mr president this is an
agency cleanup bill this bill
will clean up language that will
assist the agency with
dollars every year.
Thank you senator Senator would
like to request unanimous
consent to allow your expert
witnesses in the chamber.
Mr president unanimous consent
Jennifer contentious.
I see no objections.
Senator is very debating house
bill two twenty nine we do have
will that now use GSD risk pool
money to cover that bond cost in
case or something happens Mr
president Senator no.
Mr present so this is the bond
that you have to get with your
license that you required to do
and we're getting rid of that
bond I I know bonds are hard to
little bit more less fear and
not have to carry liability
insurance because you have a
bond on top of that case
happened.
Senate Mr president know the
insurance will cover it and the
only to bond.
Mr president that is correct.
Thank you Mr president any
further debate centers.
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands centers where voting to
item on the calendar that's
going to be item number twenty
eight and I yield to senator
Hamblen thank you Mr president
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended in that the
record show that all actions
bill thank you Mr president and
the Senate body in the past I've
had the honor of serving on the
board of directors for the Missy
Valley Community of Hope an
agency that provides services
for individuals experiencing
or stolen not having an ID
prevents them from getting
needed assistance opening a bank
account renting an apartment
when they get their financial
assistance and more so what this
does is this of this bill says
And at that point Mr president I
look forward to the discussion
of the debate thank you senators
are debating house bill three
eighty nine as amended.
Senate the record show that the
rules been called in all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senators we're voting to your
seats please if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative to in the negative
house bill three eighty nine as
amended has duly passed the
Senate center Hamblen thank you
Mr president thank you Senate
body when I go on to item number
action for placing House Bill
for eleven as amended on final
passage is been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
process increases funding
resources for those interested
engaging in the profession of
engineering and improve the
affordability for the entry of
broadens funding use to allow
equipment purchases it adds a
new first in the nation
expedited career surer path.
professional surveyors Mr Mr
president and members of the
body you might remember about
three years ago this bill was
amended by who became known as
house bill four eleven as
amended Senator Steinborn thank
you Mr president of the center
you Senator Griggs deals.
Absolutely thank you Mr
scholarship come from.
This presentation that funding
comes from the engineering
association engineers
I
no further debate Senator Griggs
to close on the bill.
Misprision I move that house
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
centers where voting tier seats
please.
By a vote of thirty seven the
house bill two sixteen all
you'll to Center souls thank you
Mr president I a.
Do now pass as consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing House
legislative education study
committee currently has
jurisdiction over K. twelve
twelve education in teacher
preparation programs what this
cover the education portion of
the early childhood education
and care department and also
higher education the Ellie it
the education committee's when
we're in session here all of
senator Morris thank you in this
present rise and support of this
we pass this before it's
something that's critical to
have continuity of this the
studies of education for some
through the lifetime of
educational spending that we're
doing so I stand in support of
this thank you Mr president
thank you senator Morris any
further debate senators.
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the rules been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
Senator is more voting tier
seats please.
to item number twenty one and
that's going to be house bill
one oh six and are you able to
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
when six has amended
To explain the bill.
increases the maximum amount of
attention that a member in the
P. E. R. A. system is permitted
to earn.
Article twenty section twenty
two of the New Mexico
constitution requires that prior
to any increase in pay and
pension benefits or any changes
Senate pension benefits that
was contracted by the P. R.
eight an independent
organization to analyze the
change while there is an initial
cost it is.
longer it will even out so that
it that this change does not
have a significant or much of an
effect on the on the.
Fund ability the the.
Mr Mr president I stand for
questions thank you Senator
Lopez we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
the amendment.
Madam I'm sorry Mr president.
Looking at floor leader I move
US Senate floor amendment number
there is a similar bill that in
the state in that same house
that I have in the and competing
bills only to happen so I would
like to strike the Senate
member number one and I'll yield
to the sponsor Senator Sedillo
Lopez and to send their Baca
centers the office Mr president
that is a friendly amendment.
We are in the bay percent of our
and they were upset that they
were taken out so I really
applaud the sponsor of this
amendment for putting them back
in because it wasn't a good
policy public policy reason for
taking them out thank you Mr
know that correctional officers
especially those on the
frontlines of our prisons and
and correctional institutions
are among some of the lowest
rate in the state and so I would
center many of us you know Mr
president when I served on a
task force in the summer with
the state police and went
through the whole process they
came up with their tension built
in recruitment bills and so we
to get me out of the room too
much and so we're going to have
this back in well we realize a
state police say and public
safety are near and dear to our
heart there we know their
copycat stuff in in change stuff
this this is what happens at the
last minute so Mister president
with that I move Senate foreman
meant to house bill one of six
take place Senator will just do
Mostly though you smoked.
Has been a request.
Senator request for voice vote
affected the floor amendment to
house bill one of six is now
twice amended we're back on the
bill we're debating the bill
Senators.
opponent of double dipping has a
has a way of dealing with our
shortage but this are up but
this is a really good bill
because what it does is it adds
roll work longer and and to be
in our stay longer and hopefully
groom the next generation to
take their place so with that Mr
And I ask for a baby okay yes
and I ask for a vote of course
it.
please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative on the negative
house bill one of six is twice
amended has duly passed the
Senate centers the elements
thank you Mr president thank you
madam members of the Senate I
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president given the.
Role we were on right there with
the house bill's we're gonna do
one more bill tonight and that's
the bill on the supplemental
calendar
that is a.
bill tonight's and so with that
Mr president is because that we
go to that our business third
reading of legislation I yield
to Senator Shendo grammar how
item number one we're on that
order business serving
record show that all action for
placing House tax revenue
committee of.
On on final passage has been
taken and that is the subject to
debate amendment or substitution
sorry that's okay session of
On the start with the floor
amendments that were made to the
increased the rebates to five
hundred dollars for it will I
income earners no because of the
marginal tax rates all New
Mexicans who receive personal
income tax cut.
This amendment also includes a
technical fix on the effective
dates for the compensating Tax.
thirty thousand of military
retirement pay and then the
third amendment is indexes to
inflation income level to
qualify for social security
income taxes inflation so the
forty seven the income tax no
income tax increases rate
reductions at the bottom
resulted in tax reductions for
all taxpayers for medium New
six hundred rebates plus more
with elector child tax credits
and potentially more.
Capital gains of this change
allows all income regardless of
states for this change retains a
forty percent deduction as it
came over but that will be
reduced to twenty percent in the
Senate amendments the gross
three point four percent the
first three eighths of a percent
or in fiscal year twenty four
and the final eighth is in
fiscal twenty five by lowering
system to five point nine
percent.
And then
the motor vehicle excise tax
currently the fifty nine point
three nine percent of the
refer to this local roads the
twenty five percent begins in
fiscal year twenty four and the
seven I begin seventy five
percent begins in the fiscal
year twenty five.
Four of ten million point eight
ten point eight million
aggregate.
Well the percent share of the
text issues into existence funds
going down a dollar amount
innovation fund received the
largest share of the contacts
and the according to HSD be able
to bring in Medicaid matching
funds.
programs behavior health
interventions support for
victims and tribes.
Tobacco six on the back wall
removed to preferential
treatment of cigars currently
all cigars regardless of the
price and and I will be taxed at
twenty four percent just like
the other cheap cigars and
tobacco products.
So now I'm gonna go over the the
deduction for school supplies
purchased by public school
teachers.
Under renewable side creates
digital thermal electricity
generation income tax credit the
geothermal electricity
Also of indeed in the area
renewable extensive geothermal
ground coupled heat pumps Tax X.
pumps for the credit Rita and
reduces the cap to eight
million.
On the film it increases the.
The annual aggregate cap an
additional amount of tax credits
additional five percent on rural
productions.
On the health area.
Find so G. R. T. deduction for
one third of receipts of
one third receipts for services
provided by counseling and
therapy practitioners.
In the tobacco area imposes a
thirty one percent tax rate on
the E. liquid E. cigarettes and
cartridges.
No gross receipts creates a G.
R. T. encompass it affects
production FOR di diesel used
for agricultural purposes.
And then on the corporate income
tax removes a single sales
factor.
five year sunset two of five to
censor and add to trigger N. G.
R. T. revenues fall below ninety
five percent.
So at this time of the.
So that's kind of the overview
Introduce your expert witnesses
are join us yes this evening I'm
joined by.
Ismael Torres and Jennifer far
beyond with the LFC.
revenues to for House Bill five
forty seven as four times
amended and we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendments.
Amendment sponsored by senator
William E. share.
Senator to move and explain the
amendment.
Mr president I move Senate floor
explain what you're what is
member does.
So first Mr president there has
been some.
Confusion here is they're
handing out the amendment and
equipment are going back and
forth.
at a different tool to numbers
that's the same the word to the
same on all of them so
essentially of what this does is
it removes any and all reference
Of gross misunderstanding of
capital gains tax and what it
means and who does it and
millionaires and all of that
stuff.
In New Mexico it's the family
business it's the rancher the
farm it's the little
Mr president Senator just
explaining the amendments when
you're done explaining amendment
will go to the sponsor and go
back to okay so so what the
business that's been owned and
operated by the family.
For decades thirty five years of
the small family business.
sometimes worrying if they can
make pay roll next week.
Taking loans out mortgaging
their own house so that they can
keep the business alive.
Working late worrying about the
taxes.
Four thirty thirty five forty
years the small family
businesses been operating that
way.
And what this gross receipts tax
says.
Is that even though you went
through decades of building a
business decades of hiring
When we decide we're gonna tax.
Capital gains like this what we
mean is we're taking the money
from that small family business.
After thirty five or forty years
of bleeding and sweating and
crying.
that family who's been running a
business.
Has been paid in more than their
fair share in literal blood
sweat and tears.
I knew this rancher once this
was decades ago now.
He sold his ranch for million
dollars in this was in nineteen
day I was worried.
Could I keep my ranch alive
could I feed my family could I
pay the power bills could I make
sure that the livestock was
taken care of properly could I
I've been living as a Popper my
whole life.
And now we're saying under this
capital gains.
Investment guy no in New Mexico
it's the small family business
it's the small ranch.
It's the small farm.
And so it just doesn't make
sense to me that right now
especially right now.
On that small family business.
And so all this does is it
protects the small family
all it Senator Shendo tell me
that's a friendly amendment will
do it by voice vote Senator
debating senator member number
one.
Senator Shendo
this is an unfriendly amendment.
We have some debate on the
amendment will have Senator
Kernan photo by Senator Gallegos
David centers committee on the
amendment Senator Kernan.
wrong came over from the house I
think it was in better shape
than where we're going and I
know Senator sure talked about
small businesses and and
basically was talking about
of money with that business and
but as years go by it increases
in value a little bit when you
sell it I learned a lot about
capital gains tax and I will
business that you're running it
was about to.
Pretty good bit of money less
than what you had so this really
does affect small businesses and
And in this particular case I
certainly believe that the house
might be the better way so I
encourage you to really take
this seriously I know we have a
lot of fun on this floor that
already left New Mexico so this
could be just one more reason to
pack up and head on over across
the state line because I
guarantee you that have tax
lawyers and they're going to
bill that I think number one
this is the one thing that is
very short sighted and we've
just got to do something so
very much we do have further
debate we're on the amendment
etcetera Gallegos followed by
Senator meetings and seminars
and Senator Ingle.
was listening to your
introduction on your amendment
what it does I want to give you
a little bit of background to
see if this does affect us so
truck one of motor grader in the
business was.
The function of his wife or
owners wife was hairdresser and
she provided funds for them to
get penalized for years and
years of working hard trying to
provide for their family and
others is that how I understood
We can't sort out the difference
between a high powered Wall
Street banker.
And a family business in
Southeast New Mexico.
Will now be taxed.
Forty percent of whatever they
sell at four in in personal
income tax on everything else.
people to work because they
built a community because they
helped the state.
In the local community.
Under this we decided that.
I appreciate that I just wanted
caution the body of from my
office for from our office to
the Texas state line is
basically six miles Mr president
presents are Senator Mr
president a you would have to be
there for your first and then
and then you can avoid.
This of.
as this bill goes forward I will
stand in support of your
amendment as this goes forward
I'll have to look into I tried
to look into long term assets
have Senator Ortiz followed by
Senator among us thing is
present with the amendment
sponsor you cynosure detailed
yes Mr president so Mister
presidents etcetera so we are in
And so if your asset is
appreciating just due to
inflation.
And you sell it.
ten percent because of inflation
nothing else.
Then you're going to be taxed on
that.
As a gain which means nothing.
inflated number that means
nothing Mr president members
that we should not be taxed
people on inflation.
I mean especially right now I
is which is great you know I I I
I don't want to talk about that
now that that's fine but to to
do this now in a period of rapid
asset that is.
So at major major problem with
that I think we should revisit
it in well I don't know when
inflation comes down.
the my my last comment on that
the size not taxing people cause
inflation that's not I mean we
did it anyway they just seems
nonsensical to me the second
thing is we just passed a bill
in entrepreneurship.
They are starting a business and
they want to grow that business
they're not getting paid on on a
wage.
company into a more valuable
company that's what
entrepreneurship is about and I
find it very odd is that I think
entrepreneurship today in the
very same day we are creating
policy to destroy
entrepreneurship.
It's it's just simple math this
can and we talked about choice
right in the medical malpractice
we we talked about a free
economy where businesses can
look where they're going to
invest.
And they're gonna look at our at
our other policies you know for
stifling entrepreneurship so
it's just not not the time I I
think it's a valuable debate.
I really do
and and onward thank you thanks
committee if you have further
debate centering us on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr president in and I
business will help you we're
going to lend you money we're
going to get you started we
passed probably fifteen
entrepreneur built with credits
in offering loans and everything
your bill that is probably have
a family and your family moves
forward and and you do that you
keep investing in New Mexico
that comes a point in time where
taxed on the sale.
And for us to work a lifetime.
People work lifetimes building
their their empires and we're
owners don't really care carry a
lot of insurance.
The plan for the Hoelscher
insurance you thing Medicaid
gonna kick in and help you and
Let me live the rest of my life
at this age and then Uncle Sam
walks in and says we want part
Make a lot of money invest
whatever it is real estate
construction technologies.
If you have to happen to have a
company you're taxed at a higher
rate.
If you come in New Mexico and
you want a lifespan of hard work
I know I rent a house here in
Santa Fe they're they're taking
those rental houses in their May
those are investments for them
and hopefully the reporting
day they've borrowed money paid
interest maintain the house try
to make a profit paid off and
then we're gonna taxable capital
gains.
say I don't have much at fifty
had a cow's are hundred cals and
I got ten thousand acres and I
want this to go to my family.
that's that's a hard life to to
to do that Senator Wirth that
she is not on the land
investments but I mean you work
hard even on cattle but for
gonna tax capital gains in New
we're going to tax you at a
higher rate.
I probably did agree with some
of the stuff that came over from
the house we usually talked
about increasing the personal
income tax by one percent.
to swallow it and the day when
you're building your nest egg
and planning on retirement so Mr
president I stand supported
then.
Thank you Mr president I
Senator Williams said a lot of
the things that I want to say
but I have the.
We're seemingly harmless or
maybe had some kind of a merit
to them.
But a bill like this believe me.
Believe me.
That will be upset about this
and remember this.
And when here are people that
have supported you in the
is really really going to hurt
them.
In person in a way that is
different than a straight tax
they worked all our lives to
With the state that has billions
in revenue.
Billions in revenue.
This year.
And probably in the next few
years.
that is talked about by other
businesses that are coming here.
For the legislature can do to
you.
Not going to be something that
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president and the
thank you Senator for bringing
president on the on the last
bill on house bill one oh six
Mister president
mmhm an amendment was brought
forward and it was brought
house bill one of six for
accepting that as a friendly
amendment and what we did there
is we took those individuals the
state police corrections
in one group or another but
really this is exactly the same
choice of it's just a different
type of retirement.
individual who is every month
having deducted from their
paycheck their retirement
working hard twenty twenty five
years looking forward to did a
that's every individual every
individual all New Mexicans
state employees private
employees and business owners.
their sweat equity they're
investing in their business and
they're looking for retirement.
And just like the state
employees that we helped out in
house bill one oh six just
this business and now we're
going to come in and we're going
to take a portion of that in
taxes okay.
Fair enough that happens what
Mr president I don't know I
don't know I think that that
looking at that reasonable
person might might think that
that is just outlandish.
are people just like anybody
else working investing to retire
for the future.
next bill coming slash this I
think could be a mistake Mr
president hope everybody gives
this deep thought.
Growing our economy those are
Just like the employee of the
state the server the public.
Thank you Mr president.
We do have further debate we
have center to subpoena on the
share a lot of credit is a very
clever amendment it goes through
the entire bill and makes
numerous changes that is focused
on one the capital gains but
half he he changes the tax on
cigars that we the the there are
multiple changes in in the bill
that the change the work of the
capital gains tax for the poor
struggling farmer who built up
his his little mini empire and
then has to pay taxes when he
sells it
they will as Senator Shendo
urges us rejected as an
unfriendly amendment thank thank
you just a reminder that we
debate the amendment or the bill
not the person.
just want everyone to understand
that you cannot amended
amendment.
According to Mason's rules.
changing the the corporate
income tax portion of the
amendment that was passed by the
tax committee and if senator
actually looking at is an
amendment that was adopted in
the tax committee so because of
the rules we're we're changing
four five pages but we have to
know it looks like he's changing
a bunch of stuff but all that
stuff was actually change in the
tax committee and searchers just
bring the portion that changes
the corporate income tax the
cannot amend an amendment thank
you thank you Mr president any
further debate on the amendment
centers.
Senator Pirtle on the amendment.
And that's okay if if you
haven't built a business and you
work for either the government
or public entity or
larger and larger minority is
all of the taxes they have to
pay all of the stress all of the
nights of sleep that they don't
get worrying about whether
they're gonna be able to pay
department are successful when
they put in that work they pay
their income tax they invested
it grows and they decide to sell
it.
Mexico there's a huge huge
divide between business owners
and people who do not own
businesses.
essentially with capital gains
tax and so I think it's it's a
road that we got to be careful
that we go down those that that
don't really understand how
I mean these are people that
have stood up that owned farms
owned business operate these
things and they're saying Hey
this is this is a a bad deal.
down Mr president that sold
their restaurant to pay off debt
that the it amassed through
COVID and guess what.
Whenever you sell that building
So we have to be really careful
here on on what we're gonna do
to people that when they say
they don't succeed and they lose
everything they got to sell
have to pay that tax bill on the
capital gains so I think we need
to be careful here and look
closely at what we're doing
because I I I really think this
is a huge mistake it's going to
sweat into for for many years so
I support the amendment.
Any further debate on the
amendment centers.
Say no further debate on the
This is the original bill.
About sixty nine pages I think
that's the original bill that
came from the house.
This is the man we're talking
about now which is fifty six
pages so.
What that does what this
that the the Senate tax business
and transportation committee
already took I didn't change
anything anywhere.
Except capital gains.
So.
That's all it's about is capital
gains.
So that's the first part.
There's nothing sneaky going on
But under the.
Under this one which came from
our tax committee.
Thank you allegedly made.
Allegedly maybe even though over
the course.
That doesn't count the time and
the turmoil.
The goes into that.
we talk about we need something
besides oil and gas and every
time I agree every time I agree.
Oil and gas pays the three point
five billion dollars that we
that we wallow around in now.
Enjoy it.
On those little New Mexico owned
businesses.
We have the FIR says that it's
going to raise.
it and we and we have to destroy
small New Mexico businesses for
fifty million.
But that fifty million doesn't
come from the Wall Street people
It comes from the grocery store
in Bloomfield.
It comes from the gift shop into
Mercilessly.
We need new businesses we need
We put a we we passed a bill in
here to create a
Creatives can.
Creative industry there we go
There's one thing about being an
artist you can be a great
sculptor great painter.
You can do all kinds of great
department here is to help you
become a business.
So that you can take that that
part and move that up to the
In rental place and then higher
for people in by a place.
And then stay up night after
And then we'll be better again.
Then all of a sudden you can
find enough antacid for the next
problem that comes along.
And then it'll get better again.
We went out of our way to say we
want to help.
Those small entrepreneurs and
now with this we're going to
We want to take it seven.
Tax eighty percent anyway.
That's just not right.
five forty years were going to
punish you.
Because now we think you're rich
needed pay your fair share
because you didn't leave enough
blood on the floor on the
We ought to be thanking the
small New Mexico businesses.
Our small New Mexico businesses
We didn't take a fatal beating
Walmart.
Lows.
Bank of America.
We did take fatal beatings.
In with this we're looking at
just one more way.
To bash small New Mexico but we
what makes New Mexico different
and special that's what makes
Santa Fe different and special.
And here we are.
In the rich in this case.
Our us our families our
neighbors the people that we
know.
Maybe more than half.
But they kept on they kept
pushing they kept trying.
New Mexico Mr president is not a
poor state we have lots and lots
businesses we need to help each
other we can have.
Great vibrant small business
economy in New Mexico.
And I don't think that was the
intent fact I'm sure that was
not the intent.
But this is another one of
those.
Great ideas.
think that they're finally going
to get to retire not going to
get to to to do the things that
they couldn't do for the last
thirty five years or forty years
And we think they're rich and we
have to take their money from
them.
Money that was grown through
inflation.
Taking this out of this tax
package.
Doesn't harm the state one bit.
Taking it out of the tax
package.
New Mexico families.
Leaving in in here doesn't help
the state leaving it in here
We don't need to rush this
through here we don't have to do
this at all.
Who put who gets punished here.
Mr president I hope that you
will take this to heart.
Please take this to heart.
as already.
Four times amended and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show the role is
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
see them as concerns and to be
education this vote based on
direct personal financial
interest.
Mr president.
Senator by the roll.
But I would say that anybody in
here who owns or has ever owned
a business.
Should recuse himself which does
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca votes yes center
Brandt.
Senator Brandt both CS Center
Burke center Byrd votes yes
etcetera do heck.
Senator guy across.
Etcetera guidepost votes yes
into guns Allah's Center
graphics.
Senator Hickey votes no center
Ingle.
Senator Ingle votes yes center
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto both CS Center
meal.
Senator Kernan votes yes Center
Lopes's.
Senator Lopez both snow Center
my Estes Center my Estes both
snow Center McKenna no Senator
Center Neville votes yes Center
o'neill Center o'neill votes no
center to the Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino vote snow
Center pope.
Etcetera Popo snow Center
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez votes no
Center Sancious Center Sanchez
center share both CS etcetera
Shendo etcetera Shendo votes no
center sells Center cells votes
no center Stefanics centers to
Etcetera Thoman both snow Center
worth Senator Wirth both snow
Center woods.
Center what's votes yes Senator
Ivey Soto.
I have to seventeen informative
twenty in the negative senator
member number one is fail to
pass the Senate Senator.
amendment.
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Lopez to move and
explain them and it.
Thank you Mr president I move
amendment one to.
See no objections Senator Lopez
please explain which amendment
as.
Thank you Mr president.
Well I am very grateful for the
creation of the alcohol
have worked with so many
individuals during the interim.
With with an incredible group of
advocates research is physicians
did not have a stable alcohol
Fund alcohol alleviation Fund.
And we also learned that with
New Mexico is on the high side
or on the on the mid to high
side of taxes for alkyl but very
interestingly it is on the low
at cheaper rates than it is sold
it's states around us.
So.
We proposed an increase that
dedicated to prevention
treatment and recovery and
alleviating the harms that we
suffer in our state.
We propose twenty five that I
bill The came over for the house
the increase was very minor and
I'm grateful that this this tax
committee increased it.
Or maybe a five cent increase
Transformational fund we had an
opportunity to increase the tax
tax in a dramatic way that would
have an impact on consumption.
excise taxes to that not all the
liquor excise taxes to the
mediation fund that are not
already spent on the alcohol
there but then it does not allow
anybody to go into the general
fund all of the liquor excise
tax would go into the general
Center.
Okay Centerville was for Mr rice
our debate.
Senator Lopez has withdrawn the
amendment we do have another
floor amendment.
I am confused why someone would
put on the amendment.
And immediately withdraw.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five forty seven as
amended amendment sponsored by
senator Byrd.
Bill five forty seven as four
times amended.
I see no objections senator Byrd
to move in a sling amendment is
needed to explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr president and like
You got a kitchen full of pots
and pans and glasses and plates
you may even have a toaster oven
and a microwave outlook Roger
got close you got toys you got
kids so you got toys he got a
lot more I mean the list goes on
and on and on.
And you had to pack up all that
stuff and move it somewhere.
Maybe just had to move it from
Wouldn't that be a fun trip and
then once you get there because
it's a slow boat to China takes
forever to get there you gotta
wait do I live in temporary
And they do this for every two
to three years.
For twenty years twenty five
years or more.
Yeah I don't know about you but
military it is a lifestyle that
they have chosen and they're
willing to do that.
What happens after you retired
twenty five years or more.
to stay in New Mexico but right
now the latest research will
tell you that ninety five
percent of the folks retire out
Now last year we added that to
the the budget.
And beginning this year they're
going to start taking some of
Which is great but also in that
same bill we put a sunset on it.
So let me ask you this if you
had to move two times every two
Knowing full than ten years that
tax benefit goes away would you
still look for another state or
would you try and chance of the
So I'm gonna ask you what we
want military retirees here in
the state.
Whether or not like social
security retirees those folks
really kinda like retire.
They are not going to go Fishin
and then I'm gonna play Gosse
except maybe in there are there
part time their leisure time.
They're going to start a
the chain in the Netflix of or
whatever Microsoft whatever
other industries we have here
and yet engineers they lose
their retirement break they're
Military retiree is what are
they to look like well like I
told you there forty two to
forty six years old.
even thousands of people as a
base commander.
They've also managed budgets
that are hundreds of thousands
if not millions of dollars.
And we all know that we don't
have this kind of employment
pool here.
Because they know the quality
person they're getting and the
education that they have puts
them in a management position in
many of those places.
personnel is because they claim
another state as their home
state.
So when they get when they have
to pay taxes they had paid to
another state.
they need for a couple years
they bring their cars with them.
And so all of that money that
would normally be here is going
to another state.
one but two income households
both those household incomes are
taxed.
Cars are taxed goods and
services that they by well over
we said at the at the labs or in
management positions with
companies.
So these are the type of people
that we want to keep here we
retirement so we've given them a
little break we've got the
carrot dangling out in front.
But they're not gonna chop on
that care it because they know
the care it's still going to go
The sunset on military
retirement pay in the state of
New Mexico the state of New
Mexico is already committed to
have a high paying jobs in the
buying those all that stuff
we're getting taxes on the back
in because we're taxing their
home their two income households
their cars when they buy them
Is to simply remove the sunset
on military retirement pay for
taxation the state of New
Mexico.
And I think in ten years or so
we have spaceport America.
That is looking for aerospace
companies to come from all over
the world and maybe be based out
of here.
New Mexico set up shop stay here
and be a viable part of this
community the last thing I'll
take about military personnel
it's not the fact that they are
service organizations they want
to get back to their communities
because that is part of the DNA
that's ingrained in them when
they're in the service.
amount of years and if you
wanted fifteen twenty years put
it back on be my guest but given
enough people a chance to come
here and prove to you that these
Senator is we're debating
senator member number one and I
yield to the sponsor Senator
Shendo.
Thank you Mr president and you
know senator birch maybe.
Maybe all the arguments to do
this.
what we've done Shettar sunset
is poor policy.
What we do then is we bring
May I I've never understood why
we did this in the first place
except the it got the the
camel's nose under the tent.
body the policy behind all of
this with the.
With the sun setting the break
and then having people who have
certainly support the bill
personal Martine amendment
because it is.
The right policy is the right
approach and it's what we should
do so thank you Mr president
Thank you Mr president.
I did not retire from the
military so this doesn't affect
me.
But I certainly wasn't military.
eight they retire the thirty
eight.
And now they have skills.
What to skills.
is the small New Mexico
entrepreneur that we're looking
for.
Four they went to college and an
officer and they join the
hundreds or thousands of people.
Doing all kinds of things the
United States military is the
greatest humanitarian agency
ever created by man.
happen take skilled people that
know how to use all of that
stuff in manage all that stuff
and manage all of the people
that make all that happen.
Then if you're in the army for a
We want here it's exactly the
kind of business we want here.
But that's what the military
really is.
The mechanics jet engine
mechanics and diesel engine
mechanics.
There are people that are.
Involved in payroll.
exactly who we want here these
are people that are that know
how to do things they know how
to run a business they're ready
to run a business they love New
further debate on the amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator to close on
the amendment.
I just want to
Remind everybody as we finish up
here how important it is.
That we recognize the sacrifices
of our military.
break let's continue to give
them a break.
And technologist second by is
that they have made.
To come here in New Mexico and I
That would love to get to know
you we'd love to get to know
them if you give them a chance
to move the family here on a
permanent basis.
So with that.
floor amendment number one to
house taxation revenue as a
committee substitute for House
Bill five forty seven as four
times amended
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt both CS Center
Burke center Burt both CS
Senator Campos Senator Campos
votes knows centers survive this
votes yes interviewed solace
integrates.
Senator Griggs vote CS Center
Hamlin Center Hamlin both snow
Center Hemphill Senator Hemphill
Ivey Soto Senator Ivey Soto
votes yes intermedio Center army
of both snow Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan vote CS Center
Lopes's.
Center Mars.
Center Marcin both CS
interminably.
Senator Neville center Neville
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino both snow
Center PD at.
Senator Padilla both snow Center
Pinto.
Senator Pinto votes no center
Center Sancious Center Sanchez
both CS Center smitteez Center
smitteez votes yes interest to
develop just.
cells Senator also votes no
center so US department.
Senator expo snow center
Steinborn.
worth Senator Wirth both snow
Center whites.
Center what's votes yes Madam
met Mister president.
Center for the Ms present with
the U. S. consent to allow the
By a vote of six in the
vote we debate the bill we
debate amendment would not
single out anybody my name.
We're back on the we are we do
have another amendment the
reader to read the amendment.
are you recognize me is present.
There is no reason member of the
mogajis Center Morris.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house taxation and
Morris to moving explain eminent
there is present I move Center
for member number one to house
tax Representative Committee
substitute for house bill two or
five forty seven as four times
amended.
tax on copays and deductibles
was supposed to be one third the
way throughout the near came out
was one third of one third over
three years so there it's it's
just a drop in there Mr
Mr president this is a friendly
amendment.
Senator dividend senator member
number one anyone wishing to
debate the amendment saying no
debate on the amendment etcetera
Moores to close on the amendment
amendment do now pass and ask
for a voice vote Senator is
there's a request to adopt
senator member number one all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
We're back on the bill Senators.
We're back on the bill and I
yield to senator Maestas.
Mr president yes so you thank
you Mr president thank you Mr I
mean I have a question but I
could one may come to me so just
what I want to have you be ready
me reluctant to to support it at
this time and the but before I
get to the whole let me let me
talk about the alcohol tax
that'll get to G. R. T. and then
Peas and cues Mr president
you're you're you know my mom
was a watcher peas and cues what
are peas and cues it's pints and
quarts pints and quarts
and leaders in other parts of
the bill and then we're taxing
things by gallons of but we're
using barrels in other parts of
if we don't raise them every ten
years they they're completely
out of whack this bill for
example Mister president doesn't
contain a a gas tax which we
have not race since nineteen
On page six.
On page six of the of the of
the.
Of the amendment that came out
of a tax business and
Is is eight cents per gallon on
the first thirty thousand
barrels sold.
And then it jumps up to twenty
five gallons to the barrel so
talks about eight cents per
gallon.
On the first thirty thousand
barrels I guess that's eight
cents times fifty five per
barrel.
by a particular producer or is
it or is it beer that's bought
by a particular distributor how
does that work.
Session now Mr president this is
On page six.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator no excellent point out
the you're right for all other
And the micro brewers I believe
it's meant.
Manufactured or produced by a
mark Gruber and sold in the
state all right great that
distillers and the the small tax
breaks we gave for those
industries amounted to tens of
million dollars in economic
activities all over over the
point we move toward and we
could talk about over the summer
and next hopefully next year
completed is the perfect tax of
IP numbers present was that the
top of that page one from twelve
cents to twenty cents over the
the over eight years so it's a
tax at the point of sale so
you're not disincentive rising
similar to to the way we tax
cannabis.
And if we are going to raise tax
on I'll call week we should
consider taxing at both points
we ought to get rid of tax
permitting this may be an egg on
industry in which the tax
permitting actually makes sense
because it will ultimately raise
the price of the commodity on
tax on to the consumer without
jeopardizing economic activity
anyway lastly Mr president
etcetera what I want to talk
about is the G. R. T. we've been
talking for years about
single commodity up then we can
lower the rate so but we have so
many holes in the metaphor in in
the lower chamber's folks here
like to say the metaphors Swiss
and villages and cities Mr a
president it's seven point eight
eight eight point five the sales
tax should be about six so how
do we get it to six we get a to
the G. R. T. from five eight
five and one aids.
Down to five and then next year
to four and seven eights.
Also in other words we we
it a quarter to provide relief
for businesses because we've
been talking about it for ten
years what this does is it
simply lowers it even more.
And you look on page one toward
the bottom of the page FY twenty
seven G. R. T. tax rate.
dollars in revenue is just too
big of a hole I believe to
support this time and then
lastly Mr president
Because that's just the remnants
of a of a of a by gone era
pieces of it was a Spanish
silver coin Mr president that
was eight reales or eight bits
day caught a point into been two
of.
Into slivers and use those
slivers as as currency and so in
our tax code we use eight it's
systems present the state of New
Mexico should use the decimal
system in its tax code and so
it's a tough pill to swallow
even the New York Stock Exchange
miss president did not go to the
eighth of a stock and now if
finally a bit the bullet and
went to a decimal so we should
really try that but anyway that
the tax proposal goes from
worries it has a trigger even if
the trigger were were pulled it
only goes up to four point three
four so the trigger.
Is lower than the current tax.
no sense from a tax policy
standpoint does in and doesn't
necessarily drive economic
activity or target a particular
industry or target a particular
senator some fantastic work that
that your committee did the the
the the child tax credit
raising the cap on film.
definitely got a raise the cap
it's unconstitutional to carry
over from year to year in my
opinion we we need to a find a
ten percent differential for
proposal of Mr president of.
To attract larger films to
essentially have to New Mexico
have these multi million dollar
films.
At that has nothing to do with
tax policy agency present that's
not tax policy that's a wish
list for these big prestigious
credit.
Isn't to bring these big boss
but blockbuster films we can all
be proud of the films that come
here but it's it's to drive
economic incentives.
To spur economic growth for
small businesses and allow New
Mexico students filmmakers
writers producers whomever to
the state of New Mexico and so
that there's a flaw in the
proposed of film tax credit that
that probably of pride doesn't
belong but anyway there's prime
in the coming years that we go
to a percentage on on on on I'll
call tax we go to a decimal
point system
Back.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator.
I have my question has to with.
The
the distribution.
Forty five percent of that tax
goes to local governments.
under this bill.
What what is that percentage Mr
president the session.
interference between us right
there's.
Etcetera etcetera going to thank
you the percent distribution of
liquor excise tax revenue the
Thirty to sixty thousand two
point seven five to the drug
court fund forty six point five
percent to alcohol harms
To the local D. W. I..
Councils.
Reducing the distribution from.
And that Senator Shendo.
I did we did we consult with the
local delivery I councils before
making this.
Senator.
President and Senator Shendo.
But because the tax rate is
going up so so what is the
dollar differential.
The local delivery guys.
Okay so the amount going to
local delivery councils will be
going up by a hundred twenty
It's it's a question transited
presented his dollar amounts so
I appreciate that and it would
be good to make sure that we
have good communication back
Senator Pirtle I believe Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and and
sponsor
bill the most of them come from
people concerned about how the
how the tax on alcohol use is
actually going to work and
municipal league they're
concerned that the way it's set
up is going to reduce their
revenue sources are their
but I think what needs to happen
is.
You need to get with the
association counties and the
league and be sure they are
they are very much aware of
I find it interesting in this
this whole the over the liquor
P. she got up and blowing and go
on with the we Senator Sedillo
goal was to to basically shut
all consumption of alcohol.
Of.
And so they raise prices
tremendously.
important and I think those are
the right approach is bad.
It looks like with the staff
the.
That we utilize used to come to
a number but it's more like
we're backing into it instead of
going out for it and I think
don't think he's correct for
today for this bill I think this
particular bill if you're gonna
do what you're doing you have to
do it the way you're doing.
have
whether you should increase
taxes or not becomes an arguing
point but if you're going to do
it you need to do it the the
manner that you've chosen
gains are.
Whether we need to.
To do what we did to some degree
or not I don't think so.
what it is I I've talked to a
I've talked to senator Wirth I
talked to him a little bit after
there was
an article in the Albuquerque
governor Richardson St you guys
some.
Some pretty interesting.
Madam said all of us some
interesting comments as well and
Why are we trying to do it what
we what are.
What's our goal here what we
trying to pay for.
When we've got all these other
money that we have maybe we need
bill not where I wanted to be.
I don't I think we I thank you
for if we really want to do this
sort of thing there's got to be
involvement and I appreciate all
the work you've done on.
Because I know you've worked
hard on this thing and I know
senator Wirth has worked hard on
package you create a committee
to sit there throughout the year
to work and come up with things
and then have the committee
bring that package to the
visually a land will plug that
little the land will plug this
other little the lamb and we
won't we won't consider of
This presentation we won't we
won't consider.
A small tax credit to the
smallest oil and gas operators
in the state.
And let's just keep nearly four
hundred million in tax revenue.
You know I talked about it this
morning I talked about my New
Mexico state math can make a
We've been my tuition but
Mister president senator I know.
I know right now that's where we
stand.
the locals are concerned and I
appreciate you guys if you get
with them so they would have
more comfort with what what
you've got and and hopefully
senator.
Thank you Senator Griggs Senator
Woods thank you Mr president
thank you for the opportunity.
senator Senator Woods okay this
little yellow piece of paper
right here this financial impact
is that in or close to what you
these are all you know estimates
going forward so it's it's it's
I think we're pretty close.
No okay center would just assume
for a minute that this is just
with the capital gains deduction
I want to raise fifty four
million nine hundred thousand
and twenty five and then we're
in twenty seven we're going to
income tax.
Seven million in twenty five and
seven point four million in
twenty seven.
And the rest of the things on
And then we're going to do some
stuff with the.
What the excise tax.
and that actually shows a liquor
negative negative negative
negative negative until we get
done to the Baco.
And that's kinda though see in
places with that were put in
that in different funds to the
general fund.
But at the end of the day.
From the from the left hand side
to two spaces over FY twenty
five.
It says.
That we're going to lose nine
hundred and ten million dollars
But twenty six.
Million dollars.
So have you got any idea how
we're going to make up those
local government funds.
Two twenty seven FY twenty
seven.
We're gonna lose.
chair Mister president and.
And sponsor of.
Resident the Senator yes you are
reading that correctly.
Senator Woods okay.
gains.
Well that incentivize anybody.
To do this.
Thank capital gains are well it
history was I'm assuming is is
how you got these figures and if
the incentive you know are you
what to stock market do and.
deal if you like new and shiny.
Because you're not going to get
taxed too hard on new and shiny
with this because you're going
to spend it as fast as you get
And encourage use not to get in
those businesses because there
won't tax the hell out of you
know the ministers.
So.
billion dollars of revenue.
In a few years.
The danger better hope that
other revenue sources don't
fold.
I'm sure that the whole group in
here you just think and those
are just fantastic things to
spend our money on our oil and
know what happened to go in and
raise taxes.
So.
Thank you.
Thank you got a little bit too
much wish list I think you got a
because you've got too many
different things going here that
could go wrong if you don't
estimate right Mr president and
I don't have any more questions
I know you did your best I know
about this deal that you're that
you got too much going at one
time is too many years a move in
here in in my estimation and no
don't grow business Mr president
that's all good thank you very
much thanks Center was we do
have further debate we have
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president sponsor
to address the fine cigar
portion of this when did we miss
president Senator lower the the
value to or from per cigar to
where it is now.
Mr president Senator twenty
nineteen.
And Mister president senator
what was the result of of doing
that what what type of revenue
Senator Shendo Mr president we
don't have the data for the
sales.
People would stop buying them
from Florida and in other states
because there was like a twenty
five percent tax I believe on on
the cigars at the time so if
you're buying a fine cigar say
fifteen dollars we were noticing
the the cigar shops locally even
here in Santa Fe just a few of
them closing down so the effort
was to keep as much of that in
protect our small cigar shops
that sell these fine cigars or
specialty item it's not like
cigarettes with with the syntax
that you're trying to I guess
weird name drinks people are
drinking now from Starbucks but
it's just something that that
people enjoy and I think what's
going to happen by doing this is
again we're gonna go back to the
think it's the the the Santa Fe
brewing has a but it was a cigar
shop and that guy I'd go by over
there and and you know by a few
here and there just for special
I I wish we were going right
back it's only been four years I
I wish we had info on it it
seems like we're flying blind
just sometimes we do but I I
Cigars thank you Mr president.
We do have for the debate we
have center Brandt followed by
center Here center ranked.
This present need to sponsor the
yield but in the spirit of
tax by slashing the deduction
and half.
Second it raises the corporate
income tax on the smallest
businesses in our state.
general fund and fifth increases
tobacco taxes on cigars so those
the top five reasons you should
vote against this bill and I
hope that will help Sir Tom and
the vote against this bill.
Thank you Mr president I do have
questions for the sponsor if you
would you senator Senator
detailed Mr president yes I of
yield to the senator so.
I want to start really with the
section fourteen the energy
storage of credit.
And so if you can find that
center Mr president Senator
you're correct.
Okay so.
So now I I create something a
More money the by the tax credit
and now they get that tax break
even on the one that the
generated that tax credit
because I've provided something
Mister president senator yes
you're on the right track.
So Mister president this one I
find very interesting here.
So it doesn't incentivize
actually doing anything but the
interesting part about this.
Which really based on capturing
carbon getting a tax credit from
the federal government not us by
the way I did tell them that
their their number one problem
gosh what we do with that.
So but they didn't ask for tax
break there were going to get a
tax break from the federal
government tax credit.
They get a tax credit then they
would be better off so you know
that's probably a good idea to
play that tax scheme right here
in this tax package it's forty
percent it did I get that right
Senator Shendo.
Because.
Capital gains.
Well so we're going to give
people the play a tax scheme
tax reform there by golly we're
gonna take somebody who's gonna
come in here with some big fancy
equipment take advantage of New
Mexicos tax scheme and then
they're going to sell their tax
It's in trouble while I just you
know this whole tax I wish I
knew there was a tax scheme in
here somewhere and I think I
found it I think I found and I
think we're going to go ahead
it's not the mom and pop of your
manufacturing company is going
to be in in that it is so this
is for some really big massive
company out here that we don't
New Mexico businesses that have
been here for forty years okay I
think that's the first tax
scheme and you know I could be
wrong about that could be a lot
worse.
This presents Senator of the
creative and the trick of
vehicle charging the unit income
tax credit of up to the three
what's different sizes do they
come in.
Of
very but if I can remember from
our debate in our Senate tax I
Senator and so Mr president are
there are there different types
of their slow Chargers and fast
Chargers and super fast Chargers
or is it just you know plug it
into the but not in the office
There's a car parked.
Right there.
It's plugged into the wall it's
cuts I mean it's just plugged
into a regular outlet there but
it's got some kind of little box
Mr president the senator of yes
could be.
the car into the outlet it's
already in the garage.
Senator.
Mr president it's only up to the
there are different kind of
charging the units out there so
there's the the there's some
that actually go a lot faster
the written much more expensive
So who sells these the the these
the fast charging ones that are
more than just plug in your car
into the outlook it's already in
the garage.
Senator Shendo.
in in the attrition can stolen.
So.
There's a there's a there's just
a really rich guy out there he's
the his own cool car and they're
very expensive very expensive
the card in the charging
stations if you want to if you
want to cool if you want the one
that charges really fast.
Whether it's whether it's Tesla
or some other electric vehicle a
group.
There's an gonna sell these
charging stations in this in in
the state of New Mexico.
But they're going to.
Bring this equipment in it's not
going to be a mom and pop shop
it's one of the big companies
Because they installed something
there and and so here we go
again another big we're going to
give you on Moscow a big tax
break here.
Charger tax credit that's pretty
cool there is one that really
confuses me though Mister
president.
It's the medical renovation G.
renovation G. R. T. so I got a
couple questions service for the
first what is a medical
renovation.
The state of ram so for elders
in their homes or bars so that
they don't fall into if they
wanted a shower or if they have
can live a live safely at home
and that's where we keep our
elders.
So.
I I love that.
But.
modifications to residents of
Medicaid so you know most the
timing here when we talk about a
provided we're talking about
some kind of medical
The term provider seems odd
there do we get a prescription
from a doctor to say okay build
it build a ramp is it is it a
written prescription is that
Senator Shendo.
This is prescribed.
It is applied that's why we're
deducting.
But it says Mr president allows
a gross receipts tax deduction
recipient it's to the eligible
provider that installed the
equipment.
So who's the provider.
Okay so Mister president this
this really happened to me this
summer so I'm I'm remodeling a
house lady next door she had
needs replaced.
And so we went over there it's
beautiful hand rail very solid.
Can I get a tax G. R. T.
deduction for putting up her
hand rail.
Okay Mister president of she's
on Medicaid or not I just put
pen real because she asked.
But
I'm not going home because you
have screwed the state of New
Mexico with this thing.
To take a nap there a Senator
the one in front.
Senator Shendo is going to stay
awake.
Nobody else.
credit for putting up that hand
rail.
Senator Shendo.
I'm gonna take that eight
percent off for whatever the I
can take off the state portion
anyway and I just do it.
There have to be a doctor's
prescription I have to be
Senate Mr president how how does
the or do you know I didn't just
make it up.
Because all of that I could be a
Senator what Mr president if you
that that direction separately
and then required by the
department.
Session okay Mister president I
I get that I understand and I'm
in it at all I mean there's no
doctor saying you needed just
somebody said Hey I I I think I
need this this ramp this hand
rail.
So.
thermal this is in section
twenty six live get their.
So.
How does this G. O. formal.
Etcetera etcetera Mr president
the senator it's the measured in
the a per kilowatt hour
generated.
that tax credit when they when
they make deal thermal powers
that is that right.
dollars was was that so again
this is this is not the
The bill invest you know company
that's going to make this multi
And then start pumping the hot
water hot.
liquids out of the earth and
using that to turn it into
electricity intended somewhere.
question little mom and pop
businesses in this in in the in
the state we're going to give
this deal thermal company.
You might.
not a small New Mexico company
it's going to do this.
Would give them a big tax break
here we can give them tax
credits.
ground coupled heat pump credit.
I don't even know what a couple
heat pump is can you tell me
what a couple he pump is.
The agency president senator the
geo thermal grown couple he pump
So Mister president who makes
those.
Senator Shendo.
So Mister president some you can
buy it the.
Well we don't have any local
hardware stores left anymore
because we've we we decided that
we don't like small New Mexico
business but this can you buy
this at Lowes or home depot.
The interesting thing so so once
again we're gonna we're gonna
give tax breaks no this is like
the third or fourth one I've of
pointed out here tax breaks to
really rich out of state New
activity will give them a tax
break for easy charging stations
all while we are to whom read
about whether the little
restaurant is paying their fair
here interesting I just love
that love that.
Mr present we've got the what we
call the liquor the the low
that to the liquor program is
present.
Mr president Senator a.
Eighteen million.
person or family or whatever.
seven hundred ninety dollars
that for a family or is that for
a person in doesn't matter how
many people are in the family.
This our family.
goes up.
Okay Senator so so Mister
president I actually think that
this one probably makes sense
closing the negative well so the
lowest income people in the
state of New Mexico that that's
probably a good one that's
targeted toward.
Can.
To help New Mexicans.
Because we're looking at
somebody was saying.
We have the resources we can
help let's let's share the love
there I think that once.
One of the things that concerns
me the most about our economy in
the state of New Mexico is what
So so we've got an awful lot of
people that aren't working right
now we also have help wanted
signs all over the place we also
know that it doesn't matter how
This this tax credit which I do
believe it's good to focus where
it needs to be.
Does that incentivize people not
to go to work even more.
Senator Shendo.
Senate chair Mister president
did he save the include.
The rebate goes up for the
So Mister president.
Well I think that this program
is targeted it helps.
earn too much money because all
of sudden you lose that tax
credit.
It's what we hear in this in
this chamber for have talked
about the cliff so all of a
hundred and so.
What we didn't do in his we
didn't reform this so that it so
that it could help for longer
and and and actually help not
If we can give them the food tax
rebate global of the litter tax
rebate.
Help them out if they're going
but as they get a job and they
And that's why people want to go
in the work force because
they're afraid that if it costs
too much to go to work.
Because what will come off.
And still have enough.
To take care of their needs
until they're actually doing
very well.
This cliff effect work or do we
have this step down thing so
that was people earn more money
this goes away slower so that
they still not punished for for
help not only the it the
individual who needs help.
But help the greater economy in
our tax package.
And we didn't.
Just incredible incredible
because.
If I recall right and maybe the
maybe the chair finance can
We look at alcohol taxes we look
the tobacco taxes we look at
cannabis taxes.
And the only one that we reduced
the tax on with cannabis.
Senator Shendo.
Miss Mister president it depends
on the product.
Mr president we raise taxes on
repeat the question.
Senator.
Resident did we raise taxes on
alcohol and tobacco in this
group in this mixed present
They go up or down nothing in
this bill okay so Mister
president.
What we did.
got to take the tax off and so
effectively what we've done is
we've now said.
Smoke more dope.
And now we're gonna say we don't
want to smoke tobacco with no
smoke something else well you
just have at it make make
yourself hello there that's
great that's great.
We try to help them and that was
well you know you're on your own
now but it's not only on your
own but now we want people to
stop when people stop using that
But here we've used our tax
code.
To pick.
An industry winter.
But all legal.
So Mister president senator why
did we why did we pick one over
the other two.
Cannabis there is tax policy
issue and are missing Senator
Shendo.
Things that have a negative
impact externality.
Senate president.
So.
Anyway I just care about that so
the the the tax film credit it
looks like we it looks like we
really really increase that a
Why did we go seventy one of the
maybe maybe I missed something
in here but I thought they ask
for fifty and we got seventy
one.
And the others are not.
Senator.
Mr president but it's still
increased by by twenty one
Mexico we get to show off some
stuff here.
But.
Is it a small New Mexico
businesses going to get these
Senator.
Mr president who's who's the
who's the New Mexico company
that gets it.
Okay all right miss present
that's good that's good.
You Mr president.
When we came in here we talked
would would you consider this
tax reform.
Senator Shendo.
That's why all three hundred and
fifty two of these tax breaks
that we give the people what
they're all here for economic
development.
We've been doing it for decades.
So what makes what makes you
think that any of these are
going to suddenly breaks through
after we failed three hundred
fifty times.
cuts are of stimulus for the
economy.
Well
Mr president that's why we had a
Under our current system.
We're aware we've given tax
breaks to to various companies
for decades come in here they
But most I don't see the I don't
see where they're at where they
are.
Can you name some of the big.
Industry that will replace the
Senator Shendo.
Mr president Senator it's it's a
the all above approach.
don't believe anybody inside or
outside of this chamber believes
that our current tax system
works I also don't believe that
this particular bill is tax
reform.
This is more just
Wherever they went there Senator
couples okay.
That's not in New Mexico company
the Eevee charges we're gonna
give somebody that's not a New
Mexican a gigantic tax break
there.
So that's what this whole thing
is is is looking at here and
But certainly.
For this for this century it's
the same play.
yeah we'll get a couple little
things here and there.
When we did get Intel Intel came
because one of these things.
family went to Arizona when
Intel decided that we were now
picking on them.
So we work for a little while
with them and they're still here
they still do some good things
So this whole tax packages just
a re run of everything that
we've done over and over and
over again except in my opinion
this will maybe worse because so
They're not buying things at a
grocery store they're not buying
the art in the it well they
might be buying art when they
stop by Santa Fe once every year
to check on their investments
here but
The billion dollars with the tax
breaks and.
And what we did is we gave
these.
Well.
But we know the system doesn't
work Mr president because we had
the same conversation year after
about real tax reform to start
working through how we could do
real tax reform.
And we chose not to do that.
But who's going to get this I'm
sure they know who they are.
Somebody knows who they are just
not you were honest president
Senator.
But it should be a fair and even
tax code.
It should be something that
treats us all.
Like New Mexicans in not special
real tax reform it's got to be
simple we all need to understand
how it works.
Nobody knows how our tax system
works.
I was amazed that.
Any starter.
Now I believe she's brilliant.
Don't get me wrong.
She's very smart.
The smartest person in New
Mexico doesn't understand our
tax code now she probably
understands it a whole lot
better than I do.
Just got to be simple enough
that that the average New
Mexican can understand it if the
average New Mexican cannot
understand the tax code.
There were broken.
think I've got a simple
solution.
But I don't care what simple
solution we come up with just
got to be a simple solution not
president that Ernst and young
one of the largest accounting
firms on the planet.
Measured all the tax systems of
all fifty states and of course
we came in number fifty.
up what will but you didn't
count this you count this
special tax breaks that we put
in there and you didn't count
this special tax break to to put
in there and you didn't count
this one and sorenstam young
seven but it took various
departments to explain all of
the special called tax breaks.
Because Ernst and young one of
the largest accounting firms on
One of the things that.
I.
this is just really tax cuts for
somebody.
Except for the capital gains tax
which is a tax increase on small
New Mexico businesses but but
all the rest of this is just tax
We have to raise enough money.
We have to pay for our schools.
You know Mr president it's
interesting.
We have to have money for those
things I'm not trying to cut any
of those.
We have to raise enough money so
it's got to be simple.
And has to raise enough money.
industry all of the above new
industry.
Our tax code is a failure.
It can be simple and not attract
We still have to pay all the
bills that were obligated to
pay.
That's enough.
And has to be attractive now
We're let vehicle charging
stuff.
None of whom are New Mexicans.
To track them.
But again just like with alcohol
tobacco and cannabis we decided
who to pick.
And who to punish.
three gigantic companies in here
that that that we're giving
money what we're giving a
billion dollars to three
gigantic companies in here at
least.
And we couldn't find it on our
part to help small New Mexico
businesses small New Mexico
And that's what this tax package
does Mister president it doesn't
help anybody.
In New Mexico.
The all four we talked about
this before but I can't find it
right here.
So when general Kearney marched
in Santa Fe eighteen forty
seven.
He wrote he wrote a set of laws
That was the entire tax code
that was the entire American tax
code when Santa Fe.
Moved from being Mexico
territory to United States
forty census.
The tax business activity.
The tax grocery stores and bars
in.
compared everything else but
that's that's just me.
The forty pages of forty census.
This one here.
fifty five fifty six sixty pages
long okay but that's only a
smidge compared to the almost
thirteen hundred pages of tax
code that we have thirteen
And I'm pretty sure Mr president
that.
The sponsoring you and I
Paid all the bills for the state
of New Mexico was very simple.
Apparently didn't attract too
many businesses though because
well we didn't grow much between
what was called the Kearney code
from eighteen forty seven until
statehood yeah there were some
changes in their but the basis
of it was was the same.
whole new tax code.
And that whole new tax code
twenty two pages long twenty two
pages the whole tax code for the
entire state was half the size
of this.
That was based almost entirely
on property taxes and again we
had some very cool tax breaks in
that one and you know I just
wasn't prepared to do this
tonight I'd read you some of
those industries had some
lobbyists here.
Right from the very beginning
that law this is a no you can't
tax my business I'm here I'm
thirteen hundred pages in really
small font and.
In all we've done now is we've
just.
At eight more pages.
for missing work.
Maybe it'll be our new big
industry.
Be cool who was.
They would come here without tax
industry in New Mexico because
we have oil and gas.
They wouldn't be here if we
didn't have oil and gas and it's
the same with the hot rocks if
If it works for them.
On an economic scale
don't do it.
There's other things that the
there and it was experimental it
would try to figure out how
things work out there.
And I believe they learn some
stuff but eventually that will
was destroyed because.
but we do have hot rocks here.
They drill down there.
There are things there
absolutely.
regulatory system that's not
insane.
But.
But this is just the tax package
rooms going to talk about taxes
for all the people all what you
need to have all this other
Capable of doing the jobs that
need to be done.
We have to have regulatory
system that doesn't shut things
down.
Not even a little bit later
existed before this still exists
trial of tax credits existed
before this they still exist.
So there was no reform in this
at all.
No reform at all in in in in the
saddest part Mister president is
have tried some bold moves.
Because we had billions of
dollars to back up those bold
moves if they didn't work.
Was given big rich international
companies tax breaks.
Instead of looking.
And that's what we're gonna vote
on here eventually.
We'll see.
When eventually is.
But I know that's what we're
Which is very interesting all
those one vote no have to raise
our hand so this is a yes vote
the Senate chamber.
We have a chance to do the right
thing for the long term.
of dollars would have been hard
to break a tax system that bad
with the amount of money that we
have to back it up make sure
it's good.
line vote pretty sure why I
don't know why.
I don't know why because we
don't want to think these things
through because it's hard.
Who's to say here.
peace health safety welfare
merge okay yep.
Yeah so that's.
We've had all summer to talk
And here we are.
Midnight.
Is this Wednesday night.
So will be Thursday a little bit
Because we wanted to rush
through these tax breaks for the
big rich out of state
corporations before anybody woke
up and then we wanted to do in
Why would we do that unless we
were trying to hide something Mr
president.
We didn't do in the Middle
today.
You middle night.
We do middle night because it is
Rearranging stuff just to make
things worse.
Wirth no over the last couple
We want to help people that need
help.
Now we're going to add some more
to it.
So we're gonna call that tax
decrease.
responsibility to help those.
They need help.
We're gonna say that's all good
and we're gonna use that is
camouflage.
As we give away.
All of the rest of that money.
And we're gonna give eighteen
million dollars.
To the people in New Mexico that
needed.
Eighteen million although some
others in here.
away.
Hundred million going to New
Mexicans.
To the people we should be
taking care of and worried
about.
exist in New Mexico today.
And we also know that they're
not going to come in here and
build things.
because that's what all three
hundred and fifty of our
previous tax breaks of really
amounted to people come in they
do a little bit they get their
I don't know where all this
stuff came from is.
Mr president.
I don't know how much this is
just.
Just like the broom manufacturer
lobby obviously in nineteen
fifteen the first one listed
that you can't you can't tax
broom for manufacturers.
Now Mr president I thought just
for secondary might actually
have that nineteen fifteen tax
code because it's pretty cool
read.
I did in there.
Who can't lobbyist for
themselves.
Mostly it's the middle class the
wealthy wealthy non New Mexicans
to come here and want our money
they can lobby.
The poorest have at risk
For the small large shop.
They don't have any advocates.
We have any advocates here at
all.
All resting on the back of the
people have no voice in this
room.
Because they're not rich enough
to pay a bunch of lobbyists.
Enter not poor enough.
They're trying to figure out how
they make pay roll next week.
The people that are trying to
figure out.
How to come up with enough money
worried because all of a sudden.
The roof leaks.
And now they have to fix that
they can't run their business
And we made a conscious decision
to tax them more.
And a conscious decision to give
Versus the New Mexicans who live
here and work here in their
children grew up here and their
parents and grandparents grew up
here.
One of those old terms I love
the words bottle.
Any idea what what all means
Mister president Senator.
You accomplish nothing and
that's what this does this was a
lot of work and you're gonna
hear about it for a little while
It will do nothing.
To help the state of New Mexico
that's this bottle.
Nothing.
Will be accomplished by this
bill.
Hundreds of millions of dollars
to people that don't live in New
Mexico.
Hundreds of millions of dollars.
I mean you know it might be
useful I understand there's
another men men out there looks
just like the one we ran first
story drafted everything so if
But if there's no interest in
actually helping New Mexicans
just just helping.
People that have.
Giant international businesses.
But I don't see that and isn't
that a shame is present.
So here we are in the middle of
the night confirming that we do
not care about the small New
Mexico business.
All of these have some value
because somebody in New Mexico
will we'll work on that G. O.
formal well somebody in New
Mexico will work on that film
Somebody in New Mexico might
work on sporty Energy.
But the owners not here the
business is not here.
They're not going to be here.
There somewhere else with our
Within minutes of me shut up
we're going to confirm.
That we have to stain.
For New Mexico families.
And unfortunately for you Mr
president I know you have to sit
up there everybody else gets to
wander off sleeping lounge
whatever's are doing in their.
You and I.
a is
I'd sports over there.
the economists from LESC who
have eyes good enough to read
the tax code.
Economists so that they know
what that word meant that's one
of those big multisyllabic words
that I can't pronounce because
it's too long.
Parts of the economy.
sign it and and will and and
we'll be off and running.
You know.
The amendment to.
No.
No Mr president can't be
and sign that amendment Matt.
We'd be home in five minutes.
In.
Mr president.
So for the sponsoring you.
So they're over here babbling
oddly.
Though your hammer Adam if you
wanted to involve me.
I know that we voted.
On so many things this year.
They didn't have to be this
partisan divide.
And I only have one tool Mr
president over here.
And I'm using the.
divide that doesn't need to be
we could have helped New Mexico
middle class families.
And had we helped New Mexico
But I would have stood with the
New Mexico middle class families
and I'd let you all go home.
And given way money we don't
even know where it's going but
somebody has good lobbyists and
I don't know if lobbyists are
working here with a lot of.
Pretty sure I didn't get any
campaign donations from the the
evening guys for the geothermal
geyser the stored energy guys
That's how special interests get
in bills.
Thank common asking they wine
and dine and do all kind of cool
things.
And I do believe that I do
believe that not added truly I'm
not accusing anybody of that
during the session and I'm not
even saying that the lobbyist
But this stuff would not be in
here.
It's somebody not approached
legislators.
And said Hey this is going to be
in here all really help your
There's been a handful of
exceptions.
Intel you Ranko.
There may be another one out
there that smaller.
This is not tax this is doing
the same thing over and over and
over and over again it's just a
huge spot all.
magnificent to fully move our
state forward.
And we decided to throw a bottle
on the table here.
Button.
At the end C. will be we're
going.
Is there a motion to do anything
right now Mr plus.
Where my just babbling.
storm we were and up at that
point but but as long as I'm
babbling and I know where I am
I'm not that lost was afraid
maybe I got lost but no.
I truly in my heart.
Wish that we could we could talk
through some of these things
By our own staff.
Not knowing exactly where these
projects came from with these
tax credits mean.
thing doesn't smell right.
There's too many things in there
for too much money that came too
fast.
And this is filled with
It will harm our families.
And it certainly doesn't
accomplish the mission we were
told it accomplishes and that's
economic development.
It won't set us on the right
path.
Mr president.
Plan for midnight on Wednesday
night.
And all this does is this is
Saturday the poor planned for
Saturday night that's a really
It's just one big party.
And we'll wake up next January.
With a terrible hangover.
Wonder where all of our money
went.
Not even in the same world is
tax reform in that stat.
But before senator Wirth pulls
the rest of his hair out I will
Thank you Mr presidential main
question being up for.
There's a motion for the
previous question.
Mr president I move that house
tax revenue Committee substitute
for House Bill five forty seven
except those voting to negative
but show hands Senators where
voting also is your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Ingle voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Center my SS voting no.
Mr president members of the
body.
Senate Majority sorry to Peter
Wirth stick is that next order
of business thank you Mr
president emphasis that we go
that our business messages from
the house where that order
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill thirty one as
amended by the Senate Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
Senate bill three ninety seven
as amended by the Senate and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk.
enrolled in a gross copies of
house bill thirty one as amended
house bill one ninety nine as
amended house bill two oh nine
have been read in full and
signed by the officers of the
house has been received elect an
ounce of the members of the body
that the officers of the Senate
have signed an open session
house bill thirty one as amended
house bill one ninety nine as
order business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth I
thank you Mr president so now's
the time for committee chairs
will be at noon tomorrow noon.
present I'd last seen as consent
to release some bills are
dropped their tools to Senate
finance.
House bill two eighty seven
which is a driver's license
plate.
we're next license plate.
Any objections see no objections
so ordered.
Senate finance for house bill
seventy eight which is an
aviation G. R. T. distributions
of funds which is a good that
need to Senate not sunset in the
drop that referral from Senate
Mr president Mr president I was
trying to full pages over here
and I did full house bill
seventy eight.
It is heard and house trained I
I'm talking about the house
committees
Senate committee it went to the
Senate business and tax.
Thank you Mr president.
I just I got a few more House
Bill three forty five is mended
that's a firefighter recruitment
of pool and so like to drop
if Mr president the Senate
finance chair would stay in the
Senate committee only that he
has that it has been terrific
thank you.
Mr president I would object
them.
Has been objection to the
unanimous consent Mr present be
happy to visit with majority
floor leader Senate finance
don't do much of transportation
fund and National Guard in case
of emergency so version the
morning go over the minority
leader with them and make sure
all right I did talk to the
centers and office phone
centers says about this thank
you Mr president Senate
conference a conta conservation
will meet at ten AM tomorrow
morning they have we have a
breeders will be served.
Can we bring the rate is now
Senator.
All you have to wait till ten.
clear out some bills so please
be prepared service call chair
but Sen judicial probably me
tomorrow after the floor session
will break between the the floor
sessions according to Majority
Leader so we'll do that right
find a room don't you worry.
Lounge.
Train station.
Thanks centers of this any
additional announcements.
See no objections the Senator
Sendiri system twelve PM
