Morning, everyone. We're going
to start off today with an
adjustment on the agenda. I'm
going to start off with the two
countries that Senator Gonzalez
will be bringing forward and I'm
gonna first start with Marcus
Montoya, who has been appointed
to the governor's Organized
Crime Prevention Commission.
Good morning, Senator. And Good
Morning, Mr Montoya. Good
morning. No
And with us senator. Good
morning if you can move the
microphone closer to you and
just speak up a little louder.
Okay with your indulgence. I'm
trying to
Get myself together a little
bit. We just had I just had one
of my trucks stolen in
Albuquerque and, uh, it is.
So but anyway, we'll we'll work
with that.
Um
With this. We have the
appointment for
To the governor's organized
Crime Prevention Commission. And
this is a the appointment for Mr
Marcos Joseph Montoya.
From Taus and I have known the
family for many years and in
fact
Uh, his one of his late sister's
former late sister.
We worked together for many
years.
And he has done a very good job
within the community and also
being a city district attorney.
And always involved with the
community and serving in any
capacity that he has. He has so
vast experience.
It seems like we're not
amplifying, but
And, uh, with that all
I don't know. Sound check sound
check.
No,
I don't think it's working.
It doesn't It doesn't sound like
it to us here in the room.
Apparently, it is picking it up
online so very well without all
Madam Chair and Vice Gerald
Yield to him to say a few words
on this come from
Madam Chair, vice chair of
members of the committee. Thank
you. Good morning for allowing
me to be here to be considered
for nomination of to the
Governor's Organized Crime
Prevention Commission. I can't
say that in the last nine months
or so and serving with the
wonderful commissioners who were
previously um and today, um,
nominated and confirmed
That has been very eye opening.
very educational, informative
and a true honor for me to serve
on that committee, and I would
appreciate your consideration to
continue to serve in that
capacity. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Mr Montoya.
I'm now going to go to members
in the committee room. Is there
anyone here in
I can give you each two minutes
to speak. If you'd like. If you
can come up and speak in the
microphone, and if you can
Say your first and last name for
the record and then also, I had
some people who signed up if
Marcus Montoya if Henry Valdez
is here
At your Henry and Rick 10 0.
Thank you, madam. Chair members
of committee. My name is Henry
Val, director of the
Administrative Office of did for
12 years previous to that I've
seen a lot of district
attorneys.
Come through the state of New
Mexico. I want to say I'm not
only but his community will
bring a rural perspective to
this. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Valdez. Rick Tero.
Madam chair. Good morning,
members of the committee. It's
great to see you didn't get to
see many of you last week, but
I'm Rick to draw on Minton Aztec
all that direction.
I've known Marcus for several
years now, ever since he first
Marcus is a very hardworking B.
A. He's currently our boards.
President Boris Association.
He's done a fine job there. Over
the years. I've watched them get
really involved with the
organizing throughout the state.
I really couldn't say.
Or I would say you won't be able
to find besides myself. I guess
I should say
Okay? Never mind. Senator
Morrison noted that
Um, they will serve on this
commission and served well, so I
give my full support. And I
thank you for this opportunity.
Thank you, Mr Tomorrow. Now No
one signed up and opposition of
this comfrey. So with that I'm
gonna go to questions or
comments from the committee.
Senator Stewart, Okay?
Don't touch it. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. I just want to thank
you for being willing to join
others on this organized.
Attention, Mr Montoya and and
ask you a little bit more about
your comment that you made about
the eye opening nature.
Thing. I'm sure there's
something you might people or
maybe not. But can you just talk
a little bit more about how that
A group of folks are working
together things that they found
out that surprised you things.
Madam Chair vice chair. Um
Senator Stewart. Just one small
example. Um, Director Heart who
is with us here today at has
done a fantastic job of moving
the
Organized Crime Commission
meetings around the state of New
Mexico and just three weeks four
weeks ago, we were in a meeting.
Um he invites great speakers, a
lot of other state and federal
agencies and just as a small
example not to say too much.
Uh, we are all aware of how well
how human trafficking does exist
here in New Mexico, um, very
surprising to me. And a lot of
the members is just how
prevalent human trafficking is
in New Mexico. That really was
eye opening, at least to myself
because I am mostly up.
Concerned with the prosecution
in cases investigations in the a
judicial district. Um so
A lot of these statewide efforts
and
Information sets of again been
eye opening. In that sense. Are
there any decisions that change
things yet? I know you. You've
really just started, but, uh
With the level of expertise so
pleased about surely you've got
some things you're going to move
forward honors suggestions to
other Madam Chair Senator
Stewart. Thank you for the
question. Yes, indeed. A lot of
expertise on this commission.
Like you said, a lot of the
efforts of up to this point have
been a fact finding mission to
really truly understand and get
up understanding of what
New Mexico is facing and a lot
of different arenas of criminal
organized conduct here and so
are true effort was to gather
all that information create a
report director hard and his
team did a great job and I think
that report has been submitted
to the executive and to this
legislative branch. And so that
has been 95% of our efforts.
Well, thank you very much, Mr
Montoya. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator or TCP? No.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Mr Montoya, picking
up scaring the heck out of me.
Uh, thank you for being willing
to tackle this, and I know the
organized crime created years
and years ago, and then it kind
of went
Defunct for awhile since you've
been involved with it have have
you seen any
Any indication
That what you're working on is
going to lead to legislative
proposals or what will happen
with what you're working on.
Madam Chair, Vice chair, Senator
or TCP? No. Yes. Thank you for
the question and
Yes, Indeed. Already much.
Legislation is coming out of a
lot of this research. We're
building upon a lot of
legislation that existed
previously, um, primarily in the
human trafficking area, And so
yes, that we do expect a lot of
infrastructure and legislation
to result from the efforts to
this point.
And Mr Chairman and Mr Mann
Therapy. Besides
Human trafficking. I mean,
there's a lot of other ways in
which
Organized crime might be
involved in drug importation,
gambling rigging. Um I can't
even think of police departments
where the police may have
created a within the police
department, a little intergroup
that's decided to
Bit out. D w I case is to have
them dismissed by not showing up
things like that. That could
have happened. Anything else
that you're working on? Besides
Madam Chair. Vice chair, Senator
TCP No, I In short, yes, a lot
of other things, particularly
infrastructure. I think there's
a lot of technology on the
horizon for combating organized
crime, which is
Really, I think going to pioneer
away to combating many forms of
crime, particularly organized
crime. The how the When, um
And the intercept of a lot of
that conduct. And as you
referenced as we all sour Friday
and the weekend um yes, I'm sure
now.
Organized crime. This commission
will want to, um
Research, learn more about and
make suggestions regarding
Law enforcement and other
governmental entities. So thank
you for that question.
Well, thank you very much and
again. Thank you for being
willing to serve. We look
forward to seeing the results of
the work of the commission in
the future. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Senator,
Senator neighbor.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Montoya I to echo
The expressions of my fellow
colleagues.
And thanking you for your
willing to serve. Uh, I don't
have any specific questions
about patients, but I do have a
few questions about how the
governors
Uh, permission.
Role of this madam chair, vice
chair, Senator neighbor. Yes, of
course. Thank you for the
question, And I think you had a
major nail on the head in
regarding statewide information
and data sharing and in real
time and I can share, um with
the senator this morning that
that is a primary, uh, and top
priority for the commission is
to be able to
Um
Share information in real time
that will aid all on force Mint
and
Informed them more of who
they're dealing with and how to
respond to, Um
Articular criminals and rural
areas, but also have the data
from statewide databases and
information sharing. So
I thank you for the question. I
hope I answered that.
Yeah.
Mr Chair and
Ah!
You know, one of the big
concerns and in our area is
Human trafficking factor in a
Very small shed.
Get everybody on the much of it.
Is related rogue people.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Chairwoman Do hug. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Ah!
So and thank you, Mr Montoya.
I I I read the report that you
all put out and really
appreciated that I also have
really appreciated. Director.
Heart, uh, working with me on
Issues around illegal cannabis
that that need to be addressed
for organized crime, and we
integrated those into the into
SB 61 issue that
I have asked the other members
of this commission to think
about when we heard had heard
some other members during the
interim is Senator RTZ Pinot
mentioned that this is this is
actually a pretty old statue.
Uh, this comes from and in that
statute. All records of your
commission are exempt from a pra
Everything. Uh, so so nothing is
a public record, even if it's
not about
Anything sensitive that that you
all are dealing with? And so I
had asked the other members of
your commission over this next
year as you're doing your work
to think about.
Whether the existing, um law
enforcement records exception
under Ipra is sufficient to
protect the information that you
all are dealing with such that
we could
Could make sure that that
records that should be public
related to the commission are
changed around that. So I just
ask you to
ask your hear other commission
member to to to give that some
thought, Um, you guys are just
getting started. I would not
expect you to take a take a look
at that for for the future.
Otherwise, thank you very much
for your work and your service
and I'm sure thank you.
Thank you, Chairman, Senator
Morris. Thank you, Mr Chair time
ago. I'm sure. Vice chair
Senator Moore's I knew when I
was preparing to enter the
commission. I don't remember it
right now. But I wanna I wanna
guess, early 19 seventies going
to ask
Madam Chair, vice chair. Senator
Moore is a great question, and
fortunately, we have not crossed
that bridge just yet, Um
Really like I've indicated
earlier. It's a fact finding
mission up to this point.
Fortunately, we do have the big
brain injustice Nakamura, who
has already been confirmed to
guide us along a lot of the
constitutional guardrails that
we need in place, um and so
unfortunately, just don't have
enough information or direction
to speak to that point
intelligently here today, so you
also have according to statute
will have subpoena power power
power.
And it's not improbable, and
it's for some reason in 1995.
They defunded it for some, um so
I have concerns about why they
would imagine this was probably
written back. Um so I'm gonna
encourage
You all are here now. Imagine
this was set up for in that last
question I have or
Madam Chair of Vice chair,
Senator Morris. I am aware, at
least to the extent that request
has been made and submitted from
the commission and perhaps
director heart could speak more
intelligently to that point
about the specifics. Um, but we
did request. Uh, an
appropriation.
Madam Chair vice chair.
Rob Hart from the director of
the Organized Crime Commission.
So it was in the governor, the
governor's executive
recommendation.
Which came in after the
DPS had proposed their budget,
so it's administratively
attached, so the funding is
coming in through a request.
Attached to the Department of
Public Safety. I believe it's
being heard on Wednesday with
Secretary Bowie as part of their
budgetary request. The amount
was for 5 Million, which was
first staff. I just got a note
that for the, um lastly
Hmm. But I think that raises
some questions, and none of us
were around. We're reasoning
disappeared and we need them.
We're actually addressing the
needs because Senator
I've had my car stolen on the
center for senators from
Albuquerque. Three. From our you
lead the way and cars that
for recently, my understanding.
I know we made some think about
that.
Four of us and I know that's
organized crime he does.
Use the airport used the
resource. We gotta get control
of the Albuquerque. You use our
hospitals.
You, Madam Chair Vice chair,
Senator Morris. Thank you for
the question, and I can speak at
least my perspective in that I'm
most excited about the
technology and the
implementation around some
communities in New Mexico that
are already using utilizing a
lot of technology.
Based
Investigative
Tools such as license plate
reading and facial recognition,
And really, it helps to keep law
enforcement safe and allows you
to be a little more proactive
and it allows you to track
statewide and really kind of
regional and nationwide efforts.
Um, and so I think with
implementation a lot of those
tools, infrastructure, real time
data and information sharing,
uh, through all law enforcement
agencies. I think you're gonna
see a great reduction and
intercepting a lot of
Organized crime.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Um, I kind of share some of the
concerns that Senator Morris has
One of the areas um
Again is to make sure that your
commission
You, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Just as a
reminder. We have five other
appointments and reappointments
to get through with the hard
stop at 1025 signal Further
questions or comments under
Stewart.
Mr Chairman, I move approval
motion by Senator Stewart's We
can have a roll call all those
in favor. Any opposition? Sorry.
Any opposition to this being
done? They can have the number
three.
By a vote of eight.
Confirming a yes. Three excused.
You move. Sure if I share
Committee Thank you so much. You
Mr Montoya. We're not sure when
we will be hearing you on the
Senate floor. But you, thank
you.
We're gonna go onto your second
one, Senator Gonzalez, which is
David Davison Koenig appointment
to the museum Board of Regions.
Thank you.
Madam chair and vice chair.
Uh, with
Appointment to the museum Board
of Regions and we have Mr Coyne
Davidson Packard.
He comes also with a lot of
experience formation shows that
he has worked in seventh states.
And also very interested into
the work that needs to be done.
And with that, being on the time
that you're looking at, I will
yield to him for some comments.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam. Chair chair
members of the Senate.
Ah, thank you. It's an honor to
be here. It's an honor to be
selected, potentially join the
New Mexico Museum Board of
Regions.
I've been in the art culture.
Profession for the last 30
years, the last 20 years in the
museum field.
Um and the executive director,
curator of the cow Sharp
Historic site, and Tallis, New
Mexico, such I'm very invested
in the preservation
interpretation Education of New
Mexico's art history culture.
We've now been in town house for
eight years. My wife is an
enrolled member of Santa Clara
Pueblo. And, um, yeah, it's it's
a privilege to be part of this
board overseeing Domecq.
Thank you so much for those
comments, and we do have
somebody who signed up to make
comments on your behalf. Garth
Clark, if you can come up, Thank
you for the opportunity to, um
Voice to the approval of
Davidson Koenig to this
position.
Um
It's It's really
Exciting when you can recommend
someone with such enormous
skills I've known
Davidson for 10 years and I've
watched him work through a whole
series of situations and roles
in the art field. First of all.
His a somewhat practicing
sculptor. Very good one for
that.
Matter. He has run museums, art
galleries, He has been a
curator. He has done documentary
films. He has, um
Great knowledge of Native
American pottery, but on the
other side has also temporary
art world and follows.
Uh, what happens there?
So, uh, he brings a sort of
boots on the ground.
Understanding of budgeting of
curating of the various things
that are involved in this, uh,
my background is that I'm an art
critic.
The least beloved person on the
planet Earth, I suppose.
But, um
Um I'm a fellow of the Royal
College of Art in London and a
member of its court, Mr Clark,
you have about 30 seconds. Thank
you. And, um so you know, I've
been able to watch his work with
great great satisfaction and I
really hope that he has
confirmed Thank you so much. And
with that I'll go to questions.
Signal senator RTZ Pillow
Thank you, Mr Chairman and and
just very quickly is the sharp
Cousteau Foundation and
independent. Uh, it's not part
of the the the New Mexico
Network of museums.
Madam Chair. Vice chair,
Senator. Yeah, we are a separate
501 c three were not good. Thank
you very much for
Stepping forward being willing
to take on the
Uh and we look forward to seeing
great progress in our museums.
Phoenix
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
the comment I had was that
Senator Morris. Thank you. Um,
we're gonna have a number of
these real questions.
Um
So the border regions actually
has rule maker Vice chair chair.
Senator I'm going to defer that
question to George Goldstone,
chairman of the New Mexico
border regions, If you can come
up and just speak into them
terrified.
Um, are stewards
You do a lot of fundraising.
Thank you. What's the will of
the committee just passed by
Senator Moore's second by
senators to Phoenix if I can
have a roll call vote.
And the when we're in session,
we we and we should do roll call
votes just so it's clear clear
for that.
So the motion is to move ahead
with this contrary.
Yes.
No remorse. Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
With eight voting Yes, and one
excuse. You will move on to the
full Senate confirmation. Thank
you, madam Chair.
I believe that Senator O'Neill
is on his way over right now. We
were gonna go
Good morning, madam Chair.
Morning.
Yeah.
Yes. Yeah.
No joke. After four.
Ship, but I don't think there's
a hell Yes, he is right behind
you, Senator.
Are you sure? Okay. Good
morning, Senator O'Neill. Good
morning.
So I think Cherry Creek.
What was the Jaguars?
Bruins one state in Colorado.
Quarterback went on to play
Colorado.
Division one and everything else
is okay.
They're also I want to know What
is middle name is
Michael. Okay, cool.
This guy is wonderful.
Thank you, Senator. Mr.
Thompson. Would you like to make
some remarks? Um Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair. Thank you so much.
It's an incredible honor to
serve and
It's being on the board of
Regions is like being a
legislator. It's
It's uh it looks cooler than it
actually is, in the end. Um, but
It.
It's an It is an incredible
honor. And I'm incredibly proud
of the folks that work at D. C.
A.
Uh, the folks who serve there.
They're not doing it for the
money. And so it's an incredible
honor to support that function
of the state of New Mexico.
Okay? And there were there was
no one who signed up for any
comments either In support of Mr
Chairman. Thank you and Joe.
Thank you so much, Senator. Mr
Thompson. I just noticed that
hadn't realized this. I wish I
had known this earlier this year
that you were the president.
Of the Capital Art Foundation.
Um, how did you get that Madam
chair and Mr Chair like I don't
know, right in 2007, the
Legislative Council service.
Put me on that on the Capital
Art Foundation, and then I've
just risen by way of attrition.
So, um, but it it's it's I mean,
we're all so proud of the
collection here.
It's amazing. It's remarkable.
There's no state capital like
the one we're in right now. Mr
Chairman. The reason I I asked
about Anya Ho.
Who is doing a story Or maybe it
already appeared. I didn't see
Did it appear in?
Okay, We'll have to look at
that, but but she was doing a
story. Did she write that one on
your whole?
She was doing a big feature
story about it for
and I and if I had known you,
did she talk to you, Mr
Thompson? I did not visit with
her. Mr.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and doing
this, in addition to everything
else that you do.
I do want to talk to you about
an aspect of the Captain come
up, and I never knew who to talk
to Senator Lopez. Thank you, Mr
Chair, and it's so fun to have
you sitting here in front of us,
Um, Mr Thompson for all the
time, right? You're always
working with us on the other
side of body. Um
Lopez. We had a motion for a do
pass by Senator Moore's Is there
a 2nd 2nd by Senator Stefan IX,
if I can have a roll call vote.
Yes.
Yes.
With the vote of eight do pass
and three excused. We will see
you on the Senate floor. Thank
you.
Fingerboard. I want to go to
your two appointments and I'm
going to start off with Sonia
Chavez.
Who has been appointed to the
governor's organized Crime
Prevention Commission.
Commission. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks.
Member of Committee. Um, Sonia
is a great story will do since
we've already asked questions,
and I think you guys are
incredibly impressed with her
resume just have experience in
this building up on the fourth
floor during the administration
and also in the press, and then
she was recruited recruited by
the FBI to come work for them.
Amazing story, including here in
New Mexico, fighting organized
crime already
Also fought gangs and Chicago as
a member of the FBI and is now
with the marshal service so
incredibly impressive resume. I
think she's gonna bring a logic
and you've heard some of our
concerns in the past.
Madam chairwoman.
Um, Mr Vice Chair. Thank you,
Senator. More. Um, just one
correction. I retired from the
marshal Service from Federal
service on October 27th and
starting my new job here is the
new director of the Law
Enforcement Academy with the
Department of Public Safety. The
following Monday on the 30th.
It's been my honor to, um, start
my career in public service here
in New Mexico and then in a very
roundabout way and up back here.
Um, I feel really honored to
have been asked to serve on this
commission as it is, um, going
to give us an opportunity to,
um find creative ways to address
are very, very serious Crime
issue here in New Mexico, Um,
one of one of the biggest things
we have to do is communicate
better, and that's one of the
things that has come up in the
last several months.
In the meetings that we have had
on the commission with, um
virtually every state, federal
and local agency here in New
Mexico when we're hearing from
them, Um we still fail to
communicate. Well, um
It's a different levels of law
enforcement. So one of the one
of our priorities will be to
look at a centralized
intelligence center, Um, looking
at the New Mexico Fusion center
and seeing how we can modify
that and bring it, um into this
into the newest level of, um
Uh, of technical expertise. It
behooves us to have the
organized crime Commission
attached to the Department of
public Safety because that is a
a wealth of influence and, um,
presence in New Mexico. Um the
state, federal and local
partners all work in conjunction
with the Department of Public
Safety, principally through the
state police.
And so know that it's not about
just bringing forward and
creating all these new things.
We don't have to reinvent
everything. We need to
capitalize on the wonderful
resources that we have. And so
that's part of what our approach
will be.
Um I could say a lot more, but I
know we have some time
constraints. So, Madam
Chairwoman, Mr Chair.
Thank you so much, and we do
have to who are here to speak on
your behalf? Cabinet Secretary
Bowie if you can come forward
and chief wise one
Members of the committee. I'll
be real brief speaking. Support
us on your child. Um I first met
her when I was with French
Police department. That's a very
popular areas here in Mexico. It
was
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you.
Chief Weisler.
Is for
Oh, probably more than a decade
worked with her and organized
crime. The FBI
So obviously continue to work
with her. Now there.
I can't imagine a better subject
matter. Expert on the topic,
Also a native New Mexican from
You know it's mountains.
Moriarty. So she always has this
position. Thank you. Thank you
so much. Now No. One signed up
in opposition of this comfrey.
any questions from the committee
in the interest of time I'll
movie do pass arm sorry many
years ago,
Senator do Hig.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I know
you heard the discussion. Uh,
about, uh, Brian and needed
reforms to the statute overall,
but I would just impress that
again upon you. We would love to
hear from you as we're heading
into, Uh, you think would be
appropriate. Thank you. And you
guys should see the ring she's
wearing afterwards. It's pretty
cool. I mean, we do pass.
Yes.
Senator Morris votes. Yes,
Senator Nyberg. You know it's
yes. Stomach stuff. Phonics
votes. Yes, Senator Stewart,
Senator R M E. Oh, yes, Senator
Ari Munich? Yes.
Vote count of eight for a do
past three. Excused. We will see
you Miss Chavez on the Senate
floor. Congratulations.
Right
to
keep you there, Senator and
we're going to call up Elizabeth
Beth Chavez.
Who is being reappointed the
museum of the Board of the
Museum Board of Regions. Good
Morning. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, madam
Chair. Thanks. Member of the
committee. Beth Chavez.
Elizabeth Chavez isn't a
Mexican. She went to Albuquerque
High School, got her master's
degree at you and M. She's a
Lobo, Um, Senator RTC piano and
has an incredibly long history
of in business and also
development with number of
nonprofits.
And retired. I retired believing
from Catholic charities and then
God appointed in the previous
administration to this board, so
she has been on this board
chair. Um, Madam Chair,
Elizabeth, if you would like to
thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Mr.
Chairman, Um, senators, It is an
honor to be here and being
confirmed, hopefully as a
regent.
Um, you know, with my resume, I
I've I have a deep passion for
New Mexico and I feel, um the
museum and historic sites is one
of the strongest most positive
aspects of New Mexico.
And my hope as I continue, if
confirmed, is to increase the
access to our museums and
historic sites.
To the people of New Mexico
orally as well as in Santa Fe
Right now, majority of the
museum attendance is actually
through tourism. So, um, we have
a good job ahead of us didn't
really encouraged the youth of
New Mexico. There's a lot of
effort right now through D. C.
A. They're really focused on
bringing groups of Children into
the museums.
And to the historic sites.
And I hope that we can continue
to increase that it's a chance
for New Mexico to really shine.
And really position ourselves to
be something positive to talk
about with New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you so much. We didn't
have anyone sign up and support
or in opposition of the
reappointment. Any questions?
Senator Lopez.
Back in front of committee.
Um So, uh,
But those who work within our
continue serving
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr
Chair and Senator Lopez. I want
to just comment and say I feel
during my tenure, I have seen a
significant improvement in the
management through the current
secretary, the collaboration
between the different divisions
is phenomenal. And, um, the
other thing I'd like to just
address is that we are so
fortunate.
To have the incredible staff we
do.
Throughout that whole system,
and it is hard. It's hard to
keep qualified people with the
kind of salaries we pay here in
New Mexico.
But I my sense is that most of
those staff members that I've
had the opportunity and honor to
meet.
They're as committed to the work
more from the point of passion
than monetary reasons, so
Just wanted to make that
comment. Thank you.
Thank you and the other comments
or questions, Senator or cheesy
peanut
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just
very quickly. I realized one of
your
References is a good is a
neighbor of ours. Holy right,
anybody that's have to vote for,
But thank you. Also, you've been
on the 17. That's that's a great
Continuity is an important thing
on any of these public boards.
Thank you for being willing to
keep on serving. Thank you Know
other questions. There's a
motion for do pass by Senator
Moors have a second.
Second by Senator neighbor if I
can have a roll call vote.
Senator Lopez votes.
Er, Stewart. Excuse me. Oh, yes,
yes. Vote of eight to do past
three. Excuse. We will see you
on the Senate floor and I have
gotten word from the majority
leader that we will be hearing
these great, thank you
handing it over to our chair.
Well, thank you, Mr West Chair
We're going to now do the
confirmation of
Ah, George Goldstein.
Senator Hermia will be filling
in for Senator Worth.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you so much for having us
this morning. I have with me.
George Goldstein, who has been
asked for reappointment to the
museum Board of Regions. Now
George is a health care
executive with over 40 years'
experience, but who has also
experienced with museums is
currently the leadership cabinet
member of the Museum of New
Mexico Foundation.
A member of the building
committee of the Valdemar
Contemporary Museum and vice
president of the Board of
Regions of the Museum of New
Mexico, and he's also had some
past areas as the chairman of
the Santa Fe Council of the
Arts. He was a trustee for the
Santa Fe Foundation Board and
the treasure and trustee of the
National Hispanic Cultural
Center. And with that, I'm gonna
hand it over to our
Contrary to speak a little bit
under his his own behalf. Thank
you, Senator, Madam Chairman,
vice chairman members of the
board.
Um it's an honor to be here.
It's an honor to serve our gems
in this state or museum. It's
our history. We come from
Um, I have been a region for
17 years.
And have been president for two
terms.
As I said, honored to be here
for a Reconfirmation hearing,
and, uh
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much. And thank you,
Senator.
We did not have anyone sign up
and support or opposition so we
will go to comments from the
committee. It's so good to see
you again. Mr
We don't
And maybe even through manage
chair. Sometimes,
Senator Senator Lopez chaired.
This is my fourth confidence,
phonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Your past experience are
extremely beneficial. Thank you,
Senator Neighbor.
Just one question. Um, there are
nine regions on the board. We
finally finally have a full
board Senator Morris
confirmations, and Senator
Nibert asks, alright, any other
questions or comments from the
committee Second? Alright, let's
have a role center Baca.
Romeo? Yes.
Votes. Senate Senator Do Hick?
Yes, the vote of eight in favor
you We will see you on the
Senate floor today. And for
we're at the beginning of our
hearing. We weren't sure if the
folks were doing confirmations
for would be heard on the floor
today or another time just so
everyone knows it will be today.
So if you'd like to be there for
it, please stick around and we
will see you down there.
Round 11 with that Senate rules
is in recess. You
