in that way and then lastly with
respect to the prohibited period
we kind of have a gap in our law
the currently
Members cannot knowingly solicit
contributions during the
prohibited period and that's
important and in the lobbyist
regulation Act lobbyists are not
allowed to make contributions in
the privative period that leaves
a gap where non lobbyists could
still make contributions in the
prohibited period without
without the members asking for
those those contributions and
this bill response to that gap
as well so this this is a really
good disclosure bill and it's
it's motivated and each of its
ways to to prevent corruption
and the appearance of quid pro
quo corruption thank you.
Thank you very much are we did
not have anyone sign up either
in support or in opposition of
this bill so we will go ahead
and go to before I go on is
there anyone who here is here in
the audience to all the money I
have signed up is if you're here
to support you raise your hand.
Thank you if you here in
opposition could you please
raise your hand.
Thank you do we have anyone
online which is raised our hands
in the face support or
opposition to that found no.
Three thank you so we'll go
ahead and go to questions of the
committee at from the committee
I have Senator Moores on first
thank you very much of Madam
work are we going to do public
testimony are bills how was was
one of them I just saw it
realizes you're for sure so
Senator so the the procedures
for the Senate rules committee
which is posted on both the
what's happening page where this
Senate judiciary procedures are
also on the actual rules page
lays out what that how we handle
public comments which is that
folks on me to sign up for
public comment at least an hour
beforehand with the then there's
a an email address listed there
where they can do so and if they
are signed up we.
We will take their public
comment if if they have not
signed up that we will do this
kind asked for a raise of hands
but we would ask that that folks
who are interested in bills are
coming for the Senate rules
committee please do review those
procedures are and and we would
love to hear from you generated
from wind gentlemen
it is added opposition.
Thank you very very ranchers.
We educate us and some of the
public.
Thanks for reading they graduate
they center and I'm gonna have.
Chasen's when over a long time
and for polluters what's the
purpose of.
a couple questions we talked off
one little bit
yes it was on the the small
dollar donations that was up to
all.
Two thousand dollars are.
Of.
Limitations through the
directing more offsite it's one
read whatever version four is a
no answers no hole on that and I
know we've in the past had to
fix it from a political on our
contribution donation maximums
that automatically is adjusted
every two years by the secretary
of state and so the courage to
do that for the hundred dollars
twenty years about a hundred
dollars now so thank you for the
process are encouraging you to
do that and then here I
appreciate that I think that's
certainly something we can.
We can look at and we don't have
to be coming back and.
We can a limited just again
these are small dollar and
recurring donations and that's
worth looking at certainly for
section subsection four page
twenty four.
Chair thank center one of the
new phenomenons I think we've
seen special last couple
sessions is
Fifty two not all that familiar
with it but the the old the
advertised on social media
now I'm not sure this bill
addresses that are not it's very
low cost in your geofence
anything you're using geo
fencing area like say just the
capitol building over to certain
issue this past spring and
summer where I think I was born
and all three projects Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino were the only ones
good Facebook ads attacking
No one else seemed to be getting
these things members of able to
target just legislators that
seem like
And so those things I do have a
power because at it had a coupon
to affect as I've seen this one
actor going all.
Almost month after month also
known also seen it in obviously
a very very low dollar amount
because as a very small so this
wanted to dress any of that kind
of advertising soliciting
lobbying.
So actually madam chair and
senator it would cause for the
first time it would require
disclosure of who is paying for
it on page eight and nine you'll
see we've added electronic
communications.
Not specifically for the reason
you say again you can't it's
obviously.
You know entities have the right
to first amendment right to
express opinions on things but
when there's an electronic
communication in the same way.
Under the current law when it's
a one of the phone call and an
audit of the phone call you
gonna disclose work if you're
gonna roll call during the
session he's the schools where
that's coming from we're adding
electronic communication for
exactly the reason you say I
mean this the the the playing
field has evolved so and it goes
the doesn't stop it but it does
require you know where it's
coming from chair Senators they
have to disclose it's gonna be a
small dollar amount do have to
disclose to funding that.
So it's on both sides of the
aisle out these groups so you
think that it aims for the thank
you look at the eight eight and
nine section a I'll just read it
the campaign committee or
political committee that's
required to register pursuing
the campaign reporting act shall
not expend campaigner political
committee funds to directly or
indirectly pay for a telephone
call now we're adding for
electronic communication without
disclosing to the recipient the
name of the organization that
authorized or paid for the call
for electronic communication if
the call or electronic
communication and then some is
one of five hundred or more
calls that are similar in nature
during an election cycle so you
do have an interesting situation
where I mean this applies if
someone is a campaign committee
or political committee again the
whole the challenge has always
been and this goes off.
That's exactly right if it's if
they're educating about an issue
you know that there's a first
amendment right to do that and
they're they're not required to
you know they're not a campaign
committee or for political
committee there I once that's
that whole that's what senator
Wirth is in these nonprofits or
doing it.
Wages rises for political
operatives well and other
interests that.
It's a bigger issue is it and
this goes as far as we can go
and you're right this is an
issue that again really came out
of the state Senate in the two
thousand and late eight election
cycle when I first ran to move
to the state Senate nonprofits
educating voters about.
Sitting incumbents records on
issues
and then Attorney General tried
to say that that needed to be
treated as a campaign.
Reporting and and and basically
Judy Herrera was a federal
district judge in that case said
no there's specific kind of
windows of thirty days before
primary sixty days before a
general election but if you're
not in those windows in your not
expressly if you're expressly
advocating for or against the
client does work for don't vote
for Mark Moores then it can be
pulled in and you got a report
but if it's educating about an
issue that doesn't get pulled in
the Senator those messages that
you just said you come from
your.
Those are.
Okay so I think yeah I I I I I'm
I'm with you on that
going back a little bit to the
blackout period and this is
always a concern since for
eleven years we've had this
conversation this committee
about the solicitation we know
why we don't have a solicitation
because I'm going to assume in
years past there were some
legislators say give me five
hundred dollars off of your bill
The problem we have session
Albuquerque is I have a PO box
and excuse myself for example in
order to
I just two weeks ago
right for the session started
last semester my P. O. boxers
Google charts Energy in December
so my question I'm sure center
what is the penalty.
If we received your your staff
saying that cancellous of which
we all agree to but there's a
administrative offense
that we're going to get mail
we're going to get things in the
mail that non solicited
and so you're now saying that we
can not accept those
Representative to return them
and my concern is that we're
we're now criminalizing
an administrative process update
that that down to the debate the
beta supposedly have very real
ethical issue we have give me
money available for this X. YC
known as a manager in center
that's a good question let me
just direct you to page twenty
four line twenty three because
again.
The fact that it happens I mean
obviously we got to educate all
of us but what that says any
contribution received during the
prohibited period in excess of
the limit the steps in the
section so we return to the
donor a donor or donated to the
public election fund prior to
the end of the reporting period
which the excess donation was
received so the fact that you
get it you know you just return
it to the downturn second take
this now or for you make a
donation to the election fund
I guess the the issue you're
bringing up is what would happen
if you go ahead deposit and then
I think it's going to be on
there's not there's no there's
no new.
L. T. R. crime that's being
created here in a deal to the
secretary of state in terms of
what the you know I think you'd
be very very highly shin and
there be administrative process
and and potentially I don't know
that the criminal process as
well so I madam chair members of
the committee certainly the
secretary in the process
currently includes an effort
towards voluntary compliance
from there are those types of
issues I'm and I don't know if
Mandy Vigil would like to add
additional technical information
regards to that but you are
correct receipt is is the
appropriate word so when you
receive a
a contribution that's when you
report it to me.
Earning madam chair members of
the committee Senator Moores
that's an excellent question we
do have an administrative role
that kind of provide some
additional guidance on what does
it mean to receive a
contribution and so that would
be actually when you take
control of that so that's
sitting in your mailbox while
you're here at session you
haven't necessarily received
that but once you have that in
hand that would be the date that
you need to to report and then
handle it accordingly.
So.
Madam Senator so.
About post office box.
And yet considering.
The staff although the chronic
renal.
Wants to but just over a lot of
students so.
What I'm hearing is that I
probably should involve our my
post office box during the
session your check my mail
because once I do that I receive
their indisputable legislative
session after that take that
checked mail it back
Senator Wirth I don't know if
you have anything to add there
but to receive an according in
accordance with the definition
of receipt then you would need
to follow the statutory
requirements to handle that
contribution so and I'm just I'm
just just to be clear so so
right now if you go to your
mailbox over the you know on
Saturday and you've got
secondary you can deposit.
Under the current law you can
deposit that check we didn't
solicit and and as I understand
it you can depart maybe I'm
wrong make sure I'm clear on
this but this is a this is one
of the challenges right now that
we have and what this would say
is you can receive it you can't
deposit it and you've got to
return it and here's the key
prior to the end of the
reporting period in which the
donation was received so it's
not like you're gonna have to
turn around and immediately send
a check back.
So we're going to penalize
people for.
It's sitting in the briefcase or
something like that and
Don't send it back right away
during the year the session got
about it Topola page twenty
twenty five it needs to be
reciprocal brought a twenty four
twenty one twenty five and one
one so we return to the donor
intending to the public election
fund prior to the end of the
reporting period in which the
excess donation was received.
So.
To the property to put in the
bank or receive it for right now
you can either put it back could
be face to last session or.
What you're saying is no about
under this this this is saying
it's it's could clarify just the
way we part exactly that
situation where where where you
didn't where you had a lobbyist
who sent the check when they
could send the check not during
the session but.
You know two weeks.
Before the end of the year and
you'll go to the bank you don't
get it in time yeah I think
madam I think we've probably all
had the experience wasn't
holidays
we get checks after the election
cycle in the in the mailbox you
know check it until the end of
January so what as
you guys get that are figure
check so I do
But I just want to make I wanna
make sure for administrative
processes remote groups for the
time being I just like to
understand the apple issues that
we're not setting traps for.
I do not have a Representative
staff or application.
Zero to come after us all.
I just wanna make sure also to
trap for ourselves and future
legislators.
Madam chair and and senator
Morris the only thing I would
add is that this language
actually clarifies the exact
issue that you're bringing forth
we get this question very often
at our office so this this
language actually clears that up
and provide the more bright line
for us to be able to educate and
support and enforcement action
that might come to either of our
agencies sure Senator
Representative was just point
out there which is where I kind
of was going to see if it's
unlawful and election code does
kick over criminal penalties.
And I think that is accurate yes
service center more so there's
two provisions in in the CRA one
deals with civil penalty is the
other one with criminal
penalties if the only time I
think that the end to end
overall there's still always the
compulsion on the secretary of
state's office of Percy fall
taking clients to matter why.
I know that's their policy but
is that statute is is yes and so
the only time that is going to
kick over into the criminal
potential criminal penalties as
of its be knowingly and
willfully violated the act and
then it's
kind of up to a hundred that are
a.
I'm up to a thousand dollars
imprisonment not more than one
year about less it's willful and
and and knowingly done it's not
going to kick over to criminal
yeah.
Chair Senators sectors that.
Prosecutor on the left and madam
chair members of the committee
not to my knowledge I defer to
general counsel chair Senator
there has not to my knowledge.
Enforcement actions taken for
prohibited period violation.
As we move forward in this
legislation.
Setting up traps for one the
last thing we talk again offline
about this is a loan of I did a
long one I first ran for my
primary which I thought about I
could do an interest on that
done across what years at
one for the federal race the
feds were incredibly cumbersome
so preference on the how the
Santos guys pull that off
because we had to do proof of
bank accounts where just like
computers if we do a loner or
something you have to get on the
status of your back and stuff
like that would do that with the
fed so is that where you're kind
of going because it was very
good the threshold for the fence
was incredibly cumbersome in for
a for a non pay legislature the
that would be really cumbersome
for someone like me eleven years
ago the one I just give myself a
small school my primary
Capricho.
So what do you envision with
that kind of proof the process
was very very deal very very in
depth so two two things madam
chair and senator first work
we're doing away with interest
so that's just gonna take that
off the table you just can't do
that and then on page twenty two
line eighteen section G. which
currently requires you disclose
the amount of each plan rate
debt and a dented the other
person to whom the data so we're
going to add the you now need to
disclose the terms of any loan
that a candidate makes to the
candidate's campaign committee
and evidence of any loan that a
candidate makes to the
candidate's campaign committee
so two things term and evidence.
What do I think there's going to
be wrong is there for secretary
of state to put in place some
regulatory definitions about
exactly what that is so and I
think it's important just as you
say that there's knowledge of
front you know so it's clear I
think that this makes it clear
to two candidates okay if if if
you do alone you're gonna have
to kind of go down this path but
to your point with the federal
system requiring you to do.
We haven't specified every
single thing that's required in
the statute I would think that
that would be something that
could be done with more
specificity through rule or
regulation so so madam chair
Senator I didn't realize I I
know there's rules that you.
A constitutional or on the basis
about being able to give
yourself as much money as you
want when you're to your own
personal campaign.
I don't know you'd go out to.
Work of bank and loan a go with
pull out alone.
and use that for campaign money.
I guess that's a tough Cruz
simple.
So madam chair I think you know
this is one of those areas that
simply as Mr Ferris stated has
been undefined and then you know
so so whether it was a
commercial institution or.
Yeah your credit card or or your
you know your uncle is doing a
family loan at fifteen percent
you could see the worst case
hypothetical I don't think we've
seen that happen and so I just I
what Mr verison rack this is
kind of a.
Yep proactive way to.
Just let everyone know up front
that you still got the ability
to loan your campaign money but
there needs to be documents to
support it growth we drive a
sport that is your money because
I've either I thought alone
always have.
but you could go out and get a
loan from Germany to say this
ten thousand dollars.
I thought that was the.
It's.
At that point I thought you have
always have under the federal
case suppose case laws that have
to be your personal one.
I guess we just don't require
that proof.
Sorry no chair members of the
committee senator if it's a
personal loan
if it's not a personal loan it's
subject to contribution limits
currently.
So would you require you to
disclose that I did go to fund
on going alone who who that
person was so madam cherry wood
the terms of any loan of the
candidate may well that a
candidate makes to the
candidate's campaign committee
and evidence of any loan the
candidate makes of the
candidate's campaign committee
and and this something I want to
look at this language a little
more because I want to make sure
that we're not.
That's that's exactly right I
mean the way this is drafted I'm
concerned about the example of.
You know would would would the
loan from the uncle.
They could have happened the
would it need to be disclosed so
I mean this is a good flag and
will I think state look at less
and less Mr Ferris has an answer
for that but it looks to me like
the way we've got distracted now
it's it's a candidate loaning
money to themselves.
And so I think that right now
you could have a situated it's
it's unclear if you got a loan
from a bank or a loan from.
The uncle what that looks like
so we need to look at that is if
it moves over to the judiciary
are there are quite from it on
the house on Santo's pull that
off.
This call came from.
With the evidence of federal
required so.
The it shock are audited for the
Evans I wouldn't know
so look at that one that's a red
flag from dressing issue that if
you wanted to address and
senator if I may I I I don't
know and and feel free to
correct me if I'm wrong about
this but I don't think we want
to do anything that would expand
the ability for folks other than
the candidates themselves to
give loans and I don't know
necessarily that what this
changes going at is getting that
who gave them the money that
that personal loan is them cope
going to it's I think it's also
going that largely did a loan
actually happened because I can
say I am loan my campaign ten
thousand dollars never did it
and then I get to pay myself ten
thousand dollars hi for this
fictional law that has occurred
so I think that's really what
what disclosing those terms more
is going to not so much finding
out that your uncles the one you
originally got those funds from
that you're napping using for
personal loan it's it's really
going to whether there is a
legitimate loan period in the
first place measures for right.
We've all done mortgages and
when you do a mortgage you have
to prove to the mortgage company
that the money came from you was
in your bank account the last
number of months it was just
given to you by your your
parents and also the cash in
your bank account so they
actually look at that.
So that's where you're getting
that right there.
In center kind of but I I think
we just want to be fun and I'm
not saying that that we don't
need to to me look at this
language and fiddle with it but
I I do want to caution us
against doing anything that will
potentially open the door to to
allowing loans beyond the on
from that that the candidates
themselves well and madam chair
I I think we may need to look at
some language that makes
explicit you can't do it I mean
that's the other question if
that's the direction we want to
go I think we got multiple
issues here I think the issue of
loans is one that needs to be.
Discussed and that's what this
is reporting to do I completely
agree with you it's it's the the
way this languages drafters
you're right Senator is focused
on the the loan you make to your
own.
Campaign whether you're charging
fifteen percent for for not even
making it you know that's the
issue that chairs bring up but
but I think that we should look
at the other piece to a perhaps
with explicit language.
It just prevents.
Third party loan to a campaign
but again we'll talk about that
and I think it's that and the
issue of the CPI on the federal
are things that I'm certainly
willing to work on some.
Talk to this UCBI and alone in
the same sentence views like
current interest rate so you put
a thousand dollar loan right now
on to your campaign with the
cost inflation right now eight
nine percent you're losing money
Rabb rather rapidly so I I the
market because too complicated
but if you're not gonna for the
attack had capped the interest
rate at zero point one think
about CPR on that because if you
put in ten dollars dollars right
now in the year that's going to
be worked on nine thousand
dollars and madam chair I think
what this bill does is you're
not getting interest so you
don't need to CPI what about you
put your foot in it is that zero
and that's exactly right so on
that specific provision we're
just eliminating that potential
problem which you're losing
money so you're building a did
you got a million dollar loan
and you've got a percent
interest all of us you know you
can see how quickly.
That does campaign contributions
could be used to pay back
interest on the loan which is
clearly what we don't want and I
don't think there's evidence of
that happening but this is one
of those proactive.
Medicaid match service center
okay.
Thank you next we have Senator
fox.
thank you madam chair
Thank you for caring this bill I
have a couple questions but I'd
like to start with the motion on
page twenty four line twenty.
In of the letter their act.
Chair Senator if you could say
that one more time
Twenty four line.
We.
Section B. and re letter there
after.
The.
You want to some of the work
this is that from.
So madam chair my concern based
on the conversation we just had
about this language is that this
is this is.
What we're basically saying now
was reading a new provision that
says you can't.
Except money during the
prohibited period even if you
don't solicit.
And so I I guess I'd like to
understand what the logic would
be and not.
So in other words if if someone
gives you a check for a thousand
dollars you're not allowed to
accept that.
The all this is saying is that
you need to return it or donate
to the fund so if we don't have
that in there I guess what would
be the.
What's the desired purpose of
the amendment what happens then.
Madam chair I believe that this
puts another burden on
Elected officials who are
serving in office I myself use a
PO box as well
I myself now have all morning
committees.
Here from morning till night and
doing this type of paperwork on
the weekends of the deposits
would wait probably after the
session in separate Senator.
I don't want my those be bought
as people know but of.
I don't see it is influencing
me.
And so if the individual amounts
come in.
It might be.
The understanding somebody
they're trying to influence me
but if people really know me
they know that's not true so I
think this really raises some
questions as to whether it would
follow to.
That's my purpose.
In deleting that section.
So madam chairman my concern
would be that I think what you
need to do I mean if basically
is delete the exception that
says you can't accept a
contribution because fate with
this ammendment what you're
doing is putting all of us in a
position where you can you can't
accept any contribution and and
then we're saying okay what we
get it in a post office box I
mean I think if you're trying to
say I want to be able to deposit
that contribution to keep things
status quo I mean I just with
the with this the whole section
up above on starting with the
program to a page twenty four
line for.
That that's got this is this is
this that allows you to accept a
contribution and these are the
the the little windows other
than the prohibition that exists
so I just what they are this is
this is a it's a policy decision
I personally think that having
that I've actually having this
language is better I'm gonna
tell you I think there's nothing
more complicated right now than
walk in the money law office on
January fourth and having a
stack of checks in there.
And again you can just deposit
on which quite frankly is a lot
of work to go and you know
that's a that's a problem too
but that this would basically
say.
What I'm gonna file and send
them back once we're done with
the session because of not
reporting period during the
session and so again I think
that's a.
You know that's a that's a
philosophical question I mean we
are taking the next step and
just kind of closing what I
think is challenging but that's
that that's I I hear what you're
saying and that's a policy
choice that can be made.
So madam chair I would wait to
see you five minutes except
you're not and then proceed from
there.
And you have another question.
Can I ask a question of the
secretary of state's office the
reporting period that it is in
existence during the session
when does that end and madam
chair and and senators so
excellent question just to point
out the bill indicates that it
would need to be returned or
kind of managed by the end of
the reporting period so that's
when you know kind of it closed
is that date as to when you need
to include transactions for your
report and so as we sit now in
January the next report is
actually due in April because
we're sitting in and non
election year and so that would
be do you know kind of in the
beginning of April.
So it's it's not necessarily
something you'd have to handle
during the legislative session.
Does that help clear that up.
Thank you.
Senator are you on the amendment
three on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator I would tend to agree
with senators to phonics and you
know another scenario that we
run into with this is is you
know we have a.
People out there that are
sending us monthly contributions
of five and ten dollars and they
sent a memory month.
Instead of go back in administer
that you know or even whatever
whatever that monthly
contribution isn't it Madam
that's there's an exception for
that okay we're going to allow
that the for exactly that reason
can point it out on the twenty
four lines.
Seven is the exception of the
monthly if it's a recurring
contribution of more than a
hundred dollars per month you're
allowed to take that for and
that's from a that could be from
a lobbyist and I'm I'm sorry
Representative if it's a of less
than.
So as the ones that are
organizations on more language
so that maybe so we need to look
at that.
Well.
and and and senators if you go
back to page twenty three it's
saying what's on lawful during
the prohibited prohibitive.
So taking of honoring recurring
contribution of more than a
hundred would be Office point
thank you madam chair so have to
be less than a hundred dollars
and so that's to address exactly
that situation so that that is
allowed and then if you get an
individual contribution that's
less than a hundred dollars
that's on some you know that's
the gap unsolicited because you
can't solicited but you can take
that and then it's got that
threshold of five hundred
dollars in two thousand dollars
so it is making a couple of
exceptions to deal with that
issue.
Yeah I so what I'm understanding
here's a forgetting a recurring
contribution then over one
hundred dollars madam chair and
senator then that would have to
be returned to Madam that's
correct.
I see I I I think we run into
really the the same issue it's
just the amount of money.
You know I anyway I I understand
what you're saying thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
for your responses.
Senator Pirtle from the
amendment.
This.
Madam chair and.
Just a little clarity with the
word received are we
interpreting that as when it
goes through the bank or
received as in possession.
Share madam chair and Senator
Pirtle so we do have an
administrative rule that helps
to clarify that and actually
upon receipt indicates when you
take possession of that
contribution so it's not
necessarily the date that is
dated or the date you deposited
it is the and the date that you
would have that in hand or your
committee would have that in
hand.
Thank you madam chair thank.
Do we have further discussion on
the amendment.
We are is there a motion.
My name motion.
Require second on time and and
Senator now I I'm often require
seconds General chant
all right so the school and do a
roll call vote on.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ingle.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
No.
Senator Moores yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino both units Senator
Pirtle yes.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart hello.
Senator had a meal Senator
Duhigg now.
That all right with that the the
here that amendment passes six
four and and then to just to be
clear all we're doing is
deleting that section B. right
so we are the leading on page
twenty four lines twenty three
and twenty five and on page
twenty five lines one and two
and then remembering subsequent
renew realize yes sadly Senator
thank you this is.
It's office
Indicate whether or not
anything.
Phil.
Would require for the changes to
your computer reporting system.
Madam chair members of the
committee we did provide
feedback in regards to those
specific changes we know that
the public and and folks who use
that are concerned with that
then the if you'd like to speak
to any system changes.
Chair and and Senators I believe
that there will be some
enhancement work that would come
with making some additional
options for the loan provision
and for the independent
expenditures but that is
something that we are planning
for and we're doing incremental
modernization of that system on
an ongoing basis chair and if
you I want to first of all thank
you all for all of your system
most of us.
I have a problem with a system
and one of the very come.
Working with us about this but
that's an issue is
working with the existing
program are there any.
Plans to change it again I mean
the entire system.
Level three.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and senator I think that's a
fair question it's something
that our office continues to
monitor and evaluate we are
obviously coming before this
body to ask for you know funding
and all areas for support of our
office at this point in time
there's not an intention to
scrap that system if you will
there is an intention to put
forth continued effort to
modernize and enhance the
current system and to support
training efforts towards the
system as well thank you madam
chair and thank you for that
response and I hope you will
continue to work with all of us
as we.
On absolutely we appreciate your
patience as well thank you
madam.
If Senator Ingle followed by
Senator Stewart.
Thank you.
Yes this bill twenty some years
ago already Chavis was here we
had a very lengthy debate on
this in of some of the things
that we debated on we're still
talking about on now and the
thing of it is is we try to make
rules everybody stays on ocean
if you want to be if you cheat
at this you can cheat.
And I think we're going to have
this a little more over
complicated what we want for
doctors and we will get
candidates to run remote scare
the hell out.
So that's.
Think about some things because
I can tell you one thing is
scary enough when you run for
office
door getting the books always
rule never even read.
Basically it's the there's
always a huge issue money comes
in during the session and you
know the teachers solicitor not.
And you know the thing about it
is is sometimes it does most of
the time it doesn't been here
thirty nine years of age
happened one time and that was
because it was commissioned to
Minnesota.
And I think this is we're
getting really over complicated
on some of these things
the secretary of state's office
has a hard time administrative
knowledge with all these phone
calls are coming in.
As I get that from logic k'inich
that they're not they can't seem
to get through I'm not being
critical of.
I don't think I am this law is
working
very well.
And you know if you look at the
campaign system that we have
here.
We don't have we don't have a
lot of people doing things for
all.
It is we've got so many new
things in here.
It's very real interesting how
this thing plays out of.
We keep this.
We can about over complicating
the thank.
A couple of things here and the
thing about it is I'm not
blaming anybody for this this
gets very complicated.
But when it gets more confusing
then you have more things to
overall.
And once it goes wrong it
doesn't matter whether totally
innocent mistake or not it's
wrong.
You were going to get is only on
the front page.
Traction will be on page
eighteen.
But the thing about it is if we
need to be very careful what
we're going.
As we all think working well.
How we take money when we take
money.
Thank overcomplicate this to
where we're going to have a real
problem well I the
On.
Thank you.
Thank you senator still if.
Thank you madam chair.
Switch it up here a little that
I have a question Senator Wirth
act hi I can't find.
Can't seem to approve the
analysis I'm looking at can you
just review what you've done for
accepting requirements.
For contributions in a given
year you've deleted something
this is when you're you know
you're you're campaign committee
is an act usually we just had to
say no activity are you changing
that can you point out to the
what were you doing that Madam
page eighteen aligned tend to
leading current law section G..
So madam chair so.
It's fun and all you have to
report even if there's no
activity the man General you'll
secretary this is a this is one
of a kind of.
Fixes that was suggested to me
by the agency so let me have
them respond.
And as as Miss Vigil is respond
that way as a candidate you
already have to file a notice of
that non knowledge no activity
this was just expands the staff
to other.
But that they would not have to
follow the same notices not
activity that we as candidates
are already compelled to file if
we have not taken any any
contributions are done
expenditures during the fourth.
So but by limiting G. that's
what it says yes because she
says it's just so madam chair
because yeah right now there's
there's that would need says the
update on the file anything.
For that for that little windows
that so I think that what the
chair saying is correct it's
going to basically I will let
the secretary to jump in here
but I think that's that is the
correct interpretation madam
chair Senator it this does not
change anything for candidates
this is simply applicables to
political committees and it is
making them file basically a
statement of no activity instead
of doing nothing.
As it reads now they could
simply just cancel their
registration meaning they would
take no action whatsoever which
makes it pretty impossible to
administer if they have to to
take no action we're simply
asking them to affirm that they
have not had any transactions in
a certain period.
All monitor I thought that was
current law
so I I I'm sorry.
Are costly whatever X..
Understand why the limiting why
limiting that I changed.
Understand what changes and
senator you're right that it is
current law for costs it's not
current law for the past and the
folks who an independent
expenditures so we're just
making sure that that the law
the current law that we have
where we have to do this
finalized that the excise to
everyone not just candidates but
still has to check off of no
activity yeah so weird that
that's what happens why we just
we just take out one grant then
by everybody because this is an
exception for drugs.
Senator okay.
Is that thank you.
Yes senator Morris
drama point so there's every
election cycle seems like the
files packs of related
for.
Once and then disappear there
every name free impact and all
the other things that come up
sorry say no but they either
have to close for.
They have to file the report the
Senators Stewart was talking
about so.
So.
Are you having others like
million of these packages show
up out of nowhere every every
cycle so they would have to
continue they're going to
continue the guest active
dormant what happens if they
don't file down so is the
Americans love free compact
thing gone.
Madam chair and senators without
this change right now they could
just go dormant and we would
never potentially hear from them
again
and there is a requirement that
says if you choose to re engage
then you have to start reporting
again we don't have a great
source for that information
unless they are required to file
on an ongoing basis so
essentially we are simply asking
them to either close if they no
longer participating or continue
to file either statement of no
activity or their transactions
that's all this provision would
you.
Director of staff.
I don't know how we have.
I don't know how we even have I
mean all these names are still.
I think would be out of freedom
names and the names of this of
all the packs.
Anymore discussion from the
committee.
both to pass it all right so
we're on a mission for do passes
then the second and we do do
will call the police.
Senator Baca no.
Senator Ingle different Senator
Lopez yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Moores mill.
Senator.
Senator Pirtle
look at all the I know you know
I'm sorry she said talking.
Okay.
So your vote is no thank you
Senator Stefanics yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Hotmail yes.
Senator Lopez to pass I said yes
I'm cert path.
Senator Duhigg yes two three
four five six and senator you
have a do pass the six hundred
just three now and to.
Thank you madam chair members.
Thank you.
And senator Wirth don't go
anywhere because we're on
another bill of yours which is
not forty four for.
Thank you madam chair and Senate
bill forty four simply
Creates rules that are
consistent for polling places
currently right now if the
polling places and in a school
there can be no guns the polling
place if it's not there can be
done presence what this does is
prohibit the carrying of firearm
with a hundred feet of a polling
place during an election with an
exception for peace officers of
this was a bill that didn't
come.
Per se from any agency or group
I had a number of constituents.
He's.
A lifeline.
client constituents who were
working as all workers this past
cycle
one of whom actually stop
working basically because people
were coming to vote with guns I
just don't think guns and
elections mix and this bill is
basically.
Going to create a uniform
standard so that polls that are
not in schools in effect have
the same rules as pools that
are.
Out of school so that's what to
build us.
Thank you senator we did not
have anyone speak signed up to
speak either in support or in
opposition of this bill I'm
sorry you did sign up I
apologize Mister Jimenez
contacted me earlier this
morning so yes.
Yes thank you madam chair
members the committee first I
would like to thank senator
Wirth for bringing forth this
piece of legislation and would
stripper strongly urged the body
to support it I do want to share
a story with you all a common
cause does run election
protection program and non
partisan election protection
program during our elections and
during this past election we got
a call that we had a poll worker
who did take his own firearm
with him to the polls openly
carrying it not to intimidate
not in any way to scare
individuals but because he
himself was fearful for his life
after seeing a lot of the things
on national news individual
showing up to polling locations
with long arms in Arizona
threats to pull workers that we
saw in Georgia he felt that he
would take it upon himself
Department self in the event he
or his colleagues that reporters
our voters themselves were
harmed and you know this piece
of legislation would just take
that away and ensure that we do
not have farms the polling
location where we may have an
accidental discharge or a
perceived threat that is not a
threat for something maybe may
happen in result in in the
passing of life so again I would
again like to thank the sponsor
for bringing forth legislation
and we urge you all to support
thank you.
Thank you has a show of hands is
there anyone in the room who is
here who did not sign up but
once indicate their support.
same for anyone in the room and
inside of one's indicate
opposition.
And all we have a new one in the
same individual locked in with
indicated opposition thank thank
you.
and without all that Senator
Moores you have an amendment.
Thank you madam chair of an
amendment that is a great our.
The other
by memo would
The people who still carries the
so have consumer here is our
offices you will go through
training background checks on
all the issues that you just
addressed the fear that you're
talking about over here Kerry
and the termination factor of
are are very interested in
appreciation are on my side.
So this will all feel conceal
carry as you know madam chair
and position authority known
those schools and for
Centers we go to target for all
the one down there by my house
where that goes apartment for us
so people carry folks to we were
going to the car you know you're
having a problem.
Right to their their fire on the
stove I don't result has a
similar law that bans firearms.
Issues for sure did not work
this last point four the cycle
result without your concern that
we have you still cares about
dating they have all their
highly trained at that
background and all the issues
that you just brought up about
safety of those with concealed
carrier caring and do everything
right to get training to do all
things to do to get to carry for
that very reason now you're
telling them that they can't do
it at the the point place your
your date basically taking them
out of to as potential poll
workers in the future well it is
a good amendment that produce
some some bipartisan support to
issue that you're talking about
still allows those who do
everything right have the
concealed carry permits to go
ahead and
look at that and go to the polls
and not leave it in their cars
at target or on Amazon Marie or
someplace like that for the.
Thank you senator and senator
Wirth is this funding to to hang
one again this would create a
different standard of four holes
that are in schools and pulls
they're not selected problem
with that for that reason and
the second thing I think you
just heard from Mr menace he
gave the perfect example a poll
worker concealed Kerry who's
with over Kerry one match is
over okay fair enough open carry
but again under that scenario
you could've you know whole
worker that's concealed carry
not and I don't want to debate
you know the merits of the
distinction with concealed carry
not conceal Kerry I just think
what we're trying to do here is
keep guns out of polling places
and and and guns out of the
election cycle so it's it's an
unfriendly amendment but I
certainly appreciate that.
Desire for bipartisan.
Is there discussion from the
committee on the amendment.
Did you move the amendment for.
All right let's do a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca yes Senator.
Lopez.
Senator McKenna no.
Senator Morris yes Senator
Pirtle yes.
Senator Stefanics now.
Senator Stewart now.
Senator have a meal of.
Senator did not.
That amendment fails us to
three.
So we're back on the original
fail.
Further discussion from the
committee on the bill.
Yes Senator Bob Evans and R.
Pirtle.
thank you madam chair thank you
senator if
actually that simple that was
just posed about the poll worker
carrying a vote during
kind of a.
It to the concerned me that that
a poll worker could be there as
we know criminals they carry
whether we like it or not so
somebody madam chair wants to
carry in violation of this the
they will the walk in you know
they'll conceal it and you won't
see it and that leaves are poor
workers exposed so I tend to
like the idea of allowing the
poll worker to to be able to
carry if you're working the pole
on to be able to really protect
themselves in the event that
someone violates this and and
intense hostile activities to
point them and I'd like to know
madam chair what with the
sponsor of the state could
sponsor this bill would think of
that phone after we had the same
discussion about that issue.
You know in our building right
here and again I just think this
is a place where.
In in the poll I just don't
think guns concealed or
otherwise should be there and
it's just a philosophical.
Difference
But you and I have and I
certainly respect you know your
position where you're coming
from I just think that.
In this particular situation.
Having having guns of of any
content other than law
enforcement and we made clear to
make an exception for law
enforcement officers
just doesn't make sense and
again for the reasons stated
before on the other amendment it
just does is also doesn't make
sense have different rules for
schools and for other polling
places and and I just but here
in Santa Fe there still are
quite a few point places in
schools and so all this does is
just level the playing field.
Thank you madam chair it in the
school so it's already illegal
to have the economic.
I'm sure that that would be
covered either way so this would
really only be impacting those
polling places that are outside
of educational facilities
correct Madam exactly right it
would create the same rules for
polling places wherever they
are.
and was gonna propose an
amendment but I think I'll just
hang on to it thank you madam
chair.
Senator Pirtle thank you madam
chair thank you senator I do
have a question I didn't know in
Albuquerque that you voted
target.
has huge parking lot target so
that the community centers right
next to target okay I did have a
question if if any of these
locations had private security
that maybe worked peace officers
I've I've been to some
businesses where they'll have a
private security officer who
Kerry's said like Walgreens
we've been to different
businesses where they might have
something like that with that
negatively affect any polling
place in New Mexico
With with regard to private
security the madam chair page
one line twenty five does not
apply to a peace officer or
other security personnel with
written authorization
appropriate municipal or county
election official to be
stationed within a hundred feet
so I think you could.
It looks to me like that
language would cover that
situation provided that there's.
Written authorization to do that
and madam chair center I I
appreciate that so that would
come from say the county clerk
or something along those lines
ahead of the election whenever
whatever deal is struck to have
a polling location at one of
these private it private
businesses or private property
that they could still need to
have their private security
chair yep the proprioceptive the
city election for more County.
Okay madam chair Senators thank
you.
Of the discussion from the
committee.
Senator Stewart.
Senate bill forty.
Thank you.
And before we we take up that
much in this state senator thank
you for for bringing this I
think you're right elections and
guns are bad mix
and we now I would frankly even
gone further we have a section
in our election code says you
can't have alcoholic spirits
within two hundred feet of a
polling place
I think if we can't have alcohol
within two hundred feet we
probably shouldn't have guns
either but but I understand what
you're doing taking the approach
that is going to align with the
rules that are currently in
place for schools and I think
that makes a lot of sense so I'm
not going to be offering an
amendment on that the and also
note that because we also have
another provision that prevents
electioneering within a hundred
feet of the polls our poll
workers are already kind of have
a sense of of keeping an eye on
that hundred fill it radius over
also it's this isn't going to
add a something that they're
already used to paying attention
to to that buffer zone so this
just add one more level of
protection both for voters and
for for election officials and
poll workers and it this is a
nice companion piece to I think
SB forty three I'll do a little
plug that one which is the the
bill to to also
extend that protections we give
against intimidation of voters
to our election officials also I
think this makes a lot of sense
especially in conjunction with
that bill
and so with that we're on a
motion for to pass let's uh call
the roll.
Senator Baca no Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores no.
Senator.
Hello no.
Senator Stefanics yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator how
to me yes Senator due date yes
and with that you have a do pass
on a six to three vote thank you
thank you members.
And that we have Senator Nino's.
Which is seven Senate Joint
Memorial one.
Good morning madam chair members
committee Senate Joint Memorial
number two I just requesting
second in the legislature news
Joint Task Force study pay rate
classifications throughout the
state and budget and best
practices what happened is we
haven't done a payment study the
last payment classification in
the last twenty years and nobody
knows what what the new rate is
what it should be what the comp
rates are
and what's happening so pretty
simple we just we want to create
it had
Task Force and hire a company do
a study on page.
Thank you senator we did not
have anyone signed up to speak
in support or opposition to this
bill is there.
I I see you he already has been
please be sure in the future to
to check the Senate rules
procedures and sign up for bills
that you wish to speak on at
least an hour ahead of the of
the hearing but please if anyone
here please raise your hand if
you like to indicate support.
And anyone here would like to
reserve hand indicate
opposition.
Yes yes.
You
madam chair no.
A ten lane passing.
Okay thank you hi we have a
motion for the taxes early
discussion before we.
To take that much I did ask that
the.
The two thousand eight is there
any opposition to the do passed
motion.
See then you have a unanimous do
pass resources Senator memorial
to resume built in the committee
on.
For.
US senator Neville thank you for
joining us thank you madam
chair.
there is a technical issue on
the amendment that you receive
this is correct this is point
to.
The date of implementation.
Amended amendment.
Thank you.
Three all the way to the RT Hon.
The impact in my file okay I
guess and and this might have
been the one I know that our our
analyst was have seen an
amendment prior so this might
have been the one that that she
started singing and it should be
addressed and then also some
reason that Senator.
It's exactly the same amendment
it's just at the very end it
puts in a date of
implementation.
Wonderful all right go ahead and
tell us talk about your
constitutional amendments and
thank you madam chair
it might be best if I explain it
with the amendment the amendment
to the original bill sets up
using the existing Education
Commission Wirth called it's
elected and let them to be the
state school board in discussing
this issue with a number of
people it was a felt that a
better system we can get
qualified.
I school board if we had at the
governor and the legislature
appointed in a fashion similar
to what we've done on the and
number boards or.
Have the protium in the speaker
in the minority leaders of both
houses to the appointments plus
the governor history
appointments that's what the
amendment does and it within the
the construction minute within
set up a school board which
would then hire state
superintendent and my motivation
happened last week we had a
resignation I think the fourth
or fifth one and this
administration two or three in
the last administration I don't
remember before that probably
had eight or ten secretaries of
education you cannot improve
education state New Mexico if we
don't get some consistency so in
talking with a number of people
we felt this is a a lot of
people thought this is the best
way we could start to achieve
some stability is to try to
establish is state school board
get a superintendent in place
the consistency issue Madam you
asked me about the CST I mean a.
The NCSL how they do it I have a
sheet I don't have it here in
Santa Fe essentially the school
said states that have done
pretty well in education they
have a spend established
administration of their school
board or other school system
typically some kind of the state
school board or some kind of a
process similar to that not
necessarily the way this is done
but this is the way we do a lot
of things in New Mexico the
source of pointing boards the
other key issue with the amended
bill would be that these people
would be similar to the board of
regents that be appointed and
could not be removed except for
costs
we couldn't have the open closed
door policy the open door policy
with the governor and everybody
changes the the state school
board every family get away or
there's bad press or whatever
they would be removed that
spring for only and essentially
with the amendment that would be
with the builders.
So.
Thank you senator
that we did not have anyone sign
up in support or opposition of
this bill either but if you
would like to raise their hands
indicate support.
All right if anyone there would
like to raise our hands indicate
opposition.
What about on everyone
participated indicated for on.
I think we'll surprise or motion
to anyone want to move the
amendment.
Any objection to that motion.
so that that that this amendment
is adopted so we're on track
resolution one as support to
amendment this is this is two
two four six six six point two
million for madam to point to
amendment as a date of
implementation at the end of
this governor's current
governors chairman would not
start until the next.
Great thank you yes the twenty
twenty seven years all right
discussion on the bill as
amended Senator from Senator
Sanchez Senator Lopez.
The.
I actually support going by what
these.
I.
Like what you're supposed.
I don't really live the idea of
taking small.
I.
The.
But now.
Provides political with
education.
Is not the.
Multiple education secretary
it's the change in policy.
One ministration to the next
administration for forty years
we had three excellent server
and.
Morgan.
letter delays for him the on
board and then Michael dates
they were good superintendents
it was an elected for
actually.
It was a ten member board I
don't think they're working one
second you're on top that.
I think that's just provided
consistency for the educational
community and now there is no
consistency.
It's it's no one's fault it's
the system.
System.
Intimacy their lectin Education
Commission.
so I would be more willing to go
this through if we have at least
partially paralyzed
I just think that it's important
I think if I were to do this and
I thought about it I would
probably turn the current PVC
areas into the state for their
skin they've been distracted by
the state hardly anybody runs
for them because the Public
Education Commission does
nothing except
Generally the charter school
issues in the state.
I don't think the PVC
model is working that well and I
frankly
and dissatisfied with the the
political inconsistency for
educational which.
You know I've I've served on the
LFC now for twenty eight years
it's my favorite committee it's
the most bipartisan committee I
serve all I'm doing current
bills with senator Graham who
served on Elian C. with me for
many years I do bills Center
permanent the same way we when
we passed both our budget and
the bills that we are are far
suggesting it was unanimous and
bipartisan house and Senate
Republicans and Democrats so I
am concerned about the system
that we're currently under and I
want to go back to that state
for a superintendent that cancer
for fifteen years that's what
those three challenges and we
make good strides in education.
But I don't live I don't like
the I don't like the small
number of appointees I've
already figured out the math in
fact in for.
You know with that seven nursery
appointees and the you know the
minority appointees that pulls.
Or the other way it will go back
and forth in to remain
apolitical I so I am willing to
work with you or others from
some other mechanism
I don't know if there's any
others of these out there
Senator came to me and said they
were.
But I don't think there's any
other item believers Madam.
And I don't disagree with you
one bit of the original bill
before you the your doctor the
amendment did just but you said
it took the existing PC and set
its analysis the new state
school board it evolves into the
that role and if you want to
retract the amendment go back to
version I'm perfectly happy
either way I'd talked around us
and what's the best way more
people so we ought to have
something appointed they do
serve for six year terms so
there would be a lot of the
governor overlap they cannot be
removed by the governor and and
for the program for that matter
they can only be removed at the
Supreme Court so trying to get
some stability some people say
well we get more qualified.
People in the school board of
federal pointed and use protein
would pick a good educator
retired educator whatever when
you major for.
I I'm just as an example.
The newspaper were.
So but I I'm I'm happy to go
either way madam chair Senator
and I'll work with you we go to
education next committee if you
want to work on a different plan
and set up a different deal and
we can amended education so
students I'm I'm easy on that I
just want to go back like you to
a system where we have some
consistency and try to get to.
Try to get fifteen year
appointees stated ten years
would be much better we've the
best we have a standard issue
six years and that's in my
history and a lot of people in
like would would you like to or
not she was there at least
longer than anybody else that's
not long enough it takes Garcia
for eight years okay I don't
recall but we.
Right.
That's right he he started this
and he had somebody stuck within
that that was good but to.
Again the point is we're not
getting longevity and even eight
years might not be long enough
whenever you look at you got to
try things out they don't work
you switch them off in the we've
modify you tweak do whatever you
have to do.
I'm perfectly amenable amenable
that whatever that word is to
try to come up with a plan on
how the school board structure
and we can do it in the next
committee if we can pass that
here are we told us over and I
work with you now I don't care.
And madam chair I'm I'm happy to
work with senator Neville this I
don't I don't know how you know
you want to write.
If you recall your amendment and
go back to the PC I.
Right and so next we have I
think and I think even
regardless of whether we we hold
over to work on it or you could
move you were in the majority on
that amendment to.
Representative I'll or or
whatever you all would like to
do but let's let's have the rest
of the conversation I think
first Senator fox.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator
I support going to the to an
older message.
And all the residents can always
be improved and probably I'd
like to see a substitute Drug
resolution come back to us
rather than wait for it because
I'd like to lend my full support
to the protest is finally coming
thank you very much.
Senator Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I remember
the discussion we had in this
committee.
And your bill Richardson.
And it was I think a pretty
heated conversation that we had
here this committee.
Of course it went through
because part of the concern if
we were going to be politicizing
Education.
The flavor of the legislature at
that time was like let's do it
if you go back to the votes I
think there was one vote that
voted no.
On the public education
secretary as well as higher
education secretary.
Part of that was I just didn't
think it was going to work and I
was the no vote go back and
research it.
Why I think time has shown is
that we have to go this way that
way and there's no consistency
and that was
I think you mentioned by a few
other persons who are of the
same mind set.
I think what needs to happen I
agree with the pro tem and
others Senator Stefanics I think
there are others out in the
community who we need to go back
but it needs to be elected.
we don't need more appointments
lord have mercy every governor
that comes is going to be
another now.
Because that.
Further to stories and we see
what happens with the board of
regents at the university is
with all the appointments and
such I think that people need to
have their choice of who they
want to send.
In different parts of our state
I remember that the complete
those school board representing
different parts of our state but
at least they all sat down kind
of figured out of there is a
voice representing different
communities I supported your
amendment because sometimes we
try to work with the sponsor but
I really preferred that we go
back to prison elected board
I guess that every part of our
state has the voice appointments
now because too politicized
thank some of that was my
original thought whenever us the
original bill which takes the
ten current slots and now and
then they evolve into the state
school board as you mentioned
there already or redistricted
and so forth that was my
original thought other people
convince me otherwise that's
what happens in the legislature.
Furthermore thank you madam
chair thank you just for the
nodding of heads around the
table are a lot of people agree
that we need to change a system
and I'm I'm like either system
you guys are talking about
better than the current system
and I would I would be tackled
if we get out of it the bill
Stewart element out of this
provided by time it to the floor
of the building would be damn
good in a much better than where
we are right now so I encourage
you Senator Stewart in
Centerville figure out which one
would systems yes for us and I
would go with either one at this
point I I think it was a mistake
and often I'm the only no vote
around here and I know of right
so I know.
I was I was in here the
legislature at that time so.
So it was I I I I think you
brought could continue down the
path good of a forty two to
nothing vote on the floor if I
if you guys can come together on
something thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you senator Bob of all by
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chairman I'm
really proud to be part of this
committee in moments like this
because this is something that
madam chair and senator we
really need to address this is
been on the front of the paper
now for of the past week we're
going on our fourth education
secretary and and it's it's it
just simply impossible to even
become acclimated to a position
like that when you're only there
a year much less proficient you
never leave you never achieve
any level of proficiency we need
some autonomy in that body to be
able to implement programs and
stick with them for awhile to
see if we can change our
educational system to make
progress and that's just that's
impossible within a few months
we all know that so I I think
that's great I ate I hope that a
disk this can go forward and we
see this on the floor I would
look forward to supporting this
thank you.
Senator Pirtle followed by
Senator Stewart and thank you
madam chair I I was gonna have a
question what as chair of this
committee what your policy is
going to be as far as.
To temporarily.
Tabling are holding on to bills
and bringing them back I just
wanted a little clarity and
then.
See what what your policy is
going to be at and thank you
senator I appreciate the
question you know I think in
situations like this where there
is a clear path forward for
folks to work together and
come back with that was
something that we can all pass
out of here I want to give them
every opportunity to do that so
yeah I will so we would I think
technically would be temporarily
table in them
with the understanding that once
you all come back with whatever
cyber aware for me happened and
we will we will bring it back up
and it'll be
we'll get it and get it heard as
as as quickly as possible thank
you thank you madam chair
members of the committee I look
forward to what Senator Stewart
in Senate Bill come up with I
think this is for those moments
where I'm glad I showed up to
work.
We're always economic shocks.
Senator Stewart thank you madam
chair so.
The reason that folks have
suggested pointing.
Is that it's hard to it's hard
statute the level of expertise
that we would want a state
school board.
So you know the idea is that if
you appoint them then you have
the better the message but I
don't think that's really true.
so I still haven't in my own
mind sort of figured out how to
answer that question of how do
you how do you attract that kind
of expertise people who
understand the education system
I mean if I was in the
legislature I would love to run
for the state school board I
just you know after spending my
entire adult life in the system
it's important to get it right
and I know where the problems
are I've been trying my whole
legislative career to fix them
so that's just an issue that
that I haven't been able to
figure out yet I don't think
that point to the board is.
So I am happy to work with
senator Neville on this Madam
chair if you want table just
roll it over you can just roll
it over well.
You know and are ready effects
are extremely.
It's for you have for it and
then just before we do I know
Center look as have other
conservation and those that are
Senator harming.
thank you madam chair what I
would just like to caution is as
you guys are figuring out what
what the final product if you
present is just to be careful
about that putting qualifiers in
their.
Because qualifiers sometimes
leave people out.
I've been able to participate if
you put they have to have so
many years of education so many
years of being associated I mean
if we put.
Qualifiers in their I just want
to caution you that we to leave
certain persons out of the
ability to participate.
Looking at our local school
boards I mean if you start
putting stuff.
Qualifiers for this and how far
is it going to carry for those
who want to serve in a local
school boards yeah there's
issues with local school boards
but I think that's where we take
you education to the community
also so I just want to caution
that because this committee has
had many year over with
qualifiers that do leave certain
groups of people with the
inability to participate.
so you know if you're gonna say
they have to have a bachelor's
degree or they have to have so
many I think that we really need
to be conscious about the so I
just wanted to share that with
both of you
I would hope that you wouldn't
come back with that.
Because we don't have qualifiers
for us to be elected if your
house.
I don't want to go down that
road.
I I just think we this is a
participatory that we're looking
at so I just want to mention
thank you.
Senator Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Neville I simply
want to publicly acknowledge and
commend you to taking this on I
can tell you put a lot of hours
into this and I'm not an
educator myself
But.
Sorry.
I just love the education that I
got here in New Mexico and
public schools.
And
And so I I'm just so pleased
that.
My colleague think so highly of
this and that that you're
legislation is going to come
back.
So thank you thank you.
If if Raul this rolling overs
entirely provide me all work
with a the pro tem um as I
recall the old school board had
a mix of appointed and elected
is about fifteen or eighteen I
would like to be a little less
involved in that but ten elected
under the current districts for
the fund from.
And and last I think we have a
Senator media and the next we're
probably good for to recess and
forcing this come back Madam
chair Senator last two districts
of money to school districts are
talking about testing in New
Mexico.
There's not consistency on what
we're trying to tested that
because there's not enough data
for us to move forward see if
we're being successful we're
doing right to definitely
appreciate this concept I'm
looking for Cebu and Senator
over.
