I have a, at least 6 of us in
the room, but we will begin as a
subcommittee. Good morning,
Senator Padilla.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you very much for allowing us to
be before you today. I do want
to let you know that I am
Senator Michael Pavia, and, uh,
so chair, vice chair and ranking
member and other members of the
committee. Um, I'm very honored
this morning to sit before you
with a kind, loving, and
hardworking New Mexican who's
held multiple roles in our
state, um, at a statewide level,
and I think this uh particular
appointment is gonna be, uh, uh,
it makes total sense that we
move in this.
direction, I think he will fit
into this role like, like a
glove. I think that's uh
something that's very important
for all of us, um, in the, the
uh professional background for
Mr. Black.
Um, he was the New Mexico, the
state president and CEO of our
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
He was the senior director and
chief of community relations
officer for Pacific Gas and
Electric in California. I had
about 5 or so years doing that,
uh, Golden State, uh, executive
director of Golden State
Restaurant Association, uh,
which was uh a statewide 500
member association there, 500
plus members. Um, he was also
the vice president, uh, for
public policy for the San
Francisco Chamber of Commerce
from the 7.
11 and
He was a legislative aide in the
office of San Francisco City and
County supervisor McKella
Aliotto Pierre in San Francisco,
and he's had a number of other
roles leading up to his work in
economic development. I think
it's a rich tapestry of, of
things that taught him how best
to approach economic
development, both from a people
standpoint, a process
standpoint, and now, and we are
all benefiting by it from a
technology standpoint as well.
He is the impetus behind a lot
of the major innovative things.
economic development that you're
seeing this year. I'll point
out, as you know, uh, Chair and
others, I'm sponsoring the
legislation for quantum physics
to bring that economy to New
Mexico. He is darting down to uh
the border for the borderplex uh
project that's going on down
there. You see them all over New
Mexico on things like chili, uh,
workforce development, higher
education, tying into our
workforce. And so this is a very
well rounded individual who, you
know, just, um, probably didn't
need to come over here and do.
this job because he had a
wonderful job uh previously that
he was already doing and uh the
governor asked him to do this,
and they, and I immediately I'm
just gonna tell you, I, I called
him right away when I heard
about it. And I, I said, I want
to volunteer to carry your
confirmation. I don't always do
that, but the reason I did is
because I've had such a terrific
working relationship uh with
this individual. So those are
the major uh things I wanted to
mention as we go into his
confirmation. I will say that he
is here with his lovely family,
and there's uh two of the kiddos
and, and his honey is over
there, and I think she's the CEO
of the.
and he sort of is doing all the
other things, and um, but Mr.
Chairman, that's Rob Black. Uh,
there's, I, I could probably
talk for about 2 hours about
this country, and I know that
what I said just scratched the
surface, I want you to hear from
him. Thank you, Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I don't know if
she's the CEO. I'm the youngest
of the family. I think the
youngest is the CEO.
Good morning, Mr. Black.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um.
On
When to start this morning.
And dedicate this.
Conversation to my mother.
She passed away this morning.
Um,
my condolences to you. Thank
you.
Um, I, I heard.
before coming in.
Um, she was ill. She lived to be
92.
an amazing life.
Born and raised in Lovington.
Uh, her family helped create the
first dairy, the First Methodist
Church, First Harbware store in
Levington.
Um
So it's, it's an honor to
be part of that legacy.
I just wanted to start.
With, with that comment.
I apologize for
No need to apologize, Mr. Black.
Take your time, you.
And I'm going to read a little
bit, that'll make it easier.
It's an honor to be here.
And I'd like to start by
recognizing some folks that,
that the senator recognized, but
I want to recognize actually for
Senator Padilla.
I moved back home in 2018, uh,
from being out of state for
about 25 years, and the very
first senator I met was Senator
Padilla. I don't know if you
remember the senator.
But we sat together at the
National Association of Women
Bussiness Owners Dinner.
And I had a conversation with
you and I was so impressed by
your legislative leadership.
And what you had done in the
state.
And that was the first of many,
many conversations, and a close
working relationship.
Where I've worked very closely
with the senator on early
childhood education on Broad
broadband deployment.
And on economic development.
And I'd also like to recognize
and acknowledge my family
members who are here today with
me.
My wife, Lisa.
Uh, Lisa and I met in law
school, so sadly, for my kids,
they have a two-layer household.
Um
And, but I could not do this
work without Lisa's support.
I'm also happy that my kids, uh,
took a day off from spring break
to join me today. Um, we have,
uh, Ruby, Ruby Rowan, uh, 9th
grader at Explorer Academy, a
charter school in Albuquerque
and rose through the 4th grader
and, and Corrales Elementary.
They're both promising
thespians, and very active in
community theater.
Many of you know me from my
time.
As the head of the Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, where I
worked closely with legislators,
the governor's office, and
executive agencies, as well as
local governments to help build
a stronger economy for New
Mexico.
As part of that effort, back in
2020, the chamber published a
statewide economic competitive
analysis called Driving New
Mexico's Future.
As part of that research, we, we
surveyed over 700 businesses and
conducted over 7 focus groups.
Looking at what it was that we
needed to do in the Mexico to
help employers, uh,
stay here and grow here. And the
two things we heard from
employers was we needed a
skilled workforce.
And we need less regulatory
burdens in order to grow in the
state.
To try and address the skilled
workforce needs. The chamber
secured funding in partnership
with the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
To launch a program called Be
Pro Be Proud, a statewide career
technical education engagement
program and that with the unique
part of being a, having a 78 ft
tractor trailer rig, and I know
many of you have seen the the
the the the program.
Um
He travels to high schools all
over the state. Students go
through the program, and in the
first year, we've had 11,000
students participate in Bro be
proud.
Looking at 2 year technical
careers and things like welding.
destruction
Uh, broadband slicing, medical
technician.
Um
Just this last August, the B
probably started visiting
correctional institutions around
the state of New Mexico.
Now they've done over 9
correctional institutions,
working with folks who are about
to re-enter society and helping
them create a better pathway for
themselves and their families.
Also, while at the chamber, I
launched New Mexico organized
retail Crime Association.
which partnered with law
enforcement, prosecutors, and
retailers to address the problem
of organized retail crime in the
state. In Amorca in the public
private partnership that it
created.
And the networks it created
helped reduce retail crime in
Greater Albuquerque area over
the past two years, and
continues to help make employees
and customers and our
communities safer in New Mexico.
Um
I also in a past life, had the
honor of working with President
Jimmy Carter and the Carter
Center.
I worked in South Africa, uh, in
South America.
I established and helped run um
election observer delegations in
Latin America and Cambodia, uh,
and in Liberia.
Um
I also established and ran the
special projects department for
the Screen Actors Guild.
The guild's first national
organizing program supporting
contract negotiations with the
Motion Picture Association.
I'm the only person, I believe.
I have verified this with the US
Chamber.
Who is the head of a a a
statewide chamber of commerce
and also head of the National
Organizing for National Union.
I think that brings a unique
perspective and my appreciation
for
Uh, business community, but also
appreciation for a good paying
job and what it means for a
community and for a family.
But what you probably don't know
about me is I was also a rock
and roll tour promoter.
And I promoted shows like Garth
Brooks, James Taylor.
Uh, the violent Femmes, iced tea
and Ice Cube.
Uh, for the past 25 years, I've
worked at the intersection of
law, policy, politics and
business.
I believe that the diversity of
experience that I have is
unique.
But it positions me hopefully,
help support the mission of the
economic development department.
That mission is to improve the
lives of New Mexico families by
increasing economic
opportunities and providing a
place for businesses to thrive.
It's what I've been doing for
the past 6 years as the head of
the chamber, and now have the
honor and privilege of doing
that work on behalf of the
citizens of the state.
From an economic development
perspective, I believe there are
key key investments that we can
make today that will change the
economic development landscape
in New Mexico.
My first priority since joining
the administration has been to
develop a site readiness program
for the state.
Today, we have very few
properties that are ready for
development.
When a company is looking to
locate or expand in Mexico, they
are looking for locations where
they can be up and running in a
matter of months, not years.
When we're showing companies
potential sites. We are often
hear that it can take 23, and
even 5 years to bring utilities
and other infrastructure to
site.
Making this uncompetitive for
development.
SB 169, the strategic Economic
Development Site Readiness Act
and SB 170, utility pre
deployment bill will help us
solve this problem for New
Mexico, creating a centralized
database for site selectors to
view potential sites, understand
their current level of
pre-development, while also
creating a fund to help do some
of that pre-development work so
that we can be quicker to market
and more competitive for
investment.
I also believe New Mexico should
double down on those areas where
we have unique competitiveness,
competitive advantages, where
there's a large growth
potential.
A good example is advanced clean
energy.
No state has the depth and
diversity of assets from our
research and development
institutions with the national
labs to our universities, the
companies already operating in
our ecosystem.
Ease solar technologies to a
Trisco wind turbine
manufacturing Maxion solar
tourrenko, the only commercial
uranium enrichment plant in the
US, the Cairo's power,
developing small module reactors
here in the in in in
Albuquerque.
The Beotex modular hydrogen
plants.
Looking forward, I see a future
here in New Mexico where we're
manufacturing batteries and
electric vehicles.
To, to, um,
New Mexico can drive the
innovation around clean energy.
Similarly, advanced computing is
an area of opportunity.
We are uniquely positioned to be
the Silicon Valley of quantum
computing.
I call it Q Valley for on the
Rio Grande.
New Mexico and Colorado were
officially designated as the
winner of the Federal Elevate
Quantum tech hub.
We're in the final stages of
competing for the National
Science Foundation Quantum
Award.
UNM is already the leading
quantum computing higher
education institution in the
country, because of their deep
partnership with Lanel and
Sandia National Labs, who
operated Quantum Fab here in the
state.
CNN is establishing a quantum
boot camp this fall, because
most of the future jobs in
quantum will actually be skilled
craftspeople, welders,
pipefitters, HVAC technicians.
But to maintain our edge, we
need to invest in quantum this
year.
Maryland recently committed $1
billion to develop quantum
computing in Illinois has
committed 500 million.
However, if we make key
investments this session by
passing SB 211 quantum facility
infrastructure tax credit and SB
212, the testing and evaluation
corrects credit, we will secure
our leadership in quantum into
the future.
Now I just mentioned 4 different
bills.
Can you guess who the bill
sponsor is on every one of those
bills.
It's the gentleman sitting
beside me here.
And again, we've worked together
on a lot of shared priorities
and initiatives.
And while these legislative
priorities for the department,
these are the legislative
priorities for the department
this session.
There are a variety of other key
initiatives from outdoor
recreation to our healthy foods
program to Main Street to the
creative economy that are
improving the quality of life
for the Mexicans and creating
economic opportunity every day
throughout the state.
I'm honored to work with an
amazing team of committed
professionals to improving who
are committed to improving the
lives of New Mexicans.
I believe economic development
is more than creating jobs and
increasing GDP, however.
It's about shrinking the very
fabric of our communities and
our democratic institutions.
Harvard economist Benjamin
Friedman talks about the role of
economic development in his
seminal book, The Moral
Consequences of Economic Growth.
Doctor Freeman demonstrates his
research that when we, when
communities experience
Broadly shared economic growth,
they become more open and
tolerant and socially cohesive.
By making the investments we are
making as a state. We're
investing in our society and our
democracy and the future of our
Communities and our families,
and I am honored to have the
opportunity to serve in this
role to support that effort, and
I hope I, I can get your
support. Thank you. Thank you so
much. Now, we do have 3 people
that signed up and organized
support and I'm gonna give them
a minute and a half minutes each
to speak on your behalf. 2
should be in the committee room
and 1 via Zoom. I'm gonna start
off with John Clark.
So read that Nair, secretary of
Department of Workforce
Solutions, and then online we
have Alicia Keys, who's the
former EDD secretary, although
I've stated your name, if you
can restate it for the record.
Good morning.
Good morning, members of the
committee, Mr. Chair, my name is
John Clark and I'm the state
investment officer. I've had the
pleasure of knowing Rob Black
for a little over 6 years. Uh, I
had the pleasure of working with
them, uh, to a significant
extent when I was at the
Economic Development department,
and he was at the Chamber of
Commerce. Uh, it was readily
apparent that he obviously was a
huge supporter of businesses in
New Mexico trying to uplift the
economy, but more than that, it
quickly became apparent that he
cared a lot about the people of
New Mexico. It was
from knowing Rob that it is
about uplifting the lives of New
Mexicans. And one thing I really
appreciated about working with
them is that he was all about
collaboration, trying to figure
out how we can make things
happen that will best improve
the lives of everyone here. He
was a great supporter of
figuring out how we could have
industry and business, work with
government. How we could have,
uh, economic development, not
just support big communities,
but small communities in New
Mexico, that it could uplift the
lives
of people in blue communities,
red communities, and I think
that's really what it comes down
to at the end of the day is
economic development is not a
party business. It is about
impacting the lives of all New
Mexicans, and I can't think of
anyone with better experience or
with better core values to do
that, uh, I strongly urge you to
support Rob's nomination. Thank
you. Thank you.
Hi, good morning. My name is
Serita Neer. I'm the secretary
of Workforce Solutions, um, but
I'm not here to talk about Rob
as a fellow cabinet member. I'm
here to talk about the work that
we got to do before he joined
our team and I think I first met
Rob when we tried to hire him as
chief of staff for uh for the
city of Albuquerque right before
the pandemic started, and he was
too smart to take that job.
But uh then we got to work
together as he mentioned on the
Bro be proud initiative and
honestly when I first heard
about it, I thought it was kind
of ridiculous to have a semi
tractor trailer with virtual
reality stations driving around
the the state, but it turned out
to be amazing. It's inspired
thousands of people of all ages
to pursue careers in the trades
and uh it's been become a prime
example of what a private public
partnership should look like,
and I think those are the
hallmarks of Rob's entire
career. He brings people to the
table.
He has that vision and that
innovation, and he also knows
how to get things done. So it is
my honor to stand and support
and strongly urge you to uh
confirm Rob Black as economic
Development Secretary.
Thank you, Alicia Keys should be
online.
is not in. OK. So I'm gonna
members in the committee room by
a show of hands, how many of you
are in favor of this country.
15 and the online.
Not online, back to the
committee room, any in
opposition.
not any online.
Robb, you're gonna be happy that
your girls raised their hands
first.
I thought I would go to the
committee for questions and I'm
gonna start with Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Mr. Black, my deepest
condolences, uh,
to your family with your
mother's passing this morning,
um.
Very, very sorry about that.
I'd also like to thank Senator
Padilla for being here to
sponsor you. I don't know if
Senator Padilla remembers the
first time we met.
In Albuquerque Isotopes baseball
game.
And uh I thanked you for what
you do for your district on your
job fair every year. I think I
call you every year to say
thanks when I see it posted, um,
so that, that means a lot.
You know, um,
A couple of things, uh, with
you, Rob.
Um, first of all, two attorneys
in the house, I would think, uh,
your oldest would have better
ethics trying to give me 5 bucks
to get your a vote.
But we'll work on that one
later.
The other thing which I thought
was interesting was
Violent Fems is one of my
favorite bands, Blister in the
Sun, Gone Daddy Gone, I mean.
I, I think your hair was
probably different back in the
early 90s.
The other thing is your Sandoval
County guy.
You've served in Corrales, um,
you are intimately familiar with
um
Mm
And tell through uh Eric
Edgeley, who, who I know well,
and I appreciate that.
And I've gotten to work with you
a little bit on a project and
see you in action that I've been
very impressed with the view
bringing together a group of
stakeholders, uh, to capture,
uh, an amazing business, uh, to
come to, um, right outside of my
district to do incredible things
for New Mexico.
One of the things I'd just like
to get your thoughts on briefly
is
Um, for 8 years on the county
commission, our number one
priority was the
Construction of PDV.
And
I, I believe.
That that is going to be the
economic
Um, powerhouse movement and in
the state of New Mexico.
You're already seeing it from
the uh
the, the booming down an I-140
PDV with Amazon and FedEx and
some other big businesses down
there moving up to take a lot of
traffic out of the metro area,
keeping it on the west side.
And when you talk about these
new technologies, one of the
things that um I agree with you
on.
is getting PDV ready so we can
uh be shovel ready for new
technologies moving in.
Um, but Western Rio Rancho, um,
It's got some uh issues with
brackish water.
And I was wondering what your
thoughts are with some of these
trying to capture new
technologies coming in of water
usage out there.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, I, I
am a
I believe very strongly that New
Mexico won because of the
quality of universities and
research being done at New
Mexico State University and New
Mexico Tech that uh in the US we
have some of the best
opportunities to begin cleaning
brackish water.
Um, we've seen it's been done
incredibly effectively well in
Israel and other places, uh, El
Paso has been desalinating
water, uh,
For almost a decade, I believe,
if not longer, um, they have the
largest inland desalinization
plant in the US in El Paso. So
I, I, and we, uh, in working
with Sandia National Labs and
again with um
Uh, our universities, we have
begun the process of
characterizing our, uh,
brackish water reserves, uh,
saltwater reserves underneath
New Mexico. I do think it's an
opportunity that we need to be,
um, aggressive in exploring
because I think if we can
continue to lead in that space
on the research and development
side that will position us very
well for the future in the West.
If we are the because Arizona
does not have the same sort of
reserves, uh, that, that we do
here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Black, how many desalination
plants do we have in New Mexico?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator one.
And Aldo.
That and it's the, we actually
have the national desalinization
lab, uh, in Alan Moorda.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, because I'm a
little familiar with the
process. I was, uh, uh base
commander on Ascension Island,
and that was what we
Uh, we had a big desal plant for
um not just operations, but
obviously for the base
population there and I'm a big,
big supporter of desalination
plants because
That can really transform the
way we do economic development
in the state of New Mexico.
Um
On the other side.
I was going to ask you, well,
one thing I think you missed.
And you shouldn't have.
fault.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Black is
We have the only
And the entire United States.
We can do flight tests here
using white sands missile range.
Which is a huge, huge asset.
For the state of New Mexico.
And if companies want to come in
here and start doing any type of
um repulsion tests.
Um, short range reentry vehicle
tests.
Uh, this is the place to go to
cut down on those travel costs.
What's your thoughts on
Uh, partnering with um white
sands for public-private
partnerships.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
you're correct, that will be
strike one on my part since the
spaceports is, is
administratively attached to my
department.
So, uh, that is an area where,
um, because of the flight, the,
the difference in flight
restrictions that happened
there, it is a unique
opportunity, uh, completely
agree that partnerships with
where appropriate, with white
sands would be very interesting
for New Mexico, um, and also we
have New Mexico Tech University,
which is, I believe, the only
university in the US that has a
bombing range. So, uh, Boeing
has tested their jet engines out
there throwing frozen turkeys.
To those into their place
because it's a safe place to do
it. And so I do think there's
unique opportunities we have
here to position ourselves uh on
behalf of national security and
defense industry.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
lastly, one of the things that
we've done in Sandoval County to
help Intel at the local level
and at the state level with LEDA
is, is IRBs.
Uh, what is your thought in
regards to uh IRBs with um
Large manufacturing or uh
technology companies.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, they play
a very important role as part of
a broad package of incentives
that New Mexico has developed.
IRBs allow for um the deferment
of those of local of property
tax, uh, but then that, that
rate of rebate, uh, is
negotiated with the local
jurisdictions so that there are
benefits that accrue back to the
schools and other, other
organizations, but it creates a
long term, depending on the time
frame of that IRB, whether
it's20 years or 30 years, a long
term benefit for that company to
locate in New Mexico, help them.
stay anchored in New Mexico, and
as part of a broader package
with Lita, JTip, our high wage
tax credit, it plays an
essential part for our incentive
packages to make us competitive
with other states. And lastly,
two quick questions, Mr. Chair,
is um clawbacks.
Um, what are, what are your
thoughts on, on
Implementing clawbacks.
And how stringent should those
clawbacks be or the threshold.
For some, especially at the
small business.
Uh, for the small business folks
because uh in Sandoval, I think
you're well aware that we, we
work with Sandoval Economic
Alliance and and Jerry Sha, the
Chamber of Commerce there, and
we insert clawbacks there and
it's kind of tough to figure out
what the threshold's gonna be.
What, what are your, um, what's
your opinions on clawbacks?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, we
utilize blacks in, in many of
our contracts, uh, such as LEDA,
even JTE, but because we're,
we're providing in uh those
incentive dollars, and we have
an expectation of local hires,
local capital expenditures, and
when a company does not make
those expenditures, um, and, and
we have this set of metrics and
often will try to provide a
grace period for, you know, uh,
a pandemic or even, even, uh,
other sorts of uh
Situations that impact the
company. Uh, they may have lost
the supplier, and they can come
to us and ask for an extension.
And if, and, but at a certain
point, uh, we, we need to
initiate a clawback.
In order to protect the
resources of the taxpayers. Uh,
and we had to do that uh with a
company in Los Alamos, uh, this
last year. Um, it's not
something that we have to do
often because um we, we often
are releasing funds in tranches,
so that they're meeting
milestones and so then it's not
as much of a clawback situation,
but there are situations where
uh we're providing more capital
money upfront that that does
require a clawback if they're
not meeting the either the
construction requirements or
the.
employment.
OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, lastly, Mr.
Black, um,
What is your connection to
Espanola.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator, uh, a great love affair
of both Lowriders and uh and the
environment.
Mr. Black, I look forward to
supporting you. I think, uh,
you've already been in the seat
again, I've seen you in action
and uh I look forward to a big
announcement coming up.
Very soon, uh, from your
department.
Regarding my, my area.
And, um
Again, my deepest condolences on
the passing of your mother and
uh I want to say congratulations
to you and your wife.
Your kids, and I look forward to
supporting you on the Senate
floor, and I thank Senator
Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I'd like
your connection with Espanola.
Thunder Townsend.
Mr. Chair, um, congratulations
on, on your, your.
Your appointment and
Absolutely, I most sincere
condolences.
Uh
You said he was a sando all
person. That's really not true.
He's a Lee County guy.
He, uh,
His dad, um,
I know it was uh.
A force in education.
Um
And a coach.
And um yeah, lots of roots over
there. And well respected.
Um, I, I appreciate you coming
by the office. Um,
This um.
And catching up, uh, I think
you're
He, uh, the right guy at the
right time for the right job,
and I look forward to supporting
you. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Senator
Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and good morning, Secretary
designee, thank you guys for
being here. Um, I just have one
quick question, and thank you
also for your presentation and
all the ideas you've laid out
for the department, but I'm
curious if you could just expand
a little bit on what community
benefits mean to you and how you
envision that type of policy in
the economic development
process.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, I
think
One of the important things to
think about when we think about
economic development is that it
has to be grounded in the
community for it to be
successful.
Um, there are situations where,
whether it's a government entity
or a developer tries to push a
project that doesn't work for
that community.
And that in those situations,
that project won't get rooted.
It won't be successful, and they
can't stay.
Um
The other part that I think is
really important to think about
is the dynamics of how economic
development have changed.
Over the last few years.
And where historically we've
been really about recruiting
businesses, it's become much
more about recruiting talent.
And when you recruit talent that
gets to the quality of life and
those community benefits that
you have in those communities.
And so, um, that is a, it
becomes a very important asset
to actually keep sustainable
economic growth that we're
thinking about what are the the
community impacts of that
development and it, and again, I
think it, it spans much more
than just the, the at the job
that that one individual might
have.
Um, which is hugely impactful
for that community or that
family.
Um, but I do think it also leads
into the creating the better tax
base, uh, aligning parks,
aligning additional resources,
public art, all of those types
of things become very important
as part of these sort of
developments.
Thank you. That's all.
Thank you, Senator. Now, I have
a couple of questions. I was
able to tour the borderplex and
was amazed at all of the work
that's happening in southern New
Mexico that we don't hear about
in local stations that deliver
news out of Albuquerque into the
north. Can you tell us what some
of the plans are for the board
of plans.
How much time do you have?
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you for
that question. I think it is an
unbelievably unique opportunity
for the state of Mexico. That is
where we're seeing the largest
growth. Uh, it's where we're
seeing a lot of our efforts
around international and trade,
which is one of the 9 sectors of
our strategy for the state.
Um, both with Mexico, but also
with Taiwan, because we're
seeing in the border area in
Santa Teresa, uh, we're, we've
had we've successfully recruited
companies from Taiwan to locate
in New Mexico to onshore their
technologies. Um, we also see in
2027, the Bridge of the Americas
in El Paso will be closing for
retrofitting.
We need to be investing heavily
in our infrastructure, road
infrastructure, expanding the
border crossing in order to
allow for that truck traffic,
which is now going through El
Paso to make a new home into New
Mexico.
And so we're looking and working
very closely with our Secretary
CERNA and DOT with uh the, the,
um, our border authority, which
is administratively attached to
EDD. We work very closely with
them, uh, around infrastructure
investments, um, and then
finally, uh, as part of that,
and thank you to the legislature
for this and uh representative
Small helped lead this, get
funding for a five-year economic
uh strategy, uh sorry, uh
infrastructure stra.
y development that we are, uh,
we published in December. So we
now have an infrastructure plan
to help build out uh water,
sewer, housing to support the
senator of development, uh, so
I'll stop there because there is
so much to talk about, but, uh,
there's a unique opportunity
that will really impact the
communities of Suer Park, uh,
and those, those border areas. I
agree. And you know, I was
completely amazed on at the
border produces the largest
amount of gums.
bears that are shipped out, and
the largest amount of hot sauce
in those vets that anything
your, your spicy McChicken
sandwich to Louisiana hot sauce
down at the border, so I was
really amazed at that. Just one
last question. What do you
anticipate your biggest issues
will be and how will you address
them?
Mr. Chairman, biggest issues,
um, I continue to believe that,
um, getting
Sights ready for quickly
deploying and uh hopefully we
will pass both SB 169 and 170.
Which setting that system up and
getting utilities uh comfortable
using this new policy process,
uh, because if we, I
The number of jobs and good
paying jobs.
In New Mexico that we can have
today. I'm, I'm talking to so
many companies that they
constraints are molecules.
Of water
And electrons.
And if we can solve the brackish
water problem, if we can solve
uh getting uh utilities to be
able to pre-deploy electricity
to a site, and we've
characterized that site. There's
no limit to what New Mexico can
accomplish over the next few
years. Thank you. I like that
answer. And with that, Senator
Brentley.
Rob, I will say my comments for
the floor. I think you're well
suited, Mr. Chairman, I move a
do pass. There's the motion made
to move you to a full Senate
confirmation this morning, uh,
before I take a roll call, I'm
sure your mother's looking down
very proud of you, Mr. Black,
and our condolences from all of
us. I'm sure she is very proud
of the son she's raised and that
you're giving back to a state
that she loved, with that if I
can have a roll call vote.
Thunder Bergman's. Yes.
Senator Block.
Hi.
Senator Brantly, yes. Senator
Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Oh, Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo
Senator Doig, Senator Doig is
excused.
With a vote of 6 in favor, you
will be moving on to a full
Senate confirmation later this
morning. Congratulations.
Senators, before we move on to
the next items on our agenda,
breakfast has been provided for
you, which is behind me, and
breakfast was sponsored by
Capitol Council and counseling,
to help yourself to a burrito
and coffee, and feel free to eat
during the remainder of the
agenda. And with that, we're
gonna move on to our next order
of business, which is listening
to House Bill 518 LGBTQ plus day
and welcome to representative
Mariana Ana. Is she in the room?
Oh, OK. I just talked to the
chair.
Because I'm gonna have to get to
the paramedics. I asked if we
do, um,
It be.
I joined.
You want to do SR2, which is a
change and repeal.
No, no.
Uh, the center rules on SR2.
I've got to get to the
paramedics shortly.
Oh, here she comes.
I'm gonna have the gavel over to
Senator Doig, um, there was a
conversation we had about moving
the agenda.
Yes, we're gonna uh do SR2
first, um, cause I know some guy
goes somewhere he needs to be,
and I know he wanted to.
To be here for.
The discussion of these changes
to our rules. So,
Senator Townsend.
So we, do we wanna go down there
and actually present or do we
wanna just have a conversation
up here as a committee.
Um.
Yeah, let's, let's go down. Why
not?
The guy goes, I went and visit
the EMT yesterday. Was it
feeling good and I thought it
was going to be like school
where you would have a bed and
leave for a while, so good luck
in there.
So we're gonna rearrange the
agenda and we're gonna go to
SR2, which is the change and
repeal of various Senate rules,
and we're gonna be joined by our
chairwoman Duhik and our ranking
member Senator Townsend, who
will present the changes, uh,
good morning, senators.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. So
hopefully, you all got a chance
to look through these, they were
sent out to you yesterday.
These are rules changes that the
majority of the minority works
together on, um, that are
largely not substantive. Uh,
they are primarily cleaning up
language in our rules.
Taking stuff out that, that
doesn't apply anymore, making
changes so that our rules match,
uh, what we actually do our
actual procedure.
Uh, in the Senate.
I think probably the most
substantive change in here and I
think probably the only
substantive change here.
would be a change that would say
that uh
While you're debating on the
floor while you are.
While you are addressing the
president.
You have to remain standing, but
while you're not addressing this
president, you can sit down.
So
So people folks aren't standing
so that it's not a physical
endurance tests, uh, to for her
to have debates in the Senate.
Really, otherwise,
It's really just aligning our
rules with our practice, and
cleaning up language. And, do
you have anything to add?
I would just say I appreciate
the um majority uh help.
Um
Jessie and and getting all this
done. Dennis, um,
Our chief of staff in minority
office worked through all of
these, um,
And leadership is supportive and
and I think they are more in
line with practices and and
procedures that occur every day
in the Senate.
And Mister Char I'll just add
that I, I don't think this will
be the end of this exercise, um,
I think there's still probably
additional.
cleanups that, that we can do.
Uh, so I'm envisioning that that
next year will probably be
coming back with with another
agreed upon package of rules
changes, um, and also here and
then we'll also if there are.
Proposed rules changes outside
of an agreed upon packet.
We'll deal with those next year
as well.
That's all, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, senators. Um, any, any
committee members wishing to ask
questions, comments under block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair and ranking member
in in regards to interim
committees for rules, is there,
are, are you as the chair,
you're the one that uh would
call those to the intermittee.
So, so, Mr. Chair, yes, so rules
is, is a unique committee, and
that is a year-round standing
committee, um, and we are
constitutionally authorized to
do, uh, confirmations during
the.
And so we're gonna have 2 or 3
2-day meetings over the the
interim, where we're gonna grind
through.
About 100, 150 or so
confirmations, so everyone can
look forward to that. Well, uh,
you'll be getting something from
Jesse in the next few days with
a a pole to so we can figure out
when the best dates are for
everyone, uh, and we're also
gonna be, we are lucky to be
hopefully don't continue to be
joined by our fantastic
committee secretary, so really
we're gonna be working around
her schedule.
Committee secretary for
confirmations is, is a hard job.
There's, there's so much work
she does that, that you all
never see, um, but so we'll be
figuring those dates out soon,
hopefully, uh, and I'll let you
all know, and we're hoping to
have them in a couple different
places, um, Jesse works for uh
uh DCA in real life, uh, and
they have some cool locations,
but I think it'd be interesting
for us to have those.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. So Rio Rancho.
That wasn't on the top of my
list, but it will, we will
definitely add it to the the
lineup.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Senator Gao.
The Madam Chair, sir,
uh, I was just looking at 31
just to visit with you on
something to think about later.
Uh, I actually asked, uh, 404 on
this since we're being very
sensitive.
The people, uh, had asked him at
the beginning session, I'd like
you to find a keyword that would
take out the word minority. I've
been in the minority.
My whole life.
I take offense that any other
issue is cleared up.
He says two political parties.
When we are doing our caucus
meetings. It's Democrat and
Republican.
Since we have two political
parties, I would like to see the
titles changed on the minority
side to reflect whichever party
is in there in order that it
would reflect.
Is in leadership?
And who's not?
And Mr. Chair, and I, and I hear
what you're saying.
The only issue, the issue that I
see with doing that in our
actual rules is that
The party in the
I, I can't think of a different
word, but in the majority of
minority, that could change. So
if we put everything as Democrat
and Republican here, we would
have to redo our rules where
that balances to change, when it
becomes your turn to be in the
minority, it'd still be
democratic, but, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, there's some, some
provisions in here that are
That that are specific to which
party is in the majority and
which party is in the minority,
uh, so I, I will try, I, I, I
commit to this history over the
interim, I'll give this some
thought and think about if
there's a way that we can
Can freight raise things, uh,
differently, uh, to address that
issue. I can't think of a way
right now. Well, I'll definitely
give it some thought. Let's say
counsel been trained all
session, but uh I haven't tried
to tell them to use what they
do.
In England, he actually gave me
a whole line of verbiage to
replace one word.
all the morning. I think it
should be reflective and
leadership and who's not, take
out the word minority.
Because that reflects back to my
old life.
Thank you, thank you.
Any further questions or
comments?
I have one comment on page 7,
lines 12 and 13.
Um, I want to thank you for
striking that as the social
senator you struck a senator
shall not speak to another
senator, otherwise interrupt the
business of the Senate. So thank
you so much for striking that
out on my behalf. Again, Mr.
Chair, we are aligning with our
practice, uh, and we can now
have newspapers
on the floor
Thank you so much for that. Uh,
what, what is the will of the
committee?
I move a do pass. I do pass on
Senate resolution 2, I believe,
Senate Resolution 2. There's
been a motion for a due pass if
I can have a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefanis is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doha.
A vote of 7 in favor, you have a
due pass motion. Senators, thank
you for taking the time on
updating our rules. Thank you.
And I'm gonna hand the gavel
back over to our madam chair to
continue on with the remaining 2
items on our agenda.
Good morning, Representative. Go
ahead on HB 518. Thank you so
much. Good morning again,
senators. I'm glad to be back in
your committee, um, today we
have LGBTQ Day in front of you.
That is House Bill 518 and I'm
really glad that two of my
co-sponsors sit on this
committee, as Senator had a meal
and Senator Stefani, um, this is
a
I hate when people say it's a
simple bill, but this is
probably one of the simplest
you'll find. Um, Madam Chair and
senators, um, this is a day of
observance every 60 day session.
It'll be the 4th Tuesday of
every January. It is gonna be
right alongside African American
Day, Hispanic Culture Day, API
native Hawaiian day, um, and it
was actually during uh API
Native Hawaiian day. Uh, there
was somebody on the floor of the
house who said, wow, it's really
great to see.
so many people from our
community represented Salud
Senator, um, to see so many uh
people uh from our community
represented and it was at that
time that I thought, holy cow,
there is nothing.
here in, in both the bodies that
celebrates LGBTQ folks, and I
will just say, senators, I
remember being a young person
and hoping that I would see
myself represented as a queer
person, um, and I just think
this would make a great
difference for a lot of the
folks that come to visit our
capital.
Um, I just quick, uh, quick stat
here here in New Mexico, our
life expectancy for LGBTQ folks
is age 37, as opposed to
non-LGBTQ folks is age 49. We
know that we are dying. Um, so,
a lot younger, um, and so, Madam
Chair and senators, I would just
like to propose that we
celebrate what we have and who
we have while we have them with
that, Madam Chair, I'll stand
for questions.
Thank you. I didn't have anyone
signed up in support or
opposition on this, so we will
go to the committee.
harm me.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
thank you so much representation
does matter. When I talk about
representing Senate District 5,
I don't only represent my Senate
district as the only gay male
senator in the Senate, I
represent the voice of LGBTQ
plus individuals across the
state of New Mexico, and the
number of young
teens and young adults who came
to see me at the beginning of
the session really meant that
they have somebody they can look
up to that has an impact on
their lives, to listen and to
understand and to be able to
speak on behalf of our issues on
the floor, not as secondhand,
but as firsthand means a lot to
me and to celebrate a community
that means so much to me, um, I
think, I'm thankful for you
bringing this forward and
thankful that you allowed me to
co-sponsor with you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
You. Other members?
I also say I think this is,
again, a theme of this morning
seems to be uh that
What we have on the book should
uh should reflect what we
actually do in real life and our
values. And so, uh, I think this
is great and right just exactly
in line with all the other days
we have up here.
Um
As much with uh African American
Day as with Ag day.
Uh, we want to celebrate all,
all the parts of our, our
society and that adds to New
Mexico and makes great. I am
shocked to hear life expectancy.
Uh, for LGBTQ is 37 and that for
non-LGBTQ is 49 in New Mexico.
That is
Both of those are disturbing
chair, same.
Right. Well, what is the will of
the committee?
Not a chair movement you pass?
All right.
Uh, let's do a roll call.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos is excused.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefanis is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator Doig.
Yes, with 5 in favor, you have
to pass. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you.
Representative Cas, come on up
for HP 120.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, committee for uh
giving us the time. Um, I'm
representative Kathleen Cates.
I'm here to present House Bill
120. So if you're an individual
using a wheelchair or blind or
have um issues uh with hearing,
and you are in a state facility
or on a state website, who do
you report accessibility issues
too.
could be the AG's office, could
be the facilities manager could
be the governor's commission on
disability, it is very
confusing. So this bill will
create a one-stop reporting and
technical assistance advice
through the Office of
Accessibility, that will be
housed in the Governor's
commission on Disability.
Um, this will allow us to stay
compliant with our federal
requirements. This bill does not
have any appropriations in it
this year, as in the
appropriations was made into the
do it budget because we need to
get compliant as making all our
state websites compliant by
April of 2026. The Governor's
commission on Disability
respectfully asks that we have
this in place this year so that
they have time to put processes,
policies in place, as well as
develop.
budget for um next year. I, I
have an expert witness. I'd like
you to introduce yourself and
then we will rest for question.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. It's an honor to be
here. My name is Eli Fresco, I'm
a civil rights attorney and been
working very closely with the
disability community uh in civil
rights and disability needs
across the state. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much and
uh we do have one person signed
up to speak on this, uh, Mr.
Jackson.
Good morning, Miss, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Jim Jackson for disability
rights in New Mexico.
Um
Excuse me, I just rushed in, um,
I'll, I'll be brief. This is
just a really important way of
providing assistance to all of
our state agencies to make sure
that they're fully in compliance
with Americans with Disabilities
Act, with a particular emphasis
on digital access, which is
becoming more and more of an uh
issue and uh really important
part of access, so we heard your
support of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, we didn't have anyone signed
up in opposition to to the
committee and accounts. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um,
representative, good to see you.
Uh.
This creates an office of
accessibility.
And it, I mean, I understand, I
think I understand what you're
trying to do. Does it have to be
another office, can it not be a
responsibility of a given agency
to do this.
I think you might be chair and
thank you representatives. So we
didn't want to create another
department or division, it is an
office within the Governor's
commission on Disability, it'll
probably just be one FTE at this
time period. The way the
structure is is currently
federal law requires all state
buildings to have an
accessibility coordinator
located. We don't know if they
do or not, and, um, might be
like the receptionist and the
accessibility coordinator. So
this
will give one area we can
communicate to the public that
if they have accessibility
issues or need technical
assistance, and then they will
decide whether or not they go to
the general service department
or to go to the AG's department
or to just be able to provide
communication back to the uh the
participants saying that no, it
is accessible. So we just need a
centralized area.
Madam chair representative, when
you say accessible.
Tell me what you, are you, are
you meaning about physically
accessible? Are you talking
about?
Having access to data, I mean,
what are, what are you?
Exactly what are you trying to
do. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, uh, senator for that
great question. So accessibility
as defined by the federal ADA
requirements, which includes
physical as well as technology.
So that is what our state is
working on right now to make
sure that all of our state
websites are accessible for
individuals who may have low
sight or um hearing impairments
to be able to access the
information that the rest of us
access through our state.
So,
ma'am chair and representative,
I thought we had crossed this
bridge, uh, and that we had
those, um, the, the of course
the physical accessibility, I
think.
I hope it's covered. I, I
thought we had done that years
ago. The technology side of it,
can you explain uh exactly what
What you're trying to do.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and uh yeah, madam chair and
senators, um, and so I, the
accessibility for on site is if
you have low sight to no sight,
you may need the ability to make
the font bigger on the, I know,
uh, I do. I am a woman of a
certain age. I need the font to
be bigger so I, if you are an
individual who may not be able
to see it, you may, you have to
be able to push a button to read
it back to you because you can't
read it onto the.
So we want to make sure that all
of our governmental sites,
websites and our physical
structures are accessible for
individuals of all abilities.
And it will, it is a federal
requirement. So this office
allows us to have a centralized
reporting area. They will not
have authority, there's somebody
that they will receive
accessibility reports, provide
technical assistance and be able
to report back to the
legislature, governor, as well
as the governor's commission on
Disability on whether what if
anything is needed.
I appreciate it,
representatives. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Other members,
Senator Block. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
and uh expert witness.
So does the state not utilize
certain technologies now or we
just don't know and this person
is gonna be kind of an
integration focal point to see
where we're at.
So thank you Madam Chair and
thank you Representative. It is
a centralized reporting area,
but right now we are using the
expertise of our do it or uh
department who is now trying to
make all of our websites
compliant, the deadline for the
federal government is April of
2026.
So Madam chair, Representative,
are those in order to do that.
Um, because the FAR doesn't have
it, and those kind of some costs
in the department already to do
updates for websites.
Madam, and thank you, Senator.
So this bill does not have an
FIR or an appropriations because
what we did was we really want
to make sure that we stay
compliant federally. So the
budget was rolled over to the do
it budget to make sure that we
meet that technology deadline in
April of 2026. What we are
trying to do here is to create
to have a centralized reporting
that we can communicate to all
of our constituents throughout
the state, that this is the one
place that doesn't always go to
the AG's office. It doesn't
always go the developmental
disabilities officer the General
Service department. Let's find
out whether or not some
individuals might say, I can't
get access to the store of this
historical state building, and
we would need a person to go
into a site interview and go,
oh, you don't need to have a
ramp in every indoor, there's
one on these other.
so it is accessible. They can do
something as simple as provide
the technical assistance as well
as how to be able to communicate
back to um general service
department if for some division,
if there's something that needs
to be addressed.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So this is also related
to the ADA, correct?
Um, yes, Madam Chair and
senators absolutely this is our
state's centralized rep uh
representative to ensure that
our state's physical and
technology sites are compliant
with ADA standards.
OK, so, Madam Chair, uh
representative, I, I understand
ADA. I think that's been around
for about 35 years now, and
hopefully,
should be compliant, 35 years,
but you never know.
Um
What
I'm trying to, so I'm, I'm not
aware of a uh federal law or
regulation that such states have
to be compliant when it comes to
Um, electronic media, you know,
computers, websites, whatever,
social media, I does that
include all that like even
government social media, like
you have to go and modify
Instagram, Facebook, and, and
all that. I mean, how do you,
is, is that, is that included or
is it just the websites?
For our government because we do
have.
Government
Social media on
Twitter, Instagram, Facebook,
whatever. you're, you're
correct. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and then I'll let my expert
witness answer that specific
question. Thank you. Yes, madam
Chair, uh, Senator, those are
great questions and this past in
2024, published the federal
government published new rules
on the ADA that require websites
and apps for any state or public
government to be accessible
based on what's called the web
content accessibility.
guidelines. So it's, it's
enormous, but it's a huge
opportunity to now uh look at
our digital content, the same
way that we look at our physical
facilities and making them
accessible for everyone. It
really increases the ability for
all communities to interact with
government, so it's an
opportunity, uh, but yes, it
includes websites and apps as
well.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, but
So if it's, again, I go back to
these private companies and,
and, and you said it would
affect Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram. Is that not true
because
Even though we have government
accounts on those.
I, I don't understand how we
could ask those companies to
modify
Their social media, uh, visual
displays for
Uh, people with disabilities.
Chair and thank you, senators. I
look forward to having these
conversations outside this
committee, Senator, this is a
great conversation to have with
that. But for this bill is
creating a centralized reporting
uh place. The ADA federal
requirement is for any state
that if, if, if let's say the
saa has got a, a great, uh
Facebook and, and we, we are
team Sandoval. So, um, if they
On providing their governmental
information on that Facebook,
that would be an issue, but if
they have a way to communicate,
get responses and be able to
roll out governmental
information on their website,
then that would make them
accessible.
OK. Well, thank you, Madam
Chair. I
I mean, I think this is an easy
way to go down a rabbit hole
with outside of the government
stuff when it comes to social
media as well because
If, if we, and I, and maybe the,
the chair could fill us in on
this with their legal background
because if we as elected
officials are using those media
platforms in as official
government.
Media platforms,
When when those have to comply
as well. I, I'm not asking you
to answer. I'm just thinking out
loud here. I, I just think it's
There's a lot more to this than
than just this. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Other members.
And uh and and I don't think the
social media thing is part of
this bill, but I will say, um,
there are, there are
accessibility features you can
do on social media easily,
having a, a brief written
description of a picture, things
like that. Um, there are a lot,
many of these sites are already
set up.
Uh, to, to accommodate
accessibility.hos. Um, but no, I
think this is, this is a good
idea. Uh,
I
Years ago, and it must not have
been in relation to
And
the thing that uh the more
recent updates that you you were
mentioned in 2024. It was before
that.
I was asked to uh
Basically figure out for
someone.
How do I make all my websites,
uh,
compliant for, for
accessibility. I said, go hire
someone who knows a lot more
about it than me.
Um, so it is, it is good to have
specialists in this area working
on these issues. Uh, what is the
will of the committee?
Right, we have a motion for it
to pass. If there are any
objection to that motion?
See then show all members voting
in the affirmative, you have a
do pass. Thank you.
Members, we had a hard stop at
10. I thought our rules
discussion was gonna go longer
than it did, so, we uh, we are
done for the day. Uh, we, we are
gonna be meeting on Friday. I
don't think we're gonna have
very much, uh, that we're gonna
be doing. We're gonna be doing
the grocery commission bill, um,
and then Senator Souls and, and
your, your dose bill and uh an
SJR from Senator Souls that
What grocery? It's, it's, it's
a, it's a house bill about like
reducing grocery costs
commission.
Um, you said?
I don't, I, I, I don't know if
it's a commission or not. It's
something about reducing grocery
costs. Um.
Yeah
So, and then Senator Souls
wanted to talk about an SJR he
has, but I don't think he is
expecting to pass, but he just
wanted to have the, the
conversation.
