For I want to make a couple of
announcements at first we have
to order here available I
believe.
It's a services is set up with
the for our members we have
these headphones here leave at
least some of the public comment
we're gonna get today will be is
very.
Of those headphones on here
that.
Hi interpretation.
We in keeping with our
procedures here the Senate rules
committee if you sign up for for
public comment you will be of
tremendous comment if you do not
sorry we did not have an option
for Richard ma'am in the case of
support for opposition.
I would.
Everyone to keep.
R. the department of this body
and mind when they're making
public comments if anyone makes
speaking public health that is
operationally attacking anyone
or is defective members of the
money for all committee I offer
us.
I
will go ahead I'm gonna turn it
over.
The vice chair.
We will get that thank you for.
The morning we've address the as
of this is that a good morning
we're going to start with the
first agenda item which is house
bill four the voting rights
protections.
Senator Duhigg.
When you're ready and thank you
and and I do want to know we are
starting as a subcommittee that
we will not take any official
action on this bill until we
have a quorum thank you for
that.
Good morning senator.
Good morning.
So Mister chair members of the
committee we are here today on
H. B. for which is on the New
Mexico voting rights act and
that despite a lot of recent
progress in strengthening voting
opportunities for all New
Mexicans Mexico still lags
behind other states in our
percentage of citizens that are
registered to vote and the
number of folks who exercise
that right avid time and this
tells us that despite the the
excellent work that are
secretary of state has done for
many years we we still have more
work to do
which is why the The New Mexico
voting rights act is here before
you one of the central component
of this bill is the native
American voting rights act
portion of it this is sections
thirteen three twenty three and
this really helps address
inequities in voter access for
New Mexico's tribal areas and
the rest of the state by doing a
couple of things.
Hi insuring the precinct
boundaries will be aligned with
political boundaries of nations
tribes and pueblos requiring
tribal translation at the polls
expanding and enhancing early
voting offer opportunities in
the near tribal communities
allowing the use of official
buildings on tribal lands as
mailing addresses for tribal
members for the purposes of
election mail including absentee
ballots and also providing
necessary resources County clerk
so that they can comply with all
aspects of the native American
voting rights act.
Some of the other things of this
bill does is allow voters the
option to automatically receive
mail in ballots by signing up
for a voluntary permanent
absentee list.
Automatically restoring voting
rights for individuals who been
convicted of a felony but are no
longer incarcerated.
Ensuring access to comprehensive
same day voter registration
streamlining the process of
updating voter information to
clean up the next thank make
sure that New Mexico's federal
state clean.
Phasing and secure automatic
voter registration.
A similar to the systems adopted
and on Alaska and Colorado.
Securing and protecting voter
data and mandating the ability
of monitor secure containers
often refer to as drop boxes in
every county.
Mr chair as you know the the
right to vote is fundamental and
New Mexicans deserve to be able
to exercise those rights fully
and fairly without any
unnecessary burdens it's a house
bill four as a step toward that
goal a law insuring that our
elections are are both safe and
secure hi and I have one.
Sanchez from the house here
leader Casey I also want to
acknowledge on
Mr speaker and Representative
Johnson and Lara who are also co
sponsors on this and I believe
us under o'neill is a co sponsor
as well
with that if if leader case has
anything to apple I'll turn it
over to her no thank you very
much Mr chairman I'm very happy
to be here this morning it's
really a privilege to work on
this important piece of
legislation
I don't have anything to add I
do believe that chair do it has
a friendly amendment to offer as
well I do and you know I'm gonna
wait Mr chair until we go to the
committee to offer that one so
that tell me something that will
have a quorum then.
since we won't be able to act on
that amendment right now and a
half we also have our secretary
of state Maggie Toulouse Oliver
here with us you want to add
anything morning Mr chair
members happy to be here and
support.
Otherwise Mr chair what I'd like
to do is we do have organized
support I believe you have a
list of those folks there by
we'd like to to spend the rest
of our are a lot of time in
those folks for the organized
support a chance to to comment
the first person we have is
Santa Fe County clerk I. Kathryn
Clark.
I don't know if he's here or on
zoom not seeing in the committee
room is Kathryn Clark on zero.
Staff.
The not yeah.
Looks like the next person on
the list is the Dona ana county
county clerk Amanda Lopez asked
him.
Who I believe would be honest in
my having of the gov Center here
are given that we're gonna hear
from Catholic clergy.
And I think I think we have
quite a bit of time left of our
twenty minutes so speakers I
would say keep your comments to
to two or three minutes
is that what Mr chair that works
and I'll I'll keep.
Thank you good morning captain
Kirk.
Good morning Mr chair madam
chair and members of the
committee I required Santa Fe
County clerk and you're speaking
in support of the bill for my
motors in Santa Fe County Santa
Fe County as you may know is the
third largest county but we have
one of the highest voter turnout
rates and we also are very proud
of our work tribes in our county
who also have very high voting
rates however what we know about
loading in New Mexico is that
there are still inequities we
would like to access this bill
allows for a fair and equitable
process for requesting drop
boxes it is a way that we can
ensure that people who have been
released from prison have a way
to get back to voting without
being stuck in paperwork limbo
it's also a way for us to move
out in ministry to flee our
ability to process new voter
registrations because it's been
thirty years since the New
Mexico since then voting rights
afternoon as the voting motor
voter and unfortunately you know
that people do not register to
vote when they go to the NMED
and so their data lags behind
this is a way to make sure that
our voter rolls are clean and
finally we have we're very proud
of the fact that in Santa Fe we
have the highest per population
numbers of drop boxes more than
half of which are ADA compliant
so we would like to see the
ability of voters all of our New
Mexico be able to use drop boxes
as a way to gain access to the
polls and to use the volunteer
permanent absentee list this is
the number one request sitting
on County because we tend to
have older voters in Santa Fe
County and they want to sign up
for absentee ballots and they
don't want to have to keep
signing up every election this
is a way to ensure that people
with guardrails of course to
sign up for an absentee ballot
list and get that absentee
ballot that they want and want
to be able to focusing on
Dropbox so I think the committee
and I think the sponsor for
proposing this fell sick right
now and I hope you spoke for the
past thank you so much.
Thank you for your comments New
Mexico to the Dona Ana County
clerk demand a little bit us.
Good morning.
For Amanda we see that you are
muted are you ready for COVID.
Not hearing from me I'm gonna go
to Jerome loose that are the
vice chair of the all public
council of governors we'll go
back to Amanda later.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is therapy on
behalf of to roll Senator vice
chairman of multiple counts of
governors
He is unable to make it and for
those reasons I am going to be
expressing his comments but with
that being said why did not you
in office hi this is the table
recently
About all of the council of
governors took action on
Thursday February twenty third
twenty twenty three to support
the native American voting
rights act House Bill for with
the inclusion of the American
voting rights act as
consequential to the public
because it increases
collaboration between tribal
leaders and election clerks to
strengthen the access to the
ballot and also standardizes
early voting on tribal lands and
guarantees much needed resources
for polling places and secures
ballot drop boxes there's no
reason needed a motion to have a
higher barrier to requesting
election resources but currently
tribes must request their police
I.
Whole year in advance of
election date is billable and
address this on renewable the
spirit for these reasons and
more all public council
governor's supports this bill
and encourages this committee to
make a new pass thank you so
much appreciate the time thank
you for your comments of let
them go to that site Damien
Chavis of New Mexico native
both.
Thank you committee then if you
can come up to the desk so that
we can hear you.
From.
Thank you committee members my
name is outside on Chavis in the
EDS and united vote and I I'm
happy to be here this morning as
a organization that works on
gaining access for voters on
tribal reservations and in the
urban areas we see all of the
disparities that happened
through the voting process and
for the reasons that APC G. has
stated for passing these bills
and for the Navajo Nation Human
Rights Council who is also shown
their support for this
particular bill I ask that you
do pass on H. before thank you.
Comments were not going to
circle back to talk about Kevin
commander.
Representative Amanda you are
muted I'm gonna have to come
back to you I'm gonna go to Adam
of the echo from the late New
Mexico.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Adam John Griego and I'm
impacted member of society I
would like to start by stating
that courage is the ability to
do the hardest thing despite the
cost.
Change on a small scale as of
when we can all begin to
transform the world around us
into something better.
As a formerly incarcerated
community members I currently
contribute in the following ways
to lead a men's Bible study at
the Grove church on Friday
mornings at six thirty eight AM
I am actively participating in
the legislative internship with
the ACLU Mondays Wednesdays
where I'm learning the
political.
And policy writing strategies
under the mentorship of Barron
Jones.
And I'm an active member of Ole
sponsor the white Tigers
basketball team.
Here in Santa Fe New Mexico over
the weekend took the state
championship in their age group
I am an adjunct professor in the
recently accredited automotive
program of the Santa Fe
community college where I teach
automotive heating ventilation
and air conditioning I'm a
certified master technician with
the Subaru car line a Subaru
Santa Fe.
I am also heavily involved in
supporting and fund raising of
my church where we currently
provide global assistance
organizations such as world
serve international convoy of
hope for international teen
challenge currently I do not
have a voice in the elections
that affect my life and
community.
I urge each and everyone of you
to do the courageous thing and
passage before we must
acknowledge on a human level the
quality and promote a healthy
society through civic engagement
I am a citizen of this country
and my voice does matter thank
you so much.
Thank you for your comment seven
go to care and cafe from the New
Mexico Asian families.
Good morning
vice chair and committee members
good morning senator just do it
I'm here Representative for my
area where I live and
international district my name
is Karen cafe I like to greet
you in mind mothers language
Monday on Monday which is good
morning my parents are from the
Philippines and I'm here today
representing the New Mexico
Asian families we stand in
support of house bill four and
did you pass for the following
reasons
that are impactful for the Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian communities
Asian Americans are among the
fast growing demographic group
in the United States and our
voting and election laws are
lagging behind this reality to
keep up with the specific needs
of our community secure
automatic voter registration
willing sure read we recently
naturalized citizens of my
community to register
immediately upon their
naturalization ceremony so like
many students are here from the
I mean teachers I shared
teaching students from the
Philippines so that would help
from if they get naturalized
the next step in is a state
agency to update their records
the unfortunate reality is the
state's existing policies are
not very predictive of
facilitating this process and
enabling my committee to use
their voice as new citizens of
the state and country the
creation of a permanent absentee
ballot list will enable many
individuals in my country and
community to reliably exercise
their vote from the safety and
comfort of their own home to
account for potential existing
language barriers
Because as you know the timing
of the state
here in the United States some
Asian Americans don't feel safe
so this would help them and it
also would help with the
language berries thank you so
much and I hope that you do
past to spell thank you for your
time somebody of that has to
come out of the and senator.
As a reminder there's headsets
in front of you this will be in
Espanol you'll be able to hear
the English translation by
putting on the have that what is
this when is yes but I see that
thank you members of the
committee the number it is but
it just was gonna get also
invited to hold a little bit
though this thing going you
usually member of people this
and we're not on the system can
we shop politicians are less
important yes into how the last
payment and this on my this
incoming members make this
company does apple yeah Lajovic
what throw another that it is
suitable to focus on that issue.
K. email in the average.
The most yes I'm yes seven seven
percent us but will would not
discovery flicking those on what
is in this to committee that put
a stop the name of king of the
south gate told us community
that is in a sustainable
in that building the implemented
a solution feel graphical well
then we'll put our fiscal issues
but I've looked at thank god I
live if that able to in the
process so if if the will is
there will be some of the total
includes C. will in a central a
mostly local government isn't
with us the last election is
that I just bought a new stake
the level two on listed company
that onto the floor not just
income families this only do we
have but a single channels get
all those toasting got most of
that is tribal till he said SO
what I'm most okay and we will
make you go to the next
testimony that a Santa percent
of us this time was it be the
lucha gonna testimony that this
Sam busted process so the more
graphical he then was first
that'll is a list of compromisso
open ended in mid central.
Gay is a I'm almost the mocha to
come into being Lucy Wilkes.
C. mobile see them to his
tomorrow committee which has got
us yes bureau let him across yes
beaver middle Mexico which is
is to say that specifies that is
and then the last circle back to
the last person to be organized
Support was a Dona ana county
clerk Amanda Lopez asked Kimmel
tried this for the third time
I'm not there either.
I believe I am we.
thank you I'm so sorry at the
jump on my phone good morning to
you as well as members of the
committee madam secretary
Senator Duhigg and I would like
to say a special good morning to
you Representative Chasey I have
been so impressed with her
compassion and her directness
and her knowledge and so thank
you to all the sponsors of
course again my name is Amanda
will cause us to serve as a
doing an accounting clerk I am
here to speak in my role solely
is elected official from Dona
Ana County my County serves
approximately a hundred and
thirty five thousand dollars and
all although not as solid I
believe this legislation will
increase participation I don't
want to thank the sponsors of
hostile for for moving to Mexico
forward working to really
modernize our elections as
election officials it has been
truly discouraging to look
across news and and all of the
the rules that basically on
building rights access in our
country and I'm so grateful that
New Mexico's working towards
removing the barriers so that
all eligible voters in New
Mexico can't participate we can
do both we can offer access and
security and is still offers
that we are all better for more
participation for our fellow New
Mexicans additionally eighty for
work to resolve existing
inequities in our native
American communities and I think
we can all get behind that I
strongly encourage you to
support the need for thank you.
Thank you for your comments that
Madam chairwoman you do have
three minutes left and the four
digitization if you wanted to
add anything or could likely to
move on Mr chair I believe
Hannah Burley in the president
league of women voters have also
signed up and so she would like
to speak for two minutes
had a permanent president after
the entertainment voters if you
can come to the death.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Hannah
Burling president of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
the league stands in strong
support of this bill.
We believe that voting is a
fundamental citizen right that
must be guaranteed.
No voter should ever have to sit
out and election because they
did not have a safe and
accessible option to cast their
ballots.
A permanent.
absentee voter list will help
voters with disabilities.
Severe health issues and
inflexible work schedules to
have equal access to ballots.
And finally if we really want to
secure and improved elections we
need to invest in upgraded
equipment.
And expanded staffing for
election administrators.
We urge you to give this ability
passed thank you.
Thank you for that now madam
chair no signs up for this bill
to speak with the twenty four
hours that we're members of the
organized support but I would
ask quite a show of hands how
many in the committee room are
in support of this bill.
With that the majority of the
room thank you and what about
reserves you can raise your hand
on zoom if your in support of
this bill.
As I think happened there's
quite a few.
I'm gonna then go will you come
together to go to the room is
there anybody in opposition of
this bill in the committee room.
I've seen a couple thank you and
and Mr chair if I may there were
five people who had signed up to
speak in opposition usually
under our procedures they would
get one minute each each since
each of the folks the proponents
took about two minutes each and
there's usually about ten
minutes given for an organized
opposition if you wouldn't mind
giving each of the of those
folks two minutes each to speak
I would appreciate it to get to
the thank you seven to go to
members are zoom who have signed
up or if you're in the room
before opposition of this bill
and I'm gonna start off with
their and Clemente.
Erin are you online.
it here.
Can you hear me.
If you could speak a little
louder and there's sounded far
away.
Is that better there you go good
morning.
Good morning I'm calling
supposed to spell the primary
reason I'm imposing is a seventy
percent of the population of
this country that includes
Democrats Republicans
independents to kind of state
libertarians do not believe our
elections are secure as the
stand right now this bill would
vastly open up opportunities for
fraud particularly with an
absentee mailing address listed
as permanent and the that are
required for registration you
can even opt out of it if you
want to that's actually illegal
so I don't know why
this is being pushed out by
particular politicians when at a
time when the public does not
trust our elections if this
committee represents their
constituency they will vote on
the side of people and on the
side of special interests.
Thank you for your comments Jill
asked with her.
Yes thank you for taking my
comment my name is still I am an
engineer and an eighteen year
resident of New Mexico and I
became interested after the
twenty twenty election about why
people we're about the integrity
and started to do lots of
research I've listened to a lot
of life commission presentations
and meetings and including
Lincoln Torrance Otero county's
pull data myself for Lee County
and to me it seems clear that
when you look at hard data our
existing system already has
problems and the changes that I
see in this bill that are being
proposed take it the wrong way
to fix what does appear to be
issues with our elections the
way to go is really paper
ballots voter ID in person hand
counted limited absentee was
victims to make the election
state and I urge you to vote for
the people and do not pass this
bill thank you for your time
thank you for your comments Leri
Sonntag.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I. Leri Sonntag
I'm a member of the better
together New Mexico which has
thousands of advocates all over
the state who are concerned
about this bill the automatic
voter registration portions of
this bill are extremely
problematic because it is
possible that the you include
residents in that automatically.
register to vote who may not be
here legally the permanent list
of absentee ballots is also
problematic.
There's so many questions of
this bill that are problematic
it will not do what the title of
the bill says as far as could be
more order.
Sections this will open the door
for problems with our election
system thank you against it
thank you.
Thank you for your comments
Ramona goals by.
Yes can you hear me.
I can hear you.
Thank you good morning chairman
the committee my name is Ramona
will be and I'm standing in
opposition of HB for.
Comments and I hope that you
take the time to read and grant
the CD concerns I have there are
many more concerns about this
bill that I was only given three
hundred words and now I think he
even.
I hope each of you understand
the gravity of the situation at
hand as I've said before I am
independent twenty five percent
of the population New Mexico is
declining State only fifty two
percent of the eligible voters
voted in the last election.
Forty eight percent of the
voters were lost I'm actually
excited about possibly being
able to the Democrat and the
next primary second he helped
shape the Democratic Party when
with other independent voters
and that is plans in the works I
also want to let you know about
the teams of thousands of emails
that you have received in
opposition to the bill these
emails are real there are lots
of composition.
There are twelve conversations
taking place at this time about
putting these partisan election
built up for recurring.
Also people outside of Santa Fe
Bernalillo county's required
being ignored and pushed.
There are twelve discussions of
reversion which is similar to
session back to territories I
mean the.
In these communities.
I want to let you know that
receive emails be if you were
that show people are being
registered that don't want to be
registered.
There was a person that was
registering her grant.
Four ninety she had dementia
they told the registration the
meeting that did not want to be
registered and they were
registered anyway as a demon
thank you for your time and
promise.
And so that was the last one on
the list is Carlos Santana.
You've got some thank you madam
chair Mr Chairman I'm Carless on
tech with the New Mexico
business coalition you know we
very much support.
Everyone's right to vote and we
want to make that easy and
accessible but there are several
problems with this bill that we
take exception to the mandated
state agencies automatically
registering people that really
is a violation of their rights
they don't have the right to
register someone without their
knowledge and consent then they
get a postcard where they can
get out of that but that's
really not a good thing and
that's not the way the system
should work.
Likewise with.
Excuse me with felons voting
rights we totally support that
having the right to vote the
gentleman that spoke before
we're glad that he's integrating
and being such a productive part
of society but there are some.
May not want to go and we think
that they should be.
Given the right to vote after
they have completed their full
sentences and the request to
vote to just register that could
violate their rights because
there may be people that don't
want to vote we've got problems
also with the permanent absentee
voter list we're not purging the
system the way that we should
when people die or move away.
And to have this permanent list
and not have a good procedure to
claim that list only creates a
problem for the potential of
fraud and people voting for
others that shouldn't be and so
with these we could tighten up
those issues where we can make
it easier for people to vote.
Without violating their rights
and without making the system in
secure more insecure that it
maybe already then possibly we
could support these initiatives.
When you look at automatic voter
registration thank you so much
for your time and your comments
your two minutes are up.
The last act is there anybody B.
as the opposition of the.
Yes those are those are people
who voted wanted to post I'm
just gonna get a raise of hands
on them if you oppose the bill.
Well the operator have twelve in
opposition and in and support it
the.
Twelve in opposition and fifteen
were in support of the assume
with that madam chair of the act
and is expanding have an
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair so I don't
know if this members been passed
out the let's go ahead and pass
that that hasn't been.
Yes the amendment.
So this amendment does does
three things.
the first thing it does is it it
strikes section three of this
bill.
Now section three and section
four of this bill are really
addressing on voter privacy
issues
We had a situation where folks
are are are publishing.
Those registration information
online and and we wanted to
address that to protect her
privacy.
Senses of Bill what adverse
bill's been going through the
process it became clear that the
some of the language in section
three could potentially leave us
vulnerable to to some some
litigation under US federal act
that that the national voting
right shakes but Education Act
and so we're taking that section
out and because we feel that
that section four will still
address the issue and and and so
we don't need that language that
that would.
You know potentially get a
liability there.
The other thing that's amendment
does is it defender defined
sorry the term correctional
facility because in this bill
when someone is in a
correctional facility they can't
vote if they're out the Campos
but the some some good points
were raised by by Representative
Nibert when this was in the
house about the fact that that
would correctional facility
cover let's say if someone is
being held in a county facility
would would would that count and
so we just want to make very
clear that any facility where
someone was is being held on a
on a felony that is a
correctional facility.
Finally the last change that
this amendment would make it
deals with the monitor secure
containers drop boxes so in this
bill we're codified actually a
rule that exists already in the
secretary of state's office this
says every county has to have to
drop offices.
But there's another part of that
rule that that world's that's
all we also want to codify which
is that for that counties
essentially could have a waiver
process so if to bot dropped
there's some small counties in
the state Mr chair where to drop
boxes dot doesn't make sense and
is not workable for those
offices especially given some of
their staffing levels and and
have spread out there county is
our and so we wanted to codify
as well this existing rule that
would allow those parks to go to
the secretary of state request a
waiver of that to drop off
requirement
that with that also have
questions on the amendment thank
you very movingly about but yes
I would move that amendment
thank you Mr chair of the
amendment has been moved is
there any opposition to the
amendment.
State senator Bob if.
I just have a quick question so
so again in section four Mr
chair Senator put what you're
doing is removing the
requirement that they have to is
just to have that right.
So so on.
So so number six of the the
amendment is which is on page
twenty seven.
We're not removing the
requirement that they have to
but we're we're making clear
that they have of of process
they can go through if to isn't
right for their County they can
go to the secretary of state's
office and request a waiver of
that requirement to have to.
Which is actually the case then
we in current law and current
rule we just want to make sure
that it's and loss of that
collection of going forward in
the state the the case no matter
what.
Mr chair Senator fits currently
being practiced now under rule
why would we just leave it there
I I don't understand Mr chair
Senator the clerk specifically
asked for this to be addressed
so this is I'm the that part of
the amendment is done at the
request of the county clerks who
wanted to be sure that because
rules can be changed so they
want to be sure that no matter
who the secretary of state
happens to be they will have
this ability to to get a waiver
of that requirement no matter
why in the future.
Okay thank you Mr thank you any
other questions on the
amendment.
Any opposition on the eleventh.
That will go back to debate in
the house bill four as amended
and Mr chair just so that I I
because I forget say the city
and I want to say it now when at
the end if if it is the will of
the committee that this bill
does pass out what I'd like to
do is roll this into a sob going
out.
Hello we would have to go back
to the house here right okay I
think about never mind.
Right.
Process a lot of back right
right.
Just today.
Exactly and and thank thank you
so much for stopping me that.
Debate on house bill four as
amended.
Any questions or comments from
the committee.
Day after that so.
I just want to thank.
Folks in the audience secretary
of state Senator do they can
Representative Chasey we have
been trying to do this
modernization now for many
years.
And what that I think has done
and is done this to the place
where it's a very good price.
That we have and specially with
the amendments we taking out the
things that are problematic so I
just want to thank folks for
their support and working on it
for so long multiple
organizations in this room that
have been trying to promote so I
just feel like this is going to
put us on the map as one of the
states that truly does care
about sharing the vote of for
everyone in our state so I thank
you all for for doing this thank
you senator Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair I'm I'm
looking at page eleven
which is the
It's a yes it's page eleven
section seven.
tell me how would Mister
chairman Senator how we envision
this process working of in the
cruise departing present.
Mr chair Senator all I'll go
ahead and and for to the
secretary of state for that and
a leader Tracy my have some
stuff that as well.
thank you Mr chair.
Senator about that so right now
the way the process works as I
understand that
An individual is departing the
correctional facility there's a
sort of an out take process that
they go through and one of the
things that they do is they have
a mobile and B. D. unit that
comes to the correctional
facility and helps them get you
know a new ID or for a new copy
of their license or whatever so
that when they when they depart
the correctional facility they
have an ID and so basically it's
just it's it's the same process
when the.
At our current under current law
and then of course under this
bill would be automatic
registration but under current
law you're offered the
opportunity to register to vote
at that time and so basically
it's just saying that is sort of
part of that exit process when
you're getting your state issued
ID can you get the same
opportunity to register will be
registered.
Thank you Mr chair of the
secretary does that
same process applied to those
that are being released on
parole.
At Mr chair and senator that is
my understanding yes I mean if
you are leaving the facility
they want they want to make sure
you have an ID to go into the
world Mr chair currently can
parolees photo right now
parolees Mr chair and and
senator I mean that's exactly
what this bill is trying to
address folks who are have not
completed fully the terms of
their sentence can currently not
register to the registered about
I should say and so the
provisions in this bill that are
that are trying to address the
restoration of voting rights
what it what address that Mr
chair Senator so sexually Mr
chair and secretary them we will
we're going to have people that
still have an obligation to the
state under their parole to be
able to now though even though
they're still under sentence.
Mr chair Senator that's correct
I don't know if Representative
Chasey want to add anything.
Yes so thank you very much Mr
chairman Senator.
What we've had the the current
law since two thousand and one
it was carried by former senator
Richard Romero and signed into
law by Gerry Johnson.
And it is taken as that we've
had this now for twenty two
years and we think there
anywhere from eleven thousand to
seventeen thousand former
incarcerated individuals who are
out who are not aware or unable
to register to vote I have some
clients in my law practice
representing and an infant whose
father a young man who
committed a crime at age
eighteen services time and he
said I learned my lesson I will
never do it again he could not
get himself registered to vote
there's been a problem it's
problematic
logistically because the
completion of the sentence
occurrence in so many different
venues it doesn't automatically
happen when they get out doesn't
happen when they get the
driver's license it doesn't it
just there's no consistent way
and it isn't that the county
clerk's haven't tried but in
this case it was a Valencia
County clerk who told the father
vital client no you can't throw
well when he told me that and he
was the one who was reunited
with his young daughter and has
is now commercial driver and
doing very well that
once we got all his paperwork
together and he had it but it
just we had to present appeared
to present a packet to the clerk
and he missed the last election
I think was probably twenty.
I think it was twenty eighteen
or twenty twenty when I learned
of all this and we help him get
registered to vote it has just
been a nightmare a paperwork
nightmare to get it done and and
the evidence shows that the more
people can engage in society
immediately upon their release
it is more productive for
society they're less likely to
re engage in criminal activity.
And Mr chair Senator yeah what
what what leader Chasey was just
saying about how how this
process has not been working for
the for for folks is that's the
reason the that was that we took
the approach that we did in this
bill which is a a much simpler
more a much simpler approach to
to re enfranchisement for
returning citizens
where if you're in you can't
vote if you're out you can't and
we want to take that simple
approach because what we've
tried to do it in a more nuanced
way as a state we have not done
so successfully
Thank you Mr chair I I think
that you know honestly by
removing you know some of these.
These I guess I'll call
provisions required to vote I I
mean I guess the the argument
that that you just gave me Mr
chair madam chair I I mean to
really solve the solution but we
do just let people vote all the
time that would be no problem at
all I guess and you know I just
don't follow the line of logic
in that sounds to me like they
still have Mister chair an
obligation to to the society
that that we're granting them
permission to participate and
actually run point eight that
society and debt repayment
through their sentence and so
the I. are just as an follow to
me the other thing is that I I
don't see what this bill a lot
of it deals with the this
automatic voter registration and
I just can't see that filling
out a little full registration
are like that with roughly three
or four sentences is so
difficult that someone can't do
that I also find it insulting a
little bit you know that that
we're talking about minorities
in Hispanics and things like
that that we have some inability
to read over again of a
registration card fill it out I
think that simply sooner that
somebody getting out of prison
or or what have you even though
we've given all this training
and all the schooling with the
prison they they're going to get
out now in the capital of that
single registration card either
or they have some inability I
don't know what that inability
might be Committee not drive
down the county clerk's office
or walk over there get it by
mail I I just don't understand
what the difficulty is is I
think a I think it's a good
thing that somebody has to go
through a little bit of effort
to to acquire the most priced
right that we have in this
country that honestly people
died for and so I I guess I just
I just don't see that.
You're welcome responded that if
you want Mr chair Senator
Hemphill I'll note that I think
we are forty eight in the
country for voter registration
so so filling out that voter
registration card apparently is.
Is a burden for a whole lot of
people in New Mexico because our
voter registration rates are are
really quite low and where in
places where they have
implemented this us secure
automatic voter registration the
opt out level is is under five
percent so far when folks get
that the postcard in the mail
saying you've been registered do
you want to opt out less than
five percent of them and and say
other states have adopted this
say yes and for those folks who
who who do opt out it's as
though they were never
registered the the specific
language of this bill he says
that
To me Mr chair and and madam
chair the fact that they don't
opt out just reflects the same
apathy is going in filling out
the card we're just changing the
presumption in my opinion from
one end to the other so now that
they're they would have to about
late in the evening to anything
act to register anyway why would
they do make an active effort to
to not register and you know you
said that it was a parent
because we have low voter
registration petition for
dissipation in the state that
That that in fact is because of
low voter registration that
could be for a number of reasons
knowledgeable expiration heck
let's go to our education system
maybe people are just educated
enough in the state that you
know they're not maybe they have
the trouble they're they're not
engaged in politics enough
within the within the structure
we give them through our
education system and introduced
to in that way that they really
don't have an understanding to
me that doesn't mean that we
provide them essentially keys to
a car and I I think there's some
amount of discipline required in
some amount of perseverance is
required for people to get to
the point where the council I am
back to the back to the the
inmates they're not they're not
having to do anything more than
a normal citizen does staffed I
I just don't see Mr chair
essentially if you're a regular
citizen going through life you
have to have all those these
documents and driver's license
whatever you have to have a
birth certificate to us to get
to the point where filling out
voter registry required these
things I can't see that inmate
hasn't acquired those things and
if they require a little bit
more like showing discharges
from prisons or or releases from
their parole obligations I I
again I I just don't see that
that is a huge obstacle to
overcome that we have to utilize
state resources to hold their
hand along the way to get into a
actually they don't even have to
go to the pool anymore I guess
they can they can send their
their ballot with a relative or
friend now to carry over there
for and they can just sit in the
comfort and forces safety of
your own home and and I I think
honestly it's we're bending so
far in here just opens it up to
all kinds of nefarious
activities and I I could.
but that's all I have on this
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you chairman of how to me
and thank you.
Representative Chasey secretary
of state
I am really quite pleased that I
get to support this while I am
in public office
I think when
Chief Justice John Roberts
really took an ax to the voting
rights act and I think twenty
thirteen
The boy was that a shock to our
system because in the sixties we
had the voting rights act which
protected a lot of folks were
disenfranchised and.
We're
We're treated badly due to
racism another reason so I cheer
this bill on and I see it as yet
another.
in.
The practices here in in New
Mexico
In New Mexico and.
Just proud of it thank you very
much.
Thank you for that and just now
we're functioning of the
subcommittee.
And so any other questions or
comments in regards to the bill.
Senator stuff that.
Thank you Mr chair in Sanchez
Senator Baca was talking about
the people coming out of state
prison not jails and do we hold
Mr chair of Sanchez do we hold
Citizens from outside our
country in our state jails or do
we send them home.
So Mr chair Senator I I know
that there are some places that
have so the so there's like the
Torrance county detention center
where they have detention Mr
chair I'm only talking about our
state prisons that we operate
and have control over.
Mr chair of us under I believe
at least one of them and does do
ice detention because I know
there's a bill this session
wanting to shut that down so I
think there's we have three
persons altogether the device
attention one of them a state
run the other two are privately
run is my understanding.
So Mr chair Sanchez this that
section of the bill would apply
to those persons in that state
run facility that might have
citizenship outside of the
country.
So Mr chair Senator now so if
you in order to be so I think
your time out if someone is
leaving one of those facilities
are and they're going through
that and the process would they
be automatically registered only
if there is documentation to
show their citizenship unless
the the the secure automatic
voter registration never happens
until citizenship has already
been established thank you Mr
chair I think that answered my
question
senators I was assessing to
clarify whether or not.
Anyone coming out of our state
prisons would be non citizens
that could get this paperwork
based upon your earlier question
that's all Mr chair thank you
Sir Senator Stuart.
Mr chairman I move it to pass us
on house before.
There's a motion and a second
and then Senator Pirtle.
Q. Mr chair just I'll be brief
You know I just been here
awhile.
Eleven years it's just strange
to me that with three weeks left
for here in a bill like this on
the Senate side I mean I still
have built I haven't had a
hearing in this committee and
yet you're gonna take this thing
and spike the football right in
front of my face and and passed
such a.
partisan piece of legislation I
think it's just extremely
disrespectful to the body
I mean it's nine thirty on a
Monday and here we are passing
house bill with three weeks left
it's
you know the Senate as it used
to be isn't that elections have
consequences I guess we'll just
have to get used to it thank you
Mr chair thank you there's been
a motion and a second to try to
have a roll call full house bill
four as amended.
Raul help please Senator Baca
hello Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart walked up to
percent of.
As a town she just excuse okay
Senator had a new yes and
Senator Duhigg yes.
I yes but the photo I need to
get it to pass Senator at the
time to the next
thank you.
What acceptable to that next
item on our agenda which is
Senate joint resolution twelve a
magistrate court property with
Senator Rodriguez of somebody
can get a cheese and wine
And asked her to come over she's
just right across the way and
I'm of the.
Which is.
Is that.
Senator Ortiz the people in
you want me to the agenda.
I think I'm gonna need you to
keep the noise level that we
use.
The.
absolutely come on over.
We're gonna move to Senate bill
for three line since we have
Senator share here.
This is the.
Approval for certain land
purchases good morning senator.
Morning Mr.
So.
Being in for a rules is very
unusual for me being in front of
any committee very unusual for
me.
But what field are we doing
because we have seven hundred
this is
the last one I just sent a bill
for three line.
So.
So thank you Mr chair so what
this bill does is.
It allows for the
Of purchase of land from the
this the state can purchase
land.
Which they can do now but it
limits it to one million dollars
so the state can can do things
that are needed at the moment
they can buy right of way or an
easement or something that needs
to happen to conduct state
business but if we're going to
buy a big chunk of land it
simply says we're the
appropriating body come back to
us and tell us why you're buying
this land and let us approve it
so of on page three of the
actual bill you can see of it
starts out.
Will also lands to be paid for
from game protection fund
provided that any purchase of
land with an appraised value of
one million dollars of one
million dollars or more chill
not be made without the approval
of the legislature in in the
back on page seven that and
other simple phrase because
well gonna make sense right so
that's all it does.
Senator did you have any part of
my support within the county
okay so I'm gonna go to the
committee if you can raise your
have since you did that if he
didn't sign up for the twenty
four hours in advance let me
check here.
I do have one person and two
people in support who do have
time to come up Tiffany Rivera
the director of government
affairs New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau you're here in
support of the bill and you have
a three minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee should
I use the microphone okay.
Thank you Mr chairman Tiffany
Rivera director of government
affairs for New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau I'm today we
strongly support just before
thirty nine which requires
legislative approval for certain
land purchases by the New Mexico
game commission we believe
requiring legislative approval
of land acquisition will provide
for more public transparency
regarding the department and the
commission which could lead to
stronger public trust in the
agency additionally we support
imposing this requirement not
only on the department of game
and fish but on all state
agencies with land acquisition
authority the legislature and
the public deserve the right to
know about these land
acquisitions their purpose
whether or not they're cheating
their goal and any future lower
financial expenses that may
result from the purchase of the
land so for these reasons we do
stand and support this morning
thank you.
Thank you we also have one
person who also signed up to
comment on that Jason Espinoza
of the New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts good
morning Chris.
You too will have.
But chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts but we do
stand in strong support of the
the legislation I think Mister
Vera covered a lot of the points
I mean purchase of the state
purchasing land I mean that's a
big big responsibility a big
thing to do we certainly do
think that provided protection
participation in approval should
be part of the the component of
that getting that done so we
stand a transport.
Thank you for your comments of
that one online in support of
this bill.
Now in the case of plus the
state no one is there anyone in
the room in opposition of this
bill by a show of hands.
Thing that anyone online in
opposition to the bill more.
Okay seeing no opposition
senator will then go to
questions and comments from the
committee senator Ortiz the
people.
Thank you Mr chairman and and.
Just curious is there anybody
here from game and fish at all.
Know what there is on this they
love me Mr chairman.
The the.
Support no I just was I said
quietly because I didn't you
know I guess that they Love Me
but.
But they may let me for other
reasons.
I don't see it.
I.
We have.
Yes there is an FIR but it's.
It doesn't say much.
Many have is this it only
applies to the game and fish
commission is that true Mr
chairman Senator yes Mister
chairman Senator.
Those are the ones that have the
authority to buy big chunks of
land.
We already have a requirement
that any other land purchases or
sales at the come through us I
believe so if there's another
one out there I'm unaware of it
but but I believe this is the
only one.
Thank.
Okay I think thank you Mr thank
you Senator budget.
Chair I move would you pass.
The
passed says the band expected by
Senator Pirtle.
I have a so.
But I do have some.
The game doesn't of large land
acquisitions are generally
funded with appropriations.
by the legislature.
And are you seeking the approval
of the actual purchase would be
redundant would create the less.
That could discourage private
land so.
the department is facing
criticism for its purchase of
the thirty four million dollars
bill of our ranch is straddling
McKinley in Santa Monica.
Actually funded with five
million dollars in federal
funds.
Hey what do we gain by this I
guess they're they're coming
raise that question for me what
do we gain if we already had
approved the money to enable
them to buy land in the first
place quite as making them come
back before they could finalize
in the field health so Mr chair
Senator they don't have to
if if if they don't have the
money they have to but if they
already have the money in their
funds they don't have to ask at
all they just do it.
So of there's there's a couple
of reasons for this one where
the appropriating body and they
should come and ask if they're
going to do anything they
certainly still have the ability
to like I say.
By easements if the if that's
what's necessary but because
with the appropriating body if
they're going to spend thirty
four million dollars we should
have a say in that because right
now the the four five million
whatever they just have a fund.
Fund is large enough and off
they go.
But other funds we still have to
appropriate.
Okay I'm I'm I'm fuzzy on this
and thank you Mr chairman and
senator.
Your bill's says they can't buy
any they make any purchase of
land over a million dollars.
Shall not be made without the
approval of the legislature but
you're saying that if we.
If we approve the budget for
them includes that that's the
approved apps absolutely yes
specific thing the L. bar red
suit up to come back because
they use some federal money for
that too is that count that is a
no if it's federal money that we
don't have appropriate authority
over that yes if it's in the
budget then it's in the budget
so we're not saying they're
going to come back for a
separate.
Line.
What is your your bill change
the.
If we are they are they going
out and buying land without.
So because it's because it's in
the budget is you know a hundred
million dollars for ten million
dollars whatever
they have the four without
asking us if that ten million
dollars is there they can do it
other agencies don't have that
other agencies to have have a
specifically listed in the
budget.
So.
In that the big reason for that
is the I see two reasons one for
the appropriating body we ought
to we ought to have that
authority the other one is of
the purchase of
But what feeling and takes off
the property tax rolls so now
what you've you've put a burden
on the county and you've also
degraded the school district's
ability to bond against against
those so for me where the
appropriators for the counties
just like quit doing that to us.
So so.
Mr Chairman.
But it's still not going to
change that if they've already
got the money in the budget they
can go ahead and I think about
the tax rolls in the case of
the.
If.
And and and if I mean.
Thank you Senator money to do
that that still has the same
effect.
So all we're really doing with
this bill is saying if they need
to come for a specific
additional amount.
They have to ask us before they
can do it will we wouldn't
approve the additional amount
this in our budgeting I guess
what it amounts to a now that
I'm thinking out loud it that.
Doesn't it amount to this that
are budgeting process already
takes this into account if they
don't have the money they can
spend it and if they pop unless
it's federal money we don't have
a say over that you already
agreed so what are we doing with
this that's different from our
budgeting okay let me let me try
again.
Every other state agency if they
want to do something make
something specific like this
other state agencies come by
land the of.
Representative transportation
but in their case they come to
us and they say we need X.
dollars for this purpose.
Came the game part here.
Does not have to say for this
purpose if they've got the money
anywhere and if the funds okay
so the it's not you know if you
the hunting licenses things like
that go into this fund so that
fund is there they don't have to
say we want this for this
specific reason.
So what we're trying to do is be
is just simply say.
You can do that the things that
need to be for game and fish.
Up to million dollars.
But if you're going to buy a
ranch if you're going to buy it
they're reviewed by something
like that.
The body I to have a say in that
today we don't have a say in
that for game and fish we do
have a say in that for everybody
else.
So it's it's not.
That doesn't Mr etcetera but
doesn't.
What you're saying that there
fund creates the possibility for
them to spend over a million
dollars.
Outside of their.
Budget.
That's what you is your
requiring them they're going to
do that they would still have to
come to us that.
Yes I believe that's exactly
that in there I.
They don't they don't now they
don't have that with me.
So it's not a separate we would
have to pass a bill like we do
some of these land purchases or
or land sales we have separate
legislative bill that has to go
through we wouldn't have to do
that you just saying they would
have to in their budget request.
Indicate that they intend to
spend a million dollars over a
million dollars from their fund.
For the purchase of a wrench yes
I believe we know I believe we
now speaking the same language.
Yeah okay Senator Baca tell me
if I'm wrong Senator shared with
the way I understand it is is
it's the source of the funds
they're getting funding from
other sources other than us and
so they're able to spend that
money however they choose on
land right now so you get twenty
million from the fed
Piper I now we know this by
virtue of a little lawsuit you
might have heard of a year to go
but.
By virtue of the fed granting
money to the state it goes
directly into their account it
is not it does not come to
legislature first therefore they
do not need our permission
however we New Mexico is still
the benefactor of that fund and
also the rest of the I think
that's what he's getting.
Accepted can Mr chairman and
senator you did say that federal
money wouldn't be include I mean
they could spend federal money
with that are.
The the federal match money is
what I'm thinking so that that
happens a lot Mr chair of where
we need Medicaid for example you
know we put in a dollar we get
for back or closed for whatever
it is but that still comes to us
to budget where that money goes
so in that case it's.
It is federal money until it
hits our bank account but
but the big difference here is
that they have their own
enterprise fund so they can they
can.
Because at yes you're just
saying we need to it needs to
show up in their budget requests
we need to improve their overall
budget for that where they
actually spend before they buy
anything more than a yes or they
can sit is timing thing.
it's becoming a little clearer
two years I think it's not it's
not just can expended but it's
they can't spend it in June of
this year out of their fund.
You have to wait until their
budget for next year goes
through so that it could be
improved approved unless unless
we approved it that is why there
that's maybe why they're
suggesting that this could delay
maybe delay will back out of the
dealer raise the price for some
is that a problem using.
I don't know that that's a
particular problem Mr chair of
on most of these land purchases
there's.
Months if not years worth of
contract negotiations.
Thank thank you Mr but not just
at.
So if you don't mind about
pointed so to my understanding
is just all that if the money is
a fund
Have you that with appropriation
generally the purchase of land
of the capital request which
would have language.
But I've been told Senator
Pirtle thank you Mr chair and
I'll try to clarify some stuff
the game fish operates off of
fees collected from under such
as myself and so I I think the
reason this is needed is also
fees are supposed to go to
habitat treatment not for
purchasing land all over the
state having nice fancy
beautiful ranches in areas and
that's why this is needed they
don't have to come to us because
they don't get budget the same
way every other department does
and for for people like me or
even at those is like bagels or
Las Vegas or those areas are
sent here paying for the stuff
that my support group game
hunting fishing opportunities
youth programs used in the fight
big fancy ranches in areas that
none of us will get to see and
so I think that's why the one
million dollar limit is in
that's why we need a little
oversight to the legislature
going Hey you want to spend ten
million on a ranch children
McKinley County were in Hidalgo
or somewhere and we need to say
what are you doing for the
people of New Mexico to benefit
them just a little check and
balance because right now
they're able to just purchase
and operate almost briefly and
separate from the legislature
which is not benefiting again
it's not benefit accounting
opportunities it's not putting
fish in the streams so I think
it's just a little check and
balance for the legislature
that's why it's necessary thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you any questions or
comments.
And our team will I guess isn't
the reason they're purchasing it
for.
The hunters and fishers they
would have access to land that
currently is private land may be
ruled out of order of the
commission well it Mr chair
Senator you know you get a lot
more bang for your Buck coming
spend ten million dollars on two
hundred acres or you could spend
ten million dollars a gain
access to hundreds of thousands
of acres through a open gate
program and and as it is now we
don't.
Get that oversight they get to
go by and and have a nice fancy
ranch
that might give opportunities to
say ten people where they could
take that same money through the
open gate program we have now
pay for easements through
private land access public land
that's landlocked that would
provide a lot more bang for your
Buck a lot more hunting
opportunities a lot more revenue
but as it is now there's no
oversight there's no budgetary
oversight on our side so they
can just go by lavish ranches
that provide some hunting
opportunities to a select elite
few but for the average person
like me the average Lujan we're
still locked a land in their
they're not doing what they
should be for game and.
Thank you for the questions.
Well.
No I I I guess this still goes
to conservation and game and
fish wants to contest they
control the conservation school
etcetera etcetera Baca thank you
I think just to help clarify a
little bit more it's it's all
about the funding source Mr
chair and and what funds are
spending right now we just don't
have view of that so they have
essentially.
Unopened ticket to go by
whatever land there buying and
and I can I mean we could see
all I we have protections I
think all over all over the log
and stuff like this because
we've seen activities by the
government were we've purchased
things and maybe should have a
paid inflated prices for things
and I see the logic in it we're
just keeping an eye on over a
million Bucks I think it we do
this everywhere else at the
makes perfect sense thanks.
Thank you and with that what's
the will of the committee.
Okay have a motion okay the fact
that.
Yes okay roll call vote please
Senator Baca yes.
Chairman yes senator Morris.
Senator to subpoena yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator hundred yes.
Thank you Mr chairman passed
would like to point out that
this is twice that scared the
hell out of me.
And that's are gonna hear from a
Senator Rodriguez Senate joint
resolution twelve magistrate
court property good morning
senator morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I have have Jason clad
here with me for the
administrative office of the
courts Mr chairman I like the
other resolution you just heard
today this one is not involving
any money transfers whatsoever
it is merely transferring a
piece of land from the state to
the state and let me explain
several years ago the
legislature started
appropriating funding for
magistrates court building the
facilities that we need so bad
in Santa Fe and little by little
we finally got there with the
funding and so now they need to
just transfer the land to get
administrative office of the
courts needs to receive the land
transfer from the General
Services Department so they can
start building there do have a
plan and in design of the
building that's all it does Mr
chairman members of the
committee Senator Rodriguez
without functioning as a
subcommittee and so if there's
any questions or comments from
committee senator Morris your
long.
Usually the federal debt like
Matt our office committee very.
More.
One of the member of this
committee are currently and
Irish or.
Mary of these requests for
exclusion of the runners there
while life from one and a couple
years ago to the members of the
I don't want your.
So we usually focus that happen
you need a lot more due to all
of those that was.
No matter your.
No yeah this is there any
legislator involved in the
transfer in the complex
structure isn't donors you have
some problems that recently
here's ago.
All that over there we do know
about so we usually go
appropriations on the of the
really weird offices over here
more information we've been for
a five thousand
And so this is not a state it's
not a lease and it's not a
purchased it's merely a transfer
of land within the state
to the state to the
administrative office of the
courts in this partial of land
is right there behind coals out
if you picture it on the way out
of Santa Fe behind there's yeah
exactly it's way out there there
for lots left that the state has
that can be used for the
magistrate court now to build
this building I mean for the
administrative office of the
courts and that's really all it
is the funding is there it's
been appropriated in we have
voted for it over the years in
the house bill two budget in in
the capital budget this is Mr
yes Mr chair Senator Moores if I
can add a little bit more
information this is this was
previously approved in twenty
fifteen there was a joint
resolution to transfer at the
time it was I lots of windows
own budgets the
since that time we weren't able
to fully effects with the
transfer with the transfer
of documents conveying the
property
and GST ended up
selling one of those lots so now
we have four months left so we
need to update this land
transfer which was previously
approved by just reducing it
from I walked down to for lots
but it is
currently
It's it's just the only and so
on additional through some
complex searches transferred
from state agencies for.
We had a situation where we just
of our building Representative
taking a number out of this body
over there and the guys are
going to prison so usually we do
a lot more information of them
and that happens.
Past year a little more on this.
In September that's what harder
questions and bigger of course
Mr center of you know how I love
you respect you
all feel comfortable without
just one little thing she
without more progression just
two years ago to return three
years ago five four years came
in Mr chair whatever other
situations
With a large don't work on that
and the nearly as controversial
so I just asked.
Asian maps the general fund
first of all I have right.
Four years ago across Senator
across the world but I trusted
the previews of the.
Regional and stuff so you and
the shows also.
Thank you Mr activity actually
run out for both
of those yes that is better
property thank you senator
Senator thank you Mr chairman if
I'm elaborate a little bit you
remember senator Morris that and
thank you for your points that
one of the the bones of
contention back then on that
other case you're talking about
is that it either didn't go to
the Planning Commission or
whether it went late I don't
remember anything of that
anymore but I but I can tell you
one thing that this here is
clear that it has to go before
the Planning Commission I want
take effect that's all the same.
Out of all of that former
members I was walking.
Thank you.
That is or to the people.
Thank you Mr chairman is.
Thank you senator Ortiz this
this the the the one of the big
differences Senator Moores and
in in this cases were simply
moving in one state department
to another there's no money
involved.
Is there no no there would be no
The result was the commission
yeah nothing it's just it's just
a legal transfer of the property
itself I don't think a similar
danger involved in this of my
only concern is that's a heck of
a location for a magistrates
court or is this administrative
facility Mr chairman and members
of the committee and the
committee as senator Ortiz Y.
Pino no it would be five rooms I
am magistrates if we have four
magistrates now and this would
accommodate an additional
magistrate because there's a the
studies that show that we need
another fifth Manchester but
there's no room and the security
of this old building here is
just really bad also so it's
it's really the the magistrate
court itself that will be out
there right this course yes more
courtroom since A. J. so we
elaborate a little bit on that
thank you Mr chair Senator yes
so this gives us room to build a
new master courthouse that will
accommodate the growth that's
needed for Santa Fe
it is also that's so close to
the state police so there's
Senator
State it's agency would be we're
all the magistrates all I would
be located that yes chair and is
there.
Where they currently.
Mr chair Senator they're
currently off of Kalisto there
in the least Office of
courthouse space hospital at
that yes Mr chair Senator that's
correct a couple of other okay
this this does sound like a
better range and so thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr memberships active system the
government although to the US
the this information was brought
before so we need to go.
