Etcetera do heck.
Center guy across.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Center male.
Senator Ortiz piano.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Sanchez.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Center share.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
today by Reverend Lynn hidden
executive director of New Mexico
compensate churches please
remain standing for the pledge
of allegiance to be that today
by Senator.
I am one voice and I am singing
hi one voice send us them
people in this storied and
reviewed roundhouse of the law
and policy that is be mindful
that none of us is a loan for
lived in harmony with the earth
and each other.
We are not alone for we carry
with us the dreams of the
children across our state the
needs of those who are hungry
and offerings of this beloved
state from those who came before
us but borrow it from those who
come after us.
We are not alone for among us or
families deserving of respect
from those promising to serve
and protect of asylum seekers
asking for grace of educators
looking for support and the un
sightedness a land relying upon
us for acts of selflessness and
attenders stewardship for the
distance in need of our
protection we hear the howl of
called as well to attend to the
pinon tree and the red and green
chillies growing in our fields
we come bearing the weight of
all that is New Mexico and it's
very existence upon our
and farms and ranches in
wilderness areas the rivers and
the mountains even as the
responsibilities to be more than
just ourselves can sometimes be
before us the hope of the
innocent who are waiting to come
behind us the courage and wisdom
of those standing with us and
others we hold in our hearts
this day thanking you that we
are not nor have we been nor
With.
on on to the US in the Cibola
County but that it was the seia
bottles.
Mexico.
of business is our Senate
majority floor leader senator
Peter Wirth.
thank you Mr president good
morning everyone unanimous
consent we go to that orders in
Dan.
Right here on the rostrum I want
to thank our chief clerk.
For the work she did to put this
together and to really exemplify
the work that we do in the New
Mexico state Senate.
Maybe citadels turn it over to
happen that's a super nice way
to start the week Ezzell thanks
so much for that
Mr president's I want to start
by just appreciating the words
is a super important.
Piece as we kind of navigate
through our journey here in the
legislature and thinking about
not being alone is another
joint session today to hear from
three members of our
congressional delegation Center
Heinrich and representatives
Leger Fernandez and Vasquez
Santa Fe a couple reminders the
deadline for having bills
drafted is today so if you'd
like a bill drafted you need to
open a file of the council
service and the the deadline for
history it's also Las Vegas day
and I know Senator Campos has
some guess up on the rostrum to
introduce for Las Vegas state
National Board certified
teachers day Senator Hotmail see
no objections will remove Center
memorial ten off of the
president's table and be placed
on today's calendar senator
six and M. S. U. Aggies football
team day from the president's
table and place that on today's
calendar seeing no objection
will remove Center memorial
twenty six off the president's
also Mr president say unanimous
consent we remove Senate
memorial twenty two New Mexico
made today from the president's
table.
Senator Morris twenty six for
and I'm just you day Senate
memorial twenty two will not be
read this morning that will be
Senator Campos we get to that
that will also will be discussed
but will not be read so with
that Mr president's
important moments and Side
you'll Senator Hamblen centers
run that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
president and thank you for
Leader worth Mr president I
beloved father grandfather great
grandfather and friend J. Paul
Taylor.
We lost J. Paul early yesterday
morning at the age of a hundred
district thirty three in New
Mexico in the New Mexico
legislature for nearly twenty
years before retiring in two
thousand five he served nine
consecutive terms and had a
In nineteen forty two J. Paul
earned a bachelor's degree in
history from what was then New
Mexico college of agriculture
mechanical arts have to wartime
service in the navy here in two
purchased an adobe home on the
west side of the Z. a plaza in
the early nineteen fifties and
proceeded to raise seven
children within its renovated
walls.
Los crucis is named in his honor
where his daughter Mary Helen
teaches I have the honor of
serving on the governing council
of J. Paul Taylor academy for
two years the J. Paul Taylor
son J. Paul Taylor junior and
his wife meri and is survived by
his remaining children Robert
Delores Mike Mary Helen Pat and
rose merry as well as his
numerous grandchildren and great
grandchildren.
great conversationalist I had
the honor of interviewing him in
the late nineties well I worked
in public radio and he was so
genuine and kind and loved in
our community and he loved
For those of us who had the
privilege of being his friend
his acquaintance or just a fan
we know that he is leaving us a
forward to hearing the stories
that all of you have about J.
Paul here thank you.
We're gonna have all.
find everybody in the gallery.
And the chambers please rise.
For a moment of silence.
Honoring John Paul Taylor.
Thank you.
Maybe Center souls.
He's one of the main reasons I'm
here when I was on the school
board back in the nineties and
we would have our legislative
that I was aware and knew what
was happening very much
supported me when I chose to
rand to rand chose to run
Thanks Center souls we have
Senator Ivy Soto followed by
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Steinborn and senator
was doing education policy at
the time for senator Kennedy
addresses drugs fellowship but I
remember I went to at a
symposium about election data.
I was happening there Washington
everybody was bonding over.
And.
And that everybody was hanging
on his every word.
So embodied the term gentleman.
In so many ways.
And when I then.
Such amazing knowledge but also
such incredible humility.
It was just a true honor so
thank you very much.
Long before I joined the
legislature I was something of
an advocate working for New
Mexico advocates for children
Taylor was a long time chairman
of that body.
so I I watched him as he
conducted those meetings as you
listen to people's concerns and
as he tried to respond
J. Paul was a an amazing human
being.
when I ran for the legislature
he.
New Mexico somehow J. Paul was
from the Romero family and and
Las Vegas's ancestry and and but
B. besides just being able to
He was an amazing man and he
left his stamp on the
legislative record for health
and Human Services legislation
we're still trying to catch up
with some of his ideas.
because it captures somehow the
the spirit of the man it's it it
it really is a beautiful book to
read.
age a hundred and two he was
still making the trip up and not
just being at the meetings the
participating actively I'm told
he was he was you know he was
passed a it was of course a
moment of sadness is whenever we
lose someone.
We love.
made in the state now the
challenge is up to us to try to
keep that work going so for his
family and and for the all those
he leaves us thank you Mr
president thank you senator
soprano we have Senator
Steinborn fo by Senator Stewart.
Center Senator Lopez and Senator
Where is Jake J. policy icon of
our community even though he
left office before we got
Taylor you had to get his wisdom
you had to learn from him and
also if you were lucky you'd try
to get a support interestingly
enough he did not support me in
against so it's like I can't do
it and you know sometimes that's
a hard thing to hear but it's
spoke to who he was and I think
something those in this chamber
Who had a heart of gold and I
want to mention three things
about him which I think are so
keyed was legacy number one key
more than anything viewed his
didn't have a voice who were
most vulnerable needed an
advocate give you that that was
his role and I remember years
after he left office I'd be in
this house and suddenly he got a
was an officer not.
But yeah I think as you'll avid
says those how you treat the
least amongst monk us is really
a statement of who who you are
Ortiz Y. Pino was saying about
his relatives he actually Dona
Ana County is roots go back to
pay the role play though one of
the earliest settlers back in
it's like what and it's so when
we worked on a campaign to
protect all those mountains and
Dona Ana County what is now the
organ mountains desert peaks
national monument the largest
national monument the state of
serious marching orders well
anyway congrats to J. Paul he
got to see that monument in
those lands protected for six
years and is home he's been a
serious art collector.
So when you're next in Los
crucis in Misia you'll actually
be able to go to the Taylor
monument on the plaza and you
will see not just an incredible
prices array of art you'll see
incredible then finally Mr
president colleagues.
He was a great man because he
was a mentor.
And he never look down on
anybody he treated us all as his
equal I don't care if you were
was really special to be in his
presence you felt privileged for
it and and I think it's really a
great model for all of us with
friends in the messy at a
community thank you Mr president
thank you senator Sam are
president pro tempore Stuart.
retired ten years later in two
thousand five he.
You know we won't be able to say
enough about him today he was
Paul Taylor who worked on that
for five or six years he knew
how important it was and he just
humble he would never really
take credit for anything he had
done but we all knew who is
behind that progress so we we
his wife donated that house as a
museum and it really is one so
rest in peace state Paul we miss
you we love you.
With everything that's been said
about him I say ditto ditto and
ditto.
Except when I first came up here
he was very helpful in guiding
me through the process as to
what would happen in the house
of representatives.
So during the interim and
what Representative Taylor.
was helpful for me was not just
only to show again and kind of
day how we work with our young
people what the value is and
what effect this body could have
on helping the children and all
of our communities.
I would go to him and ask him
for guidance just and he would
just have this wonderful.
This continent serving you would
sit down and he would listen
would talk to me and he knew and
I told him I said you are this
is in all respects Schering your
your children sharing with me is
you're you're with reserves a
father in answering many
thank you Mr tour and everything
you could sit there for hours
just listening to him talking
about whatever it may be each
little.
in his needs you know that there
to pray of it just was
phenomenal those are memories
that we all carry with us I know
in my belief that Representative
we love you and we send our love
to his family thank you.
Senator Lopez senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president of what
an extraordinary life.
he had died yesterday morning
You know Karen I talked about
him and the impact he had on us.
appointed in two thousand and
four and my first six months
were J. Paul's last six months
and he pulled me aside and I
just I I distinctly remember him
being in the house chief clerks
absolute very and and that's
that's we was and that's how he
did this job and I think that's
certainly something that we all
can learn from him.
And I just want one final thing
of what he did and what he
prioritized and what he was
willing to fight for and I just
remember after he was.
Long gone from the legislature
dealing with health issues he
sure they remembered and they
understood kind of what had been
created cell again to his whole
family you know thank you for
senator my SS followed by
Senator Burt Senator makes this.
Thank you Mr president I I got a
text from my T. up yesterday
about the passing of J. Paul
of the yellow metal that the
Baca founded Vegas in eighteen
thirty four had five sons five
daughters and they all he
compiled the genealogy with the
professor from highlands and
The fee discover the meaning of
life years before he became very
we're at elderly but I may live
to be a hundred to in his late
eighties he was a delegate on
Obama delegate to the national
in law school buddy of mine came
up here to intern and was like
came back in like was it was
kind of a haters like often
those people up there by there's
about nothing and then caught
to New Mexico he was of a legend
his own time if I get mad at me
for saying that he was a legend
in his own time Mr Mr president
and now he's a legend for all
time.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr president I
consider J. Paul Taylor a very
close friend years ago he and I
worked on welfare reform here in
the state and he wanted to make
reform we passed that we were
taking care of the mothers and
the children so over the years
as I would continue to visit
with him and become a close
friend he always asked me about
and I think that that's he just
did not he never separated from
his love of what he was doing
here for the state and so over
and it was pouring rain it was
cold it was muddy and it was
outside and I thought to myself
this man is going to catch
meeting and not only did he have
was he taken care of by the to
check goes on and Spence the
Czecho but he came back the next
day to get extricate the love
Thank you so much Senator
panics.
Senator Ingle followed by
Senator Kernan.
and he was always there to help
and listen and I remember an
interim committee at eastern New
Mexico university and I don't
remember which committee it was
but
committee meeting ended
Representative Taylor.
Had a real strong feeling about
some of the things that were
happening there eastern.
I may be wrong on that amount
but I don't think I am but it
was so generous and so warm and
so giving.
But he will not ever be
forgotten there.
He was a man of just absolutely.
Wallace character.
Word was his bond.
That's all we have here.
the the privilege of serving on
an interim committee with John
Paul Taylor as well and I just
remember as everyone has stated
today what a gentleman kind
sitting in a chair and greeting
the members as they kind of
exited one of the rooms and I
reminded my again my name I knew
person and I am privileged to
have known and worked with him
on public affairs out quite some
time ago.
Thank you for on health and
Human Services thank you very
met him probably about thirty
years ago when I was the or
however many years it was when I
was a state director for the
Clinton gore campaign and we're
a then saw him years later and I
don't know whether he remembered
me or not but he certainly made
me feel as if you did and that
was just such a gift he had and
often think.
What would John Paul Taylor do
and I think that that is a
really really huge statement of
the influence he had so I I
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr president
and thank you very much members
of the New Mexico state Senate.
all parts of the state that he
served and in particularly of
the Las Vegas area he carried
history and culture he carried
com nineteen hand to ensure that
as we move forward we were doing
the right thing.
To those individuals that have
known him and have spoken about
youth are children they would
gather around him on numerous
occasions to listen not only to
the stories at them in a story
on.
He always ensure that the
he always ensured that it wasn't
about him it was about the
future generations and the other
part of that was as he continue
on earth and as he continues
with his legacy what he has
taught each and everyone of us
is continue to preserve who you
you.
The pieces that are going to go
ahead and be in that historic
that magnificent museum that he
called home for so many years
the bed that he's rested on that
he slept on right above was a
big crucifix that was part of
his faith.
To those of you that continue to
deal if you well with the those
levels but that every single
individual counted in what it
what the future was going to be
for them.
And then lastly and moving
forward in this is the piece
It was for the time to come so I
hope that is each and everyone
of you get a chance to visit his
majestic home no that is spirit
continues to be there but also
The generosity he lived with
every ounce of his heart and his
mind and is being so that
anytime someone visited with him
That as he went along was there
just to go ahead and be in
passing every person had a place
in his heart so with that Mr
president members of the Senate
people he kids cared for those
that were young at heart and his
legacy which is more than just
the legacy it's part of our
lives will are live on forever
Senators wishing to speak.
Senate majority floor leader
said Peter Wirth takes the next
order of business Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president thank you
members I think that was
that point we've got a couple
memorials that we need to get
done we got a bunch of gas up
front
and so I think what we'll do is
allow cameras in the chamber in
the gallery seeing no objection
cameras are allowed in the
gallery and in the chamber.
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president what we're gonna do is
first sent a moral ten then
Senate memorial twenty six so
that'll be Senator hada meal for
New Mexico National Board
six Senator Wirth of if I may we
did have a I guess it did have
to leave the chamber we can and
we're on a nonsense
miscellaneous we can remain on
that until we're able to have
from the house to go for the
joint session and then we are
going to do third reading of
legislation probably that'll
happen after we come back after
today and she's with an
organization named back order
and they're in town.
Up to discuss
I do not get an annual
Mammogram.
R. after the after after they
get to the recommended age
And they can be used in a
portable setting along with the
tablet and it it detects masses
based on pressure.
In a variety of settings for the
right where they can get to
communities that don't normally
participate in mammography.
and death that is caused by
breast cancer.
Is Neil is herself a survivor
did not want to support her
through this process at that
early age.
And so Senator right the the
folks from backs up I will tell
you all are going to be up in
share information about about
how this works and about the
opportunities they are they're
able to in some places for
incentive so in the senators who
would like to at some point
today between noon and and two
thirty swing up to room three
twenty six get a quick bite to
hopefully we can integrate our
Medicaid services it is
significantly lower cost than
mammography and again is much
more accessible so thank you
you'll first to Senator how to
me for Senate memorial ten after
that to Senator millennials and
diamond percent world twenty six
see no objection we're on that
on final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
board certified teachers the
national board certification is
the most respected professional
certification available in
education and provides numerous
schools nationwide it's
important to note Mr president
that national board certified
teachers are nationally
recognized as being among the
best teachers in the profession
with more than sixty nine
improvements in their teaching
practice the process of
analysing and reflecting on
daily practices during candidacy
helps teachers focus on their
strengths and areas of
Senator debating Center moral
ten anyone wishing to speak
Senator Kernan follow by Senator
Stewart thank you Mr president
process and the time and effort
they spend to become excellent
teachers is a so at Google and I
appreciate all of them that have
gone through this process what
Senator Stewart I can go to you
or we can have the right to read
whichever you prefer Senator
Stewart Mr present thank you I
need to leave and spend it so I
certification process in DC she
went there was on the early
boards me we were one of the
first states that recognize the
through the two year process but
costly process and the hard work
it takes so I stand strong
support congratulate the
Senate memorial ten memorial
declaring February thirteenth
twenty twenty three New Mexico
National Board certified
teachers record Mr recognition
day in the Senate or as the New
Mexico National Board certified
as the New Mexico National Board
certified teacher network
advocates advocates for
leadership opportunities for
national board board certified
teachers and educates teachers
celebrates achievement offers
opportunities to all constituent
groups and supports and
recognizes all national board
certified teachers in all school
districts in the state and in
classroom after twenty years of
teaching and whereas national
board certification is a
rigorous process that can take
three to five years to achieve
and requires that applicants
knowledge and whereas a
comprehensive study conducted by
the national Research Council
found that students of National
Board certified teachers make
greater gains on achievement
growth in one school year and
whereas New Mexico has one
thousand four hundred sixty five
national board certified
teachers who have been certified
since nineteen ninety five
candidates serving in title one
schools and whereas one hundred
sixty three national board
certified teachers were
successfully renew this
certification cycle and eighty
certification seven four new
national board certified
teachers and sixteenth for the
national board certified
teachers who have renew their
certifications with six and two
Alamos Los crucis public school
district Rio Rancho Public
School District and Los Alamos
public school districts are The
New Mexico school districts with
the highest number of national
certified teachers recognition
day in the Senate to acknowledge
the achievements of all National
board certified teachers and
of public education signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator Leo how
to meal how we see Morales
Center how to muted close Mr
president I move that Senate
memorial ten do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
but all forty two members and
certified teachers day has
passed the Senate center how to
mail thank you Mr president and
I'd like to introduce a some of
our national board certified
Johnson Farmington high school.
Ronnie roar Santa Fe public
school district Ashley cart
right Los crucis public schools.
school district ladies and
gentleman of the Senate Mr
president if you can help me
congratulate him but by giving
them a round of applause.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president well
we're on third reading I think
we'll go next to Senate memorial
twenty six and that's Senator
Diamond.
guess football team day thank
you Mr president welcome back Mr
president I move that Senate
memorial twenty six may not
printed not referred to
committee and it be read for the
Mr president of Mr us determine
your senses apologies had a
scheduling conflict but I can
assure you Aggies that he will
make up for it in capital outlay
with those locker room
improvements.
I move that the Terry we
tomorrow.
The reader to read.
Senate memorial twenty six the
memorial declaring February
two regular season with the
record of six wins and six
losses and whereas the Aggies
were invited to play in the
quick lane bowl at Ford field in
Bagley's ended a historic season
in Michigan with a twenty four
to nineteen victory over Bowling
Green State University in the
quick lane bowl game and whereas
native Diego Pavia who
accumulated one hundred sixty
seven passing yards and an
additional sixty five rushing
yards and was named the Most
an interception in his final
game for the crimson and white
and whereas Shias beat an
offense of linemen from Shiprock
high school led the way for the
Jerry kill led the Aggies to
seven wins in his first season
as the Aggies head coach just
the third season with seven or
be congratulated for its victory
over Bowling Green State
University.
At the twenty twenty two quick
lane bowl and be it further
this memorial be transmitted to
the head coach of the New Mexico
State University Aggies football
team signed and sealed at the
capitol in the City of Santa Fe
I think a reader for reading
that.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president really is
my honor to be here I know that
become Southern New Mexico's
team today it's everybody's team
and and I want to make a few
comments that given kind of kind
of some gloomy days are
not just the pride of New Mexico
state the pride of Southern New
Mexico with this for the pride
of New Mexico of of New Mexico
as a whole I am is extremely
honored to have got snow coach
gather this team around and you
you could tell that there was
just a shift in the culture of
what New Mexico state football
was going to be you look you you
you leave not for fear but
through love you gather them
every child had a poster
autographed and really there's
been a real culture shift so we
don't just celebrate an amazing
when amazing when it really a
shift and and really kind of the
celebrate with you you Mr
president I open up the comments
are debates from other senators
thank you Senator Diamond we're
debating Center memorial twenty
six.
seventy four you know it's great
to see success especially on on
the football field because we go
back go back a day or two when
sure very many people here in
the audience know about Jo Jo
Jo's quarterback Joe was a was a
tall guy and he could throw the
coach kill you're working with
your quarterback for there is a
little bit of touch every now
and then but but Joe's renewable
pretty hard and he he had a guy
named Hank cook through the
outstanding outstanding football
player but Joe for charging
going on actually played in the
NFL.
when you're in the lead and you
put in the game adults out of
average and you don't try to
handle.
Could you do just that I tried
bloopers all for.
But that's job for sergeant show
he's remembered for that more so
than any other things he's ever
some of these guys will go on
and they'll have successful
careers in football which you
know what if you don't even make
it to the NFL you guys have
proud of what you've done
because those things don't
happen all the time you know.
President moralis you know had
world but we're glad you're here
congratulations on on your
accomplishment you know course
we have success all we want is a
is going to be a remarkable
thing to always carry with you
remember so thank you Mr
president thanks guys for being
here and look forward to vision
with you more.
kill but again it was gonna be a
first year where wasn't a whole
lot of your players it was
players you inherited and every
single game it got better the
around to meet with the fans and
adoring young young boys who
looked up to you all those were
important lessons for the whole
community and it started to
great group amended you got to
work with all the way through
really mattered to the community
of Los crucis and it continued
to grow through the bowl game
players have for you and you for
your players and then to win the
game I mean I know all of New
Mexico was watching as well as
lots of the rest of the country
back behind all of it and for
those who don't know there was a
big rally down in Los crucis to
support the whole team the team
came out the closet down there
if we win this ballgame that you
were going to do or something
and so the great to hear a
little bit more about how that's
going whether you picked up the
you've instilled that I often
have set up here on the
athletics that are two schools
are two main schools UNM and
NMSU are fierce rivals until the
game's over and then we're all
state thank you thank you
senator souls.
Any further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
Diamond to close thank you Mr
Sinaloa objection.
By a vote of forty three in the
firm is in the negative central
moral twenty six NMSU Aggies
with them the trophy from the
quick lane bowl so if they could
be willing that out I'm gonna go
ahead and introduce our guests
are up here with you.
Diego Pablo our quarterback a
native from Albuquerque to
graduate a volcano Vista high
school.
Diego help lead the New Mexico
a Heisman Trophy vote before
being named the MVP of the quick
lane bowl Diego wants to be a
dentist I'm sure we have lots of
opportunities here in New Mexico
we know you'll stay
Los Lunas high school in a
storied career for the Aggies he
won both the twenty seventeen
Arizona ball and then the twenty
twenty quick lane bowl he's a
linebacker's finishes collegiate
welcome our linebacker Trevor.
And the six foot eight inch
team to go straight to the
division one football this
season as a redshirt freshman he
helped anchor and Office of line
that nearly doubled in its
rushing touchdowns from the
And of course we have head coach
Jerry kill this is his first
team has reached seven or more
wins with nearly four decades of
collegiate coaching experience
kill is the eighth winning this
active football coach he plans
the community for all you've
done for New Mexico
congradulations NMSU Aggie
football.
Thank you very much we're gonna
we're gonna turn it over now for
just a couple words if you would
by Senator are by coach get
but it's a it's a privilege to
Representative New Mexico state
Los crucis
the ministration our Senators
know its
A group of kids all three from
the great state of New Mexico
and I will tell you you know the
ball trophy is
Sept as soon hard hat lunch pail
led to we are he and but we
appreciate the state of New
Mexico being right there with
not easy it's very difficult I'm
old school.
A light up a plan and said this
is what we're going to be and
who we are and I think the kids
go to class I don't go to class
or run hill that's called kill
hill and they don't want to be
on that hill but they're going
to be on time and five minutes
no I got to go to class we do
class checks they don't go to
class.
I run the hill they go to class
body and I keep going they
bought in to what we're selling.
They taught us about life
football is the greatest game
From everywhere.
All different races face and we
got to put them all together
into one.
been one one you've been no one
to you've been and Tory and I've
danger have been a one for.
But you know what a lot of
These kids Roland for and they
taught us me about live and when
we're in the Reno plain football
the most important things
didn't gripe they didn't
complain they just cap work and
and we won one and lost one and
then we went on a streak.
already got his college degree
and masters.
And this is who represents the
state of New Mexico.
Bus linebacker combination but
he's like me he's hard hat lunch
pail and tough.
He represents our state.
I didn't win any game.
Is Los crucis is football team
is the people's football team
and we want to represent the
right way to do it the coach
class and these kids are done it
with class so I thank you young
man for giving me the
opportunity to coach you.
and our football team because we
will continue to work hard for
you and we will be successful I
promise you that so again thank
Senate majority floor leader
worth to take us to the next
order of business Senator Wirth
Senator Campos has some guests
up on the rostrum for Las Vegas
day he'll do that and then as
soon as he's done we're gonna go
back to third reading Senate
memorial twenty two would New
move forward the individuals
that are to your left there on
the rostrum are individuals from
Las Vegas who have dealt with
everything from COVID to the
sure of is that the people of
Las Vegas in the entire region
of course the entire state are
safe and healthy and as they
move forward it's because of
their strong vision and their
through the entire list we have
councilmember David we've
already we have council member
Michael Montoya who is the proud
father of our New Mexico state
president Dr Edward Martinez and
we have a Las Vegas probate
judge Dwight Torrez if you all
members of the Senate please
join me in welcoming these
individuals on Las Vegas stay
Thank you Senator Campos.
Campos percent memorial twenty
two New Mexico Mason day.
Thank you senator Wirth before
Senator compass I think they
were taking some final pictures
into third reading then we'll
In order of business third
reading of legislation.
final passage has been taken is
now subject basement remember
substitution.
Hearing no objection.
Senator Campos thank you Mr
president of the reader already
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president if we don't
have a copy of it what I'll do
real on third reading so we can
just keep the volume down please
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate in essence
Senator Morial twenty two
declares February the thirteenth
and deal with math with
engineering with science and
with all these areas as they
move forward one of the things
that I would like to going to
mention is that even though
they're not up in the gallery
will stand for any additional
questions if not then I'd like
to going close on the memorial
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Campos Senator Stewart
thank you Mr president I want to
program it's Hawthorne
elementary they had a middle
school teacher moved to
Hawthorne and she started that
program it's an incredible
program so thank you Senator
Campos and thanks so much for
the mesa folks for doing what
they do with our students thank
you Senator Stewart.
do now pass and I am asking is
kind of the Senate that the
record show that all forty two
senators and the lieutenant
governor are shown voting in the
Mason day has passed the Senate
Senator Campos thank you Mr
president members of the Senate
just around of applause please
in case there are members of the
mess a program that are up in
the gallery if not I'm sure
they're going to go ahead and
Thank you Senator Campos.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth takes the next order
of business thank you Mr
president unanimous is that we
go about our business
announcements miscellaneous
round that order business
go over the joint session once
we're done please come
immediately back to the floor we
are going to go to third reading
the state house.
Representative on the on our
new.
Representative Armstrong.
And Representative headed out.
representatives has directed us
to invite the honorable members
of the Senate and the honorable
lieutenant governor to the house
chambers for a purpose of a
joint session.
order of business thank you Mr
president we will we're still
announcements if there's any
other final announcements before
we had over now is the time
otherwise we'll come back after
thank you Mr president units
consent to make an announcement.
Senator proceed thank you Mr
president tomorrow Senate Indian
rural culture affairs committee
meeting will be moved back to
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent the Senate resolve
itself into a committee of the
whole Senate for the purposes of
hearing a joint session with
members of our federal
Course offers out into a joint
session.
