Uh, the members know we had
breakfast provided for us this
morning by voters first. It's
over there if you'd like some.
Everything is gluten-free,
Senator Stewart, uh, and if the
muffins are vegan. Um, and
you're also going to be getting
uh the briefs on, on the boards
that were doing the
confirmations for passed out to
you this morning. So feel free
to take a look at those. Um, and
otherwise, I will hand the gavel
over to our vice chair, who
chairs.
Uh confirmations.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so
we're gonna start off with the
first item on the agenda, which
is the appointment of Joseph
Luhan to the state Board of
Finance. Joining us is Senator
Campos we're starting with, oh,
we're starting with Martin
Schwazo. I'm sorry about that
reappointment to the New Mexico
Finance Authority with our good
friend Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, buenos
dias. Uh, it's good to go ahead
and be here with each and every
one of you today here before the
Senate Rules Committee, and with
me, we have Mr. Martin Swasso,
uh, for consideration.
appointment to the New Mexico
Finance Authority, uh, very,
very quick.
Um
Mr. Chair, it's OK then to
proceed because I, I just heard
Senator Moo, so we're we're
fine. OK, thank you.
All right, so, uh, with us today
we have uh Mr. Martin Swasso,
who is here for consideration or
reappointment to the Mexico
Finance Authority and uh with
that, I'm gonna go ahead and
just go over a few things.
Mr. Swazo and I have uh been
acquainted for decades, and uh
throughout all the work that
he's done, not only in the
community of Las Vegas, but for
the state of New Mexico, he
continues to be a very integral
part in terms of not only the uh
uh mortgage finance Authority,
but also, uh, so many other
aspects of community life, along
with that, he is well seasoned,
he is uh uh educated, he
continues to go ahead and grow
in this particular role.
he attends the meetings. Uh,
he's very responsible in the
duties that he continues to um
provide.
And along with that, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, members of the Senate
Rules Committee, I'd like to
defer to Mr. Swazzo to um make a
a few statements and of course
possibly go uh in brief over his
credentials in order for him to
be reconsidered, if you will, or
considered as we move forward
for this reappointment. So at
this point, uh, Mr. Chair, I'd
like to defer it to Mister
Swazza.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
Senators, uh, it's a pleasure to
be here as always, uh, I mean,
uh, start by saying it's some
honor for me actually to to
serve uh in any committee state
level, so it's something that uh
I, I think I was born, uh, uh,
to do, I've been uh involved in
party politics all the way
through local politics in Las
Vegas and started off in Las
Vegas, New Mexico, where I was
born and raised, uh, throughout
my career.
Developed uh myself as a small
business owner, uh, presently
I'm also uh on a global business
or um executive vice president
with the global business. So
anyway, I, my roots are in
northern New Mexico, but uh now
we're, we're actually
representing people all over the
globe and, and uh just working
at doing what I love, which is,
uh, representing the citizens of
New Mexico and helping in any
way possible.
Thank you, Mr. Swanzo, now we
did have some organized support
on your behalf. Marquita
Russell, the CEO of New Mexico
Finance Authority, if you'd like
to come up, you have a couple of
minutes. And although I named
you, if you can restate your
name for the record.
Go ahead, Mary. Thank you. Good
morning, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Marquita
Russell. I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico Finance Authority, and I
appreciate the opportunity to
stand in support of both Martin
Swazo and later with Cathy
Keith. Um, as you may know, the
New Mexico Finance Authority is
an instrumentality of the state
and we're governed by an 11
member board of directors, 6 of
whom are ex officio. The other 5
represent both business and
community interests of the state
as well as higher education.
And two of the members that you
have here today really are uh
important parts of our board,
not only because they are vice
chair and chair respectively,
but because they actually keenly
understand the needs of New
Mexico's, particularly the small
communities, um, Martin Sarzo is
uh a serial entrepreneur, and he
brings that experience to the
New Mexico Finance Authority.
Our mission is to be New
Mexico's partner in building
economic prosperity and stronger
communities and a keen
understand
of what businesses need in order
to thrive is really very much a
part of that, um, as Senator
Compos mentioned earlier, um,
Remember Swazo works very hard
on behalf of the finance
authority. We have 5 committees.
He is on 3 of those committees.
He chairs our finance and
disclosure committee which
oversees and vets all public
disclosure documents related to
tax-exempt transactions. He is
um a member of our and oversees
our budget, most importantly
monitors that oversees our
investments and our and our
procurements in that committee.
He's on a member of our audit
committee, as well as our
executive.
Committee. So he attends
regularly. If he cannot make it,
he's the first to get on the
phone call. Tell us beforehand
and then meet with us after to
find out what he missed. Um, I
can't, uh, recommend him more
strongly, and we appreciate your
consideration of his
reappointment.
Thank you Marquina, now no one
signed up in, in opposition, but
I'm gonna go to the committee
room, is there anybody with a
show of hands in support of the
country.
Seeing 3. Anyone in opposition
of the reappointment of the
country.
No, now, any, if you can show me
a a show of hands on the
committee, anyone who wants to
ask any questions. Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator, and it's great to
see you, Mr. Sarzo. Um, Martin,
you have contributed quite a bit
to the community at large to the
state, to your own community.
But in this role, could you talk
about any needs that the agency
has that you have perceived in
your past work with them. Thank
you, Senator. Actually, uh, yes,
I, I think I'm uh uh very proud
to be associated and helping the
governor and with Marquis on
them, with the workforce housing
that is now under the, uh, OERB
uh at the uh Mexico Finance
Authority. I think that uh
With the housing shortage that
we have in New Mexico, I think
we were kind of missing the
boat, uh, with people that, with
the middle class, basically, and
I think that one of the things
that uh we were able to, to do
with workforce housing is create
a fund that will allow for uh
people that have a job that are
live in New Mexico that wanna,
you know, live in the
communities where they work, uh,
give them the, the ability to,
to secure a residence and, and
become a part of that community.
So I'm very, that's one of my
Uh, accomplishments, uh, another
thing that we're looking into,
uh, thanks to Senator Campos
with his help and, and with
again with Marquita and our our
distinguished chair uh chair one
Keith is, uh, maybe looking into
what we can do to help working
Uh, families with healthcare,
uh, having recently been, uh,
Having my mom fall sick, and I
use her as the example because
that's the example that I know,
uh.
We found out that in New Mexico,
if you've worked all your life,
you have a retirement, you're
not below the poverty level, and
you need both hospice and home
healthcare.
Can't do both. You can't afford
both.
So it's, it's, it's, it's an
issue. So one of the things that
we're starting to look into and
you'll see some bills coming
through you guys this way is how
we can maybe help uh get more
affordable healthcare to people
that worked all their lives
because in my mom's case, for
example, uh, her if uh if she
were to have to go into uh to
the assisted living uh situation
today. They would, uh, that
would probably eat up her, her,
her retirement, her savings.
quickly. So, anyway, it's, it's
something that uh that I kind of
will champion and, and move
forward, move forth. And then,
of course, lastly, the thing
that, that was really
impressive, uh, when I came on
board with the Mexico Finance
Authority was we were able to do
with PPE and the job that you
guys did and, and helping move
things along and we cared for, I
don't know how many Mexicans and
uh during their time of need
during the COVID crisis. So I
think those are the three things
that I would highlight.
Thank you very much for those
responses, and I think this is a
great candidate. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Sarzo.
Man, if I've been waiting to
cross paths with you again.
Pleasure.
Um,
congratulations, by the way.
Thank you, sir, and uh congrats
on this, um, reappointment.
I, I want to talk, um, I just
want to give you a little bit of
street credibility here and um
Because what, what you do in the
private sector just really
impresses me with, um,
Your small business.
Which to me is trans
transformational. It really is
with um,
Plastic gas and you have a.
Um, a location, is it Valencia?
I'm sorry, is it Los Lunas or
Bolen? It's Loss.
I remember when I was on the
County commissioner for
Sandoval, we were trying to get
you up there. And, um, I, I hope
you're looking to expand in New
Mexico because if you guys are
not aware of what uh this
company does, it, it's amazing.
So I hope you can um
I know you're more international
than in the US, but I'd love to
see some more expansion in New
Mexico.
Um, you know, when I'm looking
through the Senate Finance
Authority and all the areas that
it
It funds.
Um, a lot of important areas,
local government planning fund,
charter schools, programs, uh,
drinking water, state revolving
loan fund.
Uh, do you see any shortfalls in
any of these areas that the New
Mexico Finance Authority has uh
fell short in funding.
Uh, no senator actually when,
when I came on board, actually,
we, we had some issues with uh
some of the uh the computer
programs and generating some of
the uh necessary follow-ups that
we had since then and in large
part, uh, uh, under the, the
stewardship of uh our executive
director, Marquita Russell, uh,
we've gone from, uh, very
questionable audits to were
early, we're we're unqualified
and they've been fantastic. So
I'm actually very proud of.
of the of the uh what we've been
doing at the New Mexico Finance
Authority since then.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
So that that kind of brings up
a, a question for me with the
questionable audits which
happens all over the state. Is
there any type, was there any
Wrongdoing it, and if so, is
some type of ethics training
that you guys go through there.
It, it, it predated me, Senator,
so I'm not sure. We've not had
any issues since I've been on
the board. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, lastly,
Are there, are there certain
areas where you see growth in
the board of finance or maybe
pulling back in some areas.
Workforce housing, uh, we just,
we just barely started to, uh,
we just barely started to
scratch the surface, uh, as you
know, housing is an issue in in
New Mexico, the shortage, so I
think that uh there is going to
be uh lots of, of, of room to
grow. And I think that would be
uh again, and as I uh as I
mentioned earlier, we're at the
advent of looking into.
maybe helping with healthcare.
Well, I think if we can provide
homes and we can provide health
services for New Mexicans. I
think that's definitely a step
in the right direction.
Good answer. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Sarzo, uh, you got
my full support. We, we know
each other. I think you do great
work here in New Mexico, and I
think you're gonna continue to
do great work at the board of
Finance, so you definitely got
my support, I appreciate uh
Senator Campos uh campus uh
supporting you, so, um,
Honored to do with my friend.
Appreciate you, Senator. Thank
you Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you.
You know you're at a
disadvantage with the sponsor
like that on your left hand
side, don't you?
Oh, thank you very much. I
did a little checking on, on
But you stand for and I think
your work has been impressive.
One question along Senator
Stefaniks's line was
you answered.
With the need of help on
healthcare. Can you expound on
that a little bit and tell me.
What methodology you think might
be beneficial.
You know, for me, Senator, it's
just focusing on, on
working-class families because
that is a real issue with, uh,
if, if
You were not fortunate in life
and you, and you live below the
po poverty level, uh, you can
get actually through Medicare,
uh, uh, you can through
Medicaid, I'm sorry, you can get
uh full health benefits, uh,
and, and you're OK. Uh, however,
if you worked all your life and
you have a retirement and you
retired from state government,
let's say, uh, and you got sick,
you would actually have to
qualify for either.
Uh,
home health care or hospice, you
can't do both, so it's going to
be a, a stretch on your, on your
savings and on your, uh, your
family, uh, you know, who may
have to provide care and stuff
like that. Uh, I'm from a small
family, so there's, there's
literally only me, but uh what
it's done for me, for example,
senators, it's opened my eyes to
the fact that maybe I need to
get some kind of insurance so
that when I get to be uh to the
point that my mother currently
Because, uh, my daughter and
then won't have to worry about
it, so there are some insurance
plans available, but I think if
we can figure out a way to, to
subsidize, you know, maybe just
a matter of subsidizing the
income bracket, you know, above
a certain level and below a
certain level. We can even do
that to help with either hospice
or home health care with the
whatever it's not being filled
right now. We can build a niche.
I think that's important and
that's, that's what I would say
is what we need to kind of just
take a look at what we do with
the middle class. New Mexico.
needs help with the working,
with the working class.
All right, I appreciate that
very much, sir. Um.
There's a
there's nothing that we can do
in New Mexico that's more
important than creating good
jobs that provide
Not only the immediate needs,
but the long term needs of
family. So thank you very much
and thank you for your answers.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doogan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Sarzo. Um, yeah, I'm, I'm
thrilled to hear what you're
saying about, uh,
Adressing that, that healthcare
gap. I think that is absolutely
needed and, and I'm really
looking forward to seeing, uh,
what
What you're gonna be bringing
forth on that. Um, did you say
that there is, that there's
legislation, you're gonna be
supporting this session around
to it
What you're gonna be bringing
forth on that. Um, did you say
that there is, that there's
legislation, you're gonna be
supporting this session around
to
again thanks to my colleague
here on my left, Senator
Comolson, and so they'll be,
there'll be some stuff going
through there we're starting to
take a look at what we can do to
to help him in that in that.
OK. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, Mr.
Swalzo, um, I saw you last week,
uh, when you were presenting to
Judiciary as part of the
Sentencing commission. Um,
So what, how?
I know we're not here about the
sentencing commission, but I'm,
I'm intrigued with, with your
background, how, how you ended
up both on this and the
sentencing commission.
I was actually appointed to the
uh sentencing uh commission.
Uh, I came in with, uh, when,
uh, when, uh, Senator Stewart
was, uh, back in the Jerry Gary
Johnson administration. I
remember what you said
understood about that. So I was,
I came in, actually I was
appointed by the pro of the
Senate way back then at the New
Mexico Sentencing Commission,
there's, there's not a, a, a
time frame, so I've been honored
and, and, and, and proud to
serve through uh
I think it's about 5 or 6 tes at
this point and so that that was
just actually kind of my first,
uh, committee that I was ever
appointed to as a very young,
uh, party chairman at the time
and uh it was Senator Aragon
actually that gave me uh the
said I have a little committee
that uh that uh if you want it,
you can have it it's sentencing
commission has grown through the
years, uh, when I started, it
was a $60,000 a year budget and
uh they were just kind of not
doing much, uh, the Mexico.
Authority, uh, was a natural for
me. I was fortunate to be
appointed by Governor John
Grisham. I have, uh, in the past
served the community development
council CDEG grants. I have a
strong uh background in finance,
so it was a natural fit, you
know, it was an honor to be able
to serve the governor in this
capacity.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Senator, Mr. Sarzo,
um,
What
To the extent that there's
there.
are going to be changes with uh
federal funds available to New
Mexico. How, how might that
impact that you all are doing.
You know, that's a tough answer.
I can tell you it's gonna affect
me immediately because, uh, one
of the things, uh, Senator Block
mentioned, uh, I own, we own an
international company. We, we're
capable of taking uh plastic
waste and converting it into
usable gasoline diesel carbon
and kerosene or manufacturing
facility is in Mexico.
So, uh, as of, uh, Saturday, you
know, there's gonna be a 25%
tariff on it now, so that's
going to, to affect, for
example, uh, the what we're
doing in Los Lunas, uh, it's
just a cost you'll have to
absorb, but yeah, it's gonna,
it's going to to see uh how we
can work with that. My solution,
uh, is one that Senator Bloch
had had raised earlier, maybe
look at, uh, see what we can
actually produce uh or get a a
uh stainless steel manufacturing
facility.
in New Mexico and, and, and
start building our plants here
locally. We're actually engaged
with uh with uh Native American,
uh, uh, uh, tribes right at the
moment to see if uh there's a
possibility of, of doing some
kind of a partnership with them.
And Mr. Chair, uh, so our, but
as, as far
Does the finance authority, does
it use federal funding in in the
work that it does. OK,
can affect us, that's how it's,
uh, you don't, new
administration that's gonna
practice. I'm not sure yet what
the uh repercussion gonna be
with the finance authority. I
don't think so.
Um
I know that, uh, a couple of
years ago.
Uh, the finance authority had,
had tried to do.
Loans for microcannabis, uh,
organizations.
And it didn't work out well
because I think largely because
those
Those, uh, those entrepreneurs
didn't have the, couldn't put up
the collateral necessary to
secure those loans. Um, I used
to work in cannabis. I don't any
longer, but I constantly have
people asking me, where can we
get?
We heard there were these loans,
where can we get them? What,
what is happening with them. Uh,
are there
Is there a solution to, not, not
just in cannabis, but in general
in in giving loans to startups
that likely aren't going to have
the collateral.
To secure the lenses. Is that
something that the, the finance
Authority is still looking at,
um, are there solutions there,
or yes, I think uh support staff
and, and actually, uh, I know
that cer certainly under, under,
uh, our executive director and
under this board, if uh if
you're looking to uh get started
in the NMFA. Uh, I think they do
an excellent job of beginning to
end, you know, you, you go, you
put in an application, they'll
they'll help.
uh, which
uh, which fund, uh, uh, is, is
available to them, like the
microcannabis fund and stuff
like that, charter schools is
another one. Water is another
one, on and on and on, so I
think that.
The best thing that we can do to
support that is, is get them
started early in the process
with the New Mexico Finance
Authority and then take them and
and guide them through the
process. I think we've been very
successful because of uh
executive director and her staff
in doing that. So I think that
uh a lot of the loans now are,
are, are, are flowing more
smoothly, uh, keep in mind, we,
we, we dumped the the PPE. We uh
about the uh OR housing we
bought micro cannabis, we bought
the charters.
All of those were within the
first, actually 3 or 4 years of
uh of, of my, my, my time in
Mexico Finance Authority. Thank
you so much. Thank you for your,
uh, public servants, and I look
forward to supporting you on the
floor. Thanks.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stephenings.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
like to move the reappointment
of Martin Swazzo, Martin Swazzo,
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority. Thank you, Senator,
before we, we take action, were
there any further comments or
questions?
thing done, if we can have a
roll call.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
I
Senator Brantly, yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
With yes and favor and two
excused, you're gonna move on to
the Senate chamber for a full
confirmation later this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Slazzo.
Mr.
going to move back to that first
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Joseph M. Luhan
to the State Board of Finance,
and good morning, Senator Munoz,
who's your senate sponsor.
Morning, Madam Chair.
Mr Vice Chairman.
Like to.
I'd like to introduce you to Joe
Lujan, the governor's favorite
cousin
as we start off, Joe Lujan, I
probably know 20 plus years
friendships, uh, business
groups. Uh, he's currently the
president of Hub Insurance
commercial lines, uh, in uh
Saint Pius graduate and in
graduate with a bachelor's
degree. Um, there's a lot to
say. I deal a lot with his two
sons, Josh and Jake, in the
insurance business. And so uh
with that, I'll just introduce
uh Mr. Lujan and turn it over to
him.
Thank you. Um, first of all,
like to thank you for the honor
of being considered for the
board of Finance and uh.
Hopefully, uh, my 40 some year
background in business and
insurance uh gives me a little
different perspective on uh on
the things that we consider on
the finance board.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Luhanna. We do
have one person who signed up
and organized support, that's
Mr. Edward Luhan. If you want to
come up, Mr. Luhan, you have a
couple of minutes.
And although I stated your name,
if you can restate your name for
the record.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
Uh committee
I know it's a little bit
unusual, I think for the father
to get up, um, in front of the
committee to
Uh
Uh, talk about, about their son,
but
I can tell you the reason I'm
doing it.
One is extremely proud of him.
But he's the type of person that
he won't tell you all he's done.
And he won't tell you what his
I his own first ideas.
And Joe has always been since he
was young.
in both.
Um
Uh
Junior high, high.
He's always been a leader in
trying to help others.
His whole mantle.
Um, I took a couple of
Committees that he's been on.
Uh, and just give you a, uh
Of of what he's done, but he's
uh he's been on the board and
Initial board of excellent
school in Mexico.
Charter schools, they now have.
Over 10,000 students.
In in those charter schools.
It's been on that committee.
And years
I don't know
He's, he's also been on.
Uh, and he still is.
On the business council for New
Mexico State.
been on a
Uh
He's been chair of the
leadership New Mexico.
Uh, board of directors and
Uh, I think
on
Me.
This
very active.
Uh
Those are just a few. I can go
on and on, but I wanna.
I, I
For the time.
that you have and I know you
have a lot of them coming up.
But I, I have no doubt.
That
He make does make and will make.
An excellent member of the board
of finance.
He's, he's won that.
They, he, he questioned.
He's, he's just a question.
Questioned me all the time.
Ah
But I, I, I just absolutely
unconditional.
Recommend him.
Thank you, Mr. Luhan. It's
powerful to have a father stand
up for a son. There's no one who
signed up and organized
opposition. Is there anyone in
the committee room by a show of
hands who's in favor of this
country.
6
78.
Aid in favor and now any in
opposition of the country.
See none if those of you on the
committee want to raise your
hand if you have any questions
or comments.
Senator Block.
Thank Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Wang,
um, and I want to thank uh
Senator Munoz for sponsoring you
and congratulations. It's great
to see your family here
supporting you, supporting you.
I, I think your dad's a fan.
Um
Just, just real quick, why, why
do you wanna do this?
Good question. Um, no, you know,
we've always been taught since
we were little, uh.
With our family that you owe the
obligation to give back to the
community any chance you get.
And, uh, when I was first
approached about it, I, you
know, said, you know, I can
think about it just for a second
and uh
You know, actually, he's one of
the ones that I talked to. He
said, So you, you know, and they
approach you to do things to be
able to get back to the
community, you need to do it.
You owe it to the community, the
community has been good to us
and uh.
And so I think primarily that
and uh anything else that I can
do to help?
Um
True, the finance uh.
It gets sold out, gets stalled
out.
Properly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Wuhan. I, I, I agree 100%.
When I look through your resume
and I see extensive business
experience.
And that's what I love, uh, when
somebody is in, in business, a
small business owner, and they
got to deal with regulations and
everything like that, and they
want to run for office or, or
serve in government on boards or
commissions, uh, taking time out
of their day away from their
family and and things like that,
I, I greatly appreciate that,
and I applaud you. um.
I'm, I'm excited to support you
and, um.
And I think your dad's excited
to support you as well.
I'm still questionable.
But um,
Great background, highly, highly
qualified, sir, and um there
should be a unanimous, if it's
not a unanimous vote on the
Senate floor, I'm going to be
very upset. So, um, thank you
for serving, and stepping up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Gallegos.
I,
um, thank you both. I was gonna
apologize. I was in a meeting
with Broadband, uh, taking
ceremonials place on uh
questions and answers because I
knew he was uh here tied up with
you, but I did want to talk to
you and I, I appreciate
everything that I've heard,
everything I've uh learned about
you, but extensively, you look
at your community involvement,
your business professional
affiliations.
On those, and I know leadership
in New Mexico, a great
organization. Uh, how many of
these are you still?
Associated with just thinking
through the time for family, uh,
are you still really involved
national or statewide on some of
these organizations.
Uh, many of them, uh, but not
all of them on that, on that
list anymore. But, yeah, still
involved with, uh, uh, excellent
schools, um.
And uh still do some stuff in
Mexico and
and a few of the others, but.
So, yeah,
well I appreciate that and I
know, um,
Continuing where you're at now,
it's gonna be uh a lot of time
away from finance. I'd like to.
Uh, center block, talked about
your family because it is
important that you uh balance
all the workload and, and
family, so it's great that
they're here to support you,
but, uh, I'm also with Center
Block that I hope the
confirmation goes 100% because
that's
Hard in times like this to find
a leaders that are still willing
to, to work with us and uh come
alongside us, so, uh,
congratulations, I'll be
supporting. Thank you, Mr. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Luhan.
Um, yeah, I love it when parents
come, uh, and family is here,
uh, I love seeing, uh, seeing
proud families here, uh,
supporting our conferences. Um,
Hi, I'm looking at the, the
handout we got, uh, from DFA
about the board of Finance. And
it notes that I, you are respo
you approve capital expenditures
of four-year higher education
institutions, and it says in
parentheses construction and
major remodeling. Are there, are
there other
Is, are the, the capital
expenditures that, that you deal
with.
Or, or let me back up.
Um, yeah, I think through the,
uh, insurance, uh, background
that we do. We also do many of
the we specialize in
construction, so we do many of
the contractors that come in
before the board and uh we do a
lot of the bonding as well, so
you get a look at a lot of their
financials, those kind of
things. And then also sitting on
uh the business advisory board
and real estate Committee in New
Mexico State. You also get to
look at some of the uh
Various um entities and the
needs and how, what goes on to.
Getting those buildings, uh.
Constructed.
Great, thank you and Miss
Sharon, I, that's why we're,
we're doing a, a regent
confirmation uh later on this
morning and I was just curious
what kind of, how you all work
with, do you work directly with
board boards of Regents on.
Those kind of expenditures are,
but it sounds like.
Maybe depending on, on, you said
the the board for NMSU, but
But is the
Explain to me how it works.
Um,
what, how it works between NMSU
and no are the mortifying
generally between the board of
Finance and our universities.
I'm sure the board of Finance
will approve the universities'
budgets and and go through that
if they ask for tuition increase
or not improve that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Thank
you, Senator. So, so tuition
increases go through the board
of Finance. I did not, uh,
understand that.
She,
she'll get you the exact answer
so I don't make a mistake.
Thank you for that as you come
up to the mic, if you can state
your first and last name for the
record,
members,
um, uh, Ashley Lee director of
the Board of Finance, um, so,
um, Senator Do, the board of
Finance, uh, does work, um, sort
of two degrees of separation
with the board of Regents. So a
capital expenditures, of higher
ed institutions specifically for
your, uh, that are new
construction or major
remodeling, which are
Higher dollar amounts, we just
did a rule change to establish
those do come before the board
for approval. Uh, we also
review, uh, the issuance of
revenue bonds for higher higher
education institutions and so we
don't directly um uh approved
tuition increases, but if two,
sometimes those tuition
increases, uh, our, uh, in place
to issue debt and at that time,
we will review that, um, as part
of the issuance of uh system
revenue bonds by higher
education institutions.
Uh, the, all of those
transactions go before the
higher education departments
capital committee before they
come to the board of Finance,
um, and then the board of
Finance considers those, uh,
after approval by both the Board
of Regents of the institutions
and then higher education
department.
Thank you. I, I appreciate that
explanation.
Um,
Mr. Chair, I think that's all I
have. Thank you for your
service. Very good. Seeing no
further questions or comments.
What's the will of the
committee?
Motion by Senator Gaos for a
dupe to move you forward for a
full Senate confirmation, if I
can have a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's? Yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami. Yes.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 9 yes and 1
excuse, you'll move forward for
a full Senate confirmation later
this morning. Congratulations,
Mr. Lu.
We're going to move to that next
item on the agenda, which is a
reappointment of Cathy Keith to
the New Mexico Finance Authority
as her Senate sponsor, I would
have the gavel back over to our
channel.
Thank you, Senator. Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman.
It's nice to be sitting next to
a former supervisor at Los
Alamos National Laboratory and a
colleague of mine now at Los
Alamos National Laboratory.
Cathy Keith is the Los Alamos
National Laboratory Director for
Community Partnerships, where
she works to build team and
relationships across the between
the lab across the education and
workforce sector as well with
with business communities. Kathy
has over 20 years of experience
in.
public policy, including working
as a legislative director to
United States congressmen. As a
presidential appointee at the US
Department of Energy, and as the
director of Economic Development
division for the New Mexico
Economic Development Department.
She has experience in managing
budgets exceeding $400 million
and organizations with over 100
personnel. Kathy has worked
across the nation as a
consultant, assisting states and
communities and designing and
implementing innovative economic
and work.
For development projects that
serve their needs. She formerly
served as an elected member of
the governing board of the Santa
Fe Community College. Kathy
holds a bachelor's degree in
journalism and political science
from Texas Tech University and a
master's degree in public
administration from the
University of Southern
California. She's the first
generation college student who
was raised in Tucum Kerry, New
Mexico, and I'm now going to
hand the mic over to Kathy.
Thank you, Senator Armio for
being my sponsor this morning.
Much appreciated.
So for those on the committee
who I have not met before, um, I
think, uh, Senator Armi has done
a beautiful job of kind of
covering my background, but um,
the side that I'll tell you is
what I'm passionate about. So,
um, formerly working for
economic development in New
Mexico. I was all over the
state, um, and talking and
working with local communities
about their economies, how they
create new jobs and new
opportunities, and time and time
again,
You know, if you, if you have it
pointing kind of toward your
throat, yeah, that's better.
Thank you for the hint.
Time and time again, what we ran
into wasn't, um, I, I need to
recruit a new business here or
support a new business here. It
was the basics of, we don't have
clean drinking water for our
residents, much less the
capacity for our sewer system,
um, to add businesses, so
infrastructure is vital to
economic development, not only
of quality of life and every one
of our communities, but also
economic development. Uh, the
New Mexico Finance Authority
does a fabulous job and
I'm so honored uh to serve and
for you to consider me for this
appointment because the finance
authority has for many years
been helping communities across
this state with those
infrastructure needs and over
the last 5 years, 5 to 10 years,
thanks to your support, has
really been able to expand the
work that the finance authority
can do, um, branching out in
areas of small business support
across the state, in addition to
infrastructure support and also
supporting some vital
industries.
Um, through venture capital
funds, um, health care, uh,
child care, and primary
healthcare. Great, thank you.
We continue to have issues with
the, the mics in here, so we
might just want to use that, the
cordless mic, I think. Um, you
have 2 people signed up in
support, uh, Annie Hansen.
Come on up, uh, oh, and perhaps
you, I have here a note that
says rostrum. Were you not
planning on speaking this
morning.
You are welcome to if you would
like to, no need if if not. Uh,
we also have again, a director
Marquita Russell.
Hi, um, I'm Annie Hansen. I've
actually Santa Fe.
Um, have known Kathy Keith for
almost 30 years.
Um, and I'm excited to stand up
and
Support her and support the
state of.
And I'm happy to become a
resident of the state.
I know that she's
Part of, part of the reason that
the state does as well.
Welcome to New Mexico.
And director Russell.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Again, I,
Marquita Russell from the New
Mexico Finance Authority. I
stand in strong support of the
reappointment of Chair Keith.
She has been our chair for the
last several years and the
shepherded us through um our
most recent uh strategic plan,
3-year strategic plan, which
focuses on strengthening
infrastructure, uh, economic
development, uh, organizational
efficiency and uh partnerships
within the communities, um, we
are really
pleased to have her helm our
organization, we are, uh, as you
know, in the last several years,
has, have expanded tremendously
and having someone with a vision
that uh Cha Keith brings to
bring it all together to tie
those strings together is really
important. Um, in addition,
she's a wonderful uh chair in
terms of meetings, your
communities that appear before
us feel welcomed. She has an
intellectual curiosity uh that
comes out in these meetings and
brings out the three dimensions
of projects that sit before us.
Um, and again, I, I mentioned
before how important it is to
the finance authority to have
members on the board that truly
understand small communities,
rural New Mexico and having
grown up in those small towns
and having seen uh the impact
that the federal government can
have, that the state government
can have on those is really
important to us and she brings
that, that experience to us. So
again, I stand in very strong
support and appreciate your
consideration.
Thank you. Um, anyone else in
support wanna raise their hand
to indicate
Uh, anyone else in the room want
to raise their hand to indicate
support.
All right, see to anyone want to
raise their hand to indicate
opposition.
See none, members of the
committee would like to be on
the list. Senator Block.
by Senator Sphonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
congratulations, by the way, um.
I wish you had a different
sponsor, but we'll work through
that.
A very impressive resume. Uh, I
just got a, a couple of quick
questions if you can just be
brief. I just want to get your,
just your opinions, that's it.
Uh, you're up at Los Alamos
National Lab. Senator Heu and I,
um.
have kind of a common
background, uh, in this, and,
and the chair knows my
background as a uh a nuclear
weapons consultant.
So where, where do you see what
um the new administration Los
Alamos either growing or.
Um, maybe pulling back a little
bit on some uh nuclear funding
because every administration
gets what they call a nuclear
posture review, the classified
version, the unclassified
version.
Uh, do you have any idea where
Los Alamos is going to fit in
the new administration of
modernizing the nuclear force
recapitalizing the nuclear force
with long range standoff, the
new Sentinel, uh, weapon system,
the B-21 upgrading B83, B61,
Mark 21. Where, where does Los
Alamos, um, play in that, and
you see growth up there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator
Block, can you hear me?
Yes, ma'am. OK, thank you.
So, um, what I will say is Los
Alamos National Laboratory has
been integral for 80 years and,
um, nuclear weapons development
and has since, you know
many others of scientific
development and research. So,
um, during those 80 years,
there's been broad bipartisan
support for the National
Security mission of Los Alamos
National Laboratory. And I hope,
and I think the tea leaves say
that that probably won't change
the laboratory has been deeply.
in the last 3 to 4 years, um,
and building pits, uh, for our
nation's nuclear stockpile, um,
the laboratory is still engaged
in that work and will we, we've
been on, um, a hiring surge over
the last 3 years, so we've hired
about 4000 people in the last 3
years, that hiring has now come
to a leveling off point for us,
so we anticipate we'll be hiring
about 1000 people this year, 700
due to attrition because our
baby boomers are retiring just
in at Los Alamos, just like they
are.
across the country and we're
replacing those with a new
generation of workforce.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. That, that's a great
point because in the nuclear
business we have lost, we're
losing so much of that uh
experience from years and years
and trying to get young people
into nuclear engineering, uh, is
critical, so, um, thank you for
that. So on, regarding your
regional development corporation
in Espanola. Uh, this, this is
near, near and dear to my heart
as a previous county
commissioner, economic
development was so crucial.
And um
In Sandoval County, especially
in the rural areas. Can you tell
me in your 4 years there, what
worked and what, what worked and
why and what didn't work and
why. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Senate, Madam Chair,
and, uh, Senator Block. Um, I
think what works and what I'm
always in favor of is
communities working together.
We're too small in New Mexico to
think of ourselves as
independent entities, um, you
know, I, I like to think of
Northern New Mexico as
Albuquerque just spread out
over.
About seven-hour drive.
And um, when we try and go at it
ourselves, um, we, we just don't
get enough done and we don't
have enough capacity to get done
what we need to get done. So,
um, in my time at the regional
Development Corporation, we
developed a strategic plan that
was a strategic plan of
4 counties, um, multiple, uh,
city governments within those
counties and 5 tribal entities
as well. Together we worked, um,
on infrastructure development
and workforce development, which
at that time were their, um,
number one priorities in terms
of infrastructure, we were able
to take advantage of broadband
funding, which had just started
coming down from the federal
government and we're able to
build a broadband network that
runs from I-25 in Santa Fe, all
the way up to the Colorado
border through.
County and all the way up to the
Colorado border.
What that means is, in Taos
County today, and I'm in very
rural areas of Taos County. I
have broadband running all the
way to my doorstep. Um, I
recently ran into a computer
programmer who told me that he
bought a house in the ski Valley
and is now working out of there
and can't believe the broadband
speeds that he gets there which
are better than any where else
in the state.
And that's the kind of, um,
Initiatives that can happen when
we work together.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and that, you know, that
brings up a great point what
you're talking about of the
rural development because when
we look at, um,
The small town of Elgadoni.
It, um, in my previous, uh,
background over there in the
county, we were able to bring 2
sheet metal, um, companies,
small business companies up to
Algadonis, roughly 40 to 50
employees each.
Uh, because, you know, we
believed, well, Albuquerque and
Rio ranch are always going to
have the advantage in New
Mexico, by the way, is not a a
one size fits all by any means.
Northern New Mexico is different
from southeast New Mexico.
Um, you know,
Grants is different from two can
carry where you're from.
And when we were providing those
incentives in Sandoval County to
pull those businesses out of.
Albuquerque and Berna Leo County
to come up.
Um, that right there is rural
revitalization, and there's so
many other
Examples around uh the country
that we looked at, one of them
was in a small town in North
Dakota, Gwinner, North Dakota,
very small farming community,
um, about 100 miles southwest of
Fargo.
They ended up landing a bobcat
plant in a small town that was
dying, and every time I, I, you
know, I saw that you're from
Tucuer and that, that town's
near and dear to my heart
because that has so much
opportunity there, being on a
rail line and and uh I-40. So, I
mean, economic development in
the rural areas is, is crucial
to me, and same thing in the
urban areas, because when we can
find people jobs and people are
working usually they're not
doing bad stuff. Um, so when you
were at the state for those two
years.
Can you give me a couple of your
big success stories and maybe uh
one or two real quick of a
couple of things that you might
have worked with site selectors
where they just didn't come to
New Mexico for some reason.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Senator Block. So, um, I think
one of the biggest successes
that we were able to put
together at the state was um a
committee where all government
entities including federal
government entities who had
financing for infrastructure
came together, met once a month,
and opened ourselves up to any
communities who wanted to come
in with projects. Um, when
you're on the community level
and trying to develop a project,
there are many little pockets of
funds.
that can do this or that, but
not so um that committee still
exists today and that process
exists, and I think it's made it
easier for communities to figure
out the resources that you, our
state legislature, has put in
place for them and how to access
those, even though those those
resources may be spread across
multiple agencies, and they're
not sure which door to go to,
and they spend a lot of their
time knocking on doors, hearing,
oh, that's a great project, but
can only fund this piece of it.
I can only get you this.
And then you're gonna go have to
knock on somebody else's door.
So this was a one stop shop that
I think I hope has streamlined
the process of community. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. In,
in my last point on that is
that's why these
Economic development, uh,
private partner public um public
private partnerships like
Sandoval Economic Alliance.
Yeah is is huge because that's
another area of business can go
into as well as the county
governments in the municipal
governments can work with them
in area and things like that, so
I, I hope you're having some
type of coordination with those
uh entities like that with Fred
Shepherd and uh some other
people that go out and talk to
site selectors to try to get
businesses here to New Mexico.
So, um, very impressive resume,
um.
You got my full support, um,
besides your sponsor and um I'm
excited to see you do some great
things. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
He's tonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Ms.
Keith. It's great to see you.
And I'd like to first of all,
thank you for all of your
service to the state. Uh, we
have some very well qualified
people coming in front of us
today, and I really appreciate
it.
The last time, um, I spoke, um,
In relation to the finance
authority.
And I, I should have asked uh
Martin this as well.
Um, I'm concerned, Madam Chair,
about
The
Funding that small communities
need.
To do the project from beginning
to end.
And I asked whether or not
Uh, this is something that the
finance authority considered
when they made decisions.
And
How they determined that was
going to happen, and I was told
in the past years, that, that
wasn't part of the role.
To go out and to seek whether or
not they had the capacity, the
technical expertise.
The, the planning under the
belt, etc. So could you address
that, Madam Chair, Miss Keith?
Yes, Madam Chair, um, Senator
Stefaniks.
Um, the finance authority does
have in place, um, planning
grants at this point that help
communities put plans in place
for the water system, other
infrastructure projects that
they, that they are pursuing
under the PPRF or the grant fund
or other um loan funding.
Through the New Mexico Finance
Authority, which means that when
New Mexico Finance Authority
staff go out into communities,
they have the ability to help
communities put together an
application or a planning grant.
And then that planning grant can
be a basis for an application
for additional funding.
I'll also say on a second note
that um our CEO Marquita Russell
talked about, um, our strategic
plan, our 3-year strategic plan
that we just put in place and
one of our three primary goals
in that strategic plan is
customer service, and really
thinking about which um the
staff of the finance authority
has, has done heavily about how
we serve communities and become
their partners in building
stronger communities.
Well, Madam, you brought up
something, um, the staff at the
finance Authority are excellent.
And um when you call, if you
don't get the director, the next
person will give you as much
information as they can. But uh,
in, in a follow-up to these
planning grants or to the
community. Do you collaborate
with other state agencies, for
example,
On water systems. Do we know,
Madam Chair, where around the
state has no water system that
could utilize it so that we
could get off of individual
wealth, Miss Keith.
Madam Chair and Senator
Stefanik. So, uh, the New Mexico
Finance Authority does
collaborate very closely with
state agencies, and I'll
highlight a couple of those. So
all the funding for water funds,
right, come through, um, the New
Mexico Environment Department,
who does work with water on a
large scale around the state and
runs the process of vetting all
those applications before they
ever come to the betting and
ranking those applications in
terms of priority needs before
they come to the New Mexico
Finance Authority for
approval, um, and to be assigned
funding.
Um
Just last meeting, our last
board meeting, um, a close
partnership with the Energy, um,
minerals, Natural Resources
Department on a fund that will
create additional opportunities
for communities, um, and
residents or renewable energy.
Uh, federal grant funding that
came to them, but they're not an
agency that administers loans
and they want to create a
revolving loan fund with that.
So, the finance authority has an
MOU and will partner with MRD to
take those dollars, create a
fund, and get those dollars out
into communities across the
state.
So Madam Chair, Miss Keith, is
that the CCIC funds, the one,
the funds that would go to
energy and minerals and then go
out to the climate.
Investment center?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Stefani, no, this is a new grant
funding that came down to IR.
OK, well, this is
OK. We can have a conversation
offline. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I do think this is an excellent
candidate. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Cabos.
Madam Chair, thank you and uh I
actually like your sponsor, uh,
but I, I'd like to go back to
because I like the rural roots,
uh, that's all where you're, uh,
graduated Texas Tech, um, I've
got family that goes there now,
but I appreciate that. I just a
couple of questions, um, being
that you've been here in Los
Alamos, you still have connect
to uh.
Your family in, in uh
I would say to Rosa, it's not
too rosary, you can carry, uh,
or do you still have connector
rural New Mexico.
So, Madam Chair and um Senator
Gallegos. Yes, I do. So, um, my
family is still into carry. Um,
my parents and one of my
siblings are there, um, and when
you grow up in a rural
community, I, I kind of you're,
you're raised by that community,
so yes, I still have roots on
Saturday I was at the Governor's
STEM Challenge, which was held
at the University of New Mexico
this year, and I'm happy to tell
you that you walked away with a
top prize, and has a great STEM
program and the STEM teacher
there was actually
uh, on the FFA judging team with
me in high school.
So, um, once you have roots in a
rural community, I really never
go away.
Well thank you for that and
um.
I was raised in Antonito,
Colorado, graduated in Denver,
but I was grateful to move into
New Mexico to Eunice, where I
live now, and I could see the
skewing of my view while I was
in Denver, some I'm glad that
you're uh maintaining that. I
did have a question on your
groundworks in New Mexico. Can
you explain what you do there
and what Ground Works does.
Yes
Senator Gallegos,
um, Groundworks is an umbrella
organization for nonprofit
sector in New Mexico. So if you
think about government sector,
we know what they do. They're
well defined, and our business
sector, well, well defined, we
know what they do. Um, what we
argue is that's the third sector
and it's the nonprofit sector.
And we're trying to pull
together both funders and
nonprofit organizations, so
foundations and nonprofit
organizations. Um, to work
together to further that.
That the industry, the sector of
nonprofits to create capacity
among those nonprofit
organizations, which is really
important work in every one of
our communities across the
state.
Well thank you for that. I
talked to Senator Stefaniks last
week where, uh, I know that
we're dependent on them.
Uh, but those are solely working
for the state, I think should
have some benefits on basically
insurance. If you look at when
they're purchasing insurance out
on their own.
5 or 6 members, they have to pay
a lot of money for it. They're
brought into our pool, and it
would broaden our base, lower
our rate. I think it's a benefit
because on those are state only.
Then, uh, when their increases
go up, we have to pay for it, so
I'd love to talk to y'all fine
on that. The last thing I'll say
is I was in one of your
committee meetings.
In Albuquerque and I appreciate
the way you run things, so, uh,
you'll have my smartness.
Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you. Thank you, Mrs.
Keith, and uh Senator Jaramillo,
we're all new to this rules
committee, and so the process of
these confirmations, but the
strategy and the intention
behind these very political
appointments is curious to me
what motivates a governor uh to
make these appointments, some
could be based on, you know, who
you know. I want to be very
clear that looking over your
extensive resume, you were being
nominated because of what you
know, you are very well
qualified for this position,
very specifically, you just
over it very briefly in your
introduction, but your
background in economic
development is impressive. Uh,
you are clearly a, a great value
to the sport. I specifically
liked what Marquita. She made a
very quick comment about how you
run an effective and efficient
meeting, and I appreciate that
in chairs, some of the best
chairs that we have in this
legislator, uh, Senator Duigs,
Senator Hamlin, who run quick,
concise meetings, we get the
best results out of that. And so
I'm sure that those in those
meetings really appreciate
that, and I would say I don't
have a question for you, but
your, uh, your confirmation is
going a little bit longer
because of the lining of
questions, you know, Senator
Block, Senator Stephanics,
because you're clearly a wealth
of knowledge and so we are
learning from you, uh, but, but
thank you for being here. Thank
you for your service. I would
say you're clearly well uh uh
qualified for this, and we are
all happy to support this
confirmation.
I
Senator Bergman's. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, um, going off
of what Senator Brantly was just
making a point of. It definitely
seems like you are well well
qualified for this role. But my
quick question just has to do on
the strategic plan, the 2025,
2027 strategic plan, there are
13 funds that NMFA has statutory
authority for that are not
currently funded according to
whenever this was published. And
I'm just wondering if it's part
of that plan to seek funding for
these funds or what NMFAs.
doing to address
That these funds are not funded.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator.
You will see us this session.
Advocating for funds in for 3 of
those funds that haven't been
funded in the past, so, um,
early childhood education and
childcare important to us, um,
to develop infrastructure there.
Uh, I know many of you on this
committee, including you,
Senator, have been, um, really
passionate about these issues,
so, um,
You know, really what we find in
communities throughout the state
are childcare providers who
are stuck in a tough place. It's
not a high margin business. In
fact, most of the times it's
really hard to even make ends
meet in this business, but you
have to have facilities that are
state of the art, um, and you
have to have those for good
reason because our most
vulnerable children uh are in
those facilities and we want
them to be safe. So a great role
for the New Mexico Finance
Authority to have low interest
loans that can help those
childcare facilities, um,
upgrade to the standards of
facilities that are required by
the state so that they can be
successful.
serve their communities well.
The other two priorities this
session are primary health care
as a fund in behavioral
healthcare as well, which I, I
know it's a priority.
Thank you, that's all.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Congratulations. Thank you for
your service.
One question and it's
Kind of self-serving, but
In New Mexico recently, we have
had a number of communities.
Yeah
I would say they, they operate
under duress.
Uh, we've had fires, we've had
floods, we've had all of
Of those issues.
What is
What
the NMFA playing and addressing
those needs one.
And based on your experience,
what can we do better to address
those needs.
Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend. So, um, it's a good
point.
And
I, I would like to say, I would
hope in the future that we
wouldn't see this level of
disaster, but unfortunately, you
read the tea leaves, we may be
entering a time when more and
more of these natural disasters
affect our state and our
country, um, so the finance
Authority obviously has low
interest loans that can help
communities as they rebuild the
infrastructure that's destroyed.
But I think you bring up a, a
great point. And I think it's
something that as we finish up a
3-year strategic plan and start
planning for.
the future that we need to start
planning for and looking at um
Would Mexico Finance Authority
be able to help communities that
are in duress and, um, are there
any additional authorities that
we could come back to this body
and ask for, um, to enable
communities to rebuild
infrastructure after natural
disasters.
I would agree wholeheartedly
with him. I look forward to
supporting you. Thank you,
ma'am.
Thank you.
And I will send, Ms. Keith, I
all of my questions have already
been asked. Ah, but I will just
echo what you've heard from the,
the other members on here. Uh,
it is good to know that someone
with your background and and
someone of your caliber is, is
sharing this uh commission, this
authority, and thank you for
your public service, Senator
Sonics.
Madam Chair, um, I would move
the reappointment of Miss
Kathleen Keith to the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
All right. And you know, we've
been doing roll call votes, but
I
I wonder, uh, is there any any
objection to that motion.
See, and you have a unanimous,
uh, with one member excused,
unanimous approval to go forward
to the, the Senate floor where
we'll see you later on this
morning. Thank you so much.
Congratulations.
Alright, and as Senator Jami was
making his way back up here.
We have aophonics.
And, uh, Ms. King, come on up.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
We're gonna move to the last
item on our agenda, which is the
reappointment of Yolanda Jones
King to the New Mexico Institute
of Mining and Technology Board
of Regents, and I'm gonna head
on over to Center Seonics. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Today
with me, I have a friend, but
also um a colleague in many
ways, Doctor Yolanda Jones King.
She is up for reappointment as a
regent, Doctor Yolanda Jones
King earned her PhD in 19.
81 in chemical laser kinetics
and is a fellow she served the
Department of Defense for 32
years in research, management of
research, development programs.
She retired from the department
in 2014 and continues to do
technical advising to the
Department of Defense.
She holds a patent in beam
sensing techniques, and I kind
of laugh because it's like way
over my head of everything that
she does in terms of her science
and her background.
Doctor Yolanda Jones King is a
regent of the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and
Technology and is up for
reappointment.
She wears the two-term chair for
the NATO censors and electronics
technology panel.
The only woman in its history.
And also served as the US
representative and vice chair of
the NATO Space Science and
Technology Advisory Group.
She served at the Air Force
Office of Scientific Research in
Washington DC as director of the
AFRL International office.
During this time, she led a
five-year review team for the
Canadian Department of National
Defense without a tariff.
Um, for two of their national
laboratories, Ottawa and
Valcartier.
She was previously the technical
advisor for space sensing and
satellite control for the AFRL.
Prior to her fellowship, Doctor
King was responsible for
management of all ballistic
missile defense organizations.
She was at the AF Weapons
Laboratory and several research
and technical management uh
positions. But besides her
technical experience and uh
contributions. She's very active
in the community. She served
here in the International
Women's Forum of New Mexico as
the president, the Junior League
of Albuquerque.
A town club sorority alumni, the
first woman on the New Mexico
board of uh Board of Pharmacy.
And on the very first New Mexico
Space commission.
She has extreme skills for the
position that she is uh going
for for this particular
university.
She has worked in the
encouragement of STEM and
student outreach for 35 years
and actually that's how I came
to know her. She approached me
to educate me more about uh
advocating for women in the
field and then educating our
students throughout uh science,
technology, engineering and
math.
And she's also married.
To the New Mexico former AG Gary
King, who is here today, um,
your long Doctor King, please.
Thank you.
Heman or I think you're
senators.
Um, thank you, Senator
Stephanics. It's a, it's a
pleasure to be back. Um, I've
loved being in a region at New
Mexico Tech.
Um, I tell people that if I had
known more about New Mexico Tech
in high school because I did go
to high school in Albuquerque, I
would have gone there and got my
PhD, but uh it's a, it's been
amazing uh set of students and
faculty and staff.
But my real passion is uh
Senator Stephanics has said is
really STEM outreach.
So I started that at the Air
Force Research Laboratory before
it was called that.
And it's now a blooming program,
it goes all the way from
preschool through graduate
programs. Um, and some of that
was with Senator Bingaman's
help. He initially had the same
vision, so he put some money
against that. Um, I've also been
a member of the New Mexico
Network for Women in Science and
Engineering for since 1978, and
we have done STEM outreach to
young women across the state,
thousands, thousands of young
women. So I'm proud to say we
see some movement in.
in terms of increase of women in
science and engineering, and
when I'm at graduation at New
Mexico Tech, I get teary-eyed
because we have our local um
indigenous population and
Hispanic population, sometimes
the first degree in their
family, and, and they're
graduating with an engineering
degree, and I just go, you know,
so it's, um, it's been a real
pleasure. Um, I'm currently, uh,
still consulting uh to the
defense threat reduction agency
in a counter
uh
can buy you a nuclear,
specifically a nuclear weapons
survivability.
I, I, we have some commonality.
So, um, with that, I've uh
I just hope for your support.
Thank you.
Thank you for that. Now we do
have several people who signed
up and organized support and
I'll let them have a couple of
minutes each. Mark Fidel, Mark
Zavedra, Doctor David Lepre and
Doctor Mike Timmons, if you can
come up. And although I've
stated your name, if you can
restate your name for the
record. Thank you.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Mark
Fidel.
Um, I am the chair of CNM
Ingenuities Board of directors.
And I believe one of the reasons
that Doctor King asked me to
support her, speak in her
support is my long relationship
with New Mexico Tech, my, the
company that I exited in 2021
Risk Sense.
was founded out of New Mexico
Tech's Research Park
Corporation.
In 2006.
From 2006 until 2021.
We ended up employing 110 folks
here in New Mexico.
And having revenues of it was
because of the foresight of the
folks who run New Mexico Tech.
So we were able to
Establish that business.
And provide some funding back to
the school out of our sale.
Uh, from that.
I'm fortunate enough to know and
be friends with too, my former
co-founder Doctor Shrinivas
Makamala.
And, and of course, Doctor King,
um, I can't think of more of a
more qualified individual to
continue serving uh the
students.
And the faculty and the staff at
New Mexico Tech. Thank you for
this opportunity.
Thank you.
Marked Mark had a medical uh
issue this morning he was gonna
try and call in. So, please come
on up.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members.
I'm happy to be here today in
support of Doctor King.
I've served with her on the
board of regents for
My name is David Lapree. Thank
you.
Uh, I've served with Doctor King
on the board for almost 4 years,
and I, I've summarized my
support for her by saying this.
Prior to my retirement, I worked
with the Council of university
presidents for 20 years.
And 3 or 4 weeks into blissful
retirement.
I sat with coffee one morning
and decided to list the
presidents that I had.
Consulted with, served,
represented, and so on.
There were 26 of them.
And I went down the list and for
some odd reason, I decided to
sort of categorize them. I
didn't do any of this while I
worked for them, of course, but
after the fact,
Went down the list to sort of
think about them and just make a
few notes.
And in those notes, I considered
The presidents that I felt were
Serving in that capacity for the
right reasons. Sounds
judgmental, but that's the way I
looked at it at the time.
And since then, I've, I tend to
look at people in that regard,
when people are working in
service.
Doctor King and I serve.
And we agree on a lot of things,
occasionally we disagree,
sometimes vigorously on both
sides.
But I can tell you with
certainty, perhaps the most
important thing I can say in
support of her is.
She does this for the right
reasons.
He's a person of character,
she's a tremendous resource to
the institution.
And we're very lucky to have
her. Thank you so much.
Doctor Timmons.
Still working? Uh, good morning.
My name is Mike Timmons. I'm the
uh director in state geologist
at the New Mexico Bureau of
Geology.
You're a research and service
division at New Mexico Tech.
And uh in that capacity, I, I
want to offer my support.
Regent King in her
reappointment. Um,
I'm gonna put my researcher hat
on for just a moment if I can
just say what an absolute
pleasure it is to have someone
in university leadership.
Who can get into the weeds with
us researchers talk about
technical issues and geek out a
little bit from time to time.
It's always appreciated.
Um
I also very much appreciate
reaching King's uh connections
to the community.
Tory, to the national labs, most
importantly, her generosity of
time.
In helping researchers and
students alike.
Connect to those research
opportunities, and even
workforce opportunities here in
the state, um, thank you very
much for giving me this
opportunity to offer this
support, um.
And I very much support her
renomination as Region at New
Mexico Tech. Thank you. Thank
you for your comments and before
I go to questions or comments
from the committee, I'm gonna
yield to Senator Doig.
Thank you. And members, uh,
There's a an article passed out
about a recent lawsuit that's
been filed in relation to tech.
I want to make clear that it is
not appropriate to ask the
conferee to comment on any
pending litigation, um, to the
extent that you want to ask
questions that might
Deal with issues around that,
um.
Look at the, the briefing that
you have, I think those are
phrased in a way that, that
would not be asking anyone to,
to comment directly on any penny
litigation, uh, but let's just
be mindful that I, I think it
would be unfair to ask Doctor
King to, to comment on that here
today, um, concepts are fine.
specifics.
Are probably are not.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Show of hands, any questions or
comments?
Senator Block. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair.
I got a bunch of questions for
you that, um, I'd love to talk
to you offline about, um,
Just 11 heck of a resume here,
very impressive, and I think
we've had some people, uh, we've
crossed paths.
Some of the same people at the
Air Force nuclear weapons
Center, um, in General F.
Thomas.
Uh, is a, he was a mentor of
mine as a as a young officer who
was my commander at Cape
Canaveral Air Station for Titan
space lift, so.
E is alive and well in
Pennsylvania and, uh, him and
Melanie are doing very, very
well, so, um.
Love F anyway.
And I love your resume too.
Uh, I really want, uh, people to
know.
How, because as a retired Air
Force officer.
I don't, I don't think a lot of
people understand.
What you did and how important
it is, uh, especially with the
defense science board.
That was huge in in our
country's national security, and
you were a part of that, and uh
I'm very familiar with that as a
A missile and a nuclear officer.
And one of the things that, you
know, hit me on here was new
survivability with rat hardness
and all that stuff that you know
about safe escape distance, and,
and we can talk all about that
as a previous, I'll say nuclear
capable commander in NATO, um,
but one of the things I'd like
to just get your opinion on. Uh,
I'm gonna vote for you, so don't
don't worry about that. Um,
One of the things I want to get
your opinion on is we have some
serious threats, um, that
I don't want to get too much
into detail with cause you and I
still hold top secret
clearances.
But EMP,
is a huge issue in this country
as well as cyber, and I don't
think you had much cyber here,
which is fine, but
Organic EMP is, is a, is
something that can really go
after our infrastructure very
quick in either degrade it or
eliminate certain capabilities
here. And I was wondering uh
real briefly because I got a
couple more questions for you.
What, what are you guys doing at
New Mexico Tech to talk about
How we do hardness against EMP
on the civilian side.
Not very much of it is on the
civilian side.
But uh we, oh, I'm sorry. Yes,
I'm sorry. Sorry, I was speaking
out, Madam Chair.
Um
So.
Um
We, uh, we work heavily with
White Sands Missile Range and
some of the testing as well as
the defense threat reduction
agency, which I directly consult
with, um, so I helped put that
back together. We sort of had
separated over the years, uh,
and so there is testing that's
going on.
There's
There is testing that is going
on, um, with our systems and
some of our control.
Uh, facilities, um, that we
support. And so what we do
mainly is we provide fellowships
for some of the
Students, especially graduate
students at New Mexico Tech. So
that we're training them to move
into those positions, because
there is a
There has been a large drain on
the capability, you know,
personnel.
Thank you, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, you know, one
thing about New Mexico tech, I
would argue uh doctors at New
Mexico Tech is a national
treasure.
Uh, for the country, uh, without
a doubt. And I would also argue
we probably have the best
petroleum engineering program,
uh, in the country, and we
should, uh, definitely be
producing more of those and
keeping them here. But when you
look from your position at the
university and say, you know,
near mid, far term.
Uh, you know, analysis, gaps.
You know, we, we see different
engineering.
Skill sets that have been
emerging with new technologies,
AIML is huge.
Um, you know, back in the day
when I went through college, we
didn't have something called the
systems engineer who was your
basic, you know, double E ME
civil construction management.
Uh, what, what is New Mexico
Tech doing in regards to
emerging technologies to to meet
that need for the country, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, um,
we are working on what I would
call the, the cutting edge of um
alternate energy. We have always
looked out beyond.
trolling, we also are working on
like some of the water recovery.
And uh we have some pilot plants
going on, the things that we
need to do to improve, uh, our
physician and petroleum
engineering. We also have a huge
number of international students
that come in and learn from us
in petroleum engineering.
Uh, but if you're talking about
the future, we're looking at all
sorts of different energy uh
capabilities.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, yeah, because
one of the things that New
Mexico Tech is very, very good
at is doing some water, where's
Mr. Timmons? There he is, a
water studies and, and we've
worked a little bit together on
that to kind of mapping our
aquifers, which is critical for
our um our.
Our ranchers, our agriculture,
our rural area for economic
development and um.
But
On that point, where do you see
the shortfalls in funding for
the university for areas of
study that
Um
That New Mexico may may need
with future development or
future energy needs.
I think some of our, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, sorry, um, I
think the most
Need is really expansion of some
of our environmental engineering
areas.
Um, we are just getting back
into geothermal.
As well. So I think that's an
area where we can build a, a
regional consortium and, and be
successful. We are also, uh,
Entertaining a lot in the AIML
area. I would prefer to just
call it ML at this point because
I don't think we have true AI,
but machine learning uh through
ICASA, we have a lot of work
going on there that is uh
With the Department of Defense
and uh outside industry.
Thank you. And um,
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair. Lastly,
When we look to the future here
in New Mexico, you know, the
governor just talked about this.
Jeez, close to like a $1
trillion investment on a new
Um
A new plant, new capability that
is very, very energy intensive.
Is New Mexico Tech looking at or
have they done any studies or in
the process of doing any studies
or funded to do any studies
related to future uh New Mexico
energy needs in the state.
Mr. Chairman Senator, I don't
know of a New Mexico specific
one.
We look at regional needs, I
think in most cases, but we do
studies continuing.
the PRRC petroleum Resource
Center.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair. Yeah, I, I would, I would
hope that maybe there could be
some type of grant that comes
down to look at.
Um
Future
Future study and nothing against
you and I or or New Mexico
State, but I think New Mexico
tech is, it's definitely right
in their wheelhouse on looking
at near mid and far term uh
energy needs because, you know,
we've been talking about
strategic planning here, and we
really got to look at some
strategic planning of where New
Mexico's going. It quite
frankly, Mr. Doctor Timmons
knows this. We haven't done a
lot of strategic planning when
it comes to looking at water and
our aquifers and where they are,
and what's the
composition makeup of those and
where we can.
Use those resources and how
we're going to use those
resources, so that's, that's
something I would support, uh,
to get a good fidelity look on
where we're going in New Mexico,
and it sounds like you would
agree with that, and I
appreciate that. I'd like to
work on that, uh, with you and,
and Doctor Timmons so incredible
resume.
General Thomas told me to
confirm you. and if he didn't,
he was gonna kick my butt.
Um, he's a great, great man. I
just, uh, love Ev a lot and um
And I'd love to talk to you
offline with some other stuff,
but uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair.
Doctor
And uh congratulations, you got
my support. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Rattley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you guys both for being here.
You may be unaware, but there's
a very popular cowboy that
spends a little bit of time in
this roundhouse. He also spends
a lot of time in my office who
has been heavily advocating and
lobbying for you, shares your
last name, in fact, but it's
also clear that you were well
supported by the admin and staff
in New Mexico Tech. The
students, thank you for what you
have done already. New Mexico
Tech is now within my Senate
district, and I would like to
visit you for the sake of time
here today offline on what we
can do.
to recruit and retain a high
quality professors to live and
work in Socorro, New Mexico.
Equally, how we're going to
continue to recruit students to
move to Socorro, New Mexico.
I've heard, um, now for the last
4 years that New Mexico Tech is
the best kept secret in New
Mexico. It's this jewel. It no
longer needs to be a secret, and
we have to start getting that
out. It's one of the best
universities. I'd also like to
visit with you. I saw some
disappointing, uh,
that's on here that, that only
30% of the undergraduates at at
tech are female. And so what we
can do, that's far beyond the
national average of what we can
do to really encourage and
recruit females, young ladies to
go into the the areas of
engineering and research in
science, uh, to get them to get
them in there. If you'd like to
comment on that, I'd also like
to address that gap.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, I
think the, um, statistics are
that in the workforce, there's
only about 15% female.
Engineers
So really we think 30% is a
pipeline is really quite good.
So when you need, when you look
at other
Areas of education, it's
probably not appropriate. Women
are outpacing men in law school
and med school and etc. But if
you look at the engineering and
physical sciences, 30 is pretty
good
actually, but I've been working
on that since 1978, as I said,
and we are very proactive, uh,
and a lot of support, um.
So, um, anything we can do, I'm
open to it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and you serve as a
prime example to young ladies
to, to follow this, so I'm happy
to help in that in any way too.
We can get that number up. You
guys are doing fantastic work
and if I might, I was also the
president for her, which is the
higher education uh regions
Consortium, and we identified
the gap of broadband for
education, as well as the basic
needs of housing, food
insecurity, and uh access to
mental health.
So those are being pushed now,
but in the early days they
weren't being pushed, so all the
regents advocate for those, and
so we really appreciate your
assistance on that. Great, I'm
happy to help. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. Thank you, guys.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you honics, Doctor King.
Um, so you have the, the
possibly unenviable position of
being the first regent that we
are confirming after there's
been a lot of stuff in the news
about Western, um,
And, and just issues kind of
around regions in general, so
I'm
I'm curious just to get, and,
and we're going to be hearing a
lot about that as we are
confirming regions all session
and there's also a couple of
bills pending that will go
through this committee around
regions, so I'm curious to get
your opinion on, on some of
these issues. Um,
OK. What?
What do you think?
Can or or should be done overall
to
To ensure that the public has,
has trust and confidence in
regions.
Uh, specifically for, for tech.
Mr. Chairman, Senators, um,
As president of even before I
was president of, we've had uh
annual training for Regents. We
have some really high caliber
trainers that come in and teach
about open meetings Act and etc.
It's not been mandated. I'm not
sure you can mandate a lot of
those things, but it's very well
attended. We have both the
4-year and 2-year schools. Uh we
reached out and Navajo Tech
University also sent people, um,
community colleges, uh, private
sector even training set regions
to be trained.
In these areas. So I don't think
we can do enough of that. I'm
not sure about mandating it,
because having 40 years of
federal mandated training. I
have a hard time with that, but,
but people are eager to learn
more about that and do their job
better, and I think as long as
we're transparent about that,
and we have open sessions with
her and the training. Um, so I
think we just have to keep at
that and make sure that everyone
is trained and, and.
It's the right kind of training.
In the chair, Doctor King, thank
you and, and so one of the bills
that we're gonna see in here is
about um mandatory training
requirements for regents. Um,
another one deals, uh, what it's
a constitutional amendment that
would create nominating
committees.
Or regents. Um, I think with, I
understand with the goal of
Um
Ensuring that the essentially
that that Regents uh or folks
who are not who are dominated
would meet minimum
qualifications. Um, speaking not
on, on behalf of the Board of
Regents, just your, your
personal opinion, uh, which
tells us what, what you think
about that idea.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senators, um
when I was first appointed, um.
Former governor Carruthers had
put together a very nice process
with community, uh, like alums
and business people doing the
interviews of us, and then those
names were forwarded to the
governor. I think that worked
very well, um, and I think it's
important to get that buy in
from uh alumni as well and and
public members business members.
So I, I would like to see us go
back to that process, frankly,
but I don't know that it needs
to be legislated or not, but it,
it would be a better process, I
think.
I, I felt very comfortable about
it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um
And
Mr. Chair, Senator Doctor King,
uh, how
What, what, what do you do on,
on the board of Regents to, to
help ensure that the
university's funds and endowment
are wisely invested and
sufficiently diversified.
Mr. Chairman, senators, we have
a, a fiscal investment policy,
financial investment policy that
uh is adhered to.
Uh, I think that's important. We
also review our procedures and
policies on a routine basis, uh,
so as a result of some of the
highlights, uh, recently, we are
going back through all of our
policies and making sure we've
looked at them in a timely
manner. So we're, we're doing
some of that on the board. I'm
uh the member that is on the
her, the higher education uh
regions Consortium, as well as
the research part, so the
commercialization that uh Mr.
Fidel referred to.
And so I think that uh that's
very important for the
community. We're really a
nascent opportunity, uh,
compared to like UNM's
rainforest or or Arrowhead in a
misuse. So we're learning from
them and we're leveraging their
knowledge as well to grow some
of that, so, uh, I think it's
important that we see how our
research and development uh can
uh become small businesses and
products that are
Perhaps internationally uh sold.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Doctor, uh, and you
said you're, you're looking back
at, at a number of policies. Um,
Without asking any specifics
about anything that's going on
now, uh, is, are, are you
looking at a, a nepotism policy
as part of that.
Mr. Chairman, Senators, um,
That was one of many that the
president put forward, um, he
does not have to put them
through us but has chosen to, so
we're updating, like I said,
many of our policies right now
going back and reviewing them.
Um, I think that's a good one to
have, no matter where you are.
And Mr. Chair, Doctor, I'm
I'm curious, so
You said something that he
doesn't have to put that that
the president doesn't have to
put policies through a board of
regents, um,
So,
kind of curious how
I think that cause I I don't
wanna, I don't wanna ask you and
and an inappropriate question
here.
What, what, what is the role of
the Board of Regents in, in
policy review and development
for, for a university.
Mr. Chairman, senators, um,
We've given him the authority.
To do some level of policies
that are across the campus, and
then he brings them to us once
he's signed them and they're,
they're promulgated.
And then we review the overall
policy handbook.
Great. Thank you. Well, uh, you
are, you are certainly uh
overqualified, if anything, um,
for this position, it is, it is
great. Uh,
Having someone with your
experience and caliber.
Uh, on our board of Regents, I,
I think Senator Brantly is, is,
was right when she said that,
uh,
Tech is this hidden gem that
shouldn't be hidden in it
anymore. Um, I think as a, as a
state, uh, we should be
incredibly proud of, uh, tech
and it serves a really
Really crucial role, uh, in our
state community. So thank you so
much for your service. That's
all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, no more
questions.
I'll say one more thing. I'm
sorry, Mr. Chair. Also, Paula
Tackett loves you.
So.
That's noted
uh Senator, he got, she promised
me she'd make some phone calls,
you know, she's uh having some
medical things right now, so
thank you.
Thank you for that, so you no
further questions or comments,
what's the will of the
committee?
Senator Stewart.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I move that
we approved Doctor Yolanda King
for reappointment as a region of
New Mexico Tech that will be
finally decided on the floor of
the Senate.
Thank you for that, Senator
Stewart. If I can have a roll
call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
Very good with a vote of 9, yes,
and 1 excuse, you'll move
forward to a full Senate
confirmation in the Senate
chamber earlier this morning.
keep
And I'm gonna hand the gavel
back to our chairwoman for a
couple of last comments. Thank
you.
Thank you all. Um, that's all we
have for today, uh, on
Wednesday, we're going to be
hearing the constitutional
amendment to create a uh
independent commission that
would set legislator salary that
would establish and legislator
salaries. So, right now, that is
all we have on the agenda for
Wednesday cause I'm assuming
that's gonna take quite a bit
of, of time and discussion, uh,
so be given that some thought,
uh, we might have a sub for
that.
that constitutional amendment,
uh, if we do, I will get that
