Oh, it is. The land ownership
does not transfer is just allows
for
What about anyone in the
committee room and opposition?
Signaling. What about online?
And with that, I'll go with
questions or comments from the
committee.
Senator Stewart movie do pass.
The motion for a do path.
Discussion. Okay? Senator Ortiz
de Pino.
So what will happen, Mr Chairman
and representatives? What will
happen with the land now that
both the county and and the
federal government have
jurisdiction over that couldn't
have happened with just federal
jurisdiction.
MS chairman.
Sure. Er this allows for
The private sector to construct
buildings on land owned by the
Air Force.
They will then lease them to
contractors such as Northrop
Grumman. That way the federal
government does not have to
provide military construction
money to build various office
buildings on government land.
And Mr Jim, and that can't be
done if it's solely on the Jews
on under the land is solely on
the general Miss chairman,
Senator Pet that's correct.
Private sector cannot construct
buildings on government land.
That's the they call this a
enhance use lease.
Because
Both the government benefits and
the private sector benefits and
and Mr Chairman. Last couple of
issues does the county and the
state are they? I guess it's
just the county are they able to
collect property tax on
Mr Chairman, Senator, they do
not
Every mains the ownership of the
land remains with the federal
government.
And and there, Mr Chairman.
There's lined up already. It
sounds like a possible developer
of that Northrop Grumman. Yes,
the possible developer worked
with the Department of Defense
for seven years in order to go
through the lengthy federal
government process to procure
and enhanced use lease. Thank
you very much. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Any other questions?
None. Senator Stewart asked for
a do past if I can have a
Senator Baca is excuse. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna is excused.
Senator Moore's is Excuse,
Senator. Neighbor Senator.
Neighbor votes. Yes, Senator TZ
Pinot? Yes, Senator or cheesy
Pinot votes? Yes, Senator.
Poodles excused. Senators,
phonics.
Senators. Delfonics votes Yes,
Senator Stewart. Senator Stewart
votes Yes, in it, Erhardt? Me.
Oh, yes, Senator. Heard me of
us. Yes, and Senator Do Hagen's
excused? Thank you. With the
vote of six in favor. You've
gotta do path.
Thank you very much. Mr. Chair.
You're welcome and get over to
the Senate Memorial number four
Erin E R B pension benefits
structures with Senator Stewart.
Good morning, Mr Chairman.
Good morning.
May I begin? Absolutely all
right.
So this is cinema Morial, four.
It requests the LFC to look at
combining our E, R B and P e R a
pensions.
You know, we've we've heard
numerous testimony from the
administration and others where
they want to combined systems to
get a better deal for the
citizens of New Mexico.
These two systems have been
pretty far apart for a long
time. They're very dis equal.
This asked Lfc to take this, uh,
task on to look at the history
of him to see if we can combine
the two programs that I will
stand for questions.
Very good, Senator Lopez. Dicey
question, Okay.
After you do the audience.
Oh, yeah. I'm sorry about that.
Anybody in the audience in
favor?
Of this Senate memorial.
Think none anyone online.
Anyone in opposition in the
committee room.
Think not anyone online right
now go to questions and comments
centers. Hispanics move a do
pass. But if people want to
discuss it, center neighbor
neighbor
Thank you, Mr Chair. And Madam
President. Um
I guess this study would would,
uh,
Also discussed with the
Retirees and the respective
programs whether they would be
in favor of that, as well, I
presume with it, not Mr
chairman, it would depend on
what the study said. Probably
Right, Um
I don't know.
Where the to stand with respect
to one another. But I think
they're both, uh
Underfunded at this point in
time, and and we do have a
number of issues that
Have crept to the surface,
including whether or not the
right people are making
decisions, whether or not we
have the right people in place
who have the experience to make.
Uh, financial decisions and
things of that nature, and I
think we have a much bigger uh
I say, uh
That we have.
A lot of things to think about.
So maybe studying it's okay but
I I kind of wonder whether we'd
ever get both of them aligned
where they can come in together
because they do seem to be quite
a
Quite different and far apart,
and I think the public employees
probably would not want the
education folks coming over into
their program.
And maybe vice versa. But
I guess studying it, But I hope
the study would go beyond just
the integration. I hope it would
go to the basic structure of
both, because I think we have a
system that
Does not allow
Really truly professionals with
great experience like we have on
the, um s I see to be making
financial decisions programs.
So, Mr Chairman, I agree with
you.
I've
I've only been trying to look at
these systems for 30 years when
I was in the house. I had all
kinds of bills to try to merge
the two to try to increase the
ER be benefits. Uh, to at least
try to match the benefits and
para I've done all kinds of
bills to make both systems be
more solvent.
Um, I think the year B is much
more solvent. I think they're
both doing fairly well, I agree
with you on who's running them.
Um, we've we've tried to change
that in the past have not been
successful. Um, but you know it
was Senator Stefan IX, who
brought the bill that
You know, combined, are back and
said, you all must contract
together. It's like if we're
doing that with things like I
back why are we not looking at
Para and New York be? Um I do
believe they would be much more
solvent if they were in one
system and if they had better
managers, um, but I've not been
happy for many years about the
disparities in the two and, um I
don't think they're moving
further and
Further apart. I think there are
instances where they're moving
closer.
We in 2013. We made the e R B
solvency at the cola dependent
on the RB solvency. It took us
so lot longer to do that, with
para. Um, they fought. It boasts
difference. Lee for many, many
years para retiree's got 3%.
Coma a year irrespective of what
the funded for many, many, many
years trying to change that was
very difficult, and it took us
several different pieces of
legislation. So, um, I certainly
don't want to hurt anybody's
retirement. But I think it's
important that we look at some
type of combination.
Thank you for that senator
Surpassed Mr Chair. I'm a, uh,
member of each e r b n p e R A
and, um the ER be members are do
not receive the same percentage
increase.
Um are they receive a different
percentage than the Pierre A.
And it's less and many people in
the R B try to go and get a
state job.
And then retire so that they get
the PR a benefit versus the ER B
and then a couple of years ago.
The proposal came forward to
give us two separate checks
instead of one and I met. I just
opposed that big time.
And so I think that this idea of
studying it will help us get
closer.
But issue and it sounds like
night. Senator Nyberg would be
great on AIPAC when you do your
appointments. Um The other issue
is that, um I've lost my
thought. I'm done. Thanks.
So with that. I know I don't see
any other questions or comments,
but there was a motion for do
pass by senators to Fenix if I
can have a roll call vote.
Senator Baca is excuse. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes? Yes,
Senator. Many McKenna is
excused. Senator Morris is
excused. Senator Neubert,
Senator. Neighbor votes. Yes,
Senator. RTZ pinot senator or
GDP. No votes. Yes, Senator.
Puertos Excuse Senator Stefan
IX.
Yes, centers upon X votes. Yes,
Senator Stewart? Yes? Yes,
Senator. Her Romeo Senator her
me of its yes and Senator Do
Higgins excused with six in
favor? You have a do path. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Now, if you don't mind,
understood. I want to pass the
gavel to the left.
An appointment.
Senator had a meal for Senate
Memorial seven.
Good morning, madam chairwoman
and members of the committee as
all of you know, we're facing a
fentanyl crisis right here in
New Mexico.
It's the single deadliest drug
threat or state and our entire
nation is currently
encountering.
From our metro areas to rural
New Mexico. No community is safe
from this deadly drug.
Now listen. Fentanyl is showing
up in pills, Heroin,
methamphetamines and cocaine,
causing so many deaths, and my
county isn't
I'm shy of this because it led
New Mexico.
With the worst overdose rate and
death rate in 2021 and 2022.
According to an August 20 August
24th 2023 report from the
Legislative Finance Committee.
New Mexico's drug overdose rate
was the sixth highest in the
nation in 2021 and the
Department of Health reported
that in the same year 50% of New
Mexico's overdose rates were due
to family.
We must take every opportunity
to spread the word to prevent
fentanyl related overdose,
deaths and poisoning. Which is
why I'd like to see Senate
Memorial Seven. Move on with
this memorial Does, Madam
Chairwoman is it asked the or
request the public Education
Department to declare the week
of October 14th through 18th
2024 poisoning awareness week.
This memorial would encourage
local school boards and
governing bodies and charter
schools to participate by
providing appropriate education
activities and information
Addressing the risk associated
with the use of an addiction of
fentanyl, the national into the
Institute of Health suggests
that interventions in early
childhood can help prevent
future drug overdoses.
But that all stand for any
questions. Thank you, Senator.
Uh,
Anyone online? Okay. Uh, no
organized. Oh, we do have one
organized person. Comrade up.
Tell us your name.
Yeah. You're organized enough
for us this morning. Just tell
us your name first. Hello, Madam
Chair, Pepin. I'm a license.
Clinical social worker and I'm
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Alliance.
Both professionally and
personally, I have held days old
babies and I specialize in
infant mental health. That's my
specialty in social work in my
day to day job, I'm a family
therapist.
Both professionally and
personally, I have held days old
babies born addicted to parents
who are without resources to
care for them. I have worked
with medical staff caregivers,
foster parents and community
members who have had to rush to
pick up the pieces and try to
provide for babies who are
desperately uncomfortable and in
pain.
I know one child who
accidentally overdosed on drugs
left out by her mother. She was
thankfully revived by Narcan
administered by the police. My
own mother, a lifelong educator
in Santa Fe, has lost multiple
middle school students to
fentanyl overdoses.
The effects of this drug on our
youngest citizens are
devastating and chilling in
order to address their needs. We
must educate the public on the
dangers of fentanyl statewide
and provide resources to
mitigate its fallout.
For these reasons, and those
previously stated we stand in
full support. Thank you so much
A will organized presentation.
anyone else in the room, which
to speak in favor or an
opposition sing non members of
the committee, Senator Ortiz
Pinot.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
Senator, Thanks for
For bringing this forward.
I've always had a little bit of
skepticism about
Awareness weeks or, you know
Because it all it's going to
depend on the quality of the
edge, but certainly
Certainly is a the issue is such
a growing
Dilemma for us.
Such a dangerous for us that I
think anything we can do is to
the good
I? I've been a little bit
heartened. Two years ago, our
interim committee looked at this
issue and said, and we couldn't
find
Anybody who is actually treating
fentanyl addiction.
This last year, we were told in
several of our hearings that
that some of the same treatment
modalities used for
Heroin addiction or effective
with
Fentanyl addiction.
It's just that it's it's got
such a powerful physical
It creates such a powerful
physical attraction.
That it's very hard to overcome
That Suboxone, for example, does
help avoid that that craving
that that that
That leads to the
Potentially deadly use of
offensive, right? I think it's
good. I really think anything we
can do to raise the awareness
And also to begin identifying
How we get people who are
already started because they
tell me does it take very long
to get addicted?
I mean, it's not like once.
In order to become addicted,
apparently just few times, but
we asked. We ought to help
people understand there is
treatment for it as well. Thank
you.
Senator Senator Stefan IX with
the question.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I totally
support this. First of all,
madam care. Um, Senator, Have
you discussed this with the
Public Education department?
Madam chairwoman, Senator I have
and the cabinet secretaries and
full support. In addition, I
dropped a bill, which is Senate
important. Senate Bill 231
school drug education, which
would have every school
elementary, middle and high
school do age appropriate
education on fentanyl, threats
of fentanyl and how it can take
your life.
So thank you, Madam Chair and so
some of the fentanyl that's on
the street.
You know one dose. The wrong
dose can kill somebody and
people don't get that, Um they
think it's something in or I can
stop. But it's
If they get the wrong dose, So
thank you very much. Madam chair
are of course, supportive, Cute
other senator neighbor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Madam chair and and Senator.
I'm glad we're highlighting this
and going to highlight it in
schools, but
I am somewhat disappointed that
we don't really take action on
this.
Horrific drug that's uh
Has invaded society and we are
seeing so many Children today.
Being born and are being exposed
to
Fentanyl and other drugs and
We
Were not criminalizing it. We
have we have. I think there's a
house bill that was going to
criminalize. Uh
The action of exposing a child
to fentanyl, and that thing died
in committee, so we're not doing
anything substantively to curb
this type of behavior or deal
with it. And so I'm a little
disappointed there. Uh,
Albuquerque, Police Department
stated recently. I think January
29th they sent a letter that
said, We're seeing infants on a
weekly basis, Overdosing on
fentanyl and too often dying as
a result.
Our team reviews approximately
1100 SC I reports each month,
resulting in approximately
13,200 annually in 2023. We are
averaging 50 to 60 reports
monthly detailing fentanyl use
in the home of Children, which
added up to 662 C. Y F D S.
S C. I report
Cross reported with a P D, um
And see a see you. I don't know
what that means in 2023, which
equated to over 5% of all SC. I
reports
It's a crisis.
It's a crisis not only among
young people that we're talking
about here
But a crisis of little ones in
the homes being exposed to it,
And so
I know we're not going to be
able to do anything in the next
Three days, but we really do
need to
Get our hands around this, Uh,
those numbers just are
Staggering to me, uh, that many
Children being exposed to
These drugs and have sometimes
deadly results. It's
heartbreaking. So thank you for
bringing this. I hope in the
next session we can
Get serious about trying to to
address some of the issues that
surround it.
Chairwoman, Senator Thank you.
Thank you anyone else?
I just want to make one last
comment, And so the data I have
is from 2021, which is the most
recent published when it comes
to fit in all of New Mexico, and
I just want to leave you with
this. Madam chairwoman, 574 new
Mexicans died from fentanyl
related overdose and in total
1029 new Mexicans died from drug
overdoses in 2021.
And that's roughly three new
Mexicans per day.
So with that, I just want to
leave you with that. Those two
statistics
Madam Chair, senator Little
better pass.
Alright, we're gonna do pass
motion. The secretary will call
the roll.
Senator Bubka's excuse. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna's excuse.
Senator Morris's Excuse. Senator
Nibert senator neighbor boats?
Yes, Senator or TCP? No Senator
or cheesy Pino votes? Yes,
Senator. Petals Excuse senators
to phonics.
Senator Stefan Expose? Yes,
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
votes? Yes, Senator Harm you?
Yes, Senator her me about Yes,
and Senator Doig is excused.
So by vote of six to nothing you
have to do pass. Thank you for
bringing this word. Thank you.
So let's do one more. And then
we were finished calendar.
Madam chairman or member, Mr
Chairman can start off and then
you'll
and committee members. This is a
memorial.
Uh, that, uh, bring to you out
of frustration. Last year we
appropriated $200,000 to the
higher education department.
That's what the secretary
indicated to our interim
committee. It would take for
them to do two studies.
I wanna study of what would it
take?
What would be the best way?
Let's put it that way. What
would be the best approach to
financing graduate education in
the behavioral health fields due
to our incredible shortage of
our need for those professions
and before we had outlined were
psychiatric, nursing psychology,
counseling and social work.
What would it take for us to
make those free to students who
would agree to work in the state
of New Mexico? Thereafter? Would
it be simply, You know, there
are a lot of ways of going about
that. Maybe you start a new
scholarship fund. Maybe you just
expand the opportunity
Scholarship. Maybe you have some
new program that has that that
can that can tie their
commitment that they would have
to make to stay in the state and
we would have some mechanism for
getting it paid back.
There are a lot of ways of doing
that. That was 100,000 to do
that study the other 100,000.
Was for the two year programs in
the state, the community College
and and Branch college programs
that begin filling the pipeline
with the public health workers.
the community health workers,
the peer counselors, the UM
licensed alcohol and drug abuse
counselors, the social work AIDS
All the All the schools have
slightly different programs.
But how would we? How what would
be the best way of expanding
those programs and give us some
ideas about that? So we had
asked him to do that study and
to bring the report to the LFC
into the interim committee by I
I think, November
I think we gave him the date of
November. November came and we
put them on the calendar and
they came and said, I'm sorry we
didn't do the studies.
So they didn't spend the money.
It's I don't know what happened
to the money and I was going to
put a bill in this year to say
you got to do it, but it had
realized if they would just get
it done now, we're still in the
same fiscal year.
So this is basically a memorial
is says Please do the darn
studies we asked you to do last
year and get it get the reports
to the LFC in the interim Health
and Human Services Committee.
Spend the money in July. You
know before July and then get us
the results that are July
meeting. That's all this is
Thank you. Is there anybody in
the room in support of this?
Memorial, seeing one would you
like to make some comments?
Come on up.
If you can slide it up, I turned
it off.
There you go. Sorry.
Is this better?
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee Emily Pepin, licensed
clinical social worker
representing the Behavioral
Health Providers Alliance, as
you may or may not know, um
clinicians, but any behavioral
health provider all along the
scale from case manager, too.
Licensed, Um, psychologists
often spend a lot of money on
their education.
Um, but it is very, very hard to
find proper compensation
originally became licensed in
Louisiana. We share an almost
mater actually.
And when I came back to serve my
community here in New Mexico, I
took a $15 pay cut. I'm living
in Santa Fe. It's incredibly
hard to find.
Ah, housing that I can afford
and pay for my student loans.
And since the pandemic I've
actually, um
Then and yeah, not paying them.
Um, So all of this to say we
have really support this
memorial. Thank you. Thank you
for your comments, anyone online
and support
Anybody in the room in
opposition.
And what about online?
I'm going to go to questions
from the committee and I'm going
to start with Senator Stewart
followed by Senator Sniper
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
So I hear your frustration, So I
think this is a good idea. But I
thought you said it would go to
legislative. Uh,
The lfc and it does not. It goes
to higher Ed and then
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee.
I think you're right. Last
year's I think my recollection
was we wanted to go to both. But
I'm not
For some reason, I didn't
include them in this. We could
add them if you'd like.
It'll be fine.
I mean, I think it's fine. Just
go to yours. But I like the idea
of going to lfc. They just have
a stranglehold on all of this.
With that budget they do.
House and Senate votes. So thank
you for doing this. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Nyberg. Thank you, Mr Chair and
senator. Great. You guys are
going to get tired of me being
on my soapbox about this free
tuition, but
I do think that
The free part ought to be tied
to some service.
Back to the state of New Mexico
and its citizens, and so
My preference would be to look
at a loan program.
That would be forgiven at the
completion of a period of
service to the citizens of New
Mexico.
And so it's good. I'm not going
to recommend an amendment to
this, but I hope that
The, uh
The study would reveal that we
really ought to start looking at
how do how can we
Assist students getting their
college paid for if it's through
alone.
If they commit to work for a
state agency or commit to work
in a profession that we as
society believes it is.
Great. We need it. It's not just
the ones identified here.
There's others, but
Have a loan program that when
they complete so many years of
service
In New Mexico were in rural New
Mexico or wherever or for
whatever agencies that their
loan would be completely
forgiven. Uh, but if they get
their education here and then go
to Denver, Colorado
Citizens in New Mexico aren't
getting any bang for the buck.
And and so I'd like to see it
more loan program than just free
tuition. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Stefan IX.
Thank you, Um
Mr Chair. I had an senator RTC
and E piano and I had talked
about this.
Um
In the interim and leading up to
the session. I had asked for
$300 million to go into a trust
fund.
For the for grants and loans to
support all the healthcare.
Positions that we need in our
state and to spend 10% per year
until it was exhausted to try to
build up.
The social workers, Uh, nurse
practitioners, the psychiatrist,
the psychologist as
pediatricians, the primary care
everybody, and that wasn't taken
seriously. But I do think that
this is an area that we have to
focus on. Thank you for bringing
in
Thank you signal further
questions. What's the will of
the committee to do Pass, Mr
Chairman says.
Motion for do pass if I can have
a roll call vote.
Senator Bubka's excuse. Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna's Excuse.
Senator Moore's is excused,
Senator Nibert Senator November
votes. Yes, Senator or cheesy
Pinot? Yes, Senator. Orgies EP.
No votes. Yes, Senator Poodle is
Excuse center stuff Phonics.
Senators. Phonics votes Yes,
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
Boats? Yes, Senator. Harmony.
Oh, yes, Senator. Her move
votes. Yes, Senator Doig is
excused with six in favor. You
have a do paths. Thank you very
much. Committee members and Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Before we
recess. I'm gonna just let
everyone know that on Wednesday,
February 14th we will be meeting
at 9 A.m..
Will be listening to Senate
Memorial One, which is citizen
science in state Agency task
Force, and that's going to be
brought to us by our wild
friends that we've been seeing.
And so with that this committee
is in recent
Recent. Um Yep. The oops sorry
If the bill comes across or the
joint resolution comes across
regarding, um, changes to the
Legislature from the house,
Would we hear that on Wednesday?
Check with the chairwoman. But
I'm assuming she was okay. Thank
you. Thank you, Edward that the
committees and recess until
Wednesday, February 14th at nine
AM
Yeah.
Where rent
instead of making
bread grows
all of those.
Oh,
