Yes, I'll go ahead and start
Well, I'll go ahead and answer
to questions. I hope you'll ask
me about how it's different from
last year. Senator Can you
please pull the mic closer to
you?
Okay. I hope you will ask me
during the questions. How this
Um I have two senators with me
who are co sponsors of the bill,
and so I'm going to turn it over
to Senator Shannon Pinto. The
plan for this. We have an
organized presentation and the
plan for this is for the two
senators to speak briefly on the
bill and the majority of the
time will be, uh, taken up.
By community members who want to
see this building.
Thank you.
Yes, And I'll just remember
folks. I'm getting messages that
people cannot hear you online,
So please keep them. Mike's very
close to you and make sure that
they're on the mix in this room
are really bad. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee and those aren't doing
this today. I'm Senator Shannon
Pinto for those online
And there is a deep history
within the area. I represent the
district of a lot of cleanup
that needs to occur from
historical mineral extraction.
And in that sense, too, as we
move into the future.
It's going to continue to be
there practically almost our
whole my whole district. There
is underground minerals that are
there and we continue to see
this battle play out daily with
our local people and those that
have lived there and actually
had many, many generations
reside on those lands.
And when that is something that
is continue to be a battle.
There should be something in
place in which the future will
not have to.
Worry.
If we are actually there is
something in place that they can
fall back on.
So I think this is something I
really like to support.
And all those borderlands also
to the reservations are very,
very much affected, too,
especially when we talk about
some of these minerals are that
are fluid.
And that jurisdictional aspect
also plays into some of the
litigation that has come
forward.
In many, many years in which
some of these companies came in
close shop and there was no way
to restore the land. And that is
when thing when we move forward
is restoring
And when the technology today
there is some, but yet that
funding is never really put
forward.
And we're still trying to deal
with the uranium.
So I really hope this committee
being and those members consider
that aspect on my part. Thank
you, Mr Miss Madam chair and
members of the committee.
Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair Committee
members.
You know the Green amendment
would raise people's
expectations for the government
and empower them to advocate
more firmly.
And confidently for
environmental protection.
When government officials failed
to fulfill their constitutional
duty.
The Green amendment would
provide a pathway to defend
environmental rights in court
that is broader than what is
available.
Under existing laws.
In my view, and for many others,
there are no rights that are
more urgent.
And need for constitutional
recognition than these
You know, I hear so much about
this legislation and worries
about lawsuits and litigation.
But what about the lawsuits and
litigation that are happening
now?
From those who are harming our
environment.
We're also talking about
hypotheticals because
If folks do right by our
environment.
If the government officials like
us are held accountable.
We can prevent those lawsuits
with that, Madam chair, I'll
close and passed back to our
prime sponsor.
Thank you, madam Chair. We have
organized group of people in the
community. There are many, many
more that wanted to speak, but
we cut it down and we have an
organized presentation by
community members who want to
vote on this amendment. Okay,
Thank you, Senator. So, too. You
have nine people listed here as
you're organized support.
To stay within your time.
They're going to need to keep
their comments to a minute and a
half or less. First is Nicole My
Estes.
A lot of itchy. I apologize if
I've mispronounced your name.
Go ahead for about a minute and
a half.
Chairwoman.
This one.
Chairwoman and members of the
committee. My name is Nicole
Majestic Zelenovic, and I'm an
Air Force veteran Mother, a
leader with the Atalante
Progressive Caucus,
Environmental justice, obvious
Coalition member. My family has
resided in New Mexico for over
six generations Life in our land
of enchantment.
Today. I stand before you asking
you to listen to the voters of
New Mexico, not oil and gas,
deep pockets and lobbyists that
want to exploit our state.
Residents of New Mexico are
tired of fighting battle after
battle of polluted industry,
arming our air, water, soil and
way of life.
The Green amendment will not
suddenly make oil and gas go
away. The scare tactics of
frivolous lawsuits or obtuse and
quite frankly, would get a
lawyer disbarred before actually
reading any real havoc. The
Green amendment will not stop
solar or wind energy and the
boogeyman stories of some wind
farm being pushed out by a Green
amendment are patently false.
Those wind farms are being put
right next to residential
communities and a nuisance order
blocked him 30 seconds within
the most with within most
renewable industries, there's a
quiet desire for more
environmental protections.
Quiet because some renewable
companies are afraid to step
forward as investor owned
utilities like PNM hold power
over the few renewable
contracts, making the sector of
industry afraid to speak out out
of fear of losing work.
Renewable groups know that the
Green amendment would be a start
to better environmental
protections, which means less
reliance on oil and gas and a
bigger avenue for renewables.
Quite frankly, these projects
would only affect people who are
inappropriately justifiably.
Thank you Sacrificing precious,
ma'am. Thank you to vote. Yes.
on this measure. Next is and and
folks When I say time we want to
make sure everyone who wants to
speak has an opportunity to do
so. So please stop speaking when
I say time, uh, Carlos. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair
Committee members. My name is
Carlos Matutes. I am the New
Mexico community Advocate for
green Latinos. We are a National
Environmental Justice
organization. And I am here to
talk about this Green Amendment.
Every new Mexican has the right
stated in the Declaration of
Independence, Life, Liberty and
the Pursuit of happiness. These
basic rights are infringed upon
when the very air we breathe the
water we drink the soil. We grow
our food in or tainted for
profit.
The people of New Mexico deserve
to have their protections
guaranteed that the environment
they live in and raise their
Children in is healthy and
sustainable.
This all seems obvious. I think
we can all agree that we want a
healthy environment. So why
would this amendment be
necessary?
We see unsafe levels of
pollution from coal burning
power plants, industrial waste
in uranium mining, and it is our
most vulnerable populations that
bear the brunt of these toxins.
This amounts to environmental
racism.
Which Robert Bowler in his book
Dumping in Dixie defines as any
policy practice or directive
that differential effects or
disadvantages, whether intended
or unintended individuals,
groups or communities based on
race.
Economy of New Mexico can thrive
without hurting our families.
Green energy is a way forward
for all of US. And environmental
rights amendment would encourage
the growth.
We're not asking for the state
Legislature to do anything right
now other than to allow the
people of New Mexico to vote on
this amendment.
To allow the democratic process
to take place.
And to decide our own future.
Thank you Encourage you to vote
to pass.
Next is Consuelo Koro de Walker.
Hmm. Honorable senators. My name
is Consuelo Tortura, A walker.
I represent Westminster
Presbyterian Church, Santa Fe.
The president during committee
for New Mexico and El Paso and
the Sierra Club Rio Grande
chapter with 35,000 members and
supporters in our wonderful
state.
I'm also a member of the Green
Amendment.
I bring you 43 original signed
petitions, church members, and
from that I had even using it.
The original one.
We place ourselves as stewards
of creation and the earth.
We take on the challenge of
lessening this a very 30
seconds. Angel by supporting
Renew bubble energy recycling
composting, reducing waste and
changing our lifestyles and way
of living as a personal offering
what I would've future and the
future of the next generations.
I have faith.
That we all here Support Degree
amendment S. J. R eight and its
benefits and encourage you
wonderful vote for it. Thank
you.
Next, and I believe that the
remaining folks are all on zoom
Terry Sloane.
Terry, go go ahead and proceed
for about a minute and a half.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Good morning, honorable chair
and committee members. My name
is Terry Sloane, director of my
NGO Southeast native cultures
through which an accredited
member of the United Nations
Board member with Green Minister
Generations Board member with a
Mexican of eighth power and
light and a member of the
Greater Taco Coalition and in
Mexico Green Amendment
Coalition.
Rights of humans. We have the
right you and your Children have
a right to clean air, clean land
and clean water supporting and
passing a bill of rights
Constitutional change The New
Mexico Green Amendment exercises
our your human right to clean
air, land and clean sacred
water. It also respects
indigenous peoples' rights and
tribal sovereignty.
Give them Mexicans a chance to
make that choice, wanting and
working to protect one
Our only one and only piece of
planet Earth as a human right
working to protect and preserve
our land of enchantment for the
next seven generations of our
your Children and their
Children's Children isn't no
brainer.
Getting caught up in the dollar
signs the powers that be forget
about our most vulnerable part
of our humanity. Our Children,
let's work for them work to
protect the environment, Protect
sacred Mother Earth and her
inhabitants say yes to S J r A.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Next. We have Glenn
Griffin.
Glenn
Alright.
Next. We have Dave Steele.
They've go ahead and go ahead
and proceed since someone since
one folk. One person was not
about two minutes.
Good morning, senators. My name
is Dave. Still, I represent the
Unitarian Universalist Church of
Las Cruces. And it's 229 members
and friends. Our congregation
recently voted overwhelmingly to
go on record as a body in
support of the Environmental
Rights amendment S Jr A reflects
the values of my religious
community.
Particularly our belief in the
inherent worth and dignity of
every person our commitment to
justice, equity and compassion
and our respect for the
interdependent web of existence,
of which we are all part.
We also stand firmly for
democratic processes and the
right of the people to have a
voice in securing their future.
This amendment strengthens
efforts to address the climate
crisis by making it a
constitutional mandate to do so.
The obligation to protect
natural resources and
environmental rights for future
generations, including a safe
climate further strengthens the
government's mandate to advance
quality, clean energy programs.
It also provides the
constitutional and legal
foundations necessary to defend
against challenges legal or
political.
I respectfully urge you to
support SJ r eight. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Jim Eagle.
Jim, If you're on, please
proceed for less than two
minutes.
My name is Jim Eagle from Santa
Fe. And I'm, a member of 350
Santa Fe and the New Mexico
Green Amendment Coalition. And
I'm here to speak in favor of SJ
R eight. There is no good reason
for opposing.
The New Mexico Green Amendment
based on false claims of
industry lobbyists, who have
suggested that the Green
amendment would slow down clean
energy development in our state.
Rather, other experts have
clearly explained that the New
Mexico Green amendment will
support good quality renewable
energy projects. We note that
there have been no instances in
the three Green Amendment states
where the green One Amendment
language has been used to stop
good, clean energy projects, and
there have been no Green
Amendment cases which have been
thrown out as frivolous. Also
important to me is that the
Green Amendment language will
not replace our existing
environmental laws.
And rules but rather provide an
important backstop.
To our existing system. The
Green amendment will make it
more difficult for a relatively
small number of well funded
polluters to game the state
environmental system for their
profit, But in so doing
performed a service to the rest
of New Mexico. Thank you and
please support S. J. R. A
Thank you, Janet Wallace Ortiz.
Thank you, madam Chair and
committee members for the
opportunity to speak. My name is
Janet wallet or teeth, And I'm a
member of Silver City
indivisible Zone, the Grant
County Democratic Party, having
lived in Grant County for 40
years, I have witnessed ongoing
struggles of hundreds of
community members fighting to
hold corporations accountable
for their toxic spills that have
damaged lives and the
environment.
Even though S. J R eight cannot
be used to sue private industry
It would enshrine the right of
every new Mexican to a clean and
healthy environment and would
hold state and local governments
accountable for being the
gatekeepers to protecting that
right by refusing to permit bad
actors could pollute and
devastate our precious land, air
and water. We already seen many
toxic dumps throughout New
Mexico from corporate band.
Actors who can care less about
our health and livelihoods as
long as they can reap their mega
profits with little to no
regard.
For cleanup, often because of
weak regulations or poorly
enforced regulations. New Mexico
should no longer be known in the
corporate world as a dumping
ground and we need our
legislators to stand up and say
so by allowing the Green
Amendment to have a place on the
ballot so the people can vote
their voice. Please vote to do
pass on SJ R eight to move it
along quickly.
Or house is on fire, and we need
to act like it. Thank you.
And last. We have, uh Linda
Starr and Senator, I'll ask you
you have about three minutes
left. Do you want to start to
take that remaining time? Or do
you want to save anything for
the end?
Alright, Miss Starr, you have
about three minutes.
Right, Senator. Do you want to
go ahead and wrap ups and she's
not on or is there anyone else
in the audience who you'd like
to to speak in your remaining
time?
I think that's fine. Um, the
people prepared this and the
people want this.
There is there is a difference
in this amendment that I would
like feedback on because one of
the criticisms we heard last
year was that there were no
guard whales.
So on Page two.
Of the amendments starting on
eight, We added, the state
counties and municipalities
shall not allow through
government action or inaction,
the degradation, dimunition or
deletion, depletion of the
national environment that is
avoidable contributes to
significant or widespread
environmental harm resulted in
unhealthy or unstable climate.
That language comes from a
Supreme Court. I believe from
the University of Utah. No, I'm
sorry. University of Montana.
And, um, that's what the court
interpreted the more brief
amendment there. And so what
that does is, it puts car rails
It actually presents a standard.
We heard a lot of criticism last
year is that any kind of
frivolous lawsuit could be
brought for anything? This is a
very substantial standard that
courts can interpret with ease.
The other thing we heard is that
courts would be substituting
their judgment. As you know. Is
the lawyers on this committee.
No courts don't usually
substitute their judgment. What
they do is they send it back for
the agency to fix the problem.
Um, I'm happy to answer any
questions. Um, and we do have an
expert in the audience if it
becomes necessary.
But I'm prepared to answer any
questions you may have.
Okay. We have time to thank you,
Senator and the madam chair
members of the committee. One of
the things do when we talk about
litigation is that money will
not
Be if we could get the land air
and back.
On some of these cases back to
its clean state, but really, it
just comes down to them doling
out money.
So we want to be proactive in
that sense to make sure that is
not what happens beforehand.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. Thank you,
Senator. So we do have organized
opposition, Uh, to S J r eight.
So we have 67888 people signed
up for the organized opposition
for two minutes each.
We will begin with Clinton
nicely.
And and folks you're organized
opposition is actually 15
minutes, not 16 minutes, so so
keep it a little under 22. Good
morning, madam Chair members of
the Committee. Clinton nicely
risk services director. New
Mexico Self insurance Fund
registered lobbyists. New Mexico
Municipal League.
We are opposed to Senate Joint
Resolution eight, and we believe
we're well positioned to speak
with some context CERN's because
we'll be adjusting the claims
that are likely to be filed in
response to this languages,
potential enshrinement in our
state constitution.
Our main concern is that we're
going to see vexatious
litigation, which in we're not
saying that because we're
engaged in hyperbole or
exaggeration or conjecture. Um
we say it because it's just
reality. And it's reality
because everywhere else, there's
a Green amendment or something
like it. Exploitative litigation
has followed shortly thereafter.
We're talking about states like
Montana, New York and
Pennsylvania.
Where you've seen litigants
argue, for example, uh, than
medical facility should have the
ability to deny unvaccinated
persons access to care.
We've seen litigants argue that
their Children should be
entitled to damages or
contraction of seasonal
allergies. We've seen litigants
argue, for example, that
unpleasant odor three seconds.
elation, uh of of the Green
amendment in that particular
state. We also have concerns
about the language in this
particular version thereof. It
says, self executing. All that
means is you're delegating.
Authority to figure out terms
that don't exist elsewhere in
state statute to the judiciary.
Also, I want to mention and
information that the lack of
monetary damages as an available
method of recovery does nothing
to stop courts from issuing
injunctive relief obligating
millions in taxpayer funding. Q.
Thank you. Next we have Rickie
Lee Chavez.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee Rickie
Lee Chavez on behalf of my
client, Inner West Energy
Alliance West is the regional
Renewable Energy Trade
Association headquartered right
here in New Mexico, representing
roughly 40 of the largest wind.
Solar storage, geothermal and
transmission companies in the
world.
West Energy Alliance stands in
opposition to S. J. R eight and
appreciates the work and
dedication of this body to craft
sustainable energy policies.
Inner west in the renewable
energy industry are strong
believers in the goals of clean
and healthy environment and
stable climates.
We're excited to be part of that
future for New Mexico and are
investing tens of billions of
dollars here and putting
thousands of new Mexicans to
work.
In the West, commissioned a
legal analysis to fully
understand the impact of the
proposed Green Amendment.
To renewable development.
The language in the proposal is
so broad even with the changes
from last year that neither
governmental decision makers nor
private developers can
accurately guess at what it
requires leading to incredible
and efficiencies, uncertainty
and legal risk in the context of
renewable energy development.
Businesses need businesses need
predictable, stable regulatory
environments in order to receive
financing and invest And
unfortunately, SGR eight will
compromise that for New Mexico
leading to unnecessary expense
and delay.
Again. The renewable energy
industry is a strong supporter
of the goals of this proposal,
and inner West is eager to help
develop policies that make that
future a reality. But S G R
eight will create a chilling
effect on renewable energy
development. Here. We were.
Thank you, John Ryan.
Thank you, Madam Chair John Ryan
Southwestern Power Group
developer of renewable
transmission lines and projects
that, uh, costs a lot of money.
Many years of toil, Uh,
following regulations following
statutes listening to government
and frankly, we we've we've got,
um some of the biggest clean
energy projects.
That have ever been developed
not only in America.
Clean energy is the goal of this
body.
And we we we take it seriously,
and we think that our projects
have gotten better over the
years. They cost millions of
dollars. But the uncertainty of
litigation, Uh we were the
original developers of the Sun
Zia transmission project. We are
the developer of the real Soul
transmission projects. These
projects are capturing New
Mexico's wind, energy, solar
energy and
Transporting it to New Mexico to
Arizona to to the entire
southwestern part of the United
States. And so, um, you know
this this um it is what we do is
try to make these bills. Um
As 30 seconds palatable to as
many people as possible. Um, but
to have a constitutional
amendment that is hard to
change. Um, you know, the the
energy transition act that this
body has has supported, Uh, you
know, has set a direction into
renewable energy and clean
energy projects.
Now you gotta You gotta support
the project. So, um, along the
way, otherwise, um, your your
energy transition act. Thank
Yes.
Good morning, Madam Church
Committee members. I'm Fernando
Martinez.
Courts or Rita, as we like to
finally call it. Rita was
established by the legislative
Plan. Finance Development
Acquire
High voltage transmission
projects and energy storage
projects for economic
development.
Readers. Transmission projects
have enabled massive amounts of
renewable energy beat to be
developed. In fact, in the last
two years
Uh, when wind and transmission
projects are totally is about
$13 billion
We have another $10 billion in
wind trans development and will
be moving towards construction
in the next few years.
These projects have brought
thousands of jobs are needed
most and the projects under
development will bring thousands
more jobs.
By way, of example, sends you
wind and sun zero transmission
will have a $20 billion positive
economic impact in New Mexico
and Arizona with direct and
indirect and induced benefits,
Large infrastructure projects of
this nature must already comply
with nearly 30 New Expo statues,
and that's seconds, including
environmental improvement after
cultural resource problem.
Uh, protection Act. All these
have public participation
throughout with the ability of
appeal for checks and balances.
Um, anything that you edit could
cause conflicting requirements
or duplication would make our
regulatory landscape
unpredictable.
The Green amendment will add a
series of legal roadblocks that
will make construction of of
renewable energy projects in New
Mexico virtually impossible.
Next. We have Rico Gonzalez.
Good. Good morning, madam
Chairwoman, members of the
committee. I'm Rico Gonzalez
with L Paso Electric. And I
think you've heard a lot on the
electric side in the investment
side of of of the effects.
What I wanted to talk to you
about today is our territory.
We serve. El Paso, Texas, and
Las Cruces, New Mexico.
And, um in my role, um, economic
development and recruitment
comes into effect every single
day of businesses coming in.
And in New Mexico and our
territory in in Las Cruces,
someone parks. Not that Theresa.
Our number one competition.
Is El Paso.
There are there are, uh,
recruitment.
That we both are going over on
either side of the either side
of the state line.
For L. Paso Electric, whether it
lands in El Paso or Las Cruces.
We're serving it. We're happy to
have new customers and new
opportunities. But as a new
Mexican
I am.
Tired of seeing projects going
over into Texas.
And I feel like this type of of
constitutional amendment would
affect that to the adverse 40
seconds. Mexico
So to that end, that's what I'm
here to bring you today is just
insight from Southern New
Mexico and thank you.
Next Tiffany Rivera.
Madam chair and members of the
committee, Tiffany Rivera on
behalf of New Mexico Farm and
Livestock Bureau and the New
Mexico agricultural Community.
Our states, Farmers and ranchers
are some of the best stewards of
our natural resources as their
livelihoods directly depend on
them.
The resolution before you has
the potential to adversely
impact. Our producers are
producers and the agricultural
sector, which directly supports
more than 23,000 jobs and
contributes 3.49 billion to our
economy.
Constitutional amendments are
not needed when whole bodies of
law exists to protect and
regulate activities that could
impact the environment.
Deficiencies in state programs
should be directly addressed as
policy matters instead of
through a constitutional
amendment providing broad and
vague instruction.
A prime example of this very
recommendation is the dairy
role.
Which is administered by the
Environment Department.
This role was drafted as an
agreement between the
Environment Department, the
dairy industry and concerned
Environmental Coalition on what
the permits would entail.
This collaborative effort
resulted in New Mexico Dairy is
having one of the most stringent
groundwater regulations in the
nation.
Our producers responded to this
challenge with good
environmental stewardship and
one of the highest rates of
sustainability.
This is a prime example that
shows agencies and stakeholders
can achieve collective goals
without an overly burdensome and
vague constitutional amendment.
For these reasons, and
Can you hear me? Madam Madam
Chairman members of the
committee, Briancon did
executive Director in Mexico
Building Construction Trades
Council, uh, echo many of the
comments that a chilling effect
If this legislation will have on
what my council does for a
living
Okay, Keep the microphone by
your mouth. Closer online
Canadian. Okay, Thank you.
Usually people can hear me
pretty well. I'm trying to be
kind and gentle today. This this
this bill is unnecessary. Uh, it
appears to us that it will be
the Attorney Employment Security
Act for the next 20 or 25 years.
Uh, projects will end up in
court rather than
Being built, uh by by new
Mexicans and our members, Uh,
we've seen over and over and
over again. The improvements
that industries make making, uh,
they're not there yet will be
the first to say there is no
excuse for some of the legacy
items that have happened in our
state over the years. But this
isn't the solution going in and
having 13 different decisions
from 13 different
District courts in New Mexico.
Uh, completely opposite each
other makes absolutely no sense
to any of us. I would. I would
respectfully request and,
uh that you reject this notion
of settling and improving our
environment through the court
system. Thank you.
Thank you. And last we have John
Lipschitz.
And
You all have about a little over
two minutes left in your time.
If you want to take that. Thank
you, madam Chair members of the
committee. John Lip shoots with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor. Um, First of all, I do
want to very much thank the
sponsors for a what is could
only be described as a
worthwhile idea of protecting
our citizens with providing a
clean and safe environment. I
think we all
Can agree on that I do
represent, though about 40,000
working people across the state,
both in the public and private
sector and we do stand in
solidarity with our private
sector, Brothers and sisters, Mr
Condit said. You know, this is a
great effort that is worthwhile
talking about and we definitely
believe
In enforcing environmental laws
that will help make our
electorate or are people safer?
Um, that being said, we also
need jobs. Um, I right now there
is already a working shortage. A
shortage of workers and an
effort like this could
potentially delay and even
cancel projects that will put
thousands of workers out of
work. And that is something
That is a deep concern for us
for sure. So for those reasons
and all the other stated, we
very respectfully have to oppose
this measure. Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to members
of the committee. I have first
on the listeners phonics.
Oh, and I'm sorry. What?
If they're not part of the
organized opposition list that I
got, then we're not
They're not part of the list
that I have phonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair as
always. I came in late. Um so
I'm sure you discussed this
already.
I would like to know Madam chair
and senators, Um
The experience of other states
very briefly about employment.
It has not affected employment
in New York.
It hit Madam chair. It is not
affected. New York in NBA hasn't
not affected employment in
Montana.
Is not affected. Employment in,
um
Do you rip Pennsylvania?
None of those states have
experienced any kind of
employment problems.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, Um
Was there.
Any kind of
Increase in one sector decrease
in another sector.
Do you know I have
I don't everybody every state is
included is transitioning. Every
state is having different
different experiences. The Green
Amendment has not in my view
benefactor with regard to, um
um employment. In fact, I mean,
it was kind of interesting to
hear about attorneys, the
attorney
Issue about making employees
trainees employed because the
truth is there aren't that many
cases.
I don't know. Okay, so Madam
chair and senators, um
The other question I had was
about, um
And I'm sure you've covered
this, but, uh
The lawsuits whether there have
been lawsuits in other states
whether there haven't been
because in the past, um remember
the discussion that there
haven't been any, um
Build up of lawsuits about this.
There is not there has not been
vixen vexations lawsuits and
this this thing about every
lawsuit has been thank you,
Senator upset we can You know
what? I'm upset? No, no. The
reason I'm upset is it doesn't
upset me to hear false
information.
I almost reported the Holland
and Hart memo to the
disciplinary committee because
it was not signed and it had so
many falsehoods. So listen to
it. It's just so frustrating,
and it's okay if people see me
cry. This means a lot. This
means a lot to the future bro
State into two here.
Um
Just
People getting up and saying
These false things just
Tears me up, But I don't need a
senator. I
I don't want us disparaging
folks in this committee, So I
understand that you're upset and
I understand that you're
passionate about this. But if
someone was standing up in here
and saying that you were saying
false things, I wouldn't want
them to be disparaging you in
here either, So, so let's let's
stick to to the issues, please.
Madam Chair and Senator, I want
to just make a general comment,
Um
You know, I support this, but
I'm the reason I support this is
for the future.
We have future generations that
are looking to us.
Two.
Make a statement and to pave the
way and the point I wanted to
make is
If other states
Have in fact implemented this
and they have not had an impact
on employment and they have not
had for it was frivolous
lawsuits.
I think we should take a message
from that.
And I also think
We need to listen.
To the next generation who are
expecting us.
To stand up for the environment.
I
I also want to say that
sometimes
Our state agencies.
Have the best intentions but are
not fully funded.
To be the safeguards.
And so I see this as a tool.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you next on the list to
have Senator Stewart followed by
us under our TCP now.
Senator Stewart would move that
Mike real close to you.
Oh,
A turn it off first.
Sorry. Y'all were struggling
with some new technology this
year.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
apologize for that noise. I hate
these hope. At the end of the
session. We just each take one
and throw it as far as we can.
Are you with me?
I think that was an exclamation.
We can't hear it turned it off.
Yeah.
So thank you so much for
bringing this today.
You know, Over the years, I've
just gone back and forth on this
trying to figure it out.
Um, I think I'm really now down
on the side of I don't want a
lot of court cases.
No, I do notice that this time
you did not repeal the part in
the Constitution.
That we have a current court
case around.
Um, the protection of the
state's beautiful and healthful
environment is hereby declared
to be of fundamental importance
to the public interest, health
safety and the general welfare.
The Legislature shall provide
for control of pollution control
of despoil mint of the air,
water and other natural
resources of the state.
Consistent with the use and
development of these resources
for the maximum benefit of the
people.
So, Madam chair. I just think
that already covers it and that
we've had it all this time and
that now we have a major lawsuit
against the state on this
section of the Constitution.
Um
You know, I think it was six
years ago, maybe longer.
That we had start.
Um, we know can't get out of
that lawsuit.
We just can't get out of it. I
think in part because we lost
our judge.
No, we lost Sarah Singleton so
no other judge knows what to do.
They don't understand the
educational system. They don't
understand us and how we raise
revenue and how we spend it.
So I just I have less faith. Uh
then you do. I think in the
court system at this point, and
so I guess my question to you is
What do you see happening? What
do you see on the ground
happening if we were to pass
this? Thank you for that
question. What I see on the
ground is when we when I look at
that, just like a shin
I look, one of the questions I
asked is What is this problem
trying to what is this
legislation prank trying to
solve and is it constitutional?
And those are two things that I
I look very carefully yet. I
think it will affect the
legislatures.
Actions because they will know
that the people have spoken to
them and the people are asking
us to to, uh
To protect our fragile
environment for their futures
for their Children's futures,
and I also think that the
agencies will have more
direction because again when I
work for an agency I looked to
the Constitution has the guide
post. It is a statement of our
values.
There have been two cases
brought under article 20 section
21 and as you know, I read it
because it is a direct on the
floor every once in a while.
I'll read it on the floor and
it's a direction to the
Legislature to protect our
environment.
I don't believe that we've met
that. I don't believe that we've
We've done the job we need to
have done on the environment.
Pursuant to article 20 this
article 20 section 21.
I understand There is a lawsuit
and I have read that complaint,
and I think it is a brilliant
complaint.
It. It is a narrative of so much
that has failed to happen in the
state and so much that has
happened in the state.
Um, the reason I think that it's
not
Sufficient.
Is that under article 20 section
21 There was a case. Um, that
happened 10 months into the
well. It was brought 10 months
into the yard Martinez
administration.
Because all the painstaking work
That, um Governor Richardson's
administration had done on rules
to address climate change in the
environment was reversed within
10 months.
Under the Green Amendment, if
all of the painstaking work that
has happened with Luhan Gershom
administration if God forbid,
there was an administration that
wants to do it if there were
agreed Amendment
The the question would be is
undoing these regulations. Is it
going to affect our air, land
and water?
So that's why I think it is so
important. Um
In no other state. Has there
been this onslaught of
legislation? I don't know why
New Mexico would be any
different you. Mexico's had two
cases under article 20 section
21 I anticipate
A similar
A similar approach. It's hard to
bring a constitutional case took
many years for the people
bringing the
What is it called the pencil
case.
Many, many years for them to put
that together.
Um, man chair. Thank you,
Senator for that response, but I
I still don't. I don't see why
how another amendment when we've
got the one already that I think
is well written, um, that we're
having a case against so
You know to me? We don't really
need this. At this point. I am
very concerned about the
environment. You can tell that
from the bills I carry. I do
think it's our responsibility.
And that's why I continue to
carry bills like that. So, um, I
believe it's the Legislature's
job to do better. I want us to
Pay for the FTE s in the
Environment Department and M
nerves so that we can fully
stuff our regulatory agencies.
That's to me what I want to work
on.
Um And I do remember from last
year there was another state
that past degree in amendment,
where it took six years for
renewable energy projects to go
into effect because it was
slowed down by their Green
Amendment. Your amendment
doesn't say it's just the people
who want renewable that can file
so anybody can file suit we've
taken at full decade permitting
regulation to get some
To see you.
Which we wanted 10 years ago, so
I I, uh I'm listening to the
people that are telling us this
will be too hard to maneuver
around. Um, I want full
renewable energy in this state.
Look at what we've got our
resources. We can do that, and I
believe we're moving forward on
that.
Yeah, I'm nervous about the
executive orders and the things
put in place, But I I'm hopeful
for the future. I think we've
made progress already. And I
want us to can you continue to
do that? So still in that?
Great idea, but you know what
will happen because it just
doesn't sound good from what
will happen in my mind. So thank
you, Madam Chairman.
Hmm. Thank you, Senator. She's a
paedo before you turn that
microphone on. Pull it closer to
you. Well, it's off.
And and close closer than that,
Uh, sorry, Senator, we We just
aren't here. Folks online just
can't hear us unless they're
right up next to us. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
thank you Senators for
We're bringing this forward. I'm
very torn on this because I have
People.
Whose opinions I respect on both
sides sending me not just these
large packets, but hundreds of
emails about this topic.
But my basic question is very
similar to Senator Stewart's.
If this will not result in
lawsuits. What's the point of
it?
Isn't the whole point of this to
provide a new basis for suing.
Different.
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee. I'm on the hazardous
and material houses. This
materials committee through the
interim and we go throughout the
state.
And I've heard testimony from
farmers and ranchers.
About the fluidity of their
water being contaminated.
And if this was already in
statue
Then why are they not able to
have that restored?
They wanted to pass their land
onto their Children, but now
it's contaminated worth nothing.
So when we talk about lawsuits
and stuff that's already in
place that will protect them.
Well, who's really going to
bring that lawsuit? Do they have
the funding to bring a lawsuit
as a farmer in a rancher?
When they're already in.
They have no asset after that,
when it's brought down to a zero
value when there's that
contaminant, especially when we
talk about water, and this is in
the southern part of the state.
This is down in, um Gordo in
that area that this happened.
And after that, once your water
is contaminated, Can you do
anything else? No. Water is
life.
And when that is contaminated to
the point, you can't restore it.
Or take it out.
How much are we gonna go?
And let this keep going,
especially when we hear
testimony from our fellow
people. So, Madam Chairman and
Senator, did you
and Madame chair. This isn't all
about the lawsuits. It's about
changing behavior.
It's about changing behavior of
agencies. It's about changing
behavior of
Us and it's it's about a respect
for the land, air and water too
many times we've had people come
to our state and instead of
Helping us they exploit us and
leap.
And that's what this is about.
It's respecting the people.
And their air, land and water.
Except that madam chairman and
senators.
We have existing language that
does that.
The only thing you're amendment
does as far as I can tell.
Is grant new opportunities for
lawsuits.
Is there anything else that
you're amendment does besides
that It isn't already available
to us.
The the trustee language in this
amendment, which is not an
article 20 section 21 puts a
duty on municipalities and
counties to to abide by this
amendment.
And that's not so clear at all
In the last one, the last one
simply puts a duty on us which
we already in my opinion. We
already had such a duty and we
have failed that duty.
I met him, Chairman and Senator,
I think you're probably right.
We we haven't fully fulfilled
our duty.
But to make now cities and
municipalities and counties also
subject to that responsibility.
Doesn't do anything unless
there's going to be lawsuits
filed over what what other
mechanism you say? We need this
tool to change behavior, but
other than lawsuits.
We? The Legislature already has
responsibility to to take care
of the environment.
And if we're not doing a good
job to say that the cities and
counties now need to also do it.
I'm not sure we've really
changed much.
We did hear testimony from the
municipal league that that there
were many, many frivolous
lawsuit what they termed
frivolous lawsuits.
So
Yeah, And you said, Oh, there
haven't been any, but they said
there have been some so I don't
know who to believe in that
instance. But other than
lawsuits, is there any point to
this?
As I said, I really believe that
it's a statement by the people.
and when the Legislature here's
the very strong statement by the
people that this is what they
want, I think it will change
legislative behavior as well.
Thank you, madam Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Pirtle.
Okay, We have a motion to table.
It's a non debatable motion.
Would you please call the roll,
Senator Buck in order Bucko
votes? Yes, Senator Lopez is
excuse Senator McKenna.
No.
Senator McKenna votes. No.
Senator Moore's senator Morris
votes Yes, Senator Nibert.
So, Senator Nyberg votes? Yes,
Senator. Or yes, Senator. RTZ
Pinot votes. Yes, Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle. It's yes,
Senator Stefan IX, Senator
Stoner Stefan expose No. Senator
Stewart. Yes, Senator Stewart
votes Yes, Senator Harm you.
Yes, and Senator do Higgins and
with six in favor. That motion
is successful and your bills
tabled. Thank you.
Alright as folks are getting up
and leaving. Please keep the
noise down so we can continue on
with our business.
Next. We have Senate Memorial
eight, Senator Stewart
Alright, let's go ahead. Let's
go ahead and proceed with Senate
Memorial eight.
Senator Stewart Go ahead.
And and Senator Stewart, if you
want to use that hand held Mike
if that's better feel free.
I think we all have Mike PTSD.
Try it.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
A several bills to help us
improve Our oil and gas
regulations have been moving
through the house whose one over
here
Um
Every one of those bills started
off with some type of setbacks
for oil and gas facilities close
to schools, daycares, et cetera.
So none of those setbacks
remain. Now we're really divided
on this issue in the state. So
this memorial um ask our Mexico
Energy, Minerals and Resources
Department to evaluate the risk
to people and their surrounding
environment from proximity to
oil and gas operations.
It requires them to consult with
stakeholders.
Help this to mitigate those
risks by establishing some type
of setbacks.
That we can all agree on.
And then recommend legislation
for the 2025 session, so we've
certainly got plenty of
information. A latest report
from California where they
studied
Proximity issues and set back
issues. Um, that information,
um, is basically saying that
they have a very high level of
certainty in the findings that
the
Having schools, daycares cetera,
close to oil and gas is
detrimental to kids, health,
asthma, etcetera, So this
memorial just says, Let's let's
study it. Let's have the
department that deals mostly
with oil and gas to convene the
stakeholders to look at the
research.
And then suggest how we deal
with setbacks going forward
because we clearly can't do it
ourselves this session.
So I have with me. Tanis Fox as
my expert, um one of them and
and senator, We also have
Senator McKenna Online who
wanted to McKenna is my sponsor.
And so whenever you want, I
would like to have her also add,
and then you could come back to
tennis.
Go ahead, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Stewart.
Um
Chairwoman and colleagues.
The importance of this memorial.
Is a lot
Um, I've seen first hand
The amount of methane that
escapes from leaks.
It was looking through an
optical gas energy camera that I
saw methane rising from faulty
leaking wells.
Why is this so important?
It's because what comes out of
them, Madam Chair and senator
are volatile organic compounds
and federally designated
hazardous air pollutants.
Vlccs are associated with
causing cancer.
Negative impacts to the central
nervous system.
And damage to the respiratory
systems.
These wells, madam chair and
Senator when I was visiting,
they were particularly close to
homes.
In fact,
Approximately 145,000 new
Mexicans live or attend school
within a half mile of oil and
gas facilities.
This includes approximately
72,000 people of color.
Approximately 30,000.
At the 119 schools.
So, Madam Chair and Senator, I
am really pleased with what this
memorial
Tends to do.
And excited about what I can do
for us. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator.
So yeah, with your expert like
to say a few words. Don't touch
it.
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee. I'm Tanis Fox. I'm a
lawyer with Western
Environmental Law Center and
thank you today for considering
Senate Memorial eight. I would
just add to what has already
been said is that I was a member
of the
Working group initiated by the
governor and M nerd last fall to
work on oil and gas reform and
setbacks, was one of the subject
areas that we tackled.
Um, the discussions throughout
the last five months were very
robust. We took on a lot, um,
and setbacks were part of that
discussion but came out of HB
133, which is a bill in the
house, uh, dealing with oil and
gas reform. The intent of this
memorial is to continue.
That forum through the state
through em nerd with all
stakeholder holders to try to
get to consensus, or at least to
try to have her recommend a bill
that would come before you next
session because of the
importance to public health and
the environment of establishing
Setbacks and I provided some
information on setbacks and some
science. There's lots of science
out there. I could sort of
overload you on that, but did
not want to. Um we are organized
in a given the committee a list
of speakers in support.
Great. Thank you. And yes, you
have their seven speakers and
support. Um, ask you a all to to
keep your comments to no more
than two minutes each first.
Uh, I have seven. Here on the
left. Um
The first is Ben Shelton.
Thank you, Madam. Chair members.
My name is Ben Shelton. I'm the
general counsel. The energy
minerals we began, the process
of bringing conversations are
fairly wide ranging and they
wound up with, uh
A lot of the components that you
see in house. Uh, those
conversations included pretty
robust development of language
around, uh, setbacks. There was
a tremendous amount of interest
and appetite for information and
data, um around around this
issue and ultimately wind up
looking like it was too heavy to
be part of one bill, and maybe
you need to be its own
legislation.
Um, the department.
Um, has heard from stakeholders
on all sides that there is a
robust appetite for more
information and more discussion
on this. We have participated in
the process and would certainly
be interesting continue to do so
in bringing some more of
resources that we have to bear
in that conversation. Thank you.
Thank you, Wendy at
Hello. My name is Wendy at city.
I live in Farmington, New Mexico
and the Navajo tribal member. I
think the committee chair and
remembers for the opportunity to
support SME. The study is
critical to have setbacks for
oil and gas facilities. My mom
has never nation allotment
landed the bluffs above farming
to non
Our family grew up in the sacred
beauty of Mother Earth, Seen
mountains and all Cardinal
directions I share. This view is
like grew up last but sad. I had
to learn to dangerous language
of health impact sacrifice, so
air pollution, environmental
pollution cancer, asthma now to
describe my home in the sad one
basin.
Mm. My family lived with over 10
oil and gas wells within two
miles of our home.
It became a habit to smell the
air to know the direction of the
wind to determine the time to
stay outside.
And the whole water from further
sources as a flavor change with
increasing production
technology from a pump Jack to
fracking over four decades.
The setbacks add essential
protections for public health
and water. I want to play to
tribal, a lot of land or tribal
lands, but we all breathe one
air shed that people live, learn
and work. We can mitigate the
harm for Anna proximity,
industrial scale oil and gas
production facilities and add
critical essential setbacks.
I will never know. But inhaler I
carry is an adult inhaler. My
son carried out two years old
They cancer my father had in the
seventies or my late mother
passing from respiratory
symptoms could be due to live in
a lifetime. With criteria air
pollutants from extractive
energy I don't want to
generation to endure living in a
sacrifice zone.
There are other renewable energy
sources for healthy energy
transition. Thank you. Thank
you.
Sarah, not
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Committee. I'm Sarah can
open with Amigos Bravo, so Water
Justice organization.
Um, last year, the world of
water protection fundamentally
changed with the Supreme Court.
U. S. Supreme Court decision.
Sackett versus the EPI, A
This decision stripped federal
Clean Water Act protections from
a vast majority of New Mexico's
rivers, streams and wetlands.
Like other states in the West, a
large portion of New Mexico's
water those which lose
protection under this decision,
run seasonally or in response to
rainfall, or or wetlands not
connected to larger water
bodies.
It's crucial that is, federal
regulations are stripped away.
We as a state adopted common
sense safeguards such as water
setbacks of oil and gas wells to
protect New Mexico's water and
people. The health of these
smaller streams determines what
happens in our larger rivers
that provide drinking water,
irrigate our fields and provide
recreational opportunities.
When the smaller streams are
healthy, they act as the veins
bringing clean water to larger
rivers.
At the same time pollution in
small riverbeds travels quickly
as the December oil spill in
Shiprock demonstrated oil spills
can travel long distances
through these smaller waterways
and impact downstream
communities.
In that case, the oil traveled
550 ft down the roadway and hit
in Arroyo and then quickly moved
1800 ft before it could be
stopped.
Where the oil and gas industry
are drilling, there will be
spills.
Cleanup sites can span half a
mile or more.
Water is life in the state Can't
protect human health and well
being without protecting our
waters and vice versa.
The BLM already recognizes this
in their in their guidelines on
federal land they provide for
setbacks from environmentally
sensitive areas. We urge you to
vote yes, on this memorial, so
that next year the state can
take decisive in science based
action to protect our state's
waters and people. Thank you.
Louis Square, Guerrera.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee Luis
Gerardo with the Sierra Club,
reorganize the chapter
representing our 35,000 members
and supporters in New Mexico.
That, uh, we urge that you will
support center Memorial Eight.
Science tells US oil and gas
facilities in mid air pollutants
harmful to human health and the
environment can contaminate the
surrounding environment as well.
Including precious water
supplies. The closer person
lives to an oil and gas
facility, the more at risk they
are and then New Mexico at this
proportionate number of people
who live close to oil and gas
facilities are persons of color
and persons living below the
poverty line, establishing
setbacks or buffer zones between
new oil and gas facilities and
homes, schools, healthcare
facilities and streams.
Wetlands and other
environmentally sensitive areas
can provide real protection,
frontline communities and
surrounding of environment. We
are heard. So you will vote
yesterday. Thank you.
Thank you and then online we
have Caylee Shoop.
Kaylee. If you can hear me,
please go ahead and proceed for
two minutes.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Kayleigh Shupe and I'm, a
community organizer with a small
grassroots environmental
advocacy group based in
southeast New Mexico, cuts
citizens caring for the future.
We strongly urge your support of
cinema Morial eight, which will
ensure that our state protects
public health by addressing the
issue of setbacks in the future,
something that sadly has not
been done yet and I progressive
state because of the outsize
influence at the oil and gas
lobby has on our politics.
Recent high level air monitoring
data collected in southeast New
Mexico by researchers working
with the Health effects
Institute, which is an industry
back to research institution has
shown ozone levels far exceeding
its of the Clean Air Quality Act
and has also shown alarmingly
high levels of health harming
pollutants such as docs.
The data has begun to back up
what people living surrounded by
oil and gas and known for years,
which is a simple fact that
living near these sites is not
good for the body or the soul
and comes with consequences.
I often think about the future
and how scary it will be, as we
face the many crises that come
with the changing climate, and
then I think about what that
future might look like for a
child that grew up playing on a
playground under the shadow of a
flare.
What legacy will that leave
behind, and their body that will
make their future that much
harder to bear?
I think this memorial is a good
first step in ensuring that
people living in sacrifice and
such as the Permian and San Juan
are asked to carry a slightly
lighter load. And so what is a
very uncertain and daunting
future? Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Page night.
Okay, pages. Not on Todd, win
word.
Taught if you're on, go ahead
and
Proceed for two minutes.
Okay. He's not on either. All
right. Ah, so back to you,
Senator.
Did you have another name? Eric
Sissy mold because Saucedo
I I don't think he can go ahead
with this since these other
folks aren't on, Eric, Go ahead.
Uh
And and Senator, you have about
five minutes left in your time.
Do you want him to take the
remainder of your time or just
be for two minutes?
Okay. Go ahead for two minutes.
Eric.
Hello. Can you guys hear me?
Yes.
Hi. My name is Eric and I have
lived in Lake County for over 20
years, establishing setbacks for
future oil and gas facilities as
long overdue and important to
protect the health of all the
frontline communities like mine
in the southeastern New Mexico,
whose health have been and
continue to be adversely
impacted from the industry's
harmful air pollutants and
emissions have seen I have seen
firsthand how oil wells have
taken over my community growing
up.
I currently have one established
within half a mile, if not less
of my backyard. These worlds are
primarily enroll low income
immigrant and communities of
color. Asthma rates in southeast
New Mexico are the highest in
the region largely connected to
methane and other emissions from
the industry. I connect my
asthma diagnosis from when I was
a child due to the close
proximity of wells to my home
and school.
The majority of my immigrant
community or industry workers
and families and was held is
disproportionately impacted due
to the lack of safety nets and
access to quality safe jobs.
Additionally, a recent study on
the oil and gas workforce in
southeastern New Mexico revealed
that 57% of respondents who are
oilfield workers lack health
insurance, often due to
immigrant status or industry.
failure to cover while 78% like
access to unemployment benefits,
crucial for such a dangerous
industry, as I say.
On a former oil worker and
frontline community member. I
support Senate Memorial eight,
which is an important step to
reintegrate essential setback
provisions for oil and gas
facilities to protect our most
impacted communities in New
Mexico.
Our frontline communities don't
have to subsidize resources and
the state and are currently
Working and living in these
dangerous environments. Only
frontline communities know what
is best for our own communities.
We deserve a self as safe and
better quality of life. Thank
you. Members of the committee
Eric Saucedo, with some Muslims
Colonial
Thank you, Senator.
So, Madam chair. I also want to
mention that I've been in
conversation with Ashley Wagner
and Larry Haran with possible
amendments. They're not ready
today. I don't know if this will
move on. But if it does I
committed to working with them.
Apparently, they don't like the
Memorial very much.
Alright, Great. Senator Moore's
sure Thank you. Man approached
him and I'm sorry I should have
announced opposition. We didn't
have anyone sign up in
opposition. Um
So are are are are
Rules procedures are posted
online, so folks who having
business before the Senate rules
Committee need to follow the
Senate rules procedures. Um, now
we'll go to members of the
committee. Remorse, lobbyists
don't know, Know the procedures
and they're just new to Santa
Fe. And then Hmm. Sure, sure. I
apologize. We do usually do
that. So first, anyone who would
like to raise their hand in
support, please do so.
Anyone who would like to raise
their hand to indicate
opposition time.
Um And yes, folks. We've been
doing these procedures and
Senate rules for two years now,
Uh, they've been posted for two
years. So please look at those
procedures when you have matters
before us, Senator Morris. Thank
you, Madam Chair, not just for
the record. If you raise both
hands, it's equally opposed to
this, Um
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Citizen Protest. What You
said you were working with
Presbyterian on amendments.
Madam chair. I don't I don't
know how you thought that you
said Larry Haran, and I know I
should Ashley Wagner.
Okay. Do I have that name right?
I heard Larry Haran. Okay? Yeah.
Mocha and Larry Haren. Okay. I
was just wondering what
Presbyterian was interested on
this with Larry. Harun up back
there. Um, thank you, Um, so in
the crux members share is that
we get these memorials, but it
sounds like we're doing a
memorial. Tell them to do
something they already doing.
Um which I don't know. We do
that. But your your expert
witness man Pro TEM said that
this was supposed to be about
grabbing consensus, but the
memorial actions yourself toes.
Um
The agency to do this, but
without actually instructed. Oh,
you don't have to answer the
question. Like more of a comment
that I hope when they the agency
that's listening to actually go
out and work with this stuff,
but the language of the memorial
just they're already doing it,
But I didn't see any task force
unless I missed it at the bottom
of page three men chair, uh,
requested to consult with
relevant stakeholders.
Okay? Yeah. Usually wouldn't a
lot of time to York. When we do
this, we say, go ahead and
create a task force symptom and
everything else Anyways, they're
going to do it. They want to do
it. They're doing it so
Thank you, Uh, Senator or TCP.
now, Madam Chairman, I I know
we've had these rules in place
for a couple of years, but
I mean, I would like to hear
From a couple of people who
opposes. I mean it looks like
this is unanimous.
In the audience, and I don't
think that's the case. So I
wonder if we might hear maybe
three people who oppose it just
for a minute each just to give
us some of the other side.
Uh, Senator, if you're you are
making that request. I would
like to request that we hear
from three opponents for a
minute. Each. Sure, uh,
organized among yourselves
picked
Fixed three and you can all come
up for a minute each.
Senator. Thank you very much for
the opportunity. I appreciate
that, and my name is Jim
Winchester and Mexico. We are
predominantly smaller, family
owned multigenerational, state
based companies. We do stand in
respectful opposition. Um this
memorial has language that uses
conjecture. Presenting what we
would all agree are horrible
human afflictions.
But then links them solely Sir.
Please hold the mic closer to
your mouth. Focus online. Can
I'm sorry, okay?
Yeah, As I was saying the
memorial has language in there
that does present conclusions
before the study has even begun.
Um, what's not included in the
language in this study are
simple facts to ensure that this
will be a balance to study
statements of whereas billions
of dollars generated through
this industry that then goes
directly to improving human
health and the human condition
through all walks of life in New
Mexico. Thank you, including
funds for the very doctors and
healthcare one minute
That help us. Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government affairs
for the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association, has been in
conversation since August. 2023
with O. C, D and other
stakeholders regarding potential
modernizations to the oil and
Gas act we appreciate and
commend OCD for their efforts to
include a vast number of
stakeholders in ongoing and
important discussions.
We've remained fully committed
to those conversations now and
into the interim, With respect
to the sponsors we opposed and
Memorial eight as it is
currently written. We asked what
the sponsors please consider
broadening the scope of this
memorial to consider a more
comprehensive study that
identifies all of the potential
setback impacts, including
fiscal implications to the
state.
We respectfully request the
study be conducted in
conjunction with the Legislative
Finance Committee and a third
party researcher like you and
EMS Bieber. Thank you for your
consideration, and we look
forward to ongoing conversations
with the sponsors, Seed and the
stakeholders.
Madam Chair, Senator. Thank you
for the opportunity to come
Speak.
My name is Mike Miller. I
represent the Premium Basin
Petroleum Association.
I would like to state that oil
and gas activity. New Mexico has
been tremendous, especially over
the last decade. This is
provided incredible boost local
economies and to the state.
These local communities and the
state have benefited with
additional funding for
education, healthcare and
infrastructure. We have been
able to attract new business to
the state through subsidies
provided by the oil and gas
revenues.
The impacts of oil and gas
development on people's lives in
New Mexico should be studied so
both the benefits and any
drawbacks can be fully
understood. But this memorial
which in its language
automatically presumes that oil
and gas development is only a
negative is not the way to do
it. We stand in opposition.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, Senator Artistic Pino
used to have the floor.
Thank you, Madam. Chairman and
I mean, I wanted to hear why
anybody might be opposed to
having a
Workgroup.
Start on this.
And so I appreciate hearing
their views. I'm ready to vote
on this one ever. Okay, Senator
Pirtle.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Madam Pro Tim. Um, I
do have a question. Why?
immigrant understand em nerd
because we're talking about oil
and gas.
But if we're talking about the
adverse effects to people's
health, and I'm kind of curious
why we're not working with the
Department of Health or what's
going to be formally known as
human chair and Senator, This is
primarily to talk about setbacks
mean so, M nerd, the governor.
Through this year convey
conveyed this task force that's
no longer in existence. Um, and
they just they saw they had
gotten to a point where they
were okay with setbacks and then
through the legislative session
that was all stripped out of the
bill.
So people are upset about that.
Um, I want them to continue
talking about setbacks. Uh, you
know, the health studies are
numerous, didn't put in here to
study to look at the health.
Uh, aspect of this. What I put
in here is for us to look at
setbacks needed to address those
health impacts. We don't need to
do a study on that. We need to
do a New Mexico study. And of
course we want oil and gas to
continue. Um, they're great for
our economy. Um, there an
industry that's helped Newman.
But there are questions around
how close to schools and
daycares and everything else. I
have that question. I want
setbacks. And so the purpose of
this is to really focus on the
setbacks and to give it to em
Nerd because
You know that their oil and gas
conservation division has no
authority.
To do anything about setbacks.
Not so as a state. We don't have
any authority to do that. I want
us to look at that to see if the
industry and the advocates can
come together. That's hard.
That's a hard, uh
That's a hope.
More than a fact. But still,
it's important that the industry
be involved. And so it involves
the industry, but it's focused
primarily on setbacks.
And Madam Chairman, Senator, I
appreciate that. So we're just
we're assuming or we
Already have determined that
There's adverse health risks
from from living within a close
proximity is that might
understand that
Man chariots all over. It's all
over. I can give you one of the
latest ones that came out of
California. They have an issue.
They've been dealing with
setbacks, but
I don't think that it's a
question and I don't really want
us to delve deep into health. I
want us to figure out the
setback issue. Madam chairman,
Senator, I guess that's my
concern is that we're going to,
you know, go to a solution.
Without having the data in front
of me with
What are the adverse effects of
of living within close
proximity?
Um to these, and I think it's
important that many of these
wells were there first before
the school was even built.
Or before town moved into the
area, or, um, you know,
Spread out closer to the
refinery or whatever it is. And
so I do. I do see a little bit
of issue there on whose
encroaching on whom
So I think that's an important
important thing. Um, I do find
it interesting, though, on Page
two online nine
Um, you know, the paragraph
reads a little funny to me. Um,
there's a reasonable degree of
scientific certainty.
That living in close proximity.
It feels like one of those, um
possibly maybe could potentially
Definitely affect, you know, And
I just think it reads a little
funny to me. Um and so hopefully
with the amendments, we can
clean up some of that.
Um, that say what you want to
say or cut it out. And so I
think you'd make it a lot easier
for me if we did that for sure.
But you know, I do have just a
little bit of concern here. I
know a few years back. We were
able to pass the or amend the
right to Farm Act.
I think that was important
because farms don't encroach on
towns.
Towns encroach on farms. And so
I I think that maybe a similar
situation that we're having
here. Um and I think that's an
important and important note to
make
Um and I don't want to get into
the importance of oil and gas in
New Mexico. I think we all
understand that with with the
Tyne blasts
Um, but, you know, I would like
to know what are the effects,
But I don't know that the
solution is then setbacks.
Um, but that's what I'm more
interested in. And unfortunately
without the Department of
Health, I don't know that that
I'm going to have senator
neighbors.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Senator.
If you're going to work on this,
with some of the
People that opposed it. I
anticipate that much of what
they're going to want is to take
out
A number of the whereas clauses
that are possibly not even, uh,
well supported and so, you know.
You said in the beginning that
it's just a study and I think if
if we are just doing this study
taking out a lot of the, whereas
provisions would probably, uh,
get to the point of what you
want to make.
And
Probably not have the intensity
of the objections come forward,
but
Words are on the paper. So let's
go over those, Um
How would you characterize what
you mean by oil and gas
facilities? Adam Charon.
Madam president.
Um, Madam Chair.
In the broadest sense of the
term. It covers all of the
equipment everything when I read
the study out of California, um,
they talk about the wills fell,
tanks and other quip mint used
to produce store process and
transport petroleum products at
both unconventional and
conventional.
Oh G D sites are associated with
emissions of toxic air
contaminants. Not think anybody
disagrees with that I will work
with Ashley Wagner in
particular. Um, right before I
walked in. She showed me some of
her changes their significant. I
understand that I certainly
don't want to be attacking oil
and gas, so I'm gonna sit down
with her and look at them.
So, um, you know, I'm certainly
not an expert in this by any
stretch of the means, but I
believe the science around the
health and I believe we should
have setbacks. We can't do it
now with what we have, but we
certainly could do it going
forward. I believe it's a It's a
good discussion for the industry
to have
I think the industry wants to be
responsible. Um, I've talked to
the folks that Chevron at length
about the energy efficient ways
They're trying to manage their
products. So you know, I'm not a
anti industry person, but I do
think that we should look at the
harm done to kids in schools,
Daycares, et cetera, and that we
should require setbacks.
I know you guys have to go where
the oil is which Just don't want
you to go where The oil is right
next to where the kids are.
Yeah. Adam Chair and Madam
President, uh, with your
What you stated about oil and
gas facilities.
I'll just throw out one concern.
Most of us are many new Mexicans
have
A gas meter.
Within.
Probably 25 FT. 50 ft.
In my case about 35 ft from my
home.
Yeah, and those meters
On occasion.
Have the same issues that are
present on
Production facilities.
And so when we're talking about
oil and gas facilities
And define it in that nature.
Uh,
We need to be careful because it
could impact every new Mexican
who uses natural gas.
And possibly propane to heat
their homes. So, uh, we need to
be careful there, uh, with
respect to some of the other
concerns, Uh,
You know, it says that these
facilities present a risk of
harm to surrounding environment.
I thought that the purpose of
the methane rule Madam Chair,
Madam president that
Ah!
Is now in force and effect in
Mexico with respective
production facilities.
That effort was to basically
eliminate or at least
substantially reduced. I think,
uh, 98% of the methane.
From entering the atmosphere,
And and so I think we have rules
in place. So C d instituted that
rule.
To prevent the escape of methane
into the environment to address
these very risk, or
Alleged rose
And so
My
I guess my thought is that
Haven't we already addressed the
risk aspects through rulemaking
in the your conservation
division? Madam Chair, Senator,
we certainly have and and I'm
proud of what we've done. Um,
I'm proud of the industry for
accepting them. We're not there
yet.
And I think setbacks are
important, along with those kind
of engineering controls that we
put in place panel in California
found that neither setback to
Northeast engineering controls
alone are sufficient to reduce
the harm and risk from those
activities. So I believe you
need both.
We're certainly not all
Uh, at 98% yet with our methods,
but we're getting there. Um, I
think setbacks is is a missing
piece.
Um, Adam Sharon, Madam
President. I think that
The
Certainly the larger companies
have made
Huge efforts and have expended
millions and millions of dollars
to make sure that their
facilities
Are not leaking methane, and
they monitor that.
Uh, when I continual basis to
make sure that the methane is
captured, and it is not being
uh, vented or leaking in into
the atmosphere, So if the if the
Purpose of this study is to
evaluate risk.
And they already have a rule
that address those risk. I'm I
guess I'm not understanding why
any further setbacks are
necessary.
So, Madam Chair. The rule
doesn't address setbacks.
Know the rules addressed.
The mission of methane into the
atmosphere. Right Stop. You
stayed in this in this, uh
Um, Memorial
Poses the risk to Children poses
a risk to, so if that has been
eliminated, there is no risk.
So, madam. Sure. That's not the
only contaminant that's released
from oil and gas. I mean, I
think we're on our way towards
solving it at and I appreciate
that The industry has stepped
up. I just think this is a
missing piece.
So we can agree to disagree.
Madam chair. Um, just a reminder
that we have a hard stop. Okay,
we may We may.
I guess I'll shut up when we get
there, then Madam Chair, Madam
President, um
Are you aware that some counties
already
Madam chair. I think what we're
looking at is a statewide rule,
not just county rule. That's
good to know what counties have
that.
Eddy County has had in effect
for as long as I've been
practicing law, a county
ordinance that prohibits
Drilling operations within 300
ft of an occupied dwelling.
Yeah. And
That that has been in place for
Probably over 50 years. I don't
know when it was instituted, but
my entire professional career
has been in place and so in in
Eddy County, you cannot locate
In oil and gas well within 50
within 300 ft.
Now. That doesn't mean that
there aren't homes within 300 ft
of well because, as pointed out
earlier
People have moved toward, uh
Wells and have built homes and
things closer now, but those
wells would not be permitted.
Under there.
You know, in the current 100 ft,
And so, uh, you know, we do have
some
Some setback requirements in the
state companies as a policy
don't want to drill next to
somebody's house or next to a
school or next to a hospital.
The risk is you point out is is
too great.
Particularly during the drilling
operations.
Hmm. So, So I think that the
companies deal with that stuff.
Um
It. Also talks about wasting
pits and madam Chair and madam
president. The
Hit rules that would past gosh.
A dozen or so years ago that
Is largely eliminated Pits and
New Mexico. So what waste
occurring pits today to my
expert?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator. Thank
you for the question. Uh, in the
memorial. Those identified the
common pathways of contamination
for spilled liquids, which pits
is one of them in New Mexico.
Um, it is true that we have the,
um, pit rule. Uh, that is very
helpful. But it is also true
that we still have spills in New
Mexico.
Um from oil and gas operations.
Last I looked, which I believe
was last week there were over
300 spills, for example, that
had an impact on surface water,
So we still do have spills. Um,
the systems we have in place are
intended to prevent that, but
systems break
Um Madam Chair and expert. Would
you agree? There's no waste in
pits today.
Um, I can't answer.
Uh, that categorically I don't
know, I think
I think if we have eliminated
pits, we've eliminated wasting
deaths. So
Uh, you know, point that out, Um
Madam Sharon and Madam
president.
If we're going to engage in the
study, it seems to me that on
Page three line 23.
That we
Not only study the risk, but we
also study the feasibility and
the impact of any setback.
In other words, is that
Is it feasible to still
Access and develop the
production based upon a
particular setback.
If it's Colorado.
There's going to be many areas
in New Mexico where you cannot
drill. Uh
If you impose that same setback.
If if you have a lesser setback.
Then maybe it's feasible. So it
seems to me that we need to not
only study the risk
But we need to also study.
The impact that that setback
would have on the ability of
people to access their minerals
and also the impact. Um, and the
feasibility of actually
conforming to that setback.
So I wouldn't make that that
suggestion.
Senator, I do have one other
person on the list.
Okay. Can I can I finish up
Madam Chair with one statement,
Madam Chair Madam president in
Colorado. They imposed pretty
significant setback and what's
happened? What happens in
Colorado is a true waste.
There are companies who have
purchased houses.
To tear down the house.
To drill a well
And then rebuild the house where
it was
Was formerly built, Uh, in order
to get around that setback
requirement. That's a true waste
of resources. And I don't think
that that's why was
Yes, Yes, it costs the company
money, of course, but it also
waste resources because somebody
has to
Manufacture the things that go
into a new house. You take the
rest of it to the landfill. So
anyway, I hope you'll work with
them. Oh, go on this time. Thank
you, Senator. Senators, Phonics.
Ocean.
Senator Morris. Sure, I would
like to actually vote for this
If you agreed to continue to
work, I think you have in
wholeheartedly agree to work
with the industry and I would
like to see as I said earlier
from a language changed and then
actually set up a real task
force, and you seem to be
willing to continue to do that,
So I can vote for this. Madam
Chair. I task force it. You
don't I support him, nor if no
Mocha wants that. They're not
two task forces don't either
man, a brother. But
Could you make sure that they're
included as a stakeholder? Both
in the Moga and the little guy
earlier, independent guys, would
you were asking that all
relevant stakeholders But if you
want that spelled out a little
bit very
Ernest in in that of working
with them, So I appreciate that.
Thank you. Had they come a
little bit earlier than last
night? Uh, but then when I saw
them this morning, I thought Oh,
no, because they've got red
everywhere. So what we'll
compromise will come from this
goes to the floor or where to go
Goes to conservation. Okay.
Perfect. Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
Alright. We're on a motion for a
do pass. Uh, let's do a rock or
vote.
Senator Baca.
Senator but vodka boats no,
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Lopez votes. Yes, Senator
McKenna.
Senator mess.
Yes, Senator Moore's Senator
Morris votes Yes, Senator
Nibert. Senator Nibert was no
senator or TCP. No. Yes, Senator
or GOP. No votes. Yes, Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle votes No Senator
Stefan IX. Senator Stepanek's
votes. Yes, Senator Stewart?
Yes, Senator Stewart votes Yes,
Senator. Harmony. Oh, Senator
Hermia votes? Yes, Senator. Do
Hig. Yes. Couhig grows. Yes. You
have a do pass with that Senate
rules is in recess.
