And so with that Mr president
I don't see Senator Schmedes.
Senator is we announcements and
miscellaneous in senators
wishing to make an announcement.
We're in that order of Business
message on the house the reader
to read this president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that house as passed house bill
received Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr president
all takes that or a business
third reading of legislation and
I will yield to senator
missing and unidentified persons
data you'll to centers
committee.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
of the record show that all
action for placing semi Morial
that memorial.
Senator Mario forty eight the
memorial declaring February
twenty first twenty twenty three
missing and unidentified persons
public safety is required by the
mark Daniel I give our
information sharing requirement
of the missing persons
information and reporting act to
share the following information
information in the missing
persons information
clearinghouse and to be all
information the department of
public safety received pursuant
to the missing persons
remains and whereas the market
Daniel I go are information
sharing requirements became
effective on June fourteenth
twenty nineteen and whereas in
have been successfully shared
and imported into the national
missing and unidentified persons
system as of February sixth
twenty twenty three and whereas
the national missing and
States that provides resources
to law enforcement medical
examiners coroners allied
forensic professionals and
family members of missing
persons and whereas the national
three hundred sixty on
identified per.
Persons entered into the
national database and whereas
the national crime information
center as of December thirty
missing persons cases affect
people of every age race
religion socioeconomic status
gender and social and cultural
unknown whereabouts or fate of a
loved one now therefore be it
resolved by the center of the
state of New Mexico that
February twenty first twenty
twenty three be declared missing
persons and to the many families
of missing persons that indoor
ambiguous loss and be it further
resolved that New Mexicans
transmitted to the secretary of
public safety for for further
inappropriate distribution
signed and sealed at the capitol
of the in the City of Santa Fe
Senate committee.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body.
this day.
It's important that we share our
stories.
It's important that we share
stories about these people about
these loved ones.
This is a story market Daniel
Aguilar who was reported
missing.
From Santa Fe about seven years
And Mister president Martina
last spoke to his mother and his
family on September fourth.
Two thousand sixteen.
Mr president.
This family.
Was instrumental in the passage.
And what this does is it
ensures that every Wednesday a
new file.
With new cases that are
unresolved.
And thirty days or older are
reviewed.
Mark Daniels life and his family
and that they are remembered.
I'd also like to thank the New
Mexico department of public
safety.
to help a these families.
And with that I would yield
Mister president thanks
committee Senator Campos thank
him for including the within
this particular memorial and of
course our First Lady is here
with us and it stresses the
the which is really turning out
to be the greatest pain are we
don't know over these loved ones
are.
a lot of things go through our
we don't expect them to vanish.
In a lot of lot of cases in an
instant.
We want to pick up the telephone
and we want to talk to them.
Again that there is always hope
within our hearts that Sunday
these victims I will be found
What is it going to take for
each and everyone of us then to
heal because so many of us have
been touched by this.
And within the story that I
tell.
about eight months later after
he had disappeared.
And so within that going through
life and here again it's forty
As we all go forward it truly
continues to be painful within
our hearts do we ever let it go
not in our lifetime.
And within that hopefully if
there is something that has been
done to a person.
That within that hopefully the
person will still be alive.
And the pain never goes away and
so with that Mr president a
couple of things that first of
all again want to thank senators
committee I want to thank people
families that have been affected
by it but also to continue if
you will the surge to ensure
that as we go forward that we
life and so that again Mr
president is part of my story
again I'm very grateful to be
part of this particular day
thank you.
in support of senator forty
eight and I too would like to
thank senators committees and
Senator Campos for bringing this
forward.
And on February second of that
year of two thousand and nine
there is a discovery made on the
southwest mesa.
and Senator Padilla and I've
course represent the area the
district.
That was the first Mr president
of our police the authorities
within the community about what
they were take from families who
would report their loved ones
who were missing.
Of there is.
to the authorities and report
their loved one was missing but
a lot of excuses were made us
too well maybe they just left
they don't want to be found and
family members.
Once the identification
continued Mr president it took
about a year for identification
to finally be made on on the
women's bodies who were found
part of what our system and the
media of how they
With an ugly light on those
persons who are missing it must
have been their fault it must
There are persons who may have
been at the wrong place at the
wrong time in we've heard many
many stories Mr president over
the years.
And I've been honored to is to
stories of families who have
been missing loved ones women
and men young and old
who have disappeared from the
community.
And I want to say I appreciate
as no Senator Pinto Senator
McKenna and others who signed
onto the bill of Senate bill
twelve.
That actually was in the
justice for the family of a
loved one who's been missing for
a while.
Mr president this is still
something that we have to work
on that we have to stay focused
give but again I appreciate both
of my colleagues for bringing
this forward for the families of
those who are still have a loved
one missing we haven't forgotten
Michael Padilla thank you very
much Mr president I also rise
and support I have to say that
thank you senator communities
and Senator Campos and the
bipartisan nature and fashion
until it lands on top of your
into your your community or your
head or your family and you
heard it very eloquently said by
Senator Lopez in the issue that
we are facing and we continue to
agency on Albuquerque right
almost right at the border of
center Lopez and my district and
we have worked very hard with
our city councillor Clarissa
Pena in Albuquerque and many
as a matter fact even gotten to
know some of the now
grandchildren and we've gotten
to know some of their pets and
all sorts of different things
from these folks I want to tell
you one particular story Mr
lady at the some of the initial
offenses were planning a very
nice memorial and I want to
thank members of this body who
have helped us to fund that
memorial you should come by and
see it sometime it is really
Out in that area and so so from
tragedy is covered because is
coming triumph and you know
hopefully she will join us in
this because over the years to
continue to fight this issue and
so I just wanted to highlight
center Lopez and I will continue
to beat this drum in our area
and I know many others will
thank you senator CD's and
Senator Campos.
Thank you center by the.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
for all of their advocacy I just
want to highlight that yes we we
talk with sadness for the
families and and of course
Well native Americans make up
only up that make up about
eleven percent of our state's
population.
The account for nearly a quarter
An incredible problem in in our
state and it's something that I
don't think that we have
adequate laws to deal with in
fact I was in a committee where
sympathies to those whose family
members were murdered.
But we also need to remember the
other victims and those who
that's those whose family
great problem very seriously and
target resources to to address
it thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Any further discussion.
and I I do thank you thank my
colleagues for all with what
they have done so much so much
more than than I have done on
this issue.
And I would also like to thank
of other activities and
awareness activities that are
actually going on in the
roundhouse even now and and
later this afternoon.
that Mr president move that sent
Morial forty eight do now pass
and I'd like to ask unanimous
consent of the Senate at all
forty two members and lieutenant
governor be shown as voting in
the affirmative.
Has passed the Senate.
Senator Schmedes.
The members of our things
written.
Senate committee I believe you
introduce my guest to the body a
state senator there's a body I
would like to introduce my guest
today
this is Maria Mr Irvine Mariano
Senator Lopez.
And I know that my colleague
senator McKenna also has some
guests to in.
Excuse me to introduce.
us sorry I apologize I'm Mr
president like to introduce to
the Senate crystalline curly
who's that has been elected by
her colleagues to service the
speaker of the twenty fifth
Mr president I also have there
lashandra so.
cardio to pass she her maternal
grandfather result people in her
paternal grandfather is Chico
Apache she serves formerly
served as executive director of
And Mister president we also I
would like to recognize Delilah
to Noriko.
We also have sherry cat neck
director of communications from
the New Mexico Indian Affairs
Department from Polk Waukee
Pueblo.
You make it with us today the
welcome.
On the side I apologize thank
you we also would like to
And Mister president Nicholas
healthy who is special agent
also from the New Mexico office
thank you Mr president I too
would have would like to
introduce to guess joining us
today our first is Mr jasmine
Blackwater Nygren.
maternal grandfather is of the
youth running alright maybe you
to read it running water clan
and her paternal grandfather is
of the within his cover clan she
earned her undergraduate degree
from Stanford University and
graduated with a juris doctor
degree from the Sandra day
o'connor college of law at
In twenty twenty one ms
flatwater Nygren the youngest
member of the house of
representatives at the Arizona
state legislature she became the
Senator McKenna and thank you Mr
president miss melody del Mar is
constituent services she holds a
B. S. in psychology she has
fourteen years of experience
working with children families
and organizations in various
involved with M. M. I. W. R. as
a domestic violence shelter
advocate.
And that has motivated her to
Thank you senator thank you Mr
president.
Senator Mike over there to take
us to the next order of business
thank you very much Mr president
on now you'll to Senator Shendo
percent of our moral forty one.
On final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate.
Of a member substitution say no
objection the reader trade.
Senate memorial forty one a
county was founded on March
tenth nineteen oh three nine
years before New Mexico state
hood and was created from the
northern part of Bernalillo
county and whereas Sandoval
three thousand seven hundred
square miles and boasts a
diverse economic base consisting
of high technology industries
Go to do M. as Q. R. N. Z. R. as
well as the he could he Apache
nation and the Navajo Nation and
we're just Sandoval County has
six in Bernalillo now therefore
be it resolved by the center of
the state of New Mexico that
February twenty first twenty
twenty three be declared
Sandoval County board of county
commissioners and the president
and chief executive officer of
the Rio Rancho regional chamber
of commerce signed and sealed at
Mexico state Senate.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president
You know it's it's you know I I
there of highway five fifty in
Rio Grande meat and then it goes
to the west to intended hills
area Rio Rancho and and
everything north west of there
so the only areas that I don't
is a my Senate district twenty
two and I know that I share that
with the Senator Brandt whose
also of a senator from Santa Fe
County.
in here from Santa Fe County
Senator Shendo of we I do
believe we may have others who
would like to check on this and
then we can come back in and
appreciate that thank you thank
you senator Senator as we're
representatives here joining us
on the floor it's been a
pleasure to represent my
constituents there and it's a
county that I call home thank
Yes Senator Shendo represents
about eighty percent of the
county's land mass I represent
about eighty percent of the
people.
He has mostly you know the.
but the we have worked very well
together assertion no I to make
sure the needs of the county or
Matt and I really appreciate you
know the.
the work that's being done in
Santa Fe County I think we're
moving forward we got a lot of
business coming in especially in
Rio Rancho we've been.
in so that we can connect
directly to I. forty which will
really help our community
greatly to growing and have more
economic prosperity so I
Semen Senator Shendo to close in
the morning.
Okay was present I move this
Center memorial forty one do now
pass and just in in the sense of
the Senate that forty two
forty three in the Fuhrman is in
the negative Center more forty
one Sandoval County hundred
twentieth anniversary date has
passed the Senate Senator Shendo
Senator county commissioner
Joshua Jones.
Of Santa Fe County commissioner
might meet.
Rural town administrator of the
Federal.
Bernalillo county economic
development director Mike those
couple.
In the real Rancho regional
chamber of commerce president Mr
Jerry shallow.
Please help me welcome my guests
from Santa Fe County.
Thank you senator Shendo senator
Michael Padilla to take us to
business announces miscellaneous
senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and
members I wanted to follow up on
figured out kind of what
happened and what we need to do
to address the situation first
of all the chief clerk is sent
years in the state Senate but we
haven't done one of these yes.
And what happened just for the
members when the unanimous
consent was made the bill that
was.
what's sitting in Senate tax
right now.
Is an emergency bill and senator
Bach as name up up at the table
the chief clerk has a committee
Senate tax committee and the
Senate finance committee and I
did visit with Senator Pinto and
I see her screen is on.
Out heard her committee
motions the first is to refer I
fourteen back to the Indian
Affairs Committee that way the
committee report can get ready
properly shown as the sponsor on
that bill.
So I'm happy to make those
motions unless anyone has
questions or wants to discuss it
trying to figure out within the
rules how committee secretary
can take action for committee
that the committee has not met
so I don't believe there's
anywhere in the rules to do a
I I think the the lay out that
the Majority Leader has put out
violates the rules.
Mr chairman of course and
Senate it's no difference and it
was explained to him last week
by my chief of staff Lorraine
Montoya the hill so again these
that was made we have a
emergency bill sitting in Senate
tax that is with senator Senator
Baca as the sponsor I don't
think that's what Senator Kernan
There has been a request for
unanimous consent to remove
Senate bill five fourteen.
Any objection.
Senator Wirth and thank you Mr
president make a second
unanimous consent that the
sponsor on Senate bill five
Seeing no objection Senate bill
five fourteen will be now under
Senator gay Kernan as a sponsor.
We're in that order of business
committee reports to retrieve
their point Mr president your
health and public affairs
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two oh
substitute for Senate bill two
oh seven do pass invents
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
that we vote on them with the
single motion but that the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
pass and then it's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee point have been
adopted and the journal reflect
their acted upon individually
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
of seven do pass respectfully
there more than one committee
report.
Just one motion to adopt the
committee report centers is been
a motion to adopt would reports
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
whom has been referred Senate
bill five fourteen has had it
under consideration and reports
with same recommendation that it
do not passed but that Senate
Indian rural and cultural
not be referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee thence to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Shannon D. Pinto co
As opposed may the eyes have it
the committee report has been
adopted.
Senator my competitor take us to
the next order of business thank
The reader to read.
representative J. Paul Taylor
the conscience of the
legislature Senate Joint
Memorial twelfth.
Senate memorial fifty five
introduced by senators Ortiz Y.
in the Senate Senate memorial
fifty five.
Senator more fifty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
introduced by senator serve on
this a memorial declaring
February twenty eight twenty
twenty three New Mexico arctic
arctic architects date in the
to committee to be placed on the
president's table central for a
fifty six.
five and act relating to
railroad safety required at
least two persons for the
operation of the railroad train
or locomotive that is used in
House committees committee
substitute for house bill one
all I have been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
tax business transportation
House bill one sixteen
introduced by Rep it is
Representative Sarinana and act
relating to Merrill Military
Affairs authorizing the adage in
House bill one sixteen having
been read twice by title is.
Is referred to health and public
affairs committee that's Senate
Nibert Spence Ezzell and
Pettigrew and act relating to
education amending the program
administration and criteria of
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed.
Excuse me is referred to Senate
Education Committee then Senate
health of public affairs
committee that's house bill one
forty five.
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty and act relating
to state properties amending
sections sixty seven dash three
dash twelve NMSA nineteen
installation of broadband
internet infrastructure place
the longer across over or under
public highways or other
internet services to unserved or
underserved locations as defined
in the connect New Mexico act.
House rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty having been read
twice by title is referred to
House bill one eighty one
introduced by Representative
Sarinana and others and act
relating to school personnel
one house bill one eighty one
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
Education Committee then Senate
finance committee house bill one
eighty one.
Seeing no objection.
The reader to read the committee
for.
Mr president your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill three
ninety two has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that a do
Stefanics Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
Senate bill three forty nine to
pass and thence referred to the
finance committee.
thirty seven do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman Senator fenics Mr
president I move adoption the
committee reports centers we
Center for them.
Thank you very much Mr president
I think that's probably all the
business on the table there so
Thank you Mr president your
Senate tax business and
transportation committee will
meet at two fifteen.
Senator K. three twenty one
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
we have built by a Lopez souls
my **** share Burt Shendo and
another Maestas so please be on
etcetera but there thank you
very much Mr president the
Senate finance committee will go
into committee at thirty minutes
after the floor session
concludes.
that will be it for the day by
units consent that the Senate
stand in recess until eleven AM
tomorrow morning seeing no
objection to senator Senate
