Senator Gonzales resident.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator by the.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you and ask all
the members and those in the
gallery please rise for the
invocation to be given today
standing for the pledge to be
led today by Senator.
Pledge of allegiance related
today in Spanish by Senator by
the and the solution Mexico flag
by Senator Steinborn.
Reveal yourself to them that
they make your your voice
clearly and distinctly.
Speak to them the truth
integrity justice and fairness.
and to make the world in New
Mexico a better place.
Image one of them's brand reach
out to those across the island
so they can work together the
by the people across the
district.
Let their eyes be open to what
you're doing to your church in
the press with across the.
Let them hear your voice speak
to them a Bonner sacrificing to
do this is our prayer in
Christ's name amen.
county find who's the CEO part
of those.
announcements and miscellaneous
run that order business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you to president
leroy Chacon for the invocation
in his chair you were also
working to navigate it and kind
of cut come out the other end
and really do what's in the best
interest of New Mexicans so
thank you for for being here Mr
with me and following some bills
this session she's a junior at
Santa Fe high school the
president of her class also
writes for the Santa Fe New
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I yield Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president majority floor leader
Wirth unanimous consent to allow
consent to excuse us Senators
o'neill and senators are TCP no
until they return to the chamber
hearing no objection so ordered.
Any further announcements
Senators.
confirmations that we'll do
after we get the business off
the president's table center
Hermio is giving me the not so
he and there they reports are
going to do some house bill's
starting with item number nine.
that senators to fan excels bill
ninety five item number ten
help me find a sponsor on that
number thirteen and then we'll
take a break and committees will
meet and we'll figure out how
the day goes so with that Mr
president unanimous consent we
has passed Senate bill thirty
seven Senate bill one Senate
bill seventeen with emergency
clause Senate floor substitute
for Senate bill thirty nine and
the house has been received the
reader to read Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed the
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
house has been received.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee reports or on that
order of business is a reader to
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
George my nose chair sentiment
yes Mr present us that man's
objection to reiterate.
Senate bill one eighty six do
passed as amended.
House Bill thirty nine do pass
house bill sixty two as amended
house bill one sixty seven do
pass respectfully submitted
George ammonia owes chair center
many us misprision of adoption
the committee report centers we
committee to whom is been
referred house bill forty two as
amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
C. committee for its be read
into the journal and that we
acted up to read all the
committee reports that we act on
them with one motion and that
the general effect they were
sixty four as amended to pass
house joint memorial one do pass
respectfully submitted
port have been adopted in the
journal so they're acted upon
individually.
Mr president your Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
to home is been referred house
commerce and economic
respectfully submitted Shannon
Pinto chair Senators o'neill
move adoption of the committee
report we have a motion to that
the committee for an injection.
minority floor leader dated
October twenty one twenty twenty
one in which the Senate minority
floor leader makes the following
appointment Janice Baca Argo
you'll committee recommends that
the Senate confirmed
disappointment respectfully
submitted Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chair Senator Ivey Soto thank
you very much Mr president
individual hearing objects in
the reader to read.
Letter from Senate president pro
tempore a dated January
fourteenth twenty twenty two and
what's the Senate Senate
pro tempore a your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
Legislative Council letter dated
January eighteen twenty twenty
two in which the Legislative
confirmation that expiring June
eighteen twenty twenty five your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm disappointment
Legislative Council letter dated
for a term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring June
eighteen twenty twenty two your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm disappointment
member of the New Mexico
bioscience Authority for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring June eighteen twenty
twenty three the committee
recommends that the Senate
centers we have a motion to
adopt the committee report.
Seeing no objection the
committee for has been adopted a
journal show they're acted upon
then for for to the tax business
and transportation committee
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chair Senator Ivey
Soto move adoption committee
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that do pass respectfully
submitted Daniel A. Ivey Soto
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president Ms consent we going
out of business announcements
and miscellaneous for in that
order business Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so we're
going to do the confirmations
and we'll go to concurrence
after we get done with
confirmations so with that Mr
president Ms consent we go about
our business confirmations and I
yield the center Hermio or on
the colonias infrastructure
board I now yield Senator Baca
to present this country Senator
Baca thank you Mr president
pursuant to section six dash
move and and in light of a
favorable committee report I
move that Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Janice Baca our group right as a
from New Mexico State University
and her master's degree in
educational administration from
the university of New Mexico
after retiring from Secor
consolidated schools she went on
board and she currently serves
as a governor appointed region
for western New Mexico
university as a regent she has
served on the governments in
appropriations committee the
and prioritize applications for
what financial assistance for
our state's colonias given is
Baca is Pat are the breaks past
experience with capital project
infrastructure as well as the
state.
In addition to that I think I
think of what makes her just of
the perfect cat a candidate for
this is for small business
might know is is a slight bit
north of of most of the colonias
and gives her unique perspective
and I think what's going to add
Gregory anyone wishing to
debate.
I see no debate Senator Baca
close.
record show that the rules been
called in that all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands this is where
Senator wrote Burke votes yes.
member of the colonias
infrastructure board for term
commencing October twenty first
twenty twenty one to be served
at the pleasure of the Senate
minority floor leader has been
present this country.
Senator.
Mr president pursuant to section
six dash three zero dash FOR
NMSA nineteen seventy eight a
appointment of Mary Kay Papen
and as a member of the colonias
infrastructure board.
See no objections Senator
Stewart to explain.
tem of retired business woman
was represented Senate district
thirty eight from two thousand
and one through two thousand and
twenty she credits her parents
violence issues her passion was
driven by her work as a
volunteer on the board of the
Lacasse a domestic violence
shelter in Los crucis and her
Frank Paypen who represented the
same Senate district from
nineteen sixty nine to nineteen
eighty four before they were
married in nineteen ninety
Mary Kay Papen and champion
proposals to improve mental
health benefits reform regional
housing authorities address
border issues support business
funding stream for the colonials
capital outlay needs.
A community volunteer for more
than fifty years Mary Kay
continues to give back through
community she's also a
grandmother and a great
grandmother my favorite story
about Mary Kay is that she's a
former race car driver it really
We are debating the confirmation
American Paypen Senator mantas.
Thank you Mr leader for the seat
baptize me but I did Mary Kay's
husband former senator Frank
paper who's here for a long time
and so I referred to that way I
want to share with you that
Mary Kay had a very special
birthday I'm not gonna say which
one it was but was one of the
what lot of people don't know
was Mary Kay as a stock car
racer motorcycle racer you know
there's there's a group that
call themselves so there's a
nickname of for the group of
to him so that's the other side
of Mary Kay but the good the
good thing about this nomination
of course is very K. responsible
for the colonias infrastructure
terrific to see mery K.
commitment to the clone is inter
district but it's still
something they're they're hard
and she's still working also
closely so congratulations again
Thank you Mr president thank you
members I don't need Senator
Stewart to yield I just also
wanted to stand up and think
Senator Paypen for her
extraordinary public service
of public service and working
for our community working for
our state and what more
important issue than the
colonias I know you care so
deeply about that and it's it to
then be to be in a place to make
sure those dollars go exactly
where they're needed to go with
something we all should be
thankful for so it's fantastic
to see you again Mary Kay and
It's really a a good a good day
when I see Mary Kay Papen.
There's not a better person the
term in the Senate.
and she was truly successful and
still there's none better no
brag just fact.
Thank you Senator Ingle Senator
Steinborn.
legend Mary Kay is to the people
live in the colonias and how
much they count on you and
depend on you and you were there
champion I mean it's really hard
to we know what a champion means
it is to to still have you
there.
Helping these communities out
and and so happy that you're
choosing to continue to do that
so thank you Meredith thank you
Mr president thank you Senator
Steinborn Senator Lopez.
to Senator Paypen and she was
always so helpful to me in
trying to explain what was going
on I was appointed the day
before the session started so if
did and she ordered flowers
because she's just so gracious
and so kind and I just have to
say her
her wisdom at on this board is
this is just a terrific day and
I'm so honored to be able to
stand in support of this
appointment and I I think the
governor and everyone who made
this happen thank you.
want to say a few comments.
Of.
Mr president and members some.
You know with some.
school of the ski valley and at
the time you know all my
family's of the transportation
business and I used to drive
them around.
out in on the very health Alec
when things about her being a
racer it it just wasn't a razor
it was so she was a Porsche
to do this and also very you
know.
Of with the that enthusiasm off
of that loan for for racing you
know so it was a very enjoyable
And her and the Deborah
Siegelman there's no way that I
kept up with them so.
I followed him for a while and I
said no I better just quality
dedication many years of service
and all when I went to her
office I always used to admire
that beautiful map that she has
in my office and there isn't a
single person that doesn't this
at my office that doesn't make a
big compliment about that map
it's a really beautiful
anything else a very special
person to the state of New
Mexico thank you.
Thanks Seneal is just for
informational purposes for the
body we have Senator Tomlinson
thank you thank you Mr president
no need to yield I sat behind
the Senator for a couple years
and.
Got to know a little bit and
person I had the pleasure of
meeting in the Senate Rouge is
a real asset.
Of to the Senate.
And as a.
So and also those impressed with
her
Her experience in the history is
the Senate and Services we're
sure the very best in the future
thank you Mr president thank you
senator Clemente sending us
thank you Mr president and when
you walk in this building and
trust and and Sir Paypen build
that with me and accepted me and
my family and trust is one of
the things that we really have
to have up here in center paper
thank you Mr president thanks
sentiment yes Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and now
certainly support this
appointment and was in rules
like that about you and and try
to emulate it everyday I think
how can I be more like you and I
appreciate so much all that
you've done and I think we're
we're sort of related through
that in common and I just want
to thank you again for agreeing
to take on this responsibility
and I think colonias are all
over the state and I think even
honor to rise and thank you the
gentle lady from Dona Ana County
for all your years of service
and friendship and mentoring as
years we served together grew to
respect and love her she was
always fair and honest and tough
I everyone keeps talking about
trips overseas but I think
Senator Woods our families and
Mary Kay I think of the three of
us are still left from that one
trip we're got to go to Turkey
with Senator Woods in Mary Kay
and advance traveling all over
the current our country's flying
back and forth and learning
about the legislative process
the history of Southern New
appreciate all you've done for
New Mexico for me and my family
and I just continue to was god's
blessing on you and your family
need Senator Stewart to yield
of.
My strong stand in strong
support of disappointment and I
Senator Paypen the HSA thank you
for the outreach to my family
do for you please don't hesitate
to ask thank you.
Thanks senator Senator Pirtle
thank you Mr president I rise in
full support of this conferee
never regretted and she was
always so fair would keep plenty
of fruit or chocolates for us as
would get teddy bears or
different things she would
always make sure that the I went
home with enough so that my kids
didn't have to fight over them
and so I always appreciated that
Mexico and I'm just excited to
know that after twenty years of
serving in this body you have
and to stop serving the state of
New Mexico and I know you'll do
a fantastic job thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Mr president I to rise
in support of this this nominee
and your Senator Paypen and I we
was able to take advantage of
that back when when she was
going to school and and is thank
goodness it was there because
Aaron that that lottery
Senator stab wish that that was
great for for us in our family
the Senators been engage deeply
with with colonias and I know
senator know that I did have a
conversation the other day was
certain secretary and the lights
are still coming show.
Congradulations mery K..
Of the conferee I will never
forget after she was elected to
protium that myself and a few
other senators came down to the
And so we we practice to the.
Going through all the procedures
and the rules and I I think
that's probably one of the
reasons I learned all the rules
was because.
Of
On me as senator you were your
class.
Act and I miss you appear
greatly and I appreciate the
Thank you Senator Brandt Senator
Campos.
Thank you very much Mr president
and
To our pro temporary merry Kay
Senate and I really remember.
When you were selected as our
pro temporary I along with
center Lovell had the
your oath a few things number
one
This really stands out your
generosity.
Number two you're a states
person a person who really
my mother sends her best wishes
to you as you all know
my mother in Senator Paypen are
for her how she's doing so that
the.
Senator Paypen.
With all my heart to not only
love you but I respect you and I
that stay with me and they'll be
with me forever thank you.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
your service to New Mexico we
continue to to be amazed at your
energy and your ability to move
yourself to every single place
you need to be I can remember
just being shocked at one point
just want to remind everybody
the Senator Paypen and I share
of from our childhood some very
similar experiences growing up
in she was always very kind to
me and always is not was is very
with the one thing that often
surprised me in a very positive
way Mr president was and Senator
Paypen was the legislation that
you carried it truly was
obvious it was a great example
all of us so I think that the
creation of the colonias board I
can't think of a better person
to take that on and just really
look out for the people in New
Mexico that really need us the
Thank you Mr president and and I
would like to join the chorus
of.
Of support for this nomination.
with you and your daughter so
okay and and my wife always asks
about you if I go back to at the
end of the session state that we
saw you she will want to know
for your contributions through
legislation nobody has as has
created the foundation for a
strong behavioral health system
the way you have and so we will
for continuing to be what you've
always been a true servant to
the people of New Mexico thank
you Mr president thank you
senator participate I will have
Senator Woods followed by
Senator Lopez and Senator Vale
To the the first vote I took in
the Senate was.
For a program.
Mary Kay Papen.
And us are later the next day or
two at a function.
If you were so true and so
honest.
All the time and and everything
that you did.
years and it was just the honor
to serve with you.
And you you are my hero.
Thank you very much Mr president
And again Senator Paypen did for
all of that has been shared by
our colleagues here on the floor
but.
guidance sometimes are very
interesting and productive
conversations that we had over
the years I truly appreciate and
of course the kids love you.
I know near your heart with the
work that you've done always
talking to us here in educating
many of us about their students
and many of the other
communities there in your former
to learn like Senator learn to
drive like Senator Paypen so we
get where we need to go.
That was just one comment that
he had made me when he was
younger
but it's it's a good to see you
congratulations thank you
Senator Lopez Centerville thank
you Mr president I just want to
say that I greatly support this
nomination my favorite memory I
think of Mary Kay was on a trip
the ground and just laughing up
a storm she's a great lady and a
lot of fun and I always
appreciate all those little
trips when we left whatever
a lobbyist have sent me text
messages they appreciate you too
and I want to me to pass out on
the lobbyist support us really
support you and amber appreciate
Echo all the things have been
said about Senator Paypen I I
remember as a freshman coming in
here
across the aisle
a true leader here she was of
both the R. and D. and everybody
in between and I I think she's
going to be a fantastic addition
also want to recognize a Senator
Stewart for her thoughtful
appointment of of Mary Kay Papen
I think that was a.
A really otherwise in great
Thank you Mr president I to
horizon a strong supporter of
Nomination of a former pro
timber Kay Papen into the.
colonias board many of you
The trouble for structure phones
creating two thousand four.
Of course they would at that
time have a general
appropriation you know one year
little bit here.
that the infrastructure needs in
tribal reservations weren't any
different than the colonias.
So you have an ally of of folks
separated by in on several
capacity you know Fortive and
five percent for the colonias
was passed and it was a really
good the time I was no longer
cabinet secretary but it was a
Mary Kay Papen and in Taiwan you
know I I come from the New
Mexico where we have a hot air
balloon capital of the world but
my first balloon ride was
all a long way and I have
pictures.
That I just told her and and it
was it was a great one for time
and and those are times when you
really meet people who they are
behavioral health so thank you
very much and I know you do a
wonderful job for the colonials
thank you Mr president thank you
session though.
Any further debate.
first thank the members of the
Senate
what a what a beautiful response
to seeing you here today merry
KA.
And it just shows me how
important relationship building
so I just want to thank the body
for these funds story some
people tell me some other fun
story said can't really talk
about it public knows really
ask unanimous consent that the
record show that the role has
been called all those present
vote in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands says we're voting
Senator word we're showing what
you're voting yes.
By a vote of thirty nine the
affirmative zero on the negative
Does hereby is confirmed here by
by the New Mexico state Senate
Senator Stewart you so much
let's all welcome back our Mary
Kay Papen.
bioscience Authority I know
you'll to senator Wirth to
present this country Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
pursuant to section nine dash
fifteen E. dash three NMSA
appointment of Serra Serra
points for as a member of the
New Mexico bioscience Authority.
no objections center where to
explain.
You Mr president this is an
excellent appointment by
founder part Potomac for
photonics which invented and
manufactured the laser for laser
eye surgery as well as laser
machine tools for micro
manufacturing contracts services
as well as develop workforce
training programs
fab lab was granted a
apprenticeship by the US
hire three more and finally in
collaboration with the community
college she founded the new
collar innovation center at the
higher end center in twenty
twenty one to foster innovation
in lifelong learning and the
Thank you senator Wirth says
we're debating the confirmation
assemblies for any quote any
debate.
Scene and senator Wirth to close
Seven we're voting tier sees
please.
You wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator word are you there.
Mexico bioscience Authority for
term commencing upon
confirmation expiring June
eighteenth twenty twenty two has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico state Senate Senator
Wirth.
appointed to the New Mexico
bioscience Authority I know
you'll to Senator Stewart to
present this country Senator
Stewart thank you Mr president
pursuant to section nineteen
I move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Paul
Lara as member of the New Mexico
bioscience Authority.
See no objections Senator
Stewart explained.
unbelievable this Mr Paul Lara
has been in Santa Fe for thirty
years he's been an entrepreneur
there I believe send
diversifying the economy he
believes bioscience sector is
a bio pharma research intensive
company developing a drug
delivery platform for
biomolecules such a small RNA
mRNA which is part of our
gentleman he has been part of
pebble labs Inc he was the
director of corporate
development these former
president of the Eldorado bio
a physics major from university
of California yes and not a coal
industrial tech tech from cal
maritime academy and a U. S.
Coast Guard master marine or
incredible appointee to the
bioscience Authority and I stand
for questions.
We're debating the employment
any one wishing to debate.
unanimous consent records show
the rules been called all those
present phone the firm except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands Senator seats
please we're voting.
Senator Lopez Mr president
By a vote of thirty five the
affirmative zero the negative
state Senate Senator Stewart Mr
president let's all welcome Paul
and Lara to bioscience
Authority.
hereby submit the credentials of
Dr priest gotta TSS who's been
appointed to the New Mexico
bioscience Authority I know
you'll to Senator Stewart to
No objections Senator explained.
Mr president Dr prisca TSS is a
laboratory director and research
science at the community lab in
projects in Los Alamos one on
waste water the other on testing
services to understand spread
she founded Los Alamos makers a
biochemistry from university of
Paris she received an MS some
biological sciences from the
university of Wisconsin and her
how to me actually knows of her
work and I stand for questions.
Senator debating anyone wishing
debate.
appointment of Dr Prisco TRC as
a member of the New Mexico
bioscience Authority senators
here seats please if you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
I have a lot of thirty four in
the affirmative zero negative
the appointment of Dr Fisk TSC
as a member of the New Mexico
bioscience Authority for term
commencing upon confirmation
today but we welcome her and
look forward to hearing from.
Senator had a meal thank you Mr
president and now yield to
senator Wirth Senator Wirth I
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
to be up first with concurrence
counter number one they've been
passed out to everyone that
Senate bill one fifty nine and
then Senator one else will be.
sixty in Senate finance and we
see everything in house bill two
so we'd like to drop that
referral from Senate finance
with no objections Senator may
native American language and
culture of certificates.
Seeing no objection.
Senator Ingle for concurrence
counter number one on that order
business Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president as
president of.
And we've had some I had some
amendments put on in the house.
And
For sure that the house passed
this bill back to us with these
His they give an opportunity for
the the senators or
representatives that were have
not gotten into the retirement
program this gives them another
under plan one but for the.
Mister Greg Trujillo that's the
secretary of the public
employment retirement
association said if we did a
is when you did not get in this
thing you have to if you want to
join you have to prepare a whole
plus interest all the
contributions that you would
have made to the retirement
program of the state of New
on the is the retirement program
that was in place when you were
when you left the Senate you
don't get to go into the one
that we have now if you retired
earlier this that's all this
debating.
See no debate.
amended Senator Ingle thank you
Mr president members of the
Senate general senator Byrd vote
yes.
R. J..
thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate concur with
Senate bill forty eight as
amended and at will wait for
questions.
Senator we can give us an
junior bill this is the language
that the the house added in
there amendments I glanced
through it in and I don't see
anything but they're amendments
in there so I move that we
Any debate.
See no debate.
Is there any opposition to the
concurrence.
But GS.
Thank you senator Byrd.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president.
committee to home is been
referred Senate memorial thirty
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that do pass respectfully
reflect their acted upon
individually I see no objections
the reader to read House Bill
fifteen as amended do pass house
taxation and revenue committee
anything else would option the
committee report we have a
motion to that the committee
part the objections.
See no objections the committee
part is been adopted in the
journal show they're acted upon
individually.
start with item number nine on
the calendar house bill ninety
five that centers to fan X. I am
ten Senator Ivey Soto item
reading of legislation I yield
to Senator Stefanics for item
number nine Senator Stefanics
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
amendment or substitution.
Seeing no objection certificates
explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate.
House bill ninety five as
the option only the option to
authorize the taxation and
revenue department to share
relevant personal information
reporter insurance status and
in line item or The New Mexico
insurance pool would be third.
This bill authorizes taxed
relative to add a check box to
the state income tax form that
Mr president their estimates are
currently that a hundred
thousand over a hundred thousand
New Mexicans would qualify for
Medicaid or a subsidy at the New
them into health coverage my co
sponsor here on the Senate side
as senator Senator Senator
Mr president this is a really
wonderful bill I have the.
honor to support it last year
and now it's coming back to us
this year.
keep it and this is such an easy
way for New Mexicans to explore
whether or not they qualify it's
simply checking a box on their
explore their eligibility.
And we all know that once we
have health insurance we're
going to get involved with our
get involved with taking care of
And it helps to solve the donut
hole of of the about ten eleven
percent of New Mexicans who do
for questions or debate centers
renovating house bill ninety
five as amended anyone wishing
to debate.
Say no debate Senator panics
because.
voting in the negative by show
of hands Senator just your seats
please we're voting.
Senator Byrd are you on.
Mr president yes.
Reporter St.
annex thank you Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
want to the next item that's
going to be a I don't know
pertinent that we Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much Mr
for house bill one thirty five
IST by amended on final actions
been taken as now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
me.
It would be
Beth gilia and did you see above
the.
Seeing no objection is a
This act if I as we call it the
Indian family protection act is
reasons one reason is because
I think was currently under
attack at the federal level.
The second reason why it's
Strengthen the provisions of the
federal ECWA as they apply here
in New Mexico.
And as they apply in a state
where are the state of New
manner in which we are able to
Appropriately protect.
The Indian family and
contacts with their culture.
and so Mister president with
that I'll be happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you center so that we do
The reader to read the
amendment.
by senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto to move and
explain the amendment thanks
very much was president I move
Senate floor amendment number
one to house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
fifty actually amendments when
we got to
Senate Indian world cultural
affairs committee and
We are and and then when we got
of the standard.
In a custody case would it is
probable costs.
And as we are.
the house sponsor
Representative Lewis.
As well as with the deputy
of the exact same standard that
applies in the children's Code
generally.
So it's not a different standard
of evidence that a specific to
F. pop for a quote and so
basically to resolve the
concerns that centers around yes
brought up among other people
when we're in Senate Judiciary.
Senator maybe incentives are
I think I understood the
legalese that came out of there
but I would like if possible of
someone from from a Senate
Senator are you asking that
chairwoman of Indian Affairs to
yield yes Mr president Senator
appear that the expert witnesses
he has here were at that actual
committee meeting it's a
different group of people.
Senator so Mister president and
So Mr Mr president I truly would
like of a response there if we
can I don't really want to talk
for thirty or forty minutes and
It is I say I'm.
I'm gonna vote for the bill have
no problem with the bill I just
want to make sure that we didn't
have something counter because
share and I am getting the
thumbs up that it is a friendly
amendment.
Here here let's go thank you any
further debate.
Si no further debate on the
substitute for House Bill to I
was surprised bill thirty five
one thirty five as twice amended
do now pass and I ask for
unanimous consent Senator been
We have to stand for questions
thank you senator Senator many
of us thank you Mr president
Sanchez Bill Senator so the
yield Mister president happy to
there's no language issues are
are trouble in any area.
This president as everybody else
Mexico from CYFD from people who
work professionally in this area
this is really been one of the
most collaborative bills that
I've ever worked on and in fact
on the floor as an expert
witness.
I see no objections the sergeant
Austin please escort the
secretary to the chamber thank
consultation and in fact as well
as as I joined was was very
privileged to to join this team
throughout the summer and begin
of of of the series of meetings
social service organizations
we're taken back to CYFD to make
sure that everybody was on board
with the various different
provisions that are on this
much an important issue thank
you Mr president thank you
centerman elsewhere further
debate Senator panics.
Thank you Mr president would do
please explain your amendment
that you just put on this bill
again because I'm trying to
track with the language of the
bill are analysis and what you
did.
sheets the the amendments that
were done and the Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee.
And you will see in that
committee there were actually
amendment number eight.
Which is at the top of page two
states for purposes of
establishing legal custody at
the custody hearing.
that's the key that's that's the
key part that were striking the
reason we're striking that is
because in that section of the
bill we're talking about
the federal state balance as we
do this and in corporate those
and the state law.
At a at a legal custody hearing
however.
It's the same standard that is
cause standard is really a
negative probable cause
standard.
applied in a in a custody
hearing about custody Mr
and and so as it provides in the
children's code and has is also
applicables to F. PA is that is
the standard of probable cause
then the judge has the option he
there are a placing the child in
the cost of the department or of
returning the child to the
was nice it didn't really
encompass all of the various
aspects that are provided for in
the children's code by striking
at we default to the children's
because I did listen to the
arguments on this bill.
And there was concern that we
not.
just finally also know to
centers the fact that the
probable cause standard that is
listed here is not in ECWA
probable cause standard it's a
children's code probable cause
and before a debate if I may ask
unanimous consent to excuse
Senators o'neill sirventes and
Gonzalez until they return to
that we are debating today Mr
president I've been honored to
serve on the children's court
improvement commission.
over many years and this is a
legislation Mr president again
to protect the best interests
and to promote the stability and
security of Indian tribes and
families by establishing these
Senator Ivey Soto but this has
been of concerned and again of
need to put New Mexico needs to
do so thank you Mr president
are involved in how long it took
to draft this it's interesting
that we're still having to do
amendments on the floor
as far as consultation and doing
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor please yield Senator the
deal is present we have to thank
you Mr president Senator Ivey
Soto I'm just trying to re to
catch up here so this law is
So because we're worried it may
be ruled unconstitutional a
federal level.
Senator I thank you very much Mr
have this in place so that if
the federal EC what is our is
found to be unconstitutional
depending on the reasons why.
opportunity for us to instead of
having our laws devoid of this
really very important and very
complex area of law.
urban myth than it does off of
what's actually written it was
an opportunity for us to have it
in our code so that
practitioners at the state level
would be able to find it would
be able to understand it would
senator then if CYFD isn't
complying at the federal level
today what makes us think that
they're gonna plot comply with
state laws once we pass this.
compliance with the quote that
has not been an issue.
What is what is it what is an
issue is is ensuring for example
one of things that we provide
for in this bill is training for
judges one of things we find for
make sure that we have qualified
expert witnesses whose expertise
matches the tribe of the child.
and so and so by by bringing it
done at the at the federal level
and what we're able to do in a
much more refined with the state
level.
Thank you Mr president and
senator would you just briefly
then explain to me why this is
challenges at the federal level
both of which get resolved by
putting in the state law.
The first is the law and at the
adopted them at the state level
actually.
Is not race based its political
status in terms of membership in
a tribe.
tribe who are eligible for
membership in a tribe.
The the second thing is is
what's known as a commandeering
challenge which is to say that
then and just commandeered and
area that should be exclusive to
the states however by doctors at
the state level at least as far
as New Mexico's concerned that
issue gets resolved as well.
Miss president US Senate I'm in
about one fifty.
One fifteen thank you and Mister
president I'm reading this
analysis here said that.
state child welfare programs in
fact this is a native children
are being removed and at these
eighty five percent were placed
outside of their families my
question to that would be what
Thanks very much Mr president
and Senate I'm and so off to to
placement is where they're with
the a family member that
includes an extended family
member or includes tribal
members and our preferred
placement as of none of those
part of what we do in this bill
enter the out of preferred
placement is that we place the
burden on the department.
To have to go back to court
every six months.
And the burdens on the
Senator Diamond are we also in
this bill require if it's if
it's in our preferred placement
placement we require that there
And then finally it Mr president
Senator Diamond one of the
historic issues that has
happened and and and most of
these are not so much New
placement that takes place our
our prior to the child and the
mother leaving the hospital.
And so one of the things that we
do another thing we do in this
bill this presents Senate I'm in
can only be and a preferred
placement so that we remove that
option for the six first for six
can be done by simply signing a
piece of paper however within an
echo or an F. pop perspective if
you're doing a voluntary
fostering the of them the
they also have to have the judge
also asked ascertain that they
that they have sufficient
fluency in English to understand
the proceedings or ensure that
Senator you say our preferred
placement but I just want to
clarify that that CYFD rural the
reason these children are being
removed or horrific so it's
children my concern is we're all
here committed to providing the
best homes and placements for
these children what my fear is I
look at this is that we're not
has all the information all the
background stories on why these
children perhaps should not be
reunited with repeat child
abusers and I just wonder if
sometimes we can look at this
discrimination for someone like
me if I was of readily available
to take in a child in need and
so does this limit my ability to
home and is now threatened to be
removed because it's not a so
called prefer placement I mean
when can we prioritize a loving
is the best place for a child to
be and and and so what this bill
does actually is a lot of what
you're just saying why can't we
that that would take place.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator I'm still very uneasy
about this bill I just don't
know if it's put in the best
interest of all children above
followed by Senator the elephant
Center Shinda.
Thank you a
Mr president
I'm gonna just the sponsor to to
here but I just wanna make some
comment I think this is a really
director CYFD and many others
that really come to to craft
this bill that I think you know
it's.
Hopefully you know with his work
and so forth but you know it's
really interesting and I think
when it comes to Indian history
and Indian tribes in this
country we always get into this
that you know Indian tribes have
a very unique relationship with
the federal government.
If you re you know the United
States constitution you know
Reason why you know there is no.
So that unique relationship
extends in on today in terms of
therefore we're treated you know
it in ways that sometimes people
don't understand I think one of
these things is this particular
you know issue.
very tragic history you know
four hundred we don't close
years.
With the federal government in
print in providing policies to
do away with our language to do
aren't away with our religious
they were basically shipping you
know young Indian of students
right out of high school to you
know.
Foreign cities around the
and the whole idea of the
federal government was to
simulate are Indian people
remove them from their
communities their cultural
languages and have them
same thing and so part of this
is restoring the wrong that has
been done to our people and
you're going to hear about
language programs you're going
to hear about schools and you
know others that we're trying to
children can have a future that
we have and that really is what
this is about Mr president I
just want to make that point
Indian children with their
families is the gold standard of
best practices the Indian child
Studies have shown that large
numbers of native children are
being separated from their
families extended families and
their communities by state child
children were being removed of
these eighty five percent were
placed outside their families
and communities even when fit
and willing relatives were
available.
Congress is intent under a court
was to protect the best
interests of Indian children and
to promote the stability and
security of Indian tribes and
families.
challenged what what does and
the state and the state is where
does is it provides active
efforts to the family and give
parents of the child custody
proceeding.
Finally and importantly it works
actively to involve the child
tribe in the child's parents in
the proceedings.
extremely important because they
are able to provide services to
the family and they are also
able to identify cultural
No progress has been made as a
result of the court.
But there are continued
challenges to equip because of a
So I rise in strong support of
this state it quote and and I
commend the sponsors for
recognized and I really hope
that people recognize that this
is about the best interests of
an Indian child thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Mr president.
As.
You all know my daughter.
Livia.
my family's given.
And I'm raising my daughter.
She lives in the dominant
culture of the society.
Raising my daughter so that she
understands her history.
Where she comes from.
And what it means to be human.
An expository although she has
not given our issue let the math
but she supported in this.
This bill.
This bill.
I'm I would just say that that
this is I don't think I've ever
worked so hard.
Stepped into a group of people.
And felt so welcomed.
As I was.
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty five.
voted in the affirmative except
for those voting and the
negative by show of hands
Senators we're voting to your
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Burt are you on.
Yes yes.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative for the negative.
Senate has passed house.
Health health and humans.
The heart the soul the
determination and the passion
behind this bill Representative
Georgene Louis.
my friend Georgene please.
show all action replacing house
bill one eighty on final passage
been taken its subject debate
amendment or substitution see no
objection senator Wirth
explained the bill I thank you
Mr president so this just
of documents subject to the
inspection of public records act
basically the bill just takes
that section out
makes sense and again
representative Nibert and the
light are the house sponsor
stand for questions.
Sen is very very house bill one
eighty with emergency clause
anyone wishing to bid.
record show that all those the
rules been called all those
present or the affirmative
except those willing and
negative I show hands sinister
states please we're voting.
If you wish to vote no please
Yes.
I have a lot of thirty four in
the affirmative zero negative
We're going on to the next item
that's going to be sent
missiles.
Thank you Mr president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
See no objections Senator souls
to explain about thank you Mr
president said in our house bill
thirteen is twice amended is
bill that expands the teacher
residency program with a thirty
five thousand dollar stipend
that goes with it instead of one
semester of student teaching.
from their university or teacher
preparation program
with that I'll stand for
questions so we're debating
house bill thirteen is twice
thirteen has twice amended do
now pass I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present vote in
the affirmative except those
Those yes.
president the professional
training of our teachers matters
both for recruitment and
retention of our teachers and
providing a stipend ensures that
they are able to do that without
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill fifty seven house bill
fifty seven as amended on final
president this bill requires the
public education department to
provide the same transportation
distribution allocation to
schools in FY twenty three as
to make sure that our school
districts receive the
appropriate amount of allocation
that they need going forward and
with that I'll stand for
questions thank you Senator
Kernan centers remaining house
president I move that house bill
fifty seven as amended do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
Please raise your hand.
Senator vote yes.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative zero the negative
house bill fifty seven as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Kernan.
Much Mr president now our
children will get to school
that is all we're going to do in
this morning and early afternoon
session
we've got some committees that
need to work this afternoon the
where we are so now's the time
to committee chairs to make
their announcements Senator is
we're in that order business
analysis miscellaneous anyone
wishing to make an announcement
Center Shindo thank you Mr
president your Senate tax
Mr president Senate finance will
also going at two o'clock we got
some capital outlay in the geo
bonds to get down the floor and
the re off bill and and a few
room so members please take note
s'mores I'm looking to use their
Baca we're gonna be in three
eleven folks so we've been
looking for so we're in a
different room thanks to a club
Senate recess till six PM.
