applied for benefits.
Without the knowledge or with
the knowledge.
Of those kids and used them.
Or
Other purposes.
You said 20 years, but you have
no idea.
How many kids this has happened
to, is that correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator Block, I know
that there are over 2000
children in legal custody right
now, um, and the percentage of
Confirmed disabled kids versus
the percentage who likely are
disabled is also.
There's a there's a discrepancy.
There's so many children in
custody, in other words, who
definitely suffer from a
disability that is um not
captured by the agency or by
their advocates or the court. So
it's, it's really, it's hard,
it's a large number of children.
It's got to be hundreds and in
the thousands over the last 20
years of children who have
either been eligible for or have
actually received Social
Security benefits that the state
has taken and used for general
purposes rather than their
individual benefit. Thank you.
appreciate that answer. Sorry to
kind of cut you off there
shortly, but it drives me, Mr.
uh Chairman and um Miss Miss
Craig and and senators.
What is the average benefit.
Uh, that these, um, kids get, I
know they all get probably
different amounts, but I'm
trying to get a handle here,
what's the average benefit a
month that they get.
It's pretty significant, Mr.
Chair, Senator Block, the
average disability per uh per
child is $700 a month.
OK.
I don't want to do math in
public, so I just, just bear
with me here. Um,
So 700 a month is the average
benefit that these kids get, and
you said there's roughly 2000
kids.
Mr. Chair, Senter Block 2000
total in custody, not each of
them qualifying for disability,
um, some may and some may also I
don't, I want the committee to
remember death benefits as well
for children who are
beneficiaries of a parent who is
has worked hard and paid into
our Social Security system.
Yeah.
Uh, thank you for that. Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So really
we're looking at, if you think
about the number here because
you guys didn't talk about the
number.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senators, Miss,
Miss Kraga.
Keep, keep, did I pronounce that
right?
Prega, OK.
Um
Think about that for a minute.
You're, you're talking roughly.
$8000?
A year?
And benefits
That they didn't get.
We're talking about thousands.
And thousands and thousands of
kids over 20 years.
I guess my question is, Mr.
Chair and senators and and uh
Miss Craga, where the hell did
that money go?
Mr. Chairman Senator Block, I
think that you are echoing the
question that legislators raised
in 2023 when this became, you
know, uh, evident don't lied on
legislators. OK. Thank, thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
let me ask just two more quick
questions.
Mr. Chair and senators.
His CYFD, do they go through
audits?
Yes Mr. Chair, Senator, yes,
they go through audits. Thank
you, Senators. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Then my question, Mr.
Chair and senators, is wouldn't
this have come up in audits to
see that CYFD is not using this
money appropriately where it
should be going.
Over 20 years we didn't, that
wasn't in an audit. So Mr.
Chair, Senator.
Many states have been doing
this. This has been an
unfortunate practice that that
we've seen across the country.
Uh, and now the Social Security
Administration is recommending
that each state end this
practice. So, it wasn't, it
wasn't unlawful.
Uh, it, it still would not be
unlawful unless until we pass
this bill.
Thank you, Senator Duhague, Mr.
Chair, I, I, I don't like that
answer, and that's exactly why
we need to pass this as quickly
as possible to put these
guardrails on, and lastly, I'll
ask Mr. Chair and senators and
Mr. Krieger, thank you for your
patience.
Besides these benefits from the
federal government, are there
other grants that CYFD applies
for or are there any type of
funding programs that.
Should have been going toward
these kids that may have been
diverted because according to
you, Senator Duhague, it wasn't,
wasn't illegal to use the money,
not for the kids where it was
supposed to go.
And Mr. Chair Senator, that I
think that's a question for the
agency.
And I think that's a question we
will definitely ask the agency
as a legislative body. That's
important to prevent this from
happening again. Uh, thank you,
senators. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I just want to say
Um, again, my, my talk with the
CYFD secretary yesterday was,
was very, very good, um, I
think.
She is a good woman trying her
best.
This happened before her watch,
is happening now under her
watch, and um, I would imagine
she's supportive of this bill,
is there someone from CYFD in
the room, Mr. Chair, senators.
I, I, I didn't hear if they were
Mr. Chair, I didn't hear if they
were in support of this or not,
but I, I definitely appreciate
uh them being here to listen to
this because this is.
An issue that has to get fixed
immediately, and I hope this,
uh, breeds us through this
committee and the other
committees and gets on the floor
to the governor to sign, and I
appreciate you.
Uh, both from a bipartisan.
Uh, position, Republican and
Democrat, I think there's 4 of
you on here, 2 D's and 2 R's.
Um
Up there, yeah, Senator Burgers,
thank you, the fresh the
freshman all-star over there.
Um
This is a great bill, and I
fully, fully support it, and I
look forward to working with
CYFD.
To get some type of, to get some
type of financial tracing back.
To get that money rightfully
where it belongs with those
children.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gallego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for this bill. I'm just
gonna give you, uh, we have a
new freshman here and uh I just
wanted you to understand his
passion. He speaks Spanish when
he says hell and shit, uh, but
it shows the passion that we
have. I've worked off of CYFT's.
Inaccuracies for a long time.
Uh, we've always asked for
transparency, and I understand
that they didn't know this wood
or could be against the law, uh,
but I just wanted to see.
Uh, my colleague, Senator Block
had asked if CYD was here, would
you be opposed to find out how
they uh
How they feel about this bill.
She'd raise her hand, and we did
not call her as chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I think
we can ask. I don't know if this
person who's been sent is
authorized to state a position
for the agency, but if you are,
just feel free to.
Come up to the microphone,
introduce yourself, and
Let us know.
Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Um, my
name is Melissa Soto. I am the
director for performance and
accountability for CYFD.
Um, I do support the premise of
this bill, um, we, I had the
Social Security liaison um in
under my
Provision since 20.
19, uh, we have struggled with
the Social Security
Administration and following
their rules and um yes, uh.
Senator Black, uh, we do get,
um, audited every year by Social
Security Administration. I
think, um, there just could be
clearer language between the
difference of the two types of
benefits. I absolutely do
believe that the RSDI benefits
are the Title 2 benefits.
Should be conserved, um, for
youth, especially those aging
out of custody, um, where we
have more difficult time is
conserving the SSI benefits, the
supplemental security income.
Um, because of
The income limitations and
assistance limitations, um, not
allowing uh accounts to go over
$2000. Right now, most of our
kids, because we apply the SSI
benefits, um, to the foster care
maintenance rate, they get the
max benefit of 985, um, that's
calculated by Social Security
because they have no income or
no other assistance coming to
them. Um, if we were to stop
applying SSI to the foster care
maintenance.
entertainment, Social Security
would reduce their benefit. So
we, the state would be paying,
um, yes, foster care
maintenance, and then we could
look at, uh, conserving, um, the
extra money and enable account.
Um, I think what I would just
suggest is, uh, just more clear
language about how to work with
um Social Security
Administration, um, and
Uh, how we can work with uh
state treasurer's office, um, to
set up these accounts.
Thank you. Thank you for those
comments, Senator Gayos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that, I just want
clarity because uh as we go
forward, this is gonna change
your life and the life of the
children, but, uh, that's all I
needed from you. I was gonna
refer back to the uh senators
and uh just wondering, uh, and I
know that, uh, actually, if
you'll go with me to page 5 of
the bill, Section 7.
In line 23, it talks about a
report into legislative human
Services Committee, and I'm
wondering just for a thought, I,
I know she bought a lot of
points that we might want to
look at as far as, as we have
mean going forward, uh, but I'm
wondering if you're actually
anticipating during session or
if it wouldn't be a really good
topic for an interim discussion
of the Health and Human Services
Committee because I think as we
get the ground um
on this, it'd be really good for
us to all understand first off,
if the money goes to the child,
if the financial accounting
classes or, you know, financial
legacies being done, what this
child's gonna do if it's gonna
go to foster parent, how the
overarching support of the
child's gonna be, and I think
that's gonna be a huge
discussion uh as we go forward,
but I just wanted to leave that
with you in a thought and uh
Mr. Madam Chair and senators,
uh, I also wanted to bring up
That, um, it, my, my colleague
brought up on the, uh, if there
are other benefits on behalf of
the child, um.
Do we track any of the other
federal monies that come in for
these children in our custody,
Mr. Chair.
Miss Sarah
Mr. Chair, Senator Gallegos, I
don't, again, the data system at
this agency was antiquated when
it was implemented 30 years ago.
So there's the, there's the
primary data system. There's the
one they're trying to develop,
spending a lot of money to try
and develop it, and then there's
the offline use of it literally
Excel spreadsheets to to track
data. So, um, Miss Soto works in
the data division. I, I believe
she would be more qualified to
answer that, but I can tell you.
Again, from the Kevins
arbitration decision order.
At the data system is severely
flawed.
It is not accurately capturing,
um, current data. I don't think
it has the capacity to do that,
so, um, that is an issue.
And as for the categories that
you mentioned earlier, I just
wanted to touch on one point.
If, if the payee is not CYFD,
there are recommendations on the
Social Security Administration
website, in fact, requirements
of the payee to ensure that the
funds are used for the sole use
and benefit of the child. So I
know that there are um could be
more distinguished language in
this bill, but we have the
Social Security Administration
federal requirements of payees
that um complement this bill,
and I think this bill is.
quite thorough and it, it's
really important that it passes
so that again.
These children at the outset of
the case and then throughout the
case have notice whether the
application's even been done.
There's notice to their, um,
advocates and the court, none of
that's happening currently.
Thank you.
Uh chair and Senator Gallego,
Senator Doig has asked me to
address the um the safeguarding
of the funds, Miss sort
mentioned A accounts. Abel
accounts are something that each
state and our state included.
Allows um a safeguarding and
safekeeping of up to $15,000 per
beneficiary, so that those funds
are not in conflict with um
other competing benefits and
they're able to hold on to those
federal benefits even if
Outside of the Abel account,
that amount exceeded their
monthly threshold. So Social
Security um will revert if you
have not spent down your funds
below a certain amount, able
accounts bypass that rule
lawfully and with approval by
Social Security Administration
and our state to safeguard up to
$15,000 per child. That is a
that is a really important
point. Secretary Casados is not
only aware of that, the
secretary has talked about
leaning.
on and relying on A accounts in
order to safeguard these funds
for our youth.
Well, thank for that, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, um, Sarah, I, I
appreciate that because it gives
me uh an understanding of this
well thought out, uh, how many
states and, and we look at the
other states that are
implementing this, are we, are
we following there?
I guess I don't want to reinvent
the wheel. It seems like even
with CYFD structure matters.
I've asked forever on ombudsman
or given a window into CYFD, but
I'm just wondering if we've
looked at other states to see
how they're structuring it, how
they're uh working with uh.
Uh, with the, um,
Oh, I went blank, uh, with other
entities on how they do this, so
it's so scary.
Mr. Chair, uh, senator, so yes,
uh, Amy Harfeld, who we heard
from earlier. So she, uh, I
believe she said that 30 other
states are doing this, and we've
worked with her in drafting this
bill, uh, so that we can get,
she has the benefit of kind of
Seeing the, the broad picture of
what's happening, what's
working, what's not, and so we
are leaning on her expertise and
Miss Kreka's and in crafting
this approach.
Thank you, and, and I, I will
finish with this, Mr. Armchair
and Senator, uh, I just, uh,
this morning we had a Bible
study and, and we're always
supposed to consider, you know,
um,
Firepower. So in Exodus 2022
talks.
That we should not abuse the
orphans and and the widows. Uh,
I appreciate you guys doing this
because this will be a piece of
we will pay for if we continue
to hurt our children.
So, uh, with that, I will yield
because I'd like to get a vote
on this or I have to go to uh
Senate Finance, so I yield.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't
have any questions. I just
wanted to say thank you for
working on this and for
presenting it today, and I look
forward to it passing.
Thank you. And any other
questions, seeing no I just have
one comment to make there's a
powerful statement that was made
that when New Mexico serves as
the legal parent. We have an
obligation to secure the
benefits for the beneficiary.
That was a powerful statement
and thank you for this bill.
With that, what is the will of
the committee?
I'm overdue pass
for a pass, seconded by Senator
Townsend, if I can have a roll
call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend,
ma'am.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 8 yes and 2
excused, your bill will move
forward to the next committee.
Thank you, senators.
Madam Chairwoman will be coming
So,
we are going to go to SB 16
next. Um, but we're just waiting
on send to Figuero. She'll be
here momentarily.
And while we're waiting on uh
Senator Figueroa, um, I've
mentioned from the table, we've
updated our procedures for the
committee, so I would encourage
members and folks coming before
the committee to check, look at
that online, uh, the, the
Come on up, Senator Fierro.
One of the updates to our
procedures is, uh, proponents
have 15 minutes to to present
their bill rather than 20 as we
get further into the session, we
are
We are encouraging efficiency,
um, also our start time will be
8:30 from here on, uh, rather
than 9.
Senator, go ahead with SB 16.
Thank you, Madam Chair committee
with huge apologies for keeping
you waiting.
Um
I am happy to
be with you again this morning
to bring SB 16 on behalf of the
other sponsors, Senator words
from part of Rubio and Kate. Um,
this is a bill that this
committee has seen before, um,
so I need to give a special
shout out to a previous sponsor,
Senator Bill O'Neill, who is the
most recent Senate sponsor and
moved this idea all the way
through the Senate with
bipartisan support.
This bill is about accessibility
to primary voting.
Um, and it come about.
With growing understanding that
our electorate in New Mexico has
changed.
And in particular, 40%, Madam
Chair of the 18 to 24 age group
of registered voters, 40% are
choosing not to affiliate with
party.
They want to be involved, they
register to vote, um, and they
want to talk about issues, but
they're not particularly
interested in party affiliation.
And of special note, Madam
Chair.
I believe it's
In the FIR.
Um, if not, I think one of the
speakers will address it.
49% of the veterans.
Or also unaffiliated with any of
our major parties.
So as of December, that's a
total of 340,000 voters.
One in almost every 4.
are not affiliated with a major
party in New Mexico, and we need
to update our process to ensure
that these voters can
participate, to keep them
involved in our democracy.
So this bill.
Specifically allows those voters
who have not designated
affiliation with one of our
major parties to participate in
the public primary elections.
On primary election day, such a
voter would choose a ballot from
one of the parties holding a
primary.
Republicans would still vote in
Republican primaries, Democrats
would still vote Democrat
Democratic primaries and
libertarians would still vote
libertarian primary. It's just
those who are unaffiliated with
one of those 3 major parties.
That would have a change under
this bill.
And with me, I have so that
Abel, who's the executive
director of NM Voters first, and
somewhere back here, we have
someone from the Secretary of
State, either Lindsey or Maggie,
to address technical questions.
There you are. I got who.
We have a high power in the
room, um, with that unlessila
wants to add something, we can
go to the supporters. All right,
so for your organized support. I
have 7 people listed, uh,
starting with our Secretary of
State.
Go.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
and
Oh,
my microphone for, for online.
You just need to speak into the
microphone.
I'm so old school. Good morning,
madam Chair and members of the
committee, Maggie to lose all of
our Secretary of State. Um, I
and my team have long been
supporters of allowing folks who
are not registered with a major
party to participate in the
primaries. Uh, what we know is
that participation begets
participation. Uh, if we want,
uh, the fullest, um, you know,
electorate possible and if we
want to make sure, especially in
those counties, uh, we know
those counties and districts
where individuals, um,
are not really able to
participate in a general
election because it gets decided
in a primary, right? On the
Republican side or the
Democratic side, um, so we're
very much in support of this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Santa Fe County
Clerk's Office.
Do we have anyone here from the
Santa Fe County clerk's office.
I don't see anyone, uh, Claudia
Reisner.
Come on up to the microphone.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, thank you so
much for giving me the
opportunity to speak this
morning.
Claudia. I'm a Navy vet and I'm
here representing two
organizations, the National
Bipartisan Organization,
Veterans for All Voters, as well
as New Mexico's veteran and
military caucus.
Um, as the senator said, we have
49% of the veterans in this
country are unaffiliated with
any of the major parties.
With 122,000 veterans in New
Mexico at 60 or 70,000 veterans
that are not able to to vote in
a primary despite paying taxes.
And having served the country.
They're excluded from voting in
the primary, and we think that
this is a wonderful,
we really strongly supported,
and we thank the sponsors for
bringing this back up.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chris Rayner from UNM
Dems.
And just so you're aware,
Senator, you have like 9 minutes
left in your time.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm with the UNM
College Democrats and a
coordinator of our organization
is to get students on campus
involved with legislative
politics and the legislative
process and as many of these
peers um participate in campus
activities, legislative
activities, um, we'll quickly
learn that um the most important
election um they missed, um, and
a lot of these same students are
registered as independents
because they feel as if neither
major party represents them, um,
and there's more young people 18
to
34 are registered independent
than any other. We believe um
that SB 16 is important to
amplify the voices of the youth,
um, in our representative
democracy. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, Stevie Pos with NM Cafe.
Uh, on Zoom, OK.
Go ahead, Stevie.
All right. Well, we're figuring
out what's happening with
Stevie, we're gonna move on to
John Martinez, conservation and
voters, New Mexico, and he'll be
followed by Otta Chavez.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning, members of the
committee. My name is John
Martinez. I'm here from
conservation Voters New Mexico.
Uh, we are in support of this
bill, um, for a couple of
reasons. You've already heard
some of them about the youth
participation, fairness of the
process, taxpayer dollars being
spent on this and taxpayers who
are not allowed to participate.
Um, but what I'd like to talk
about most is, um, a feeling of
cynicism.
Uh, people across the country
have been feeling that politics
have not been working for them,
that the system is not meant for
them, uh, and having these
closed primaries, uh, just
further reinforces that.
So in order to combat cynicism
and in a democracy that is
better representative of the
people. We urge you to support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm here
today in strong support of SB
16, a critical step toward
ensuring a more inclusive and
representative democracy in New
Mexico, as the ED of NAVA and NM
Native vote, we are very aware
how our voters are
disenfranchised in the state. We
helped pass the New Mexico VRE
and the only 8 American voting
rights in the nation to help
overcome many barriers to
voting. Currently, approximately
25% of registered New Mexico
voters are 347,000.
people aren't able to
participate in primary elections
unless they change their party
registration. As VRAs, we also
see firsthand that the number of
declined to state voters is
rising each election year,
especially amongst our youth.
There are more native registered
voters under the age of 35,
compared to non-native
registered voters. We are almost
3 times more likely to register
as unaffiliated with the
political party, the non-native
voters. In fact, 27.8% of native
voters registered.
Yes, 40.7% of native voters
under the age of 35 are
registered DTS. This trend
creates an alarming number of
voters were denied a a voice
during the most critical stages
of our democratic process, SB 16
will re-enfranchise these
voters, allowing them to vote
for the preferred candidates
during these critical primary
elections. It ensures that
native voters are included in
the process. It promotes
inclusivity, increases voter
participation.
and insures a larger number of
voters. We asked you and urged
the committee to pass SB 16 to
take an important step toward an
electoral system that is fair
for all New Mexicans. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
from E Cafe online?
Who wishes to speak.
OK, whoever's online for and I'm
cafe.
Go ahead, please.
NM Cafe.
Right.
Where
NMC A F E.
All right, so that was the
organized support. We did have
some other people sign up and
support in addition to the
organized support, and you have
about little under 5 minutes
left. Uh, I like to let sponsors
choose their own support. So if
you would like us to, to go to
the other folks who've signed
up, we can do so, uh, if you
want to.
Uh, go to organized opposition,
we can do that.
If those folks have signed up,
I'd let them speak.
Madam Chair,
Thank you, uh, Molly Swank from
Common Cause.
Followed by Kurt Rager.
And Hongy.
Thank you committee members and
chair. My name is Molly Swank,
and I'm the executive director
for Common Cause New Mexico.
More than 340,000 voters cannot
participate in our primary
elections, and that number will
only continue to climb as we see
more and more voters registered
every election.
Common cause wants to see these
newly registered voters to be
welcomed without barriers of
having to change their
registration into our elections
through semi-open primaries.
SB 16 will open doors to not
only these new voters, but
hundreds of thousands of those
of people who have been left out
for decades, and I hope you'll
support um SB 16 today. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Kurt Reger, who I
think is online.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Kurt Rager with Lutheran
Advocacy Ministry in New Mexico,
Lutheran advocacy also expresses
the position of the New Mexico
conference of churches, and I'm
here to speak in favor of SB 16,
as faith organizations, we
worked to further the democratic
process throughout the state,
and we encourage our citizen
members to join in public
deliberations at all levels and
to regularly exercise their
right to vote in terms of voter
registration, our members surely
would reflect that of New
Mexico, where almost 25% of
registered voters are not
connected to a major party.
We believe that the political
health of our state suffers when
barriers are in place that make
it more difficult or suppress
eligibles from a key opportunity
to participate in elections. In
this case, primary elections,
with the growing demographics
that you've heard, it's time to
give non-affiliated voters the
opportunity to vote throughout
our election process. Lutheran
advocacy Ministry of New Mexico
and the New Mexico Conference of
Churches, urge your support for
SB 16, and thank you for the
opportunity to share our
position this morning.
Thank you. And then our last
person is uh Ms. Wynn from the
New Mexico Asian Family Center,
and there's about 2 minutes
left.
So
They online?
Madam.
Yes, hi, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Heng Yuan, representing New
Mexico Asian Family Center, as
the largest and most
comprehensive provider for the
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian community in
New Mexico, we believe that SB
16 will help to ensure a more
equitable and inclusive
representation in the election
process in New Mexico.
Through our nonpartisan civic
engagement work with AIPINH
voters. We have seen a growing
number of independent voters.
Many voters, including first
time, newer limited English
proficient, younger voters have
chosen an affiliated option.
New Mexico number of independent
voters has grown by more than
30,000 people in the last 4
years.
Since 2020, the number of Asian
Americans identifying as
independent rose from 25% to
31%, according to AAPI data 2024
survey.
To tap in the voter voting
potential of Asian Americans and
other community in our state. We
need to allow as many people to
participate in the primary as
possible. We hope you vote yes
on this legislation. Thank you
so much for your work in our
state. Thank you.
Thank you. We
Pat, we do have organized
opposition, uh, I have Beth
Dowling and Ramona Goolsby, fan
as the organized opposition, uh,
you all will have 10 minutes in
total to divide that time as you
see.
Good morning. My name is Beth
Dowling. I'm from Sandoval
County and I am the chair of the
Republican Party currently, and
I've also been very involved in
voter registration and voter
integrity, um, throughout the
county.
I'm opposed to Senate Bill 16.
This bill
Doesn't address
The needs of the of the people
in terms of the
set primaries.
Every legal citizen has a right
to vote.
Every legal citizen has a right
to run for office. The closed
primary is not a two-party
system, as it's being argued by
this group.
What we want to do is say, we
have same day registration. That
is what's open to all voters
throughout the state.
What's happening with this bill,
I will tell you, is a semi-open
primary weakens the integrity of
the election.
same day registration and
provisional ballots are already
the biggest reason we don't have
results in a timely fashion.
semi-open will also increase
spoiled ballots. Let's think
about this, which hasn't been
discussed. When a declined to
state voter is able to ask for a
Democrat ballot. Then they
realize that they don't like or
know any of the candidates on
the ballot.
They have to go back and ask for
a Republican ballot instead, and
also take into account.
Absentee ballots. What happens
when a voter gets the wrong
absentee ballot.
These are things that need to be
worked out, and we don't need to
be working on things that make
it easier for people to vote. We
have those policies and, and
procedures in place with same
day registration. I urge you not
to support Senate Bill 16.
Thank you, Ms. Goolsby.
Chair, committee
Um
I want to let people know that
um.
Oh, I'm sorry, Ramona Goolsbee,
Sandoval County.
Uh, I am a declined state. I'm
not in the young category,
actually, I'm in the retired
category, and there is a reason
why I'm a declined state.
And that is because I don't
agree with either of the
parties' politics in general.
But those are the party
politics. I think that, um, in
the primary, if I want to change
because I am extremely excited
about a political candidate. I
have that opportunity to do that
in New Mexico. I'm not stupid. I
know how to do it. I don't think
anyone is stupid. They should
know how to do same day
registration changes.
The party is um.
Important to those that
participate in it. What I can
see and what has been talked
about is how you can join now,
you don't have to ask or change
your registration. I can go and
ask for a Democrat ballot, and I
can vote against you.
I can organize people to go up
there and vote against you.
and I haven't paid any dues to
your party. I haven't
participated in your party
process, but I can determine who
represents your party.
And I'm making this argument
just as um
Balance. I don't think any bill
should be passed just on uh one
side or the other that we need
to have conversations about the
things that
Miss Dowling brought up. I
appreciate the fact that being a
register voter registrar myself.
I have seen many, many people
change their party affiliation
to decline to state, and that is
happening all across the
country. That isn't just in New
Mexico. What needs to be
addressed is increasing voter
participation. Um, you don't
have to change your party in the
general election. And if you
look at the number of people
that participate in New Mexico's
general election is abysmal.
Uh, and that is why I am asking
for continued conversation on
this issue. Thank you.
Thank you. That is everyone that
we have signed up.
Um, so we will go to uh or does
anyone in the audience want to
raise their hand to indicate
support. All right. These folks
over here. Anyone want to raise
their hand to indicate
opposition.
These folks over here, right,
you guys are planned your
seating. All right. Uh, we're
gonna go ahead and go to members
of the committee, uh, who would
like to be on the list.
No, you guys want to go straight
to a vote.
Townsend, all of us on block.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think we were, uh.
Try to figure out who wanted to
go first, so.
I will, um, start here.
Um
Senator
Um
You may, I may want to ask of
our Secretary of State this
question. Are you aware of any
analysis?
Done by any party.
That purports that this
particular
Piece of legislation.
would tend to benefit one major
party or the other.
Madam Chair, senator, no, um, 38
states have some form of open
primary, and we do not see the
integrity of parties in those
states being threatened, they
Allow their voters to vote.
According to the primary system
that they have enabled and.
Voters vote their conscience.
So, Madam Chair, um, Senator, am
I to believe
That a bill that came forward.
Um
reported.
I, in this instance.
People on the left hand side of
the room.
And opposed by people on the
right side of the room.
And no one dared a.
An analysis to say that this is
good for us or bad for this. I
mean, that's, that's kind of
hard for me to
Fathom that would occur.
has, has
Did you not think about that,
Madam Chair, and senator, there
have been many hypotheticals
proposed, but when you look at
the data from the states who
have semi-open primaries,
there's been nothing measurable.
So, uh, Madam Chair, and
Senator, are any of those
hypothetical analysis available
to the committee to
Look at.
Madam Chair and Senator
clarified, not hypothetical
analyses concerns.
Expressed by both parties, Madam
Chair and senator, um, and
speculation about what might
happen, there's been a great
deal of that.
But when you look at the data
from states who've had it,
Um, it
Hasn't been measured, as in
they've tried, but.
No one has found a measurable
difference yet, or Madam Chair,
believe me, we would all be
hearing about it.
Well
Madam Chair, um, senator.
I certainly have been hearing
about it. Um,
There are a number of people,
including many of the county
clerks.
Across New Mexico that are very
concerned and their opposing
this piece of legislation were
the county clerks.
Um
Input sought and uh included in
this piece of legislation.
Madam Chair and senator, um, the
county clerks who we have spoken
to have had varied opinions.
Um
The common
refrain that we have heard and
part of the reason we're
carrying the bill is to remove
the administrative headache.
Um, that
Asking
Unaffiliated voters to register
for a day and then unregister,
um, is
Difficult and they would like to
see that addressed, but perhaps
that is a question for Secretary
of State in case she has heard
from the county clerks, because
she works with all of them.
I like to post my original
question to you to her as well.
Madam Chair, uh, senator.
Um
I know my team had a call with
the county clerks yesterday did
was
This particular bill discussed
on that cough?
was but not
OK, so I can't obviously speak
for the county clerks, we did
have a discussion my team did
yesterday with them, their
county clerks here in the room,
they're more than capable of
speaking for themselves on that.
Um, and then I'm sorry, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, your
original question about
research, um.
I am generally aware that there
is plenty of research out there
that shows that
Uh
Nonclosed or rather open
primaries, the more open the
primary is, the greater the
participation. I have never in
my academic career, which I do
have aside from my role as
Secretary of State, ever seen a
document that indicates that it
favors one party or the other,
um, and, and so that's all I'm
able to tell you. I can't prove
a negative. So if it doesn't
exist, I can't tell you if, if
something doesn't exist, Madam
Chair, Senator.
Thank you for that though.
Um, Madam Chair and the
Secretary of State.
I, um
I
I find it troubling and the
reason I, I can't support the
piece of legislation is because
I have a number of trusted
County clerks across New Mexico
that have great concerns and
they believe that their
Um
Boy has either been.
Washed or or ignored.
Um, and that is, is very
troubling.
Personally.
I find it almost incredible.
That, um, someone.
On the proponent side of this
piece of legislation.
is not looking at it in a
favorable way to help them win
elections.
They certainly wouldn't be
proposing something.
That undermines or hurts them,
you know that as well as I do.
And so, to sit here and in
committee and say, well, this is
completely neutral.
It's not gonna favor anybody.
It's incredible.
And, um, and quite frankly, um,
I think the general public
understands exactly what's
Trying to occur and uh
And that's why they opposed it,
so I appreciate it, um, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, uh, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam chair, um,
thank you, Senator.
And I appreciate uh your time,
Senator, uh, with me on the
floor, I think it was yesterday
talking about um this bill.
And as you know, I am torn.
On this bill, but I just want to
also thank um those that are
here that opposed the bill and
those that are here that support
the bill.
Uh, one thing I just want to
make a correction on a little
civics matter is this is not a
democracy, this is a republic.
This is an important point that
we should all be aware of.
The other thing, um, Madam Chair
and senator.
As a military guy who lived many
years overseas.
And I actually voted from
Afghanistan one year.
As a New Hampshire resident, uh,
at the time.
Now New Hampshire, as you know,
Senator, from our talks is a
completely open primary.
So what does that mean? That
means in New Hampshire in the
primary in September of the
election year.
Just 2 months before the general
election, any voter can vote for
any candidate.
Totally open.
Gives you a bunch of choices.
I like that.
This bill doesn't do that.
This bill actually, in my
opinion, it discriminates
against the parties that are
Here in New Mexico, besides the
Republicans and Democrats, we
have the Green Party, the
Socialist Party.
Um,
there's 4 of those people in New
Mexico.
The Libertarian Party, Natural
Law Party, other, I don't know
what other is.
And conservative.
I guess other would be DTS.
So
I think the point was also
brought up that these people
have the opportunity, all year
long for the most part, 24 hours
a day.
go on their phone or their
laptop and type in all their
little boogie woogie information
to change their party
affiliation anytime they want,
they have the freedom to do so,
and I support that 100%.
I think, uh, Miss Dowling
brought up, you can go and
change your party registration
the day you wanna register, so
the
The tools and the capabilities
are already there for the
citizen.
However, they are not there for
the citizen of these other
parties that were discriminated
against because in a primary, if
you're a Republican, you only
get a Republican ballot.
But if your DTS, you can choose.
And if you're a Democrat, you're
stuck with the Democrat
candidates. If you're a
Republican, you're stuck with
the Republican candidates. It's
really not an open primary.
That being said, when you look
at the registration numbers in
New Mexico, the DTS, as somebody
said, is rightfully gaining more
members.
Then the Republican and primary
Republican and Democrat Party
and quite frankly.
I totally get that. Both parties
are just kind of wacky
sometimes.
I think we can all agree with
that.
But we have not been suppressing
voters in the state of New
Mexico, when you look at the
primary results.
That they have an opportunity.
Change their party affiliation.
What's even funny is that in
2020, before we were able to do.
The change of party
registration.
We had about 42% of New Mexicans
participate in the election.
Less in 2022 when we had the
opportunity to change.
Let me just make sure, Madam
Chair, senator.
I stress that point again.
In a closed primary in 2020.
We had more voter turnout than
we had in 2022.
With the option of changing your
party.
In my opinion,
The responsibility is on the
citizen.
To be smart enough, I think as
one of this, uh, this, uh, young
lady here mentioned.
The people have the
responsibility, it is their
right to vote, and they have to
take that responsibility very,
very seriously.
And that's a right that I fought
for and defended many years in
uniform.
I have a hard time with this
bill and I'm on the fence, and
you know that.
But when we start discriminating
against these minor parties.
We're leaving a lot of people on
the table.
Now the other side of the
argument that I have a hard time
answering, and you might bring
it up, and I'll bring it up for
you to give you a little
ammunition against me.
It
What type of message is New
Mexico sending when we say we
want everyone to vote.
But you got to be in a club.
That's a tough argument.
And I'm with you.
And my answer to that, as I
think about it is, we already
provide those tools and
capabilities 24 hours a day.
On a phone, on a laptop, on a
website that are distinguished
SOS has set up to allow us to do
that when we're watching, when
we're binge watching on Netflix
watching The Walking Dead or
something.
We have that opportunity and
that capability and everyone can
go in and has the time to go do
that.
But we shouldn't be
discriminating against voters,
and I think that's what we're
doing.
Because we're not giving them a
truly open primary where
Democrats, Republicans, Green
Party, ETS can look at a primary
ballot.
And pick and choose like a
Chinese menu of what they want.
They can't do that.
That's an open primary, and
that's what we're not doing.
That's what I would support, but
this bill doesn't allow us to do
that.
This bill
Puts us in stovepipes. It gives
one group of people a choice
versus others. And that's my
heartache with this. It really
is discriminatory against many,
many people and doesn't give
them the choice, as other states
have those open primaries we can
cross party lines.
That I'm familiar with.
As a voter of my previous home
state for many, many years
before I moved here into this
closed system.
So I, I might have some other
comments after.
But again
This bill
We have to recognize.
We had more of a voter turnout.
In 2020, then 2022.
And by the way, that was during
COVID.
And thankfully we were able to
have some, you know, mail-in
ballast to help, uh, with that,
so people could vote and feel
safe. So,
I, I thank you for this. I, I, I
Probably going to vote no. I
might have some more comments,
but I want to work with you to
make this more inclusive.
And more diverse.
Because it's not, and it needs
to be to allow members to have
our citizens registered voters
to have a more wide choice. And
in regards to same day
registration.
That's been a that's that's been
a very tough issue on the
clerks. I have a Democrat clerk
in Sandoval County, and Brady
with the Deputy Joey Dominguez,
they've had a tough time with
same day registration.
Uh, to change ballots that has
really put a lot of stress on
election operations, and I see
the Secretary of State agreeing
with me, nodding 12 6, and I
thank you, ma'am, for, for
agreeing with me because, uh,
we, we got to fix that. There's
a lot of things we have to fix
with elections uh in New Mexico,
and I, I hope I can work with
the Secretary of State, and you,
Senator, for doing this, and I
appreciate the work you put into
it and um I'll reserve any
further comments, uh, Madam
Chair, but, uh, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
It's anyone else want to be on
the list?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
Secretary, thank you guys for
the presentation. What gives me
pause is the concerns expressed
by the county clerks. Can you
take a moment and just walk us
through the process of how a
clerk.
would, would handle this process
on election day.
Yes, madam chair and senator,
that's exactly why the Secretary
of State is here,
um, and, and again, uh, Madam
Chair, senator, um, I don't
speak for the clerks, but I can
speak to the process,
essentially, um, we will make a
change in the programming of our
ballot on demand system, valid
on demand system, as you know,
Madam Chair and senator, is when
you go to vote, um, they bring
up your record, um, they see
you're registered in a primary
right.
Now currently as a Republican or
a Democrat, you basically
already have a ballot assigned
to your record, um, what this
change would entail would be to
change the programming so that
if you are a decline to state,
um, that you would be able to
tell the the clerk who's
checking you in. I want a
Democratic ballot. I want a
Republican ballot. I want a
libertarian ballot, whatever the
question may be, um, and then
they will, the clerk at the
polling place.
like on the correct ballot,
print that out for you. So it's
it's, it's a programming change.
There, there is training
involved with our poll
officials, and I know, um, from
what I've heard that's, you
know, something our clerks are
concerned about. Every time we
make a change to the election
code, you know, we always have
to retrain our poll officials.
And in terms of the technical
changes though, it, it's pretty
minor, and we have a pretty long
runway because our next primary
won't be until June of next
year.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary, can you speak to the
concern that was addressed
during public comment that if
let's say I'm declined to stay
and I printed out a Democrat
ballot, I don't recognize it was
was stated any of these
candidates, and I then want to
change.
I'm assuming it's too late, that
there's a record that I've
already.
Received a Democrat ballot,
correct? So Madam Chair and
Senator, it is possible because
we haven't developed the
procedures for this yet and our
office would be, um, in charge
of writing a rule, um, and of
course, developing a process,
um, right now when you go to
vote.
Um, if you get a ballot and you
say.
Vote for someone
unintentionally, we can spoil
that ballot. It is possible that
if if the desire is there that
we can develop a process to
spoil that ballot. Um, if, if
they, if the voter decides, oh,
whoops, I really didn't want a
Democratic ballot. I want a
Republican ballot or vice versa,
um, but that would be sort of
the in the weeds piece that we
could develop working together
with everybody, including the
clerks in terms of a rulemaking.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That,
that gives me a little bit of
concern right there.
I would say that we're trying to
set up guardrails that really
kind of speak to voter integrity
that once the ballot is printed,
kind of.
Too little too late, you've
asked for that ballot, and so
there aren't um
There aren't additional ballots,
so, so I, I would work like to
work with you to ensure that
those ballots are accounted for
somewhere I think that's what
gives voters the biggest
concernsenator, every single
ballot that is printed is
accounted for. If it's not
voted, it's spoiled and it's
accounted for in its own package
as a spoiled ballot, and we
always, um.
Uh, make sure that everything
adds up,
Madam, I appreciate that, madam,
Adam, uh, secretary, back to the
senator's part, I have to say
you guys did a really good job
of presenting this bill, uh,
when you opened up here, you
talked about the number of the
kind of states or independents
at 40%. I have to tell you that
many days, especially during the
legislative session, I identify
with the 40.
And I am sick and tired of a two
party system.
There's, there's pros and cons
to this bill, and I'm also with
Senator Block as I can see both
perspectives and in the pros and
cons, from the perspective of
voters. I really like that it
provides easy access and
encouragement for everybody to
vote.
And that's what we should want.
Everybody has a quick, easy way
to the polls and can participate
in this process. I also see the
point that if you don't register
with a particular party.
Or a particular club or a
particular association, you are
not entitled to a vote.
In that election process. I
understand that, but I, I will
say that I think there is
something much grander than
that. And when I look at the
pros of this, what I see is that
this targets.
Uh, and I've, and I've tried to
see from all perspective, I see
this bill targeting radical
candidates on both sides. That's
who I think would be most
threatened by this bill, and
honestly, that's what's wrong
with our political system.
I say that as a product of
primary politics.
Because I'm sitting up here.
Because a primary election.
Of John Arthur Smith.
Against a a a radical candidate.
Allowed that radical to prevail,
and the first time in history, a
republic as a result was
elected. And so when we look at
self-interest of who this
benefits.
In my case, those kind of
Locked up ugly politics.
Benefited me. I'm sitting here
by Democrats who think that I
represent the district.
Better
And someone who prevailed from.
A primary race.
And I would say, yeah, I may
have benefited from the process
of that, but the reality is it's
still broken.
That's why I was sent here, but
the reason why I stay here is
because I don't represent the
values of a party.
I represent the values of Senate
District 35.
Whatever that may look like and
is elected officials, I would
hope that when we come up here
and we say this all the time
when we're frustrated in debate.
I represent the values of New
Mexico.
And for that reason, I don't
have pause with this bill at
all, because if I'm doing my job
back home and I'm representing
independence and Democrats and
Republicans. I don't care who
votes as long as they vote for
me and I'm doing their job, I'm
quite confident they will.
And so that is the reason why I
lean to supporting his bill is
because we need more people and
I don't know how we have to open
this up, but I see that this
election system change favors
people over politics.
And, and that's what we need in
New Mexico, because there are a
lot of people in the middle who
are not represented when we have
the radicals on both sides, and
I would argue that redistricting
encouraged that.
The radicals on both sides that
can prevail in a primary, and we
vote in a general for the lesser
of two evils.
And so for that reason alone, if
we all come up here, we don't
follow party lines and we vote
for the people of New Mexico. I
see nothing wrong with this bill
and I'm happy to support it as
is. Thank you guys.
Great, thank you, anyone else?
Pushing to debate.
All right, um,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this bill.
Um,
I agree with a lot of what's
under Brantley.
I just said, and so I won't, uh,
I won't repeat it because I
wouldn't be nearly as eloquent.
Um, but there is, and I'm gonna
suggest an amendment to this
bill. Um, right now, this would
cover both decline to state
voters and minor party voters. I
know the minor parties, they
have their own process for
choosing candidates for the
general election. I don't see
anything in this bill that would
disallow a minor party voter
from both participating in that.
process and from participating
in a major party primary, um,
and that would essentially be
letting them, uh, double dip in
in a primary. And so I'm going
to suggest an amendment that
will take minor parties out of
this bill.
I'm gonna walk through the
amendment, but just as a heads
up, all this amendment is doing
would be striking out the the
language about that would, would
bring in minor parties.
And
Ah, committee secretary, I am
wrote it out here, so I don't
worry about, seriously,
scribbling everything down. So
on page one, line 12.
Removing major political.
from the title.
So it's just saying allowing
voters who have not designated a
party affiliation on their
certificates of registration to
participate in the primary
election process.
On page 2.
Line 9.
Strike it from the, the comma on
online 9, striking everything
through the semicolon line 11.
Page 2.
Lines 9 through 11 striking
everything from the, the comma
on that 9 through the semicolon
on 11.
On page 3.
Striking all of the language
that is added lines 3 through 9.
It's a comma, you know, I, I
accidentally put a dot with my
pen right there. Thank you. I
thought that was a really weird
choice to put a semicolon in
there, um.
OK, so and then page 3, we're
striking all that added language
on lines 3 through 9.
On page 7.
Lines 13 through 15.
Striking everything from the
The the comma on 13 through the
comma on 15.
On page 8.
Lines 21 through 23, doing the
same thing, everything from the
comma on 21 through the comma on
23.
same thing on page 10 lines 4
through 6.
Everything from the comma on 4
with the comma on sex.
Madam Chair, can you repeat that
on, um, page 10, you said the
comma on online for the commas
after the word registration. Is
that correct? Yeah, so right
there at the end of line 4.
Through the comma on line 6.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And on page 12.
Starting on line 19.
Striking everything after the
word affiliation.
Through the comma on line 21.
Oh, sorry, the first
affiliation, thank you. Good
catch.
it
The first use of the first word
on that line of affiliation and
striking everything after that
through the comma.
On line 21.
The senator is not a and before
I go to center Figuero.
Members, was that clear?
Does everyone understand that.
The amendment that's being
proposed. Senator, is that a
friendly or unfriendly
amendment?
Madam Chair, that's a friendly
amendment.
Uh, is there, um.
I am getting a, an urgent look
that tells me I may have, might
have done something wrong with
my amendment. Um, Ms. Bachman,
do you wanna?
Did I miss something?
Come on.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Lindsay Bachmann,
director of legislative and
executive affairs for the
Secretary of State's office on
page 13, um, there are
There's a section that
addresses, um, challenges and
would likely just need to be
amended to um include some of
the decisions being made
regarding the amendment.
And, and Ms. Bachman, would it,
would it would adding that
they're on line 17, adding or
minor.
that, so, uh, a basis for a
challenge would be in the case
of a primary election, the
person desiring to vote is
currently affiliated with a
major or minor political party
represented on the open minor
parties not represented on the
ballot, OK, I think it's, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it might read better
to say the person desiring to
vote is currently affiliated
with a political party strike
represented on the ballot, but
the person uh requests a ballot
for a party for which
The person not affiliated.
Excuse me.
So I think it would read with
the amendments in the case of a
primary election, the person
desiring to vote is currently
affiliated.
With a and strike major
political party.
Strike represented on the
ballot.
And leave, but the person
requests a ballot for a party
with which the person is not
affiliated.
Yeah, I think that works.
Remembers, does that make sense?
Everyone.
All right.
Uh, and is it still friendly?
Yes, madam chair.
OK. Friendly and better, yes,
absolutely. Thank you, Ms.
Bachman.
All right. Um,
Any debate on the amendment.
Any opposition to adopting that
amendment.
seen none, that amendment is
adopted. We're back on the bill
as amended. Any further debate
on the bill.
What is Senator Stewart.
Um, I try to move it to pass on
16, Azamin.
All right, we have a motion for
as amended. Uh, let's go ahead
and do a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
No
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart. Yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
Yeah, but
It's in
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I apologize for
people online. I did not have my
microphone on, with 6 in favor,
you have to pass.
All right, um.
Let's
Go ahead and
Let's go ahead and go to 218.
And Senator Bergman's is going
to be presenting uh with our
Secretary of State, and I will,
uh, continue to share.
All right, Senator, go ahead.
And keep it down so we can
continue with our work. Go
ahead, Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
And the folks can keep it down
so we can continue with our
work.
Go ahead, Senator. Thank you
Senate Bill 218 makes to the New
Mexico election code, which have
been informed by the firsthand
experience of election
administrators statewide over
the past two years.
The drafters, including myself
and Senator Duay have worked
closely with the Secretary of
State's office.
And they strongly support these
changes.
They're also here today to help
as my expert witnesses, and I
will hand it over to them to go
through the bill, and after
that, we'll move the two
amendments that we have.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you to the sponsor. Thank
you to the committee, Maggie to
Luce Oliver, Secretary of State,
um, briefly before I go through
the components of the major
components of the bill, um, this
is.
Similar in many ways to bills
that this committee has seen
before, I know we have a lot of
new members now, um, in, in the
sense that we're always trying
to bring the election code kind
of up to uh the reality of the
modern day, um, there are no
major policy.
Um
Uh, provisions within this bill.
It's a, it's intended to be a
technical bill to address issues
that election administrators,
uh, confront and deal with
during the election process and
also, of course, as always, to
make it easier for voters. Um,
so I'll hit on some of the top
lines, um, were intending to
amend the con confidential
address designation provisions,
uh, to include all election
administrators and staff, um,
because as you all.
No, uh, election staff have
been.
Threatened and, you know, had a
lot of challenges,
unfortunately, over the last 4
years, uh, we are creating an
opportunity for training
opportunities, not not just for
the county clerks, um,
especially the newer county
clerks who haven't administered
an election before, but also
because our office um has
frequently. I, I would say drop
the ball in terms of ensuring
that our county clerks have all
the training that they need and
so it's also.
intended to hold my team and my,
uh, office accountable and any
future Secretary of State,
accountable to ensure that our
county clerks are getting
adequate training before they
administer their first election.
Um, we are
Intending to eliminate the
municipal officer election when
we first created the regular
local election, we gave
municipalities the option to opt
in and over time, uh, we now
have about 100 out of 106
municipalities in the state that
are participating. So now we
have really just a handful of
municipalities that are not and
the uh the level of resources it
takes both from our office and
from our county clerks to
administer those elections.
There are, there are.
actual costs and staff resources
needed, um, we, we've gone
beyond the tipping point, so
much like uh when we made vote
centers optional back in 2011
and got to a point where we had
mostly vote centers just made
sense to have all those centers,
um, that's what we're asking
for, uh, with regard to the
municipal officer election. It's
also less confusing for voters,
uh, because there are, are only
about 6 municipalities in the
state where they have an
election in March versus every
other election is.
Happening in November and the
participation for those
elections is quite low compared
to the regular local election.
We're going to ideally create
some emergency election
procedures, and this is informed
directly from both the the the
wildfires that happened in 2022
during the primary up here in
northern New Mexico as well as
the Chavez County flooding that
occurred during the general
election time this year, when a
voter is displaced because of an
emergency or a natural disaster,
we want to make sure they can
still vote. Um, if they're not
in their home county, and if and
and if it's not possible in
their home county.
a stand up polling places and
early voting, um, and things
like that, we want to make sure
those voters are still able to
vote and they, they absolutely
could, uh, as long as we use the
same process that we do for our
overseas and military voters,
uh, who we know, um, can't be
home to vote, um.
We are trying to adjust
automatic recount calculations,
um, this is really the final
piece to address, um, madam or
Mr. Chair and members, um, for
the regular local election we
had something like 37 recounts
after the last regular local
election, um, and, and, and
again, and there was no change
in any of the outcomes, and I
think it was because we just had
it, um, uh, it, it was just too
high.
give a percentage, so it
captured too many, I think races
that, um, really didn't need to
be included in that recount
provision and it was a lot of
money. It was a lot of time for
our county clerks and their
staff, um, and so, um, with
that, uh, Mr. Chair and members,
uh, that is the the basis of the
bill, and of course, my team and
I won't speak for Senator
Bergman's, but Senator Bergman
today stand for any questions
you may have.
Great. Thank you. Um, that's
been your presentation, you're
ready for organized support.
Yes. All right. Um,
We have uh
22 people signed up in support,
uh, but they're both from common
cause. I don't know if they both
want to speak for common cause.
OK Mason Graham, come on up.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Mason Graham
from Common Cause in Mexico. I'm
here in support of Senate Bill
218 that takes meaningful steps
to protect election officials,
improve our election
administration and make voting
more accessible and secure for
everyone. Uh, the rising threats
of violence against election
workers are deeply concerning.
Election administrators should
not have to fear for their
safety, simply for doing their
jobs.
In addition, the new
certification requirements for
our county clerks will
standardize education and
practice, ensuring that every
election is run smoothly and
uniformly across the state.
This can improve trust in
elections down the road.
Uh, lastly, as ecological
disasters increase, increase
them both frequency and
severity, it's critical that our
voters continue to have a voice
on elections, even in times of
crisis. So we do ask for your
support. Uh, thanks again to the
sponsor and to the Secretary of
State for bringing this forward.
Thank you, that's the only
person I had signed up in
support. Uh, we, we got, you
folks need to sign up at least
an hour before if they want to
speak and and support our
opposition on bills. So I
encourage you to, to look at
the, the Senate rules, uh,
Procedures that are posted. Um,
we do have organized opposition.
There are 4 people listed in the
organized opposition. You'll
have a total of 10 minutes to to
divide up as you like, Ramona
Goolsby, Beth Dowling, uh,
Cynthia Luhan Canner and Larry
Liejo.
Ramona Goolsbee Rio Rancho.
There are many flaws and
problems I see with Senate Bill
218. I have read the bill
multiple times reflect
reflecting on what they choose
to change and wonder why they
didn't address problems I saw
personally as a poll worker in
both 2022 and 2024 elections.
I know the secretary is a state
is aware of the problems because
I sent reports to the Sandoval
County clerk and to the
Secretary of State attorney. I
will let my fellow New Mexicans
talk more about the problems
they saw with the bill. What I
want to talk about is a little
more personal.
A little over 3 years ago, I
chose to retire and moved to Rio
Rancho, for its low crime rate
business friendly environment,
excellent schools, and strong
sense of community. These
qualities stand out markedly
compared to other cities in our
state, making Rio Rancho a model
of what New Mexico could aspire
to be.
Send a bill to 218, which
proposes to repeal Section
1-22-3.1, threatens to undermine
the fundamental aspect of our
municipal identity and
governance. This section
currently empowers cities like
ours to enforce voter ID.
A measure that was
democratically embedded in our
local charter in 2012.
This law is not merely a
regulation, it is a reflection
of our community's choice to
ensure that our elections remain
secure and that our officials
truly represent their
constituents.
Our local voter ID requirement
is a prime example of how Rio
Rancho proactively addresses its
unique needs. The proposed
repeal of this provision by
Senate Bill 2218 represents a
concerning overreach into the
rights of municipalities to
manage their affairs,
potentially violating
constitutional Article 4 Section
24 of the New Mexico
Constitution, which protects
local governance from special
or local laws regulating
municipal matters.
In Rio Rancho, voter ID
requirements contribute
significantly to the confidence
residents have in our electoral
system.
Knowing that each vote cast is
verified under stringent
criteria helps ensure that
elected officials are genuinely
represented of our
representative of our community.
This is how we maintain a family
friendly traditional community
in a state that struggles with
numerous challenges.
The repeal of Section 1-22-3.1
would strip away a crucial
element of our city's charter
that was established to enhance
the integrity of our local
elections. When I work, people
readily walk in with their voter
ID. I don't ask.
They want to show that.
Um, and I.
Good morning, Beth Dowling,
Sandoval County.
I want you to say no to Senate
Bill 218. Transparency is
paramount in our electoral
process. The proposed change to
the election section program,
security program within Senate
Bill 218 raises significant
concerns regarding transparency.
By shifting this critical
component of our modern election
system away from the oversight
of the election bureau with no
accountability to the public,
the Secretary of State's office
could significantly weaken both.
Election integrity and
transparency.
The bill's modification of
language from voters to eligible
voters might seem minor, but it
carries profound implications
for voter accessibility.
I will also tell you from
personal experience, both in
2022 and 2024 in Sandoval County
as a
Um, pole challenger.
We experienced significant
computer issues around the
entire state with over 25,000
same-day registrations processed
on November 5th.
Causing the same day
registration system to go down
twice.
And certainly many people were
forced to accept provisional
ballots and a large portion of
people just walked out and
didn't stay to cast their
ballot.
In Sandoval County and, and
Provisional ballots hasn't been
discussed um to you today, and
it needs to be because it's part
of this bill.
Sandoval County provisional
ballots issued on November 5th,
427 of those 427 provisional
ballots over 72% were
disqualified.
And only 27% were qualified. We
are, we are disenfranchising
voters, right and left, and
that's just 1 out of 33 counties
that were affected on election
day.
The only solution offered in
this legislation is to complete
a provisional ballot register.
And I'm gonna tell you that's
not the solution here. We need
this to go back to the drawing
board. It's not a true solution,
and it doesn't resolve the
underlying problems that we face
here in this state.
Good morning, Ms. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Cynthia Luhan Kanner,
and I am a board member at the
Pre-libertarian New Mexico party
and um, I oppose this bill here.
Um, there are several reasons
why I oppose this bill. This
bill has too many subjects in
here. There are some subjects
that some people will agree on,
and there are some subjects that
people will not agree on, for
example, the pre
Primary convention detonation
and um another subject would be
the certification program of
county clerks in the we should
be able to vote um on each
individual subject, not all or
none at the package in there.
Um, the second thing that I am,
um, concerned about is the
transparency at there, as I read
between the line, I had to
remember back in 2020, I used to
be able to get cast boat records
um for almost all of the county,
um, but then in 2022, I was not
able to get the cast boat
record, so I am concerned about
transparency of the election
process.
The election security program,
um, without specifying what
agency there's a risk of
diminished oversight and
coordination. So we really need
to look at that and question
that in there. It's hard to know
who holds accountability for
election security. The public
isn't allowed to do IPA like I
used to do to hold um to, to
even just educate ourselves. We,
I don't think anybody should
have to go to the judge to do
that.
Yeah, is um dropped it and it is
dropped it improperly in there.
That was added in there that
does not have that underscored
materials, which is new and that
decreased your transparency in
there. So we need to see what
has actually has been changed on
this bill here.
Look at all the definitions.
Oh, OK. I'm sorry. If you go to
section 30 in there, I would
suggest you to read all of the
definition and see what is
omitted in there, there are lots
of definitions that had been
admitted in section 30, and an
in section 33. I will yield my
time back with the rest of the
um commentator.
Thank you,
Mr. Leeja is online. Mr. Lieha,
you have about a minute and a
half left.
Go ahead.
Mr. Li, how, you need to unmute
yourself and go ahead.
OK, in 15 seconds. Go ahead.
Good morning. Uh, I'm from
Berneu County. I have a
bachelor's in physics. I have a
trainer's experience as a
database programming analysts,
and I ask you not to vote for SB
218.
Uh, the, uh, uh, there's 5 words
that all it takes to create a
cybersecurity black box in New
Mexico. So when uh the Secretary
of State uh makes statements
like, uh, that we have
transparency in the Mexico
elections that's pretty empty
assurances. Uh, since, uh,
The 2023 legislature included a
section governing a new
department under the Secretary
of State, name the election
security program.
Uh
The, uh, changes made to this
section will eliminate uh a
certain word, uh, and the, the
section A of this chapter one
elections 12, 1-32-34 uh will
state the Secretary of State or
stated the Secretary of State
shall maintain an elections
security program within the
Bureau of Elections. Well,
within the Bureau of Elections,
it's gonna be eliminated and
there's
No other mention of that is,
that is time.
OK. All right. So, uh, would
anyone in the audience like to
raise their hand to indicate
support.
All right. Again.
You guys are still uh organ
except for 11 supporter now on
this side. All right, anyone in
the audience want to raise their
hand to indicate opposition.
All right.
Members of the committee.
Oh, I'm sorry. You know, uh,
have you, have you moved your
moved the amendments or
or described them, would you
like us to do that now? Yes,
please, please go ahead.
Um, Madam Chair.
We have 2 amendments which are
purely technical drafting
corrections. The first one that
we can start with is 230769.1.
Which simply changes.
A strike through that's on page
21.
To remove the strike through and
then adds
some new clarifying language.
Miss Bachman, do you want to
describe why we're making this
change?
Sure, Madam Chair, members of
the committee inadvertently in
drafting and addressing
pre-primary convention changes
in the bill. Um, there was a
section that was struck through
completely and and the effect of
that would to would be an impact
to nominating petition signature
requirements for statewide and
federal candidates. That was not
the intention, um, for this
bill, and so the amendment, um,
makes a change and I can, I can
read it on page 21, lines 2
through 10. It removes the
opening bracket and the line
through on page 21 lines 2 and
3, it's strike, it strikes
pre-primary convention, so it
reinstates that section B, goes
back and strikes pre-primary
convention designation and
inserts in lieu thereof
statewide office or the Office
of the United States
Representative on page 21 line
11, it makes conforming changes
to Section C, which will no
longer need to be amended,
because Section B will be
reinstated, um, and so
Those include, um, um, removing
the brackets in the line through
of any other and striking and.
All right, um, and this is a
friendly amendment.
Here, yes. All right. Uh, is
there any debate on that
amendment?
And then, is there any objection
to adopting that amendment.
Seeing that amendment is
adopted.
Ah, let's go to the next
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Same with this one, it's fixing
technical.
Drafting, it's drafting cleanup
and all that.
Ms. Bob was explained it as
well.
Sure happy to Madam Chair,
members of the committee, this
is amendment um.23413.1, um,
and, and this amendment
addresses, um, the repeal and
removal of the municipal officer
election will impact, um, terms
related to those officers. It
mirrors language that we, that
you all, um, worked on in 2018
when they, uh, when we all
implemented the local election,
I mean consolidated.
public bodies into that election
that occurs in the odd numbered
year. Um, so, uh, it's a
temporary provision and, and it,
it kind of just outlines folks
who would be, um, a lot who
would have been elected pursuant
to the MOE, um, in March of next
year, addresses their terms and
then the following, uh, MOE that
would have existed addresses
those folks' terms too, so it
captures a 4 year timeline.
Is there any debate on that
amendment?
Any objection to adopting that
amendment.
See none. That amendment is also
adopted. We are back on the
bill.
As amended.
Members who would like to be on
the list.
walk.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator and Secretary
of State, I appreciate you being
here.
Um
I, I just wanted to let you know
before I get into a couple of
questions to kind of shape this
is
Um, well, first, let me, let me
ask Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
can you, can you just refresh
me?
When, when somebody is online.
To talk, uh, whether they're for
or against the bill.
Uh, how do they sign in?
So, Senator, uh, we have our
procedures that are available on
the LeisS website, um, the same
procedures that have been
adopted by the tax committee.
Uh, they are also used in the
judiciary Committee. We've been
using almost the exact same
procedures. This is our 3rd year
using them. And it's, it
describes, you need to email our
committee secretary and let her
know at least an hour ahead of
time. If you want to speak for
or against a bell, and also
talks about organized
opposition. Now that works, we
encourage folks to do organized
opposition, um, so that we can,
rather than having so 10 people
stand up and say, vote no, uh,
that we can get a
Get real information about why
folks are are opposing the bill.
Organized opposition gets 10
minutes. If there's time left
over and there's unorganized
opposition that has signed up an
hour at least an hour before the
meeting, then they would, they
could take that additional time.
This time, the organized
opposition took the entire time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So on
the procedure you were talking
about, I just wanna make sure
I'm clear so we don't have this
again, cause a lot of people are
here and they want to speak out
on this bill, so I wanna make
sure the public that is
listening and those here
understand this, um.
Do they have to sign, do they
have to be logged in an hour
before the committee hearing,
can they log in any time as long
as they send an email to the
staff. Is that what you're
telling me? Senator, yes, as
long as you have signed up with
our committee secretary, uh, at
least an hour before our
meeting. Uh, I think should be
logged in by the time we get to
you, otherwise we won't get to
you, but it's not about when
they log in. It's about signing
up ahead of time, which is the
same procedure we have had in
place. This is now our 3rd year
doing so. OK, so that.
procedure hasn't changed
recently. It's one hour and
that's it. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for the clarification. I
appreciate that a lot. Um, I
will tell you that, um, we, we
do have some people here, um,
um, Madam Secretary of State,
uh, Senator, in fact,
We have uh the clerks
association came out against
this bill. Uh my clerk in
Sandoval County.
Democrat Ann Brady, who is uh
near and dear to my heart, by
the way, and enjoy Dominguez,
the deputy came out against this
bill. My mayor, uh, is here, uh,
Mayor Greg Hall from Rio Rancho
as well as uh being a former
commissioner, my other mayor
from Bernna Leo, Jack Torres is
here, Democrat and Republican,
they are also against this bill
for for various reasons, and I
think
Um, when we have all this
opposition from both parties,
that kind of says something that
we really haven't flushed out a
lot of these details. And a lot
of these details are very, very
complicated, it's a very complex
bill, and I know a lot of work
went into it and, and I
definitely appreciate that.
I, I will tell you.
That my
Um, passed on some of these
election.
Uh, certifications, as you know,
I think I'm the only county
commissioner in the state to
vote against 3, to fail to
certify 3 elections.
Because we had
Uh, county clerks.
Whether it was the county clerk
at the county level or a
municipal clerks, literally not
follow state statute and uh and.
And all their great integrity,
admit they didn't follow state
statutes.
Um, law on these elections, and
which is why I, I personally
didn't vote for the certify 3
elections, not that I deny those
elections. It's just I felt
elections should be.
100% complied with the state
statute, and if we don't do
that.
What's the point of even doing
heaven state statues, and I see
you shaking your head in
agreement there, and I
appreciate that.
So
We've had a lot of issues in
Sandoval County. And I will tell
you over 8 years serving there
as a commissioner.
We've had great bipartisan
support.
I would argue that Anne Brady,
Democrat, uh, with Joey
Dominguez, her deputy, have been
probably the most transparent
clerk's office, uh, with the
Democratic Party, the
Libertarian Party and the
Republican Party and bringing in
all of all the key stakeholders
to make sure our elections are
Safe
Secure and fair.
That's what we all want, I think
we can agree with that.
Um, one of the things, um, in my
experience in Sandoval County
has made me very aware of the
importance of the election
system and the security.
Program.
There have been machines that
were deployed that didn't have
appropriate CF cards, which
caused numerous issues in the
county.
And in the previous election,
uh, that we just had.
They deployed the wrong
machines, they've pulled out the
wrong, uh, pulled out to CF
cards when the polls were closed
and one didn't upload as well.
Now this brings a lot of
questions into the election
system, which we want to make
sure that everyone agrees the
election.
was run smooth.
Taking away a lot of
responsibilities from the Bureau
of Elections, it's very, very
concerning to me as well as
local control from different
Uh, municipalities, whether they
are Republican or Democrat
mayors.
I was moving the security
program out of the Bureau of
Elections going to improve these
security issues.
OK.
Uh, Madam Chair, senator, really
good questions, um.
You noted
So issues that arose, uh, in
terms of machine deployment and
CF cards, etc. um.
First and foremost, Madam Chair
and Senator.
Elections are a human process.
They're never perfect.
The challenge that we strive to
address and everything we do
with our election processes and
procedures in New Mexico is to
ensure that there is resilience
and a way to address those
issues.
When they arise so that our
elections continue to maintain
integrity. The training program
Which is the piece of this bill
that, as I understand it since
you raised the issue, Senator.
Again, I don't speak for the
clerks, as I understand it is.
The main issue
That the clerks have with this
bill.
And why they are not supporting
it, and again, I don't speak for
them. That's what I understand.
We'll attempt to address those
exact type of issues.
The security program is not
leaving the Secretary of State's
office. The security program is
expanding because we don't just
have elections in my office, and
I think this is something that
folks often forget.
We have a major business
services piece in our office as
well, where we receive filings,
process them, the business
community in New Mexico is very
dependent on my office, and
we've spent the last year and a
half building a totally new
program to ensure that
businesses can file timely and
get their documents quickly.
There are often mergers and
major uh uh processes that take
place that require timely
response from our office, and
we're heavily uh reliant.
On our IT, uh.
Components to ensure that these
happen and that we're also uh in
in the midst of being challenged
with uh folks fraudulently
trying to uh create businesses,
um, so this the, the whole point
of moving the security division
out of the under uh out from
under the Bureau of Elections is
not to eliminate it, but to
expand it to cover all of the
needs of our office. The
elections component is not going
away, in fact, our security
division is going to
have to grow because as we are
hearing, in fact, we just heard
the other day that uh the cyber
and infrastructure security
agency under DHS, which has been
providing our office with so
many resources over the last
years, all of the staff that we
work with have been laid off.
So our security program is only
going to have to grow in the
state to continue to protect
these systems, which I totally
agree with you, Senator. It's
incredibly important. So this is
not a lack of transparency move.
This is not intended to to
shrink the program, uh, it's
reflecting the reality of the
program, which is that it's
getting bigger and trying to
cover all of the needs of the
office to include elections and
taking on a bigger role with
regard to election security and
importantly,
it needs to be independent. We
wouldn't want to have this
department under the IT division
because of the security division
is telling IT you need to do
this, you need to do that in
order to ensure that our systems
are secure.
But reporting up to the CIO or
the Bureau of Elections
director, then
They have that accountability,
whereas now they can have the
independence much like a a uh
inspector General, say for
security to say this is what
needs to happen in order to keep
these systems secure.
Thank, thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I, I, I appreciate that
answer. uh, I, and I understand
where you're going with that, I
really do. But I would argue
that that the Secretary of
State's office has had so many.
Uh, computer cyber issues in
relation to same day
registration, the system's going
down and other issues, and the,
and it's not your fault, it just
happens. I understand that. Um.
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary,
how many municipalities
currently in New Mexico run
their own elections.
My understanding and I could be
wrong and and you just are we at
6?
9 in the last.
OK, so, um, Madam Chair,
senator, and the last municipal
officer election out of 106
total, we had 9.
That were running their own
elections and we understand that
at least 3 more are intending to
opt in, so we'll, we're looking
at like 6 for the next one.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, Madam Secretary.
Does this bill take away those
independent elections of those
remaining 6 of those 9, they can
still, the city of Rio Rancho.
It's still run their own
independent city election that
they run, um, because their
clerk, uh, who's here who just
retired after many, many years,
and the mayor's here, you know,
they're adamant because the
state, uh, in the municipalities
had an agreement not too long
ago.
And seems like we're going back
on on our word here at Santa Fe,
that cities were granted an opt
out for local elections.
And I hope that's still the
case.
And can you tell me?
100%, you know, sure with your
knowledge that these 9 local
municipalities.
We'll have
The option and we'll be able to
keep and decide for their own if
they can do local elections.
Madam Cha Senator, no, I can't
tell you that because the intent
of this bill is to bring them
into the regular local election.
At this point, there's an
outsized number of resources
that are being dedicated to
support those 9 or 6 individual
municipalities, um, what I can
tell you is that as long as
Whatever is in the city charter
does not conflict with state
law.
Those individual requirements
within the city charter will
continue to be, um, a pet.
Thank, thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, Madam Secretary, can,
can you tell me, or maybe, uh,
your assistant can which, what
are those municipalities that
currently run their own
elections besides uh Rio Rancho.
Uh, I don't, um, unfortunately,
um, Madam Chair, Senator, we
don't have the list in front of
us. Um, I know Ms. Martinez can
probably tell you, uh, city
clerk that's OK. Thank, thank
you, Madam Chair, and I assume
The Rio Rancho is the largest
municipality that runs its own.
Elections,
Madam Chair, Senator, my staff
is nodding yes. I will take that
as a yes. All right, thank you.
So thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I, I, I would ask, did your
office?
Um, now Rio Rancho is, it may be
the 2nd largest city, may have
passed Las Cruces, but we know
it's the fastest growing city uh
in New Mexico, one of the
fastest growing in the
Southwest.
And Rio ranch is a a very
independent city, city vision,
they have voter ID.
Um
Can you tell me who from your
office has coordinated not just
with this, the city staff of Rio
Rancho, but the other
8 municipalities.
Um, on this bill that takes
away.
Their ability to run their own
elections in order to get that
buy in, cause I, I really do
believe that you want to get by
it and you want to work with
others, I do believe that.
And that being said, this is
such a complex.
Oversight bill that I would, I
would hope there would be a lot
of coordination over many, many
months with Rio Rancho and the
other municipalities. Is that
the case? Well, respectfully,
Senator Madam Chair, we, we, we
routinely work with these
municipalities. We work with
them in coordinating their and
coordinating the municipal
officer election. Um, we,
because the reality at this
point, Madam Chair and senator,
is that the vast majority of the
municipalities in the state.
have opted in. Again, we're
getting to a tipping point and
now we're at a point where
we're, if we don't do this, if
we don't bring everybody in to
the regular local election. We
are carving out and I know the
legislature generally speaking,
um, doesn't like to carve things
out for one or maybe only a
couple of entities, um, and so
this is intended to just bring
uniformity now, of course, we
have in the past and we will
continue to work with these
municipalities regardless of
whether this particular
provision or this bill passes,
um, so I hope that answers your
question, Madam Chair, senator.
Thank you Madam Secretary. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um.
It, uh, I was hoping to see
more, more partnership, I.
Uh, quite frankly,
Um, on the ballot on section
1-10-6 the ballot, uh, starts on
page 23. The ballot name, order,
and printing standards.
The changes here, that's how
names in the federal and
presidential elections appear on
ballots and determines the
order order uh via a
randomization method.
Um, why is the Secretary of
State's office adding federal
and.
Presidential elections to the
wording in the statute, and I'm
curious if there were
Questions regarding ballot
placement for federal and
presidential races in the last
election, for instance,
Usually you would assume um.
On the presidential
Ballot specifically for the
president. There's numerous
candidates. It's like 10 or 12
or whatever.
But we saw, I would, I wouldn't,
and I would assume that I would
have seen on my ballot.
The Democrat and the Republican
as the two major candidates, 12,
whatever order you want to put
him in, I don't really care, but
you saw the Republican nominee,
um, Trump all the way down #7.
Was that, was that randomized or
how was that picked? Sure, yes,
exactly, Madam Chair, Senator.
So we've adopted the election
alphabet approach. This is the
3rd election cycle, um, that
we've adopted it actually, and
when I say the 3rd going into
the 2020 2026 cycle. Um, we work
with an independent CPA. They
randomize the alphabet in a
public meeting, we actually have
it, uh, a, a video of it, um, on
our website so you can always
see it and it's intended to
just.
Create fairness, um, so like no
matter what your last name is,
no matter what your party is,
you have just as likely a chance
of being first or last or in the
middle on the ballot as anybody
else, and we use that for all of
the offices and we have used
that for all of the offices. I,
I ran for reelection under that
system in 2022 and that is why,
um, the, the ballot order was
the way it was reflected, um,
this last year and this is
intended to be clarifying
language.
that I'm sure senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary, for that,
um.
Cause I thought we used to do
when there was just 2 candidates
in the old coin flip.
Whatever happened to that. So,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, the
major parties used to draw by
lot.
Or flip a coin or whatever, um.
it seemed more fair to just have
it randomized because, you know,
always the minor parties were
getting the short end of the
stick, but importantly for all
of the other races to, now it,
it's sort of like, you know, if
Democrats always get.
Heads
You know, they're always going
to be number one on the ballot,
right? And Republicans are going
to be #2, and then we go from
there. I,
I see.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Secretary, because, uh,
I have a two headed quarter I'm
trying to use, so.
Um
Let's just talk about the home
address confidentiality a little
bit, and
I, I want to make sure I
understand this.
This may have made a little bit
more sense to me back in the day
before the internet when you
just couldn't type in somebody's
name, and you can easily get
their, their address, um, and
for candidates there our
addresses are public anyway.
Um
So the changes, it allows
elected non-elected and
appointed employees of a county
clerk of the SOS.
To designate their home
addresses as confidential and
election-related disclosures.
This includes federal, state,
county, or local office or a
candidate thereof or a person
appointed.
to a federal, state, county or
local position.
Does that change mean that all
county clerk employees, all of
them.
Can ask to have their addresses
made confidential.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
specifically with regard to
their voter registration.
OK. Does this mean that people
that work the elections.
Volunteers or paid.
Um, can choose to have their
home addresses made
confidential.
Again, yes, Madam Chair,
senator, with specifically with
regard to their voter
registration.
What type of documented.
Problems or police reports.
Um, or interactions with law
enforcement.
Um, I'll just say for your,
you've been in office almost 868
years.
18 if you count when I was
counting 18 years. OK. All
right, so you're the right
person to watch because you were
the burnco clerk before, right,
so in your extensive experience
of 18 years working this stuff,
and I don't know how you've done
it so well, but congratulations.
Have there been any documented
problems with employees or
election workers being harassed
at home, and if so, and you
specifically tell me what those
examples are, and I don't need
the names, I just
want to say there was 3 workers
in Berna Leo during this
election cycle, Sandoval.
Los Lunas, whatever. Uh, yes,
madam chair senator, and of
course I don't have the list in
front of me, but off the top of
my head, uh, we've heard of, uh,
poll workers being followed home
at the end of the night. We've
heard of, um, folks who couldn't
because they weren't certified,
um, poll watchers, uh, sort of
stocking, if you will, sort of
standing outside the buildings
and then again following folks
home. We've heard of slash
tires, um, I have personally.
received a number of threats. I
know our county clerks have
received a number of threats,
both, uh, sort of harassment
style and death threats, um, and
so this is really intended to
ensure that, OK, I as Secretary
of State or one of our county
clerks is protected, but what
happens with the person who runs
the elections bureau and the
county clerk, you know, what,
what happens with Joey, right,
so.
Oh
Thank you, I'm sure, thank you,
um, Madam Secretary, we can talk
about Joey later, um, he's a
good friend of mine, but in
relation to those are, those are
great instances but documented
in police reports how many they
are documented in police
reports. Are you seeing an
increased number or is it kind
of, um, you know, just your
typical random.
random issues across.
Several years, Madam Chair,
Senator, I think, um, Ms.
Bachmann wanted to elaborate
about. Sure, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, this, this provision was,
was contemplated by the
legislature in 2023.
Um, so this provision was
contemplated in 2023. It was an
amendment actually, I think, in
this committee, maybe by Senator
Mark Morris in response to a
candidate who went to, um,
public officials' houses, um,
and, and, and we're it was
violent, um, and, and in and
insisting on threatening and all
of those things. Um, that same
person, um, we know, uh, went to
a a election officer's home,
appeared at that person's home.
Um, and, and engaged in
conversation with that person,
but did go Salmon Pena to that
person's house. And this was
just in an election
administrator, just a member of
staff in one of the county
clerk's offices. Thank you for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair,
yeah, that guy's in jail and he
should be in jail for what for
what he did. He kind of
Kind of uh took a few crazy
pills in my opinion.
Um, the last point I want to hit
here.
I think is related to the
training requirements that you
have put in here, uh, Madam
Chair and Madam Secretary.
Um, can you tell me
What, what this training is, how
they get trained.
And why it is mandatory in this
bill now versus leaving it up to
the clerks to do the training.
Madam Chair senator. So first of
all, we have uh.
Sort of a disconnect in the
election code where we are
required by law to provide
training, um, but the only
mandate on the county clerks is
to come to what we call election
school or the pre-election
seminar, uh, that we conduct for
about 2 days before every
election, statewide election,
and I think even the clerks
would agree, uh, I will say
certain clerks I talk to about
this, agree that that's not
enough time to train and sort of
be ready and
fa mi li ar ize ourselves with
everything we need to remember
before an election, um,
importantly, this requirement
puts a mandate on my office.
To administer that training. So
it's not just saying, you know,
clerks have to come to training.
It's not intended to be, uh,
dismissive or punitive, it also
creates a requirement for our
office to, because often, uh,
you know, we're in the, the
thick of things, and we're
dealing with all of the things
and we go, oh gosh, next week is
when early voting starts, and we
haven't sent guidance yet. And
at this point, the clerks are
already so far down that path,
um.
So we want to make sure that we
are doing training timely,
refreshing on the election code,
refreshing on all of the rules
and administrative procedures
because it's not just the
election code, it's the code,
it's the rule, and it's the
procedure and that we have the
time to do that and especially
with a new clerk, they're gonna
have to, every new clerk's gonna
have to conduct a statewide
election in their first year.
And many of our clerks have been
in their office for years and
years and know absolutely what
they're doing. And many of them
have just started, and I will
tell you I would have benefited
from this kind of training when
I started out. Thank you for
that answer. I, I appreciate
that, Madam Secretary, Madam
Chair, just, um.
A couple other things here to
kind of flush out the details
and I and um.
I, I guess I should apologize to
you in your office. I, I should
have come to you, um, just to go
through some of these questions,
uh, before, and I know you're
busy, but, um, I'm senator,
you're always welcome. Oh, thank
you, thank you, and, and vice
versa because this is probably
the most comprehensive election
bill that we've had in some
time.
And, um, I want to just go over
my notes, what's so funny.
sorry, senator. No, this is
actually the thinnest, uh,
election. Welcome to the Senate,
uh, that's OK.
Well, this is nothing for yeah,
for all, with all due respect, I
have extensive experience of my
3 weeks as a senator. Fair
enough
senator, all right.
So, uh, this, uh, the mandates
comprehensive voter
notifications for each election,
uh, including information how
where to vote be sent not only
to registered voters, but
eligible voters.
OK. This includes people who
have chosen not to register to
people who are immigrants.
Uh, it looks like it, it may
even be sent to um those who are
not um
Uh
Legal immigrants, by the way,
since the SOS, I think you're
unable to determine citizenship
as, as we've had issues at the
clerk's office.
Um
By adding language in the
statute to include eligible
voters.
Can you guarantee that you will.
Be sending voter notification to
people.
Who can legally, legally vote.
Um, since you have said earlier
it's very tough to determine
citizenship.
Yes. How, how, how do you do
that because there is so much
talk.
Um, in regards to if we and, and
I believe you don't want
illegal uh immigrants voting.
No, nobody does and they
shouldn't be voting, and I know
some municipalities around the
country have tried to.
Pass local ordinances to to do
that, which I'm totally not in
favor of, um.
So
How, how can we re, how can you
as a secretary of state, the
lead election official officer.
Ensure the people of New Mexico.
That every single voter.
is a citizen of the United
States.
Because I would argue you, you
can't because there is a trust.
There are ways around.
Registering to vote.
From people who don't, uh, who
aren't here legally, where they
can get certain documents and do
that.
How can you reassure the people
of New Mexico that we're gonna
have 100% compliance to make
sure only
Legal
You, well, US citizens are
voting.
Madam chair, Senator, so I am
more than willing to have that
conversation, but with regard to
this bill, that's not what's in
this bill. What this bill is
trying to do is to address an
issue that we discovered.
Um, a couple of years ago, we
passed a bill that said every
single eligible voter or every
single voter in the state, i
registered voter, not qualified
elector, not potential voter,
but every registered voter would
get a notification before an
election. And when we came up to
the primary last year, we saw
that the law still required us
to mail to every eligible voter,
in other words, every voter in
the system and we thought, oh my
gosh, this is gonna really
confuse people because we have
DTS, you know, we have all
these.
people as we discussed in the
previous bill. I'm sorry, can I,
can I stop you? I want to make
it quick cause I wanna just
trying to explain what this
provision does,
Madam Chair to the 5000, that is
a totally different thing. OK,
so what this provision, Madam
sorry uh and Senator, what I'm
trying to explain is that what
we're trying to say in this bill
is that if you're a registered
voter.
Uh, with a major party.
Uh, if you're eligible, in other
words, if you're eligible to
vote in the primary.
Then you get this notice before
the election. Otherwise, if
you're a minor party unless the
other bill passes, uh, a DTS,
whatever, you don't get the
mailing, and that's, so that's a
totally different mailing that
you were talking about. Happy to
talk about that at some other
point. hold on, hold on,
Senator, just real quickly. So
we have half an hour left.
You've had the floor for, for
about half an hour. I want to
make sure I know who else wants
to be on the list, so that
OK, Senator Townsend, does
anyone else Brantly, I, I just
want to say thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, Secretary,
and I look forward to working
with you. I just have concerns
about the collaboration, Madam
Chair, Madam Secretary, with the
municipalities and the state
kind of going back on our word
with those municipalities that
makes me very, um, that's some
very concerned. So thank you for
the dialogue back and forth, I
appreciate it. Thank you, madam
Chair, Senator.
Thank you, uh, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Senator and uh
Secretary of State, I think we
can all agree that the clerks
are critical.
The implementation and the
Um
The fact that we all want.
elections. Is that correct?
Absolutely.
With that being said, um, Madam
Chair,
Can you help me come to grips
with the fact that I have been
told that the clerks'
Association unanimously opposed
both of these bills.
And I'm trying to figure out.
If that, if we can agree that
they're critical.
And we know that they
Well
I, I can tell you that the
information that I have received
is that
They feel slighted, ignored.
And um
And what I've been told is they
unanimously opposed both these
bills. How do I come to grips
with the fact, because that's a
bipartisan group.
Every one of them, I mean, the
ones that I know regardless of
their affiliation or, I mean,
they're dedicated to making sure
they run their elections good.
And they're opposing this. How
do I, how do I?
Get my arms around that. It's,
it's a very good question, Madam
Chair and Senator. And again, I
cannot speak for the clerks, nor
would I. Again, what I can tell
you what I understand, and again
they're here in the room, is
that they opposed the entirety
of the bill based on one
provision.
And we've been talking with them
about this legislation since
November.
Now, I can't speak to why they
made a strategic decision to
pose the entire bill.
Obviously you're in conversation
with them, um.
So Madam Chair senator, that's
all I can tell you.
Well,
um,
Senator
Madam Chair
Secretary
that
That really causes me.
Want to continue to look, and I,
and I know uh
Senator block has has looked
through it pretty good and uh
And he has expressed his
concerns, um.
And when I, when I hear these
continuing to come back.
The training
I mean, that's a big deal. I
hear it from all of them.
Um,
And I just
I think we need their buy-in,
Madam Chair. I think you need
the clerk's buy-in if you're
going to execute and execute
properly. And, and Madam Chair,
Senator, I totally agree with
you. Um, I, I would be, I, I
still haven't understood.
What the opposition is to
additional training.
Of this important
Elected official position in our
state that is so critical.
Um, that hasn't been
communicated to me other than.
Sort of feeling like it's being
imposed, but as I said, Madam
Chair and senator, it's, it's
not an imposition on the clerks.
It, it, well, it is, but it's an
imposition on my office too. We
are holding ourselves to
account. So it's not an
unfairness in the sense of, oh,
the clerks need this, but we
don't need to do this, that,
that is the whole point of of
putting this into the law is
putting requirements on
ourselves as well. And I'll tell
you, Madam Chair and Senator,
and I'm not gonna speak for any
of the folks in this room. I'm
not gonna name any names, but
when we make training optional.
The clerks that come.
Are the clerks that are really
getting things.
On the money all the time,
they're not calling our office
with last minute.
Stress or challenges or or a
need for guidance, and it, it
sometimes we have clerks that
don't, they just don't wanna
come or they can't or whatever
it is, right? We understand that
clerks have their own schedules.
They have their own offices to
run and we're totally willing to
work with them on the scheduling
and to be flexible. But it's, if
it's when we don't have folks
come and get trained that we end
up having problems. And, and
we're there to help them and
we're there to help them solve
it and we will.
Madam Chair and Secretary of
State, Senator, what happens if
they don't?
I mean, they're elected
officials, so I mean.
What
With this piece of legislation.
What, how, I mean, what happens
to him?
And Madam Chair, Senator, again,
it's, it's, we're not in the
business of being punitive, um,
we're not in the business of
going after clerks and saying,
oh, shame on you, you didn't
come to training. The idea is
the notion that training is
important for all of us and for
everyone. And if again, if we
make it optional, we're gonna
have a certain group of clerks
that that show up and they
participate and they are totally
on top of it and we have a
certain group of clerks that may
not, and they may miss something
and they.
may need that, and there may be
an issue, and then we don't have
uniformity.
In terms of election
administration across the state
and that is the real goal.
Great, my office is charged with
ensuring uniformity and
nondiscriminatory election
practices across the state.
So that's why we're trying to do
this program, manage your
senator.
Well, um, madam chair and
Secretary of State, I think, let
me just be real blunt, the
quality of that training.
has been in question. I have
been told that there was an hour
spent in one of the training
sessions for clerks to use
Narcan.
And they were like
What the heck is are we doing
here?
For this.
Madam Chair, Senator, perfect
example.
Of why we want to implement this
program.
Uh, because we only get
statutorily a handful of hours.
With clerks before leading up to
every election, we provide
training otherwise. We offer it.
Optionally, but it's not always
taken advantage of, Madam Chair,
Senator.
Well, you, you know, Madam
Chair, and Secretary of State,
there's not a question or a
conversation that I'd rather get
into you in public and the Eric
list and the 105,000 postcards.
I look forward to that, uh,
with, uh,
Great expectation, um.
But Madam Chair, and Secretary
of State.
I think
When we have heard.
The
Disconnect that apparently is
there.
Where the clerks.
Either
were not included, ignored, or,
or
Oh
We're not in the room, you know,
to help in the drafting causes
me great concern.
Um, I think we should do that,
Madam Chair on a separate
subject. We have a couple of
elected officials in the room
that weren't aware.
Um, of the sinium.
And I would just appeal to the
chair to.
Give them a small opportunity to
speak at appropriate time, they
have reached out and asked him,
so I think you know who they are
and uh
It's normal customary that
elected officials, I think.
Given a little leeway on the
these type of rules. So with
that said, I listen to you and
I'll uh hope you will.
A pine, thank you. I, I know we
have the, the mayor of Rio
rancher here. Is there someone
else? Leo.
Um
Uh
We're not gonna go back to
public comment for multiple
people. These are, these are
rules that we and procedures
we've had in place for years,
um,
I think most of the people in
this room and in this committee.
Over the last two years, um, I
appreciate you coming, uh, but.
We
Everyone who comes before our
committee is expected to conform
equally to our procedures. OK.
So Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, uh, Senator and secretary.
This is a very comprehensive
bill, and, and I hate.
big bills like this because I
feel like we're given kind of a
take it or lose it vote here
because there's a lot of good
stuff in this bill that I
support, and there's a lot of
things that I have, you know,
take, take issue with. And so I
feel like when you're looking on
how to vote, it's not fair to
legislators, it's certainly not
fair to Mexicans when we're up
here trying to give something
that's just a little more good
or a little more bad, and that's
what we're basing our decisions
on. I think my biggest heartburn
with this, and I wish it wasn't
included in a bill that has a
lot of good stuff.
It's is really the provisions
that uh preempts local decision
making and taking those
municipalities out of that, I
wish there'd been a little more
communication with them and that
that wasn't included in here
because I feel like when we did
this election change the first
time in good faith we allowed
them to to opt in or opt out and
then we come back and now we're
mandating that they don't have
that option. I feel like that's
kind of disingenuous to the
conversations that we had with
them in the in the election
reform.
For, um, and, and so for that
reason, because I feel like
we're given this.
Such a comprehensive bill that
unfortunately I feel like we're
throwing the baby out with the
bath water. We don't support
something like this cause
there's a lot of good, um, but
there's also just a lot
specifically that and the impact
it's gonna have on our clerks. I
wish it'd been taken into a
little more consideration. But
thank you guys for your time.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Callegos.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Madam Secretary, thank you for
being here. Uh, I did have a
question, and Madam Chair, um,
one of the
I've been on school board units
for so long.
But we're always looking for
local control, and I understand
some of the dialogue and some of
the changes. Madam Chair, would
it be appropriate if I could ask
one question from one of the
mayors, um.
Mayor Torres from Borneo,
Berlio, I understand there's
some opposition to uh section
34, and I just wondered if he
could clarify to me what that
would do for him.
If we repeal that section,
Senator, yes, if you have a
specific question to ask someone
here, you can do so, I do not
want this to turn into, uh,
another round of public comment.
Thank you.
Yes, sir.
Um
chair,
gentlemen, can you state your
name and title?
Yes, my name is Jack. Excuse me,
Jack Torres, mayor of the town
of Bernal Leo.
And Madame Charon, Madam
Secretary and Senator. I had
heard some opposition from some
of the um mayors in the state on
the autonomy that you would lose
with this, these changes. Could
you explain what it would do to
you at your level?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, um, when we
had the choice to opt in or out
of the November elections, um.
We spoke to our residents, my
governing body unanimously
agreed to stay with the march uh
elections that we've
traditionally held, and the
basic reasons that we heard from
community members, ours is an
older traditional community, uh,
folks like myself have voted in
March for municipal elections,
um, all my life, uh, people like
that or a small town, it's a
small election. It's a small
ballot. Our concerns essentially
were, um, we know our community,
we know our people.
Uh, we're also, uh, as a
municipal election, nonpartisan.
And one of the concerns that we
had from folks were, if we're
added to this huge partisan
ballot in November, and we knew
we'd be at the end of the
ballot, there could be the
perception that we were now a
partisan election, um, and I
think the other thing is, again,
just responding to the needs of
our constituents who said they
wanted us to keep doing those,
uh, we, uh, we're a small
community, but we know what
we're doing. We run our
elections well, we run them
openly and transparently and
To my knowledge, at least since
I've been in office since 2010,
we've never had a challenge to
any of our elections or any real
problems. Um, I love our.
County clerk as well. I think
she's worked real hard.
And I worry um we sent officers
to help with
Uh, security for the November
elections, um, as a necessity,
we don't have that issue when we
run our elections in March. It's
very low key community-based,
and this would change all those
things, and we also worry that
participation would decrease.
And again, I've heard a lot of
people talk about the importance
of participation. We absolutely
agree with that. That was a
major decision that our
governing body was unanimous in
maintaining the March election.
Thank you for that. Thank you
for that, madam chair and, uh,
Madam Secretary and Senator, uh,
I guess want to go back in time
when that was first brought in,
uh, Lee County had a hard time
with it in my community of
Eunice had a hard time with it,
but after time, we've been able
to realize that there's some
value in having that, and I was
just wondering, Madam Chair, uh,
senator, if it would be an
unfriendly amendment if we
proposed an amendment right now
to strike all of Section 34, so
they would have their
opportunity and autonomy to be
able to fill the needs of their
specific community.
That would be an unfriendly
amendment,
Madam Chair, Senator, I still
proposed the amendment because I
think it's valuable to those
smaller communities in the
state.
I would ask that we consider
that.
So Senator, uh, so state your
amendment, what page are we
looking at?
And, uh, page 57, line 3.
Striking from the beginning
section 34.
All the way to the period behind
repealed on line 7.
I'm sorry, can you say that one
more time?
Uh, starting on page 57, line 3.
Beginning with section.
Section 34 and all the way to
the end of line 7, which is a
period at repealed.
So this is a motion to take out
all of the repeals.
In the bell
I suspect that does more than
just take out what you're aiming
to.
To take out. Um,
Madam Secretary, would you, Ms.
Bachman, would you let us know
what the impact, uh, cause I, I
wanna make sure you're, you're
making the the motion that
achieves what you're trying to
achieve. And I think this might
go a little farther I appreciate
that coming in and out cause I'd
had to build another committee
and I'll let her speak and then
if I could ask the mayor which
section it was that they have
hardship.
Oh
My colleague here is giving me
information.
Expenditure, it's actually um.
Just the in section or still
section 34, but it's line 4,
repealing or taking out 1-22-3.1
MSA 1978.
But it's uh that part of the
section.
All right, so I'm gonna, I'm
gonna state your motion for you.
Uh.
On page 57, line 4.
You would like to strike and
1-22-3.1. You need to leave that
NSA 978 in there because that
still qualifies the others, and
on line 3.
You would be inserting an and.
Before that last statutory
reference there.
Yes, madam chair.
All right. Members, does that
make sense?
Right, and you have indicated
this is an unfriendly amendment.
All right, is there a debate on
the amendment.
Center. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I, again, I
I would just like to ask, um,
the secretary, um,
Why, what, what would this do to
the bill if we kept the
municipalities separate. Would
it?
Could it increase any type of
voter suppression, would it
increase vote election
insecurity, what would it do?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, the
effect of, of.
Removing this provision
maintains the status quo, um,
and what that essentially means
is that.
The county clerks that over that
are, uh, the county.
clerk for that particular
municipality or those
municipalities and our office
are required to expend a
tremendous amount of resources
in order to conduct an election
for approximately 6
municipalities, as opposed to
the regular local election in
November in which the other 100
or so municipalities in the
state.
Um, have, have decided it is in
their best interests, um, those
municipalities are also going to
continue to spend money out of
the coffers to conduct those
elections, um, so,
And we have seen far lower
turnout in those elections than
in the regular local election.
So that those would be the
differences, Madam Chair,
senator. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I, I would argue that on
those municipality elections,
they are usually around 10 to
15% turnout, which, by the way,
is a national average when you
look at it anyway, so it's not
like a typical primary or
general election and an even
year, so I, I, I don't think
that's really the issue on
turnout because they're already
meeting their national average,
that being said,
What which of these
municipalities that have opted
out and continue to opt out
have.
Let's talk about the funding
because that's extremely
important.
Let's talk about the city of Rio
Rancho, which in my opinion, is
the largest of these
municipalities, we can't, we
agreed with that. How much does
it cost the city of Rio Rancho
and have they approached
Senator,
we have 10 minutes before we
need to be on the floor. We need
to get through this amendment.
We need to take a vote on the
bill, and there's other people
who still want to speak on the
bill.
So if you, I think you are
voicing support for the
amendment. That is fine. No, uh,
yes, Madam Chair, just, I just
like to know which
these municipalities have
reached out to the Secretary of
State and saying our elections
cost too much, we want you are,
you are, you are off the, the
amendment at this point. That
is, that is you're debating on
the bill, so I'm sure, I'll,
I'll make my last point is she's
the one that brought up costs,
so I'm following up because it's
related to the amendment.
All right. We have 10 minutes,
so we need to be on the floor. I
have given you a lot of leeway
on this a lot.
So, is there any further debate
on the amendment?
Let's do a roll call vote on the
amendment.
Senator Bergman's no.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez. No.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, no.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami.
No.
Senator Doig. No.
I'm sure, uh completed my
duties, but I thank you and I do
apologize for having to go.
Put on my bills, so I missed a
few things, so thank you. Yeah,
senator, unfortunately we're all
in that.
We're all in the same position
on that, doing the best we can
juggling a lot of things. All
right. Is there any additional,
uh,
Debate
Remembers on the bill.
Stewart.
And try move it do pass on
Senate Bill 218 as amended.
Before we get to that motion, I
just wanna say a couple of
things, um.
I want to assure that the mayor
of Berlio is, I don't know if
he's still here. Oh yes. Uh, I,
I heard a concern that
Um, they're getting rid of the
municipal officer election would
put you all on a partisan
ballot. And I want to assure you
that that is not the case. You
would not go on a partisan
ballot. You would go on the
regular local election ballot,
which is, which is nonpartisan.
Um.
And I, I also heard concerns
that participation would, would
go down. Uh, all of the, uh,
research that I'm aware of shows
that one of the best things to
boost voter participation is
consolidation of elections. So
the more, the more people only
have to show up once to elect,
the more likely.
They are to, to participate in
our democracy, um.
So I, I think that this will
likely increase participation.
Um,
Um, senator.
I think it was a Senator
Townsend was we're we're talking
about the training.
And was saying and and first on
the training, I don't think I,
I, I also do not understand.
Why there would be opposition to
making sure that people who
serve a critical, critical role
in our democracy.
Have thorough training.
I think that just makes sense.
We, we had, we voted, we all
voted for a bill for regents.
To get more training the other
day.
The PRC, we talked about all
about all the training they get.
We want people who occupy
important positions in our
society.
To be well trained and, and to
have all the information and
resources that they need to do a
hard job. Um, so I don't, I
don't understand the pushback on
that.
Um, but you, I think Senator
Townsend, you'd asked, what if
they don't do it? Kind of
what's, what's the consequence?
And madam secretary had said,
you know.
You're not, you're not the, the
punisher, you're not punitive,
um, I think, Senator, what
happens if they don't do it is
that the voters will know that
they have a clerk who disregards
the law, and they will likely
suffer the political
consequences of making that
choice, I would think.
Um,
I also know, we are, uh,
We are, we are first in the
nation for election
administration.
In New Mexico, MIT, uh, a
nonpartisan, they, every year
they do the rankings. So correct
me if I'm wrong, um, it is a
nonpartisan analysis, and New
Mexico is first in the nation on
election administration. Well,
while more training, I think is
is always good. Uh, we are doing
a really, really good job.
Um, and we should be really
proud of that as a state.
Um
I'll just leave it at that, yes.
We gotta get to floor. So we are
on a motion for a do pass.
How would you call it, do a roll
call vote on that motion.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block, no.
Senator Brantly. No.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, yes.
Senator Stephonics.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend, Senator
Jaramillo, and to explain my
vote.
Senator Doha, yes.
Yes, uh, Senator Hermio to
explain this. Thank you. So the
two major components of the bill
that had my support is, of
course, training, and then in
northern New Mexico, we saw what
happened when wildfire
devastated Wata County, and the
displacement of people who
didn't take part in voting, who
wanted to be part of the
process, but couldn't. And this
bill would allow if we see
devastation again that people's
voice can be heard through their
vote. Now this morning, the city
of Espanola informed me they
weren't taking a position on the
bill.
But then more recently said that
they're having some issues with
it. So although I voted for the
bill now, I'm gonna be calling
the mayor of the city of
Espanola to hear his concerns,
and then to the two sponsors,
I'll be speaking to you about
what his concerns are and hopes
that we can either address those
or you can help me with an
answer to the mayor, and with
that, Madam Chair, I yield.
Thank you, um, thank you,
Senator. You do pass. Um we are
not gonna get to the last two
items on our agenda, we will
hear those on Friday members,
uh, we wanted to do a bunch of
regents on Friday, only the Nimi
ones are available, so there's 2
nami regions we're gonna have
we'll hear these bills that were
on our agenda and we'll probably
add a couple more on. I'll, I'll
