Two individuals here that uh
we're gonna ask for your
consideration to be appointed to
the New Mexico Highlands
University Board of Regents.
These individuals, and I'm gonna
just uh do the plural and then
I'll get into the to the
singular in a minute.
Uh, continue to go ahead and be
uh community and state leaders.
I want to be starting now with
uh Mr. Gary John Tripp.
And as I briefly go through part
of his background.
Within all of it, I just want to
also indicate that he is
ultimately and very much so
dedicated to the future of New
Mexico.
And it goes back many years in
terms, and you'll probably hear
some of the stories in a few
minutes.
Of his energy, his involvement,
his commitment.
And I call it the truism that he
continues to bring forward uh to
ensure that education is at the
forefront of everything that he
does.
been married for 45 years along
with that, he received his, uh,
degrees, his bachelor's and his
master's from New Mexico
Highlands University.
He's been executive director of
the New Mexico Activities
Association, of which I served
on the board uh during the time
of his tenure there.
And each and every meeting that
we had.
His focus was always on student
athletes.
And the way that he would start
any other discussions.
is that I want to ensure that
our students are going to be
prepared academically and
athletically.
And along with that he wanted to
ensure that they were going to
be in a safe environment.
So many years back, as people
have started to talk about that
today.
He has been a visionary in that
that area. He continues to go
ahead and do that in everything
that he that he does.
A few things uh along with that.
As a longtime educator, whether
it be in a more yarie or with
the rearanal schools and he'll
elaborate in a few minutes.
And as he's moved forward and of
course uh claiming uh as a very
proudly does to be a West Las
Vegas graduate, so he ties in
Las Vegas, he ties in Rio
Rancho, he ties in Moriarty, he
ties in the entire state,
particularly in his role for
athletics.
This individual, as you're gonna
find very quickly.
It is not only committed as I've
indicated.
But he has a great sense of
humor. He really draws in people
to the discussion. He doesn't
leave people out. He's all
inclusive, and with that, Mr.
Chairman members of the Senate
Rules Committee, I present to
you, Mister Garry Trip.
What else.
Mr. Chairman, thank you and
members of the Rules Committee,
thank you for having me here
this morning and considering me
for the border region's position
in New Mexico Highlands
University.
I'll try to give you a little
bit uh more detailed background
about myself, um.
Grew up in Las Vegas, New
Mexico, and um
If you were, if you know a
little bit about New Mexico
Highlands University, um, the
1967 baseball team where the
national champions, and I just
happened to live in the projects
on the other side of left field,
Vegas is a very small community,
as most of our communities are,
and I could, I was I had the
opportunity when I was 78, and 9
to be a bat boy.
For some of those baseball
teams, but it was an aspiration
of seeing people succeed.
And uh hopefully I, I got that
same value from my teachers at
West Las Vegas, and my
professors at New Mexico
Highlands University and from
New Mexico Highlands University,
my wife and I were fortunate
enough to get hired by the
Moriarty School District.
Where that's where I taught and
coached and and uh was a part of
that community for 17 years.
Uh, we did a lot of hopefully
good things for young people at
Moriarty schools in those days,
and from there I was able to go
to Rio Rancho.
Public schools
serve as the principal of that
high school for 5 years and and
really uh do some good things
with the staff there from there
in the Mexico Activities
Association for a decade where
I'm proud to say we did a lot of
good things as a team.
Uh, we, we now have a million
dollar foundation that provides
many students uh uh scholarship
opportunities for young people
around the state, you might see
that next week at the state
basketball tournament.
As well as being the first date
ever in the state of New Mexico
to
Video, our state championships
to the military across the seas
and uh I'm very proud of that,
that, that position from the
exactivities Association.
From big, I went to small and
that was at Za Pueblo, and I was
able to serve that community for
3 years as the superintendent
and principal and, and from
there.
A lot of work with getting
teachers ready to become
administrators in our schools.
And um
Most recently, as Senator Geigel
knows I push.
Bringing physics back into our,
into our classrooms across the
state of New Mexico as Eunice
was a was a fine community host.
My dad met my mom at New Mexico
Highlands University. He was a
graduate of Carlsbad High
School, came out of football and
baseball scholarship and met a
lady that he fell in love with.
And a lot of people from Las
Vegas and
That that know are that know the
uh Baca family knew that this
man fell in love with this um
wonderful woman, Evangeline
Trip.
On South Pacific in the small
community of New Mexico and
that's how we the university
life usually works to people,
uh, getting married, meeting
each other, and hopefully,
That
Experience at New Mexico
Highland's University has led me
to try to do something in the in
the area of service for the
young people of the state of New
Mexico.
So
With that, I would humbly serve
to the best of my ability.
The students that would be
attending the Mexico Highlands
University. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman of the Senate Rules
Committee were available for
questions. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Tripp. Before we
go to questions, we did have
organized support for you and
that's part of your opening
statements. And so I'm gonna ask
the people that I call up to
come and stand behind you and
all the I state your name, if
you restate your name for the
record, Doctor Frank Sanchez,
Doctor Sue Cleveland, and online
I have Doctor
Sylvester Pettis, who will be
waiting. You have a minute and a
half to make comments. When the
Doctor Sanchez.
Good morning, Sherman and the
members of the committee, uh
thank you for allowing me to say
a few words about dairy trip.
I've known Gary Trip for over 50
years now. Uh, we both went to
West Las Vegas. Of course, I
graduated about 20 or 30 years
before he did, but uh he
followed in my footsteps.
Anyway, he came to Highland
University, graduated from
Highlands, uh, being that he was
from West Las Vegas, I continued
to follow his career, and I'm
very proud to say that I support
Gary in the utmost.
I respect for him and also um I,
I wanted to just mention one
thing besides what's already
been said, and that is that Gary
Trip has the ability to connect
with people. It's a God-given
gift. He's able to uh listen
very carefully, uh, and, and,
and make sure that he follows up
with his commitments. So I am
honored to have you consider
your trip for the border regions
and New Mexic College
University, and I thank you for
the opportunity to say a few
words about him, um.
Um, I'm, I'm a dentist in Las
Vegas from Las Vegas, New
Mexico, and like I said, I
attended West Las Vegas also, so
I, I have followed him
throughout his career, and I'm
very proud to, to be standing
behind him today. Thank you for
your consideration. Thank you,
Doctor Sue Cleveland.
He might be in the house, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, she might be in
house at right now, but she did
have plans to be here to support
Gary Trip. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And if I can go to
Zoom and hear from Doctor
Sylvester Pettis.
And he's not in, so let the
record show that Doctor Sue
Cleveland and Doctor Sylvester
Pettis were also in support of
this country. Now, looking at
people in the room, so just so
you know, those of you who might
be new, I, I saw you raise your
hand. We ask that the organized
opposition to speak, uh, 24
hours in advance. But I will go
to the room and ask by a show of
hands, how many of you are in
support of this country.
11 and on Zoom saying none. And
what about in opposition in the
committee room by a show of
hands, anyone in opposition of
this country.
No, and the online.
None? OK. And with that, Mr.
Tripp, Senator Copos, I'll go to
the committee for questions.
Sent's defends. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator Campos
for bringing this candidate and
uh thank you, Mr. Tripp for
stopping by to chat with me in
my office.
Um, could you talk about some of
your, um,
Goals for the university or some
of the issues you think that
need to be dealt with right
away.
how
Uh, Senator Savanic uh yes, I, I
think there's, there's several
goals and needs at New Mexico
Highlands University. I think um
the dormitories for the for the
students.
is a primary concern, and, and I
know that, that we constantly
come and
Beg the legislature for for
those efforts, but our, our
young people.
Are people in attendance at New
Mexicans University are in
desperate need of improvements
to those, to those dormitories.
I think that New Mexico
Highlands University has an
opportunity for growth.
And I know that we have land and
we have
We have a housing made for our
professors and for our students,
and we have that opportunity to,
to grow and, and, and, and help
Las Vegas.
Cause I know that's part of our
fiduciary responsibilities to
work with the community, and I,
I think we have that, that
opportunity to improve Highlands
University in that capacity.
And I think there's a big need
to continue to expand the
athletic programs and Highlands
University because that's going
to attract young people to
attend, especially our New
Mexican or Mexico young people
from all across the state.
So, I personally would like to
see a few things in that area as
well that would allow people
like my background to get
started, get connected to that
higher ed life and then prosper
and give back to their
communities. So those are three
things that come to mind. Thank
you. Thank you very much for
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block. Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
Mr. Tripp, welcome. It's good to
have the hometown Rio rancher
guy. I know you're.
Originally from Vegas there, uh,
the strong ties to Vegas, but
you're a real rancher guy
serving on the school board.
And, um, looking through your
resume real quick as a principal
and educator, and you also
served uh in Sandoval County,
uh, to Zia Pueblo.
So all that experience that
you've had and still having
serving on the school board,
where, where do you think we're
not measuring up.
When it comes to preparing
students, um, for either
university or um
Or some much needed life skills
to enter the workforce.
Determine how senator block,
thank you for the question, um.
I, in the last 3 years.
Of my life. I've, I've come to a
deep, deep passion.
And an understanding that
Math
Needs to occur, the math
improvement in every classroom K
through 12.
And
I, that's, that's what I do
during the day and, and that's
what I continue to push his
hands on instructional materials
for students in the classroom.
Or they, they actually don't do
math abstractly, but they learn
how everything works and how why
algebra has a meaning. Why basic
mathematical principles have a
meaning and
And um I, I do that all day and
all night sometimes, and I'll
continue to do it, and I think
in the near future we'll start
seeing proficiency scores in
those.
With those scores, we'll start
seeing reading comprehension and
critical thinking and problem
solving improve because my goal
is not to be number 19.
In science in the world, and
number 38 in math in the world.
My goal is that we go back to
1967 and we're number one in the
world.
Thank you. Thank you Mr. Chair,
Mr. Trump, that's a, a
phenomenal answer, and I think
what we're doing in Rio Rancho
is, uh, we're doing exactly
that. And uh that's why it's one
of the best.
People moved to Rio Rancho's one
of the best school districts, so
I appreciate you taking that
philosophy, um, up, up to, uh,
Las Vegas there, um, for
Highlands.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, you,
you said you were, uh, a coach
as well, and was it more arty?
Chairman Senator Block, yes, and
Moriarty. What type of coach?
I, I was a football coach. I was
a basketball coach. I was a, and
I was a baseball coach, a small
school where we wear a lot of
hats. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
you're a big baseball fan,
right?
Yes, sir. Who's your favorite
team?
Roger
be careful
I, uh I'm from New Hampshire
originally.
I, I know you are Senator Block,
but I have to tell you that Bart
Starr, Jerry West, and Willie
Mays are, I've never deviated,
so it's the San Francisco Giants
Senator Mr. Tripp, I thought he
was going to say New Mexico
Highlands baseball.
I mean, Mr. Chair, I got to tell
you, I mean, they were national
champions in, uh, for college in
1967. Yes, sir.
Were you on the team in 1967? I,
I was a bat boy
Mr. Chair, um, or Mr. Trip, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Trip, thank you very
much. I, I think, um, we have
seen some really, um, qualified
people come through for
Highlands and uh I think you're
another one of them. It's good
to have one of my hometown, uh,
guys there, um, I reluctantly
will support you not being a Red
Sox fan, but, um, I think you're
gonna do some great things.
For the university to give back
and I appreciate Senator uh
Campos sponsoring you. So Mr.
Chair, I yield. Thank you. Thank
you, Senan guide list.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator, Miss trip, uh, we have
had a long discussion prior and
I, I like a lot of things you're
doing, um, and I actually like
your
Uh, sponsor, he and I, uh, Mr.
Tripp, I was gonna bring up your
CES tenure with them, uh,
Senator Cotos and I always do
bills trying to elevate some of
the uh costs associated with CAS
on their caps, but uh I did
wanna ask you, so I know you're
on school board. Uh, do you
think this
This job will be similar to what
you do on scored, but at the
higher ed level, is it
something, uh, you talked to
them, but, you know, I
understand the regents have a
lot more power than the screw
board.
Uh, we just basically do
finances for hire the
superintendent and do finance
for them, but if you looked at
any dis uh distinctions between
them, it was separate school
board and also the region Mr
returns and Mr.
determine how to meal. Senator
Geel, thank you for the
question. I, um, I do see some
similarities, but I also see
some room, what I would consider
room for improvement and the
fiduciary responsibility. I
noticed that the border regions
minimally meet 4 times a year.
And I know that, I know the
legislators are looking at more
training. One of the things I'd
like to take to the border
regions is the possibility of
monthly meetings.
because of the fiduciary
responsibility locally at the
Rear Rancho School Board. I
I, I enjoy being a member of the
audit committee, and I enjoyed
those those meetings that go on
about every 6 weeks or 7 weeks
with auditors because I I I
believe that allows you the
opportunity to uphold your
fiduciary responsibility, so
there are some things that I
think that we do at the K-12
school board level that.
That could help improve some of
the things we do as Board of
Regents, so I'm, I'm gonna
Try to take it upon myself to
ask my colleagues if we can have
a little bit more than the
minimum meetings just to give
you an example of what I think
uh in our primary role.
To be very active to make sure
that we're stewards, good
stewards of the money that comes
in.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Senator and Mr. Trip. I, I
appreciate that and as one of my
As Irish was, if you look at the
deep dive because I think those
4 times a year makes it a little
bit hard to understand
everything that's going on. Now,
the community will tell you and
your students will tell you in
faculty, but it's better to be
able to have clarification on
what's going on. I did have a
question and Mr center and Miss
Tripp, uh, your
Physics in a box.
And I love the program. I like
the idea. Do you see um moving
that type of
Uh, opportunity up into higher
ed, you see areas you talked
earlier about math, and, and
this does that, but, uh,
proficiencies, um,
Go back when this terror center
and this trip when you came to
Eunice, uh, we
We're always looking for change,
you know, how do we do things
better and by going back into a
point in time where're number
one in anything would be good.
But I'm just wondering if you've
looked at any other
opportunities that you could
bring in higher ed like you did
with physics and mos.
I know, uh,
Chairman and Senator Gagles so.
One of the, one of the areas
cause I don't wanna be able to
be, uh, I wanna, I wanna try to
bring in some of the areas that
New Mexico University we're
working on.
On some optics.
In in the area in the mountains,
and one of the things I, I'd
like to explore because I know
the gentleman that you met, the
founder of physics and the boxer
brought the European and Asian
curriculum over.
Has a lot of
A lot of things within the range
that kids need to know today, so
when we get to where we're
strong in math, and we can
understand all the levels of
rays that he's working on
formulas with the wind binds and
the solar and everything else
that we're working on in the
state of New Mexico.
He wants to try to bring that to
the higher end.
Level and uh I think there's a
lot of great opportunity he
teaches optics to undergraduate
students at the University of
Colorado and.
Senator Greggles and I are
talking about a gentleman that's
the founder of physics of a box
right now.
So those, in those areas, yes,
and then the other uh area that
To be quite honest, that I would
like to at least try to promote
it, I think the Highlands
University has a great
opportunity to have a ROTC
program.
And so I think that would be
another way of attracting young
people that they could leave a
university and be an officer in
the in the military, and we used
to have an ROTC program, like I
say, back in the day, and I
think that would be another area
where we could attract young
people to the university if we
can get the right United States
senator to back us.
I think uh Mer center
atrip, I think he just got uh
pair of blocks, uh, I think you
already had that.
Uh, I just wanted to clarify
that because I, there again, I
like the idea of physics in the
box. I like that you're looking
beyond that. It's
It's all those things that our
students deserve it at all
levels, K-12 and now into higher
ed. I think the um
Experience you've had.
Uh, will help us there in
highlights that I look forward
to supporting you.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator. Now I don't have a
question, but just a few
comments and I'm happy to see
Senator Antoinette Savio Lopez
here, because we just talked the
other day about meeting students
where they are, and that meeting
students where they are ensures
that it builds the foundations
for success for students in
college or beyond, and so I'm
happy to know that you talked
about the value to succeed
because it ties into that, and
your time at the Pueblo working
with native students, your time
working in
New Mexico, you definitely
understand that we have to meet
students where they are so that
they can succeed as a first
generation college student,
that's something that's
important that someone like you
understands where we come from
and can help us succeed in the
classroom. And I'll just quickly
in 1998, Gary Trip, um, assisted
us or assisted me and I assisted
him, his dad's coach quit, and
there were 2 months before the
state competition, he called me
and asked if I could come and
take over a dance program in 2
months. Coach took music, took.
think I was able to help you.
And so, I just want to say thank
you for everything you did for
student athletes in New Mexico.
Your commitment to students is
gonna be the same commitment you
took with student athletes to
New Mexico Highlands University.
And with that, I'm going to
entertain emotion from senator
Stephanics. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Madam Chair, I move the
appointment of Gary John Trip to
the New Mexico Highlands
University Board of Regents.
And with that we have a motion
to move you forward to a full
Senate confirmation. I'm gonna
ask for a roll call.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Bergman's is excused.
Senator Block.
We were, yes
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara.
Senator Doig.
With 7 in favor, Mr. Trip, you
will be moving forward for a
full Senate confirmation later
this morning. Congratulations.
Thank you.
And as um Miss Luna is coming
up, I, I just wanna let folks
know we just found out we need
to be out of here by 10:30
today. So we're gonna change our
agenda a bit after Miss Luna,
we're gonna go to you, uh,
Senator Sabio Lopez, because I
know we have some visitors who
have come up today. We want to
be sure we get to them, um,
after that, if we have time, we
will go to HB 308, uh, but
compos, your, your memorial.
We will do, uh, when we do the,
the student regent for, for
highlands.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
Mr. Chair, as we go forward to
the members of the Senate Rules
Committee, it is indeed a
pleasure to be here with each
and every one of you this
morning.
To present, if you will, not
only the credentials but also a
very deep and personal
relationship that I've enjoyed
with the uh person that is here
with us, and that is Elaine
Luna.
So over the years as she has
moved forward in her career, she
has always been devoted, and I
know a lot of times we use the
terms dedicated, but she is
devoted not only to her family,
to the community, but to the
health of every individual in
the state of New Mexico, and she
has shown that in each and
everything that she has chosen
to do.
She is very thoughtful. She's
hard working. She's a bridge
builder.
And as she continues to deal
with issues that surround our
students, people in our
communities and especially
during times of the hard times,
whether it be the fires, the
floods, whether it be COVID, the
pandemic as we dealt with that.
Miss Luna continues to go ahead
and be there, always coming
forward, whether it be as an
individual who had a paid
position or as a volunteer. She
has never ever let any of us
down as she has moved forward.
She served on the, uh, school
board for the Las Vegas City
Schools. She worked at Luna
Community College and I'll let
her uh get a little more
specific in terms of her roles
at these places, along with
that, working with uh Northeast.
Regional Hospital and serving on
the board with Alta Vista
Hospital in Las Vegas. This
individual brings a high level
of credibility, integrity, and
most importantly, as I
indicated, the devoted
commitment to the people's
health and in particularly to
our students, and if she's given
the opportunity to carry forward
as a region at New Mexico
Highlands University.
What you're going to find from
her is a person who is building
a vision
standing steadfast with a
commitment and lastly a most
importantly, giving everything
that she has working days and
nights to ensure that there is
proper structure, and there is
going to be, if you will, the
full spectrum of how students
can learn, how faculty can
engage and most importantly, how
all of us will go ahead and be
prepared, if you will, to move
forward with.
The strong commitment in what
our future can be. So with that,
uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, if I
may, I wish to defer now to
Elaine Luna for her statement.
Good morning.
Wonderful to be here before you,
and I feel very honored to be
here this morning.
As you know, I'm Elaine Luna.
I have very humble beginnings in
northern New Mexico.
Born right outside of Espanola.
At the young age of 16 years
old.
My mother
took me to Las Vegas.
And
She was
Amazed at the buildings.
And amazed at everything that I
had potentially waiting for me.
At such a young age.
She was also very scared.
But
At that young age,
I adventured, I say it was an
adventure at that time. Little
did I know at 16 years old.
What I had before me in my
educational journey.
At New Mexico Highlands
University.
I have nothing but gratitude.
For my professors.
For the resources that were
allotted me.
And for the community that
embraced me.
Every day at the university was
a learning experience.
With that guidance,
I graduated at the young age of
20.
With a bachelor's in social
work.
I went on to, I had to work
because
Um, parents just couldn't
afford.
College at that time.
When Mom dropped me off.
She handed me a $50 bill.
And she said, he
Make it last.
And I'll tell you what, it more
than lasted.
Not only the $50 but the
relationships that ensued.
I worked at the local hospital,
3 to 11 shift in the emergency
room.
I walked from my dorm every day.
And put in those hours. It was
embraced at such a young age, by
all the healthcare providers.
And I prayed for days in the
emergency room that would be
slow days if you've ever heard
of a slow day in an emergency
room.
I prayed for that because
Part of what I needed to do was
study.
as well.
I went on after that, with the
guidance that I had from my
adoptive parents at the
university.
To gain a master's degree in
social work, with a specialty.
In medical social work.
The experience that I had in
that emergency room,
tremendously impacted me, not
only from a medical but a
behavioral perspective as well.
I count my blessings.
For that opportunity, even
though it was difficult to work
and go to school at the same
time.
I was given the sabbatical to be
able to uh complete that
master's degree in one year.
And I proudly say at the age of
21.
I went back to my mother with my
degree.
Both parents were tremendously
Happy and proud.
I was the first of 5 in my
family to complete my degree.
The day I graduated.
I knew
That I would give a debt of
gratitude to the university that
helped this young woman.
Through her years.
And in doing so,
I was very fortunate that
After that one year sabbatical
After that one year sabbatical.
I went back
And they indicated you will now
be the director of the program.
It was beyond words.
I stayed connected with my
university faculty.
For I, for I knew that
everything that they had given
me during that time frame.
That not only did I have to give
that back, but they continued to
mentor me.
Continued to mentor me in so
many ways.
That I was able to and very
successful in giving back to my
community in so many ways.
I went on to Luna Community
College.
And I worked on a workforce.
Development program in rural
healthcare.
I saw
For myself as a student, the
needs that students had in terms
of how we can help them move up
the ladder.
And successful workforce
development.
And in those 25 years, I
encountered so many students
with so much need.
And we guided them.
Not only did we guide them
educationally. We guided them.
Physically and mentally as well.
There is a tremendous need for
mental and physical support for
our students.
I had a tremendous opportunity
to be a summer practicum
coordinator for the University
of New Mexico bachelor's to MD
program.
We had young minds in our rural
community that were anxious and
eager to become healthcare
providers and professionals.
And my hope
was simply
Get them through their courses.
And have them come work for us.
Because there is such a
tremendous need.
During that time, as Senator
Campos mentioned.
I worked for 10 years on the
school board.
I saw the ends, the outs.
The challenges
The students who excelled in the
students who did not.
I sat there with my fellow board
members.
And we made a difference. Was it
a challenge? Absolutely.
But we made a difference.
Now in retirement,
I'm even more excited because I
get to spend time with my
husband of 45 years, my children
and my first grandchild.
In that, I have not forgotten
what it takes to give back to my
community.
I serve on a few boards.
And I proudly do so.
And I'm super excited as Doctor
Campo said that during the
turbulent times of COVID and the
fires, our community foundations
stepped up.
We stepped up and we met Be
challenges, and we continue to
do so.
So I stand here before you or I
sit here before you.
Very proud.
And excited for what I am about
to embark on.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, members of the
Senate Rules Committee, uh,
we're ready for questions and
just to let you all know that uh
Miss Elaine Luna was my boss
during those 10 years. Thank you
very much. Appreciate that.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Ms. Luna, as part of your
opening, we do have organized
support for you. And so I'm
gonna call Doctor Frank Sanchez
up again. You have a minute and
a half, and then I have a few
people on Zoom who will also
have a minute and a half. And
once again, all I stated your
name if you can restate it for
the record.
Mr. Chair and senators, my name
is uh Frank Sanchez. I'm a
retired uh dentist from Las
Vegas, New Mexico and I
currently serve on the board of
Regents at Highlands University.
Uh, this is my 3rd time serving
on the board.
I am proud to stand behind a
Mrs. Luna. I have worked with
her in the past. Uh, we worked
on some church, uh,
Commits uh over the years, uh, I
have known her and her family
for over 30 years. I I treated
her and her family at my dental
practice, and I know of her a
diligence. I know of her hard
work. I know of her dedication,
and I'm very proud to say that
uh I've been a good friend with
her over the years. I know how
she feels about education and I,
I, I think that, uh, I know that
she'll do a tremendous job on
the border regions for Highlands
University. So I
Just stand in strong support.
And I thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you so much. And so we
have 3 online. I'm gonna start
off with Jerry Harrison.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
I stand in strong support of
this nomination. I've had the
opportunity to know E name Luna
for 30 years. I know that she
has committed her life to
improving the health of New
Mexicans. She has committed her
life to improving the
educational status of young
people and uh those pursuing
health careers. I am the
director of New Mexico Health
Resources.
uh,
Mrs. Luna served 6 years on our
board of directors, took some
time off and just recently came
back on and she has worked very,
very hard to make New Mexico a
healthier place with well
educated citizens.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Carla Romero.
OK. Yes, good morning. Thank
you, uh, chairman, Mr. Chairman
and committee members for the
past, uh, I'm Carlo Romero, um,
I have a retired faculty member
of both uh LuA Community College
and New Mexico Highlands
University, and uh I'm also as
the treasurer of the Las Vegas,
New Mexico Community Foundation.
For the past 25 years plus I
have known Elaine Luna in
various capacities.
We worked together at Luna
Community College, where she was
the director of AIC Area Health
Education Centers. She was
consistently demonstrated the
ability to analyze complex
issues and collaborate with us
and finding solutions for
success for our students and the
institution. As our children
grew up together, Elaine was
elected to the Board of
Education at Las Vegas City
Schools. She always exhibited
great leadership qualities as
well.
is a deep understanding of our
community and students. Uh, we
now serve.
Uh, for the past 3 years, we've
served together as uh executive
board members at the Las Vegas,
New Mexico Community Foundation
where we work together to uh
help people through the hermit's
peak uh Caf Canyon fire and
flood.
Her background is social work
and health organizations has
been invaluable to deal with
this devastation and help with
the recovery in our areas of San
Miguel and more. Thank you, Mr.
Romero.
All right
Amanda shirt shirts.
Good morning. Thank you for
having me speak on behalf of
Elaine Luna today. My name is
Amanda Shirts. Uh, I have been
serving for the last year uh at
Alta Vista Hospital, uh, where
Elaine serves as a board member.
Uh, I've, the last 6 months,
I've been serving as the interim
CEO there. Um, I've had the
opportunity to um lean into
Elaine's knowledge about
health care and the community
and what the community needs,
uh, through the hospital, but
I've
also watched her tireless
commitment as she serves on
multiple boards in the
community and from the
compassion she shows others and
her passion for uh the
communities that she is involved
with, I think you could not
select a better, more
professional, kind and
compassionate person than Miss
Elaine Luna, um, and I would
just ask that you consider her.
Thank you. Thank you for your
comments. Now we did have a few
others and in the essence of
time, I can't go to them, but
I'm gonna read them out, OK? We
had.
Linder, the president of Luna
Community College, Almobaca, Las
Vegas Community Foundation,
Lorraine Martinez, Las Vegas
Community Foundation and Walter
Adams. And with that, I'm gonna
go to the committee if you can,
I'm not gonna be able to cause
of time if you can raise your
hand in the committee room, if
you're in support of this
country.
12, any online?
And one online.
Any in the committee room in
opposition of this country.
say none and the online.
done online will now entertain
questions from the committee.
reply. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
congratulations, Ms. Luna, to
you and your lovely husband
there of
I thought you were his daughter
at first, but, um
Um,
I, once again, I, I gotta tell
you, uh, what a great
connection uh to the university
and I always joke with the chair
about seems like everything goes
through Espinola, um,
But with your background there,
especially in social work and,
and some healthcare stuff.
I gotta tell you, this is, this
is an easy one to support me
here really likes you a lot and
um so it carries a lot of
weight, but I, I, I'm, I'm just
so impressed with Highlands
University, uh, in the Regents
there, so, Senator, thank you
for uh supporting Ms. Luna, uh
congratulations.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Duohe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Miss Luna.
Um,
What?
What can we do as so
Social workers are clearly a
critical part of addressing the,
the behavioral health issues
that we've been talking about
all session.
What do you think we as a
legislature can do to to help uh
build up our, our social work
workforce. I know that Highlands
does amazing work in that area
already. Um, but what else could
we be doing to, to get more
social workers here in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Chairman Caramil.
Thank you, Senator Katie Dohang
for the uh great question.
So, um, part of the support
that's needed, um.
There's so many different
components of what a student
needs.
To achieve, but also to look at
the track, and social work
really takes that and you have
to be able to say I want to
serve, I want to serve
individuals, um, I want to take
from my own experiences and know
that I can be empathetic in what
I do and how I do it within um
the
Legislative area definitely
supporting mental health,
behavioral health and physical
health.
I can't say it enough. How much
students really need to be
prepared, not only from the
academic side, but also have the
tools necessary to work from the
mental health and behavioral
health side.
Uh, of their work, so, uh, in
answering your question, looking
to see what we can do to support
those students in career
development.
Would be essential.
So, um
I would like to say career
development would definitely be
um
Helpful
For students in their career
pathways.
Well, thank you and thank you
for the, the work that you've
done and you're doing, uh, I
think Highlands is, uh,
And incredibly critical part of
Of uh social work here in New in
New Mexico, so.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Gaymas.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator, a house on
stand in support. I, I just want
to give a little bit brief
comment we talked earlier about
to meet you and your husband.
Uh, I was really, really afraid
to vote for you because of your
brother-in-law, Harry Montoya,
who is our speaker on the floor,
cannot, uh, speak out currently,
uh, because it's his job, uh,
here in the Capitol, but I did
want to say that I'm very, very
impressed. Uh, I'd asked Senator
Block on uh
Because I was still on the edge,
but since he said Ms voting for
you, we're gonna go ahead and
take that as a positive, uh, but
I did want to tell you I've got
a lot of family in in Vegas, uh,
Mauricio Gonzalez had Gonzalez
ranch outside of town's family
and, and it's, it's a wonder to
hear the stories of the people
from that community that have
gone abroad.
People to do things that uh we'd
only hope for, for our families,
you know, being Hispanic my
whole life and minority, it's
one of those things that it's
really good to see somewhere in
the states of reality is color
doesn't matter.
But they do the best for the
child and student in order to
help them prosper. So I look
forward to hearing good reports
on what you're gonna do, looking
at your resume, incredible
resume, so, uh, I just wanted to
throw that out there that I, as
a Mia, I'll be joining center
block on, on a positive vote for
you and we look forward to uh
doing it also even if me is not
in the room on the same floor, I
think you have a yes for me.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Thank you, Senator, before I go.
to the motion from Senator
Bergmann's. I also want to say,
um, I'm proud of you. And so
somebody from northern New
Mexico who truly is making an
impact for Nortenos and students
around the country. And I said,
no, Doctor Frank uh made me an
honorary letterman to New Mexico
Highlands University, and I have
my Highlands Letterman hanging
in my Senate office. I'm going
to make sure I bring it down on
the floor today to show my
support for New Mexico Highlands
University. But just as a
first-generation college
students, you understand just
as, uh, Gary Trip.
The importance of providing
support for students, and I'm
really happy that you talked
about mental support for
students and guiding them. For
so many years, we don't talk
about mental health and knowing
now that we can talk about why
we need to bring that to the
forefront is so important. And I
think your mama did well by
giving those $50 and ask you to
stretch it because the return on
her investment is so huge and
you should be proud. And with
that, I'll go to the motion from
Senator Bergmans. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I move Ms. Eli.
Luna for appointment to the New
Mexico Highlands University
Board of regions. There has been
a motion to move you forward to
the full Senate for a
confirmation. I'll ask for a
roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. Yes.
Senator
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Yes.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 7 in favor, and I
know Senator Stephanic was
excited to move the motion
forward, but she had to step out
for another bill. 7 in favor,
you move forward for a full
Senate confirmation later this
morning. Congratulations. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
I'm gonna have the gavel back
over to Chairwoman Duhik who
will continue on with the
remainder of our agenda.
All right. So we're gonna go
next to Senate Memorial 13. Uh,
if anyone is here for, for House
Bill 143 that has been rolled.
Uh, we, and so we definitely
won't be getting to that one
today, and we definitely won't
be getting to Senate Memorial
18. We might get to Senate or
House Bill 308.
OK.
Senatorvia Lopez.
Go ahead.
my experts today.
It's got a lever on the side,
and what are you OK?
I.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm here with wild
friends.
And what's exciting about wild
Friends is is it actually
started as a law school program
years ago and they right now are
in in 12 different classrooms
around the state of New Mexico
from wagon mound to Penasco to
Tohajli to
Albuquerque, um, and so, um, I
also happen to know that Senator
Bergman's was a wild friend
student. Um, and I, um, will let
my experts, I have 4 experts
here, Mia Gonzalez from Penasco
Elementary, who I think uh has
now been has been assisting as
an analyst for Senator Block. um
uh Vivian Cook from one of his
Elementary, Audrey Eldred from
Mona Vista Elementary and Scout
Duchart from one of his
elementary.
So with that, who's gonna go
first?
Mia's gonna go first.
You don't you can if you want to
do.
Madam Chair and the members of
the committee. Hello, my name is
Mia Gonzalez and I'm in the 5th
grade at Maskell Elementarysco.
I'm here to talk to you about
our citizen science Memorial, SM
13th.
The memorial asks that the
legislature recognize the
importance of citizen science
that citizen science be used in
the classroom, and that we
create an official citizen
Science Day.
Citizen science can be helpful
because students across New
Mexico can help government
agencies like the Department of
Game and Fish by collecting data
that will help protect natural
resources such as grass, the
air, and nature.
For me, citizen size is
important, because our community
lives in a forest, and we're
surrounded by nature. If
something bad were to happen to
it, we would have to move, but
with citizen science there's a
bigger chance of that probably
won't happen.
The memorial will cost nothing
and can help students.
Will help get students involved
in protecting our environment. I
hope you vote to pass this
memorial. Thank you.
Next we have Vivian Cook, my
second expert.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Hello, my name is
Vivian Cook, and I'm a 5th
grader at Mona Vista Elementary
in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
I
Our memorial asks that we create
an official citizen Science Day,
What what society, you might
ask? Well, citizen science is
something where the public can
volunteer to help collect data
that goes to scientists so they
can better understand nature.
It's important to our state
because citizen scientists will
feel encouraged and kids like me
might want to be a citizen
scientists
since it's important to me
because I think citizen
scientists deserve some
celebration, and I would like to
help preserve our.
natural environment, as I should
also mention that it won't cost
anything and that we are
planning to have the Citizen
Science Day on April 25th. Thank
you. Next is Audrey Eldrid.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Hello, my name is
Audrey Edred. I am 9 years old,
in 4th grade at Monna Vista
Elementary School.
in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
I would like to ask you to
support our citizen science
memorial.
Citizen science is a way that
average everyday people, like
students and teachers and
can help make a difference.
And can help our fellow
scientists collect data.
An example of how this works is
actually my own class. Yeah,
every Friday and collect data
from our school garden, and then
upload it to our dashboard on
nature's notebook.
This is important to the state
because it gives opportunities
from younger kids all the way to
the older adults.
They get to go outdoors and get
real life experiences.
It's also important to me
because I get to make
differences. I also get to go
outside and watch nature.
And watch the birds sing
outside.
I also get a real life
experience away from screens.
I also think you should know
that this does not cost
anything.
Will you please support our
citizen science Memorial. Thank
you, next we have Scouter.
car.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Hello, my name is
Scout Duar, and I go to Monna
Vista Elementary School in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
I'm here today to talk about our
citizen science Memorial.
What it did sign.
Citizen science is when the
public volunteers to collect
data to help scientists better
understand the wildlife around
New Mexico.
Say almost every day some
dark-eyed junkos would hang out
in your backyard.
OK
You, you could use a citizen
science app such as Nature's
Notebook to record your data,
which will get set to
scientists.
To help them track dark-eyed
junkos.
This memorial is important to me
because I love the nature around
New Mexico, and I want to help
it thrive.
And this memorial will cost
nothing at all.
Thank you for your support and
thank you to our sponsoror
sponsor Senator Sidil Lopez.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
also wanted to mention that um
all students that participate in
the program, got to vote on what
was the, what's going to be the
topic of the memorial. They
actually helped draft it and um
so um this is a, this was a very
democratic process from day one.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're um
we're ready to proceed.
Thank you, uh, senator. Thank
you, experts. All right, we
don't have anyone signed up, uh,
in support or opposition. Uh,
would anyone in the room like to
raise their hand to indicate
support.
You guys got pretty much the
whole room, uh, anyone online?
They wouldn't want to raise
their hand to indicate
opposition.
No, no, that's a good, good
thing. All right. Members of the
committee, Senator Towns.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator.
Right, can I ask your experts if
their parents are in the room.
Yes, of course.
Would, would you ask?
Um, your parents stand up.
Man,
of course, with the parents,
some of our grandparents, Madam
Chair. Madam chair, I've been
see an uncle in the room
There you go. Thank you for
bringing them here today.
Can we hire you to help us
present our bills to committees.
I'm just kidding. Thank you very
much.
Senator Bergman. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you guys
for being here. I don't think I
have any questions. You did a
great job presenting, and it's
very clear that we should
support this. I just want to say
keep doing what you're doing and
loving what you do, and thank
you for being here.
harm you, followed by Senator
Bloch. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Vivian, and I'm happy you're
here. I went to high school with
your mom and your uncle and your
grandma and grandpa had a meal
just live a few houses away from
me, so I'm happy that you're
here. Your grandpa works every
day to take care of the Asea,
which part of what we do as
citizen scientists, he's already
doing the work even before the
memorial, so you gotta thank
him. All I want to say, Madam
Chair and senator and expert
witnesses is it was nice to have
so many wild friends come and
tell me about the importance of
saving.
our environment and every one of
you did a great job on telling
me why I should support the
memorial, so much so that 12
students from Chamisa Elementary
in Los Alamos County came to see
me. They're not wild friends,
but they're part of the global
warming express and so students
weren't even part of your group
came to join you in fighting for
the memorial, so I wanted to
make that clear that not only
wild friends are doing this, but
their students across New Mexico
who are watching you and who are
so proud that you brought this
forward, so I want to.
say thank you to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator Block by Senator
Brantley.
Madam Chair panel, why is
citizen science important to New
Mexico?
My expert Audrey wants to
answer.
OK
Citizen science is something
where
For example, there's assigned.
scientists that are all the way
in Roswell, that can't collect
data from Albuquerque or Sanna
Bay.
So we can send that data to them
so they can speed up the
process, and they can also.
They can also, um, know more
about it.
Also, Citizen science state is a
way to recognize those people
that have donated.
There data to our citizen
scientists.
Scientists and science is also
something that we are going to
learn about in class, if you
support it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, panel. I think me and I are
gonna support this.
Senator Brantley.
Thank you guys, and I appreciate
your visit to my office, um, as
well. When you guys visited us,
we went over the roles of uh
everyone in the legislative
process, right, in the Senate
and the House, and the role of
the executive and your roles at
the time as lobbyists. Today you
guys are serving as expert
witness, but you guys did a lot
of groundwork by providing us
the information beforehand. We
don't often get that. In fact,
sometimes we hear bells for the
first time right before us, but
some of the best bills are
vetted out before.
You guys did that. You came to
each of us to ask if we had any
concerns, how you could address
those concerns so that we were
all prepared here to vote today.
You did it the right way, and I
am happy to support this
memorial. Thank you guys from
start to finish. You did an
excellent job getting it here.
So that's everyone on the list,
so I agree. I am always so
impressed with wild Friends
because often you guys are, are
better at this than, than most
of the grown-ups who come in
front of us, um, you're super
prepared. You guys always have
great presentations, um, yes,
all like parliamentary
procedure, it's amazing. Uh, I
do have a question. What is a
dark-eyed junko?
Um, it's a type of bird, the
body is kind of a grayish white.
Um, and then around the eyes
sort of like a pen.
It's black.
Yeah
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
See, thank you so much.
Well, thank you guys so much for
coming and so much for bringing
us this memorial. Uh, this is
probably, uh, gonna be like the,
the most fun part of our day is
having you guys here. So thank
you so much, uh,
response, before we go to a
motion, did you wanna?
Jump in on this one at all? Uh,
no, but I really appreciate the
involvement of our future of our
state. So thank you very much.
Senator Bergman, Madam chair
move would do pass.
All right, we have a motion for
her to pass. Is there any
objection to that motion?
See then, you have a unanimous
due a roll call, sure, sure.
Let's do a roll call.
Senator Bergmans.
Senator Block.
I
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara meal.
Yes, Senator Doig. Yes, you have
a unanimous due pass.
Congratulations. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee.
All right, we have time, so
let's go to HB 308.
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam. Good
morning. Good morning members. I
don't know if that's a common
occurrence to applaud after
every bill that passes here, so
I'm expecting the same.
But uh thank you for the
opportunity to present in front
of you this morning. I have with
me Jason Kasugas, uh, who is the
CEO for the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District in in
Middle New Mex Middle Valley of
New Mexico as well as um we have
a representative from the
Secretary of State's office as
well as Senator Woods with me
this this morning.
What we're doing is uh House
Bill 308 seeks to remove the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District and the Archurley
Conservancy District, the only
two conservative districts in
the state from the local
elections Act. And so since 9
since 2018, the passage of then
House Bill 98 consolidated all
local elections into one act,
um, while the intent was, was
noble. It's a one size fits all
that doesn't work, uh, for
everybody in this state and
notably these consumers.
districts that are that are
represented here today, uh, the
approach was proven
unimplementable for conservancy
districts which are statutorily
designed as special districts,
and with that, Madam Chair, we
stand for any questions.
Great, thank you. We do have a
number of people signed up in
support and you were very
efficient with your
presentation, so we have plenty
of time left. We have uh Kathy
Elliott, John Thompson, and I
was like I'm calling your name
just line up there if you're
here. Um, Melania Ortiz,
Drewettter, Jay Garcia.
Um
So go ahead, uh, for up to 3
minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Kathy Elliott, and I am the
registered lobbyist for our
Thurley Conservancy District, as
much as we love our county clerk
in Quy County, Ellen White, she
is unable to uh fulfill the role
and run our elections, uh,
through the Election Act, and so
at this point, we really
appreciate the amendment that um
Representative Lente put on for
this and adding our hurley to
this um bill and
We, um appreciate your support.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Thompson
registered lobbyist for the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, for purposes of time,
I will certainly not use 3
minutes, but I, I definitely
want to stand in strong support
of the bill. I would note that
we've had broad support in other
committees, including the 6
Middle Rio Grande Pueblos, the
League of Women Voters, the
Bernalio County Clerk came out
in House Judiciary, so had a lot
of broad support for this bill
and certainly appreciate uh
Representative Lente, Senator
Woods, Representative Armstrong,
and all our other co-sponsors
and asked that we support this
legislation.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman
and respected members of the
committee. Uh, my name is Jay
Garcia. I am from Santa Ano
Pablo. I am a tribal council
member and former lieutenant
governor, and on behalf of
Governor Armijo and Lieutenant
Governor Montoya and our tribal
council, the Pope of Santa Ana
asks for your support with HB
308. Sunin Pub is a member of
the Middle Grand Conservancy
District along with the 5 other
Middle grand problems of coach T
Santo Domingo San Felipe Sandia
in his letter. We work hand in
hand with and and in
partnership.
with the district, as we all
know the matter of water
allocations in New Mexico,
there's always going to be at
the forefront.
This bill will help the overall
process for the district and the
pueblos, thus ensuring ensuring
an efficient, free and fair
election process for the Middle
Grand Conservancy District.
Thank you.
Thank you. And so I think online
we have Melania Ortiz and Drew
Sumner.
All right, Ms. Ortiz, go ahead
for up to 3 minutes.
Good morning, Chair and
committee members. My name is
Melina Ortiz, and I am a
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo of Aleta and the Pueblo
of San Felipe, and for the
reasons stated previously, the
Pueblo support House Bill 308
and urge you to pass it. Thank
you.
Thank you. We did not have
anyone signed up in opposition,
uh, we'll go to members of the
committee, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I wanted to
quickly just go through the
differences between I'm familiar
with conservation districts more
than conservancy districts. It's
my understanding that our
conservancy districts, the
voters have to be landowners
within that, is that correct?
Madam Chairwoman and Senator,
yes, ma'am. Thank you. And these
are also nonpartisan elections,
correct, Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chair and
Senator, yes, ma'am. Thank you.
And for that reason, I
absolutely understand this. I
think it would be near
impossible for our clerks to
filter out on these voter rolls
who owns land and, and this is
more of a member process, you
know, those who are involved and
have an impact on this. I think
this is necessary and I
appreciate it, see more of a
cleanup bill for some of our
local elections, um, and
imperative. So thank you for
bringing it forward.
Right. Other members of the
committee, Senator Block. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, panel, uh,
which, which pueblos in Sandoval
County and Bernali are affected
by this.
Madame Truman and and Senator
were talking about Sandia
Pueblo, Santa Ana Pueblo San
Felipe Pueblo, Santo Domingo
Pueblo, and Coach Pueblo. So
they're all in Sandoval,
basically.
I mean,
yeah, there's a little run over
there in Bernnalio.
Uh, Madam Tirin and Senator, the
only one that's not a part of
this in Sandoval County is a
sled of polo and that's in
Valencia County, yep, got it.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Any other members?
OK. So, yes, thank you for
bringing this. Um, I, I
understand why there was the
initial effort to, to put these
districts in the local election
Act, uh,
one consolidation of elections
is the number one thing to to
increase participation in
elections. Um, and a lot of what
the local Election Act was
seeking to do was to consolidate
uh a lot of these, these smaller
elections. Um, I think this is
probably the only election we
have where
It's so, if you're at the landed
gentry, you can, you can vote,
uh, but, but not just if you are
a qualified elector, um, and so
in the past, I, I have supported
having these in the local
Election Act, but I've also seen
that since we tried to do that,
it just hasn't worked. Um, and I
understand that, that if you
change it from the landowners
voting to everyone voting,
whether they are impacted by
what looks like MRGCD are doing,
uh, you really
the the vote of the folks who
are directly impacted. Um, and,
and I understand why, why folks
would not want that. So I am
supportive of this, uh,
hopefully, I feel like this is a
conversation that I've heard
happening since I have come into
office and hopefully now the
conversation will conclude. Uh,
on, on, on this particular
issue, um, so what is the, the
will of the committee?
Manager moved DuP pass. All
right, we have a motion for a
new pass. Is there any objection
to that motion?
See none, you have unanimous to
pass. Thank you.
And I guess we can, yeah.
