Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator about this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Santo Domingo.
He's here Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator.
Center Marcin.
Centamin yes.
Senator Neville.
Etcetera now.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Etcetera etcetera yes.
Senator Mary's.
Senator sells.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart here senator Tom
in.
everyone please rise for the
invocation to be led today by
are are Reverend father Richard
energy New Mexico state Senate
chaplain please remain standing
Kernan.
That means hello welcome to the
Senate.
That was my assistant chaplain
do have twenty one days re
remaining so that I would not
run afoul of our Senate Majority
Leader and tell you interact
with.
Anyone days.
the in the thriving of our
districts in our constituents.
May dialogue continue to provide
a new vision at present other
perspectives were both that and
But what we hear.
May our purpose be to shift and
shape our thinking towards
wisdom and wholeness and bring
this heart centered wisdom into
may our words to each other be
true.
Provide the necessary.
Maybe listen for the purpose of
understanding rather than simply
to persuade.
real understanding.
We just these things in the name
of our try in god and all the
names we call you holy a man.
From metal that Assad hello and
that.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico in the C. assemble
a perfect friendship and then
you need cultures.
session just reminder all
Senators during the week and
four sessions that you are
allowed to wear jeans into the
chamber so just want to make
sure that you knew very little
good afternoon out everyone
unanimous that we go that our
business announcements
miscellaneous hearing no
objection on that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Thank you Mr president thank you
we be in week number two so it's
still a lot of time so everyone
just needs to put it all in
perspective three weeks is a lot
of time I will say I'm very
put it that way it's not a fun
deal so we all need to just be
careful as we navigate these
twenty one days but huge thank
you to all the folks that
in the chamber so before I kind
of give a road map this morning
I'd like to yield to our Senate
economic let me say this I just
want right you know Senator the
the president's made a big thank
we very much appreciate how you
did it's and appreciate that
about so ideal Senator Padilla.
Senator Mike over there thank
you very much Mr president and
for that that you consent to
allow cameras in the chamber and
in the Senate gallery see no
objections cameras are allowed
in both the chamber and in the
gallery today senator Michaelia
Thank you Mr president I I too
want to welcome back or a my
counterpart on the other side
over there hope he's doing well
us keep us well keep our
families will take care of us
through crisis and continue to
stick with us thank you the
Senate recognizes you.
Senator Brandt Mr president I
just want to stand and say how
glad I am to have our Majority
Leader back on the floor it'll
be great to have great
leadership back with us thank
you.
guest today my son Jacob who six
years old director you could
stand up and welcome you to the
Senate.
Mr president I have two things I
want to talk about not with our
floor earlier talking about the
him yet but I hope that we can
truly see what they go through
and we've got some built in
front of us this year that
Mexico I appreciate them and and
what they do forces a state but
it gives us a place so we can
write our diaries the
information that we have as
Baptist thank them for misprint
you.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
Further announcements Senators.
I
see no further announcements
chair assigning those Canadian
reports right now so we'll get
the committee reports read in
and then do the seven
confirmations and then today on
third reading we're going to do
Mr president just a moment.
reports the reader to read.
This president your rules
committee has had it under
department for term commencing
on January first twenty twenty
three to be served at the
pleasure of the governor your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirmed this
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
actions on individually hearing
no objection the reader to read.
Senate executive message number
department for term commencing
on January first twenty twenty
three to be served at the
pleasure of the governor your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirmed this
re appointment Senate executive
approval Elizabeth and Groginsky
as secretary of the early
childhood education and care
council for a term commencing
January first twenty twenty
three to be served at the
higher education department for
a term commencing January first
twenty twenty three to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
Senate.
asked that the Senate confirmed
this re appointment.
recommends that the Senate
confirmed this reappointment
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman
Senator.
The committee reports centers we
their acted upon individually
the reader to read president
George Disher Committee to who
has been referred Senate
memorial twenty one has had it
under consideration.
Your Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee.
As to who has been referred
Senate bill forty three has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
With president I have to be to
to read all the committee report
and so that they need like that
we acted upon to individually.
And the.
same without recommendation as
amended and that's referred to
the finance committee.
Senate bill four sixty eight has
Senate bill twenty seven without
recommendation and thence
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Shannon D. Pinto chair
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee report has been
adopted in the journal reflect
their acted upon individually
the reader to read this
president Education Committee to
committee respectfully submitted
Senator William P. souls
chairman Senator souls Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill four ninety eight to
pass and then just referred to
the finance committee.
chairman Senator souls I move
adoption the committee report
enters we have a motion to adopt
the committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
been referred Senate memorial
twenty one has had it under
consideration reports that same
has been duly and rolled and it
grows preparatory to signing by
president I move the adoption of
the committee report senators we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye
those opposed eight the eyes
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth take us to the next
order of business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
confirmations and ideal to
Serra Propst who has been
reappointed as cabinet secretary
to the Energy minerals natural
resources department and I now
yield to senator Wirth.
Senator Peter Wirth.
department as secretary.
Hearing no objection Senator
Peter Wirth to explain.
Thank you Mr president four
years ago I had the honor of
caring
when she's got a whole portfolio
of additional things that have
been accomplished during her
four years as secretary it was
an incredible honor to present
for for this position and I just
want to share some of the
just resources full professional
huge integrity and and and
something that I really
appreciate.
of our confirmation and it just
shows the very tricky arena that
she works in when it comes to
our energy policy and climate
willing to sign up for round
number two and I think this is a
tremendous reappointment by the
governor and I certainly stand
for any questions thank you
about secretary is her
leadership on the prime will
issue and I was afraid we might
lose our over that so she was
was done and I know it was a
difficult thing but I do
appreciate your leadership on
that many other gory on
everything going forward but I
do appreciate your ability to
Mr president thank you I do
stand in strong support of this
nomination to I first want to
thank us secretary probes for
your willingness to serve it's a
expertise and I come in with
something I thought I knew and
she still sits there and listens
to me and see if maybe I have
some perspective the perhaps she
she just didn't think cover
Senator Rodriguez Senator Campos
thank you Mr president I to
stand in full support of this
particular nomination and a
couple of things that really
come to mind number one as we
meetings but talking to people
and absorbing the information
that is necessary to make a lot
of the tough decisions as we all
know particularly with our
forests with our parks with all
the pieces to help each and
everyone of us regardless of
where we live so that Mr
president members of the Senate
I to fully support an individual
I to stand strong support of the
nomination her staff she is I
think she came in and under
difficult circumstances the
office is severely underfunded
and she has managed to create a
the best interest of the state
and that is so important to have
someone who really listens to
everybody and and tries to come
in this office again standing
and strong support.
Senator Lopez senator Munoz.
All.
Thank you Mr president I also
know that by now but there's one
those people that you can trust
to the pandemic rules she cares
about what she does and she's
does with compassion and you can
have in a conversation with a
today well we're headed and and
what's happening in and I
appreciate her and waiting and
their commitment to the state
because this is I think this may
so from my heart and from the
people in New Mexico to you guys
as a couple thank you for your
commitment thank you senator
Munoz we have Senator Brandt
followed by Senator Woods in
objection Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president and I
have no question for the sponsor
but I I do want to brag a
little.
Somehow she always we and so.
I appreciate that.
I appreciate her husband that
set aside thank you Sir for
supporting.
I around the capital for the
last few weeks trying to get a
pretty major piece of
legislation through it'll be in
the house I think Tuesday this
week and now we'll get it done
she's worked long and hard
trying to coordinate the
asset to the state and I want to
congratulate and thank her for
those efforts thank you.
Senator Griggs.
secretary has always listened
always been willing to talk
about issues and Mr president
even sometimes and she actually
does what I ask her to do.
she put jam and look forward to
working with her in the future
and make in New Mexico better
environmentally and through
great great appointment and you
know when I'd like you to.
Your great DFA man I love your
name on my checks and the
these Google does.
their integrity and their
working ability and what they do
for the state has never been
question.
Not by anyone thank you.
Mr president thank you members I
just thank you can see from the.
Words colleagues on both sides
of the aisle what a what an
amazing appointment this is and
I'll just say this I've known
the.
but I just don't want to be
picking which one I like better
because we've got two amazing
individuals and this is this is
secretary cultural Propst day
reappointment of Serra cultural
Propst secretary of energy
minerals and natural resources
department and ask for shell
pants thank you senator Wirth
senators we're voting to your
commencing on January first
twenty twenty three to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
has duly been confirmed by the
New Mexico state Senate Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president members
Senator huh.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I move the Senate do
hereby confirm the reappointment
of Jan Paul Schrier as secretary
of the tourism department.
present these two secretaries
and.
I think many of us were really
impressed with some of the
watch the last four years five
point two percent of the state's
GDP and then there was a
statement about.
the department bringing in the
tourism is as an economic
development driver and one of
the things that I am
particularly thrilled about
where we've come over the years
Schreier.
I think if the timing is
absolutely perfect and so she's
done a terrific job of steering
this departments and again we
debating anyone wishing to
debate.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
And again of the sponsored a
Trying to.
Go into another market.
San Francisco and she was
talking about the money that she
can tell me dollars invested
dollars returned and I
appreciate that thank you so
much for the work you do thank
you Mr president thank you Sir
We so appreciate the work that
you have been doing that you've
done
say what you will do should I
say in the future but one thing
I just wanted to mention to the
have ever you mentioned that for
all of us who had a concern as
to how to appropriately in and
of mention your name but also
you're bringing your children
with you today is is wonderful
also rises support but also for
a plea for the secretary to quit
texting me.
To projects mean like four
trillion times in one session
should listen to professionalism
and and not a get entranced and
what we want but I I rise and
support so thank you madam
secretary at I will get a text
that right.
Thank you centerman yes we have
emphasis that she has placed on
the outdoor tourism and what
that brings to rural New Mexico
your emphasis that our small
communities also have a hard and
and the attraction that it
Wirth for bringing us secretary
sharp Act to us again I do have
to stand in full support we work
together on a few things here
and there but the really big
thing that I want to mention and
a rearranged in this the
secretary stood up and said
we'll take it on will make sure
the New Mexico true helps to
manage the dollars that flowed
Special Olympics New Mexico and
we all know what an incredible
you.
Thank you center for the.
Any further debate senator
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president I stand
in support as well
we're going without but Mr
president secretary Senator
thanks thanks for the job you do
and thanks for being willing to
take it on further.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president I
appreciate I didn't mention up
front New Mexico true and I
program rolled out across the
country so with that Mr
president I ask the Senate to
secure by confirm the
reappointment of Jan Paul
all cameras on if you wish to
vote no please raise your hand.
affirmative zero negative the
reappointment of Gen pasar a
secretary of the tourism
department for term commencing
on January first twenty twenty
three to be served at the
kids use round of applause
congratulations.
Stephanie Schardin Clarke who's
up for re appointment as the
cabinet secretary for taxation
and revenue I now yield to
Senator Shendo.
appointment of Stephanie
reappointment of Stephanie
Schardin Clarke to taxation
revenue department see no
objections Senator Shendo to
explain.
secretary so work in the attacks
and Revenue Department I think
reports over the years have
spoke for herself and I just
want to quote
So I'll just leave it at that
and open up for debate.
Thank you senator and the
senators we're debating the
reappointment of Stephanie
Schardin Clarke.
all our money process is it puts
in the right accounts and and so
the secretary taxis and Revenue
issues of doing a great job at
this I think that code is
excellent perfect for.
call me give your constituents
my number should say I'll give
you somebody else's number she
says given my number and I'll
take care personally and that
yes we do have further debate we
have Senator Campos followed by
Senator Woods Senator Campos and
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate and has
already been stated we have an
whenever I talk about this
person she's responsive she's
smart she's informed she gets
input from her colleague she
always is very much involved in
she wants to ensure that that
outreach is always going to be
there and there's several cases
that come to mind as a recent
that she has dealt directly with
and these individuals have come
doing the right thing we have
families that have either been
able to continue in business or
if you will have an uptick in
terms of it's time for us to
move forward and that's what she
thank you Senator Campos we have
Senator Woods followed by
Senator with the biggest in
center how to meal Senator Woods
thank you Mr president and again
constituents in the past to to
stir been a pleasure to work
with you thank you very much
thanks Senator Woods Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr president
knew and was fortunate enough to
know Stephanie I may call you
that from the county Santa Fe
County and she did a great job
there and when she got hired for
and she's just done it also well
she's also in addition to that
very pleasant kind and always
helpful thank you Stephanie
thank you Mr president thank you
takes the time to educate those
of us who might need a little
bit of help I was running a bill
that I thought would help our R.
T. D. district in Senate
district I and it wasn't as
quick as a fix that I thought it
dollars of trouble for the
taxation department thanks to
her on educating me and then on
helping me with the solution
everyone within my tax district
was happy with the solution she
president thanks and have a meal
we have Senator by the F.
followed by Senator Tomlinson
about the thank you very much Mr
president I also rise and
support thank you Senator Shendo
minute increments of the year
and the likelihood is she will
answer and if she doesn't she
calls back within X. number of
seconds that's one thing that is
very valuable and and and I
something I've called about that
she didn't personally know about
and then told me a little bit
about it and they got somebody
in the department working on it
and I think I called her for
probably about half of the total
things that her department does
Thank you Mr president also rise
and support of this nomination
there was no secret that the
secretary in here the other
apartment it was in disarray and
Padilla as already mentioned one
her response very responsive
matter what time of day or night
you you a contactor she's gets
back to you very quickly and
lan and so Sen strong support
this nomination and I wish the
nominee the very best thank you
Mr president thank you senator
Stephanie Schardin Clarke.
Senator is we're voting all
sinister suits all cameras on if
you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Thirty eight in the affirmative
you're on the negative the
reappointment of Stephanie
Schardin Clarke is secretary of
the taxation and revenue
department for term commencing
this time I like the whole body
to rice in the congratulate our
our secretary for the next four
years.
You Mr president I hereby submit
the credentials of Elisabeth and
again ski who is being
reappointed as the cabinet
secretary of early childhood
appointment of Elizabeth and
against U. S. secretary of the
early childhood education care
department hearing no objections
center this explain.
I thank you very much Mr
conferee who I think we all know
and who is criss crossed the
state one of the very first
thing she did Mr president upon
her original appointment was to
hop in the in the also mobile
Mr president she brings with her
a wealth of information many of
us here in this chamber work for
now you know decades to help
streamline build up and create a
the bill that I carry to create
the department she did go around
the world to find a professional
to lead this department for us
and what we wound up is finding
agencies and mold the early
education department into
something that had deliverables
that lists and that had a pre K.
program in early pre K. program
at home visiting from all these
ground leadership from this
conferee she was literally
building in this department as I
said many times while she was
flying this airplane she's
building it washes flying it and
there was a lot of bumps in the
great programming and respecting
the history and the culture
really education New Mexico she
also went on and and found other
creative thing.
Is to bring into New Mexico and
us I also know that I stand here
easily saying that New Mexico is
leading the country and how to
build an practice early
education and I think that's
directly you know because of the
Senator Sedillo Lopez followed
by Senator poke Senator Lopez
thank you Mr president I to
stand in strong support of the
nomination I had the opportunity
to contact her was a very long
time day care in our community
and had some issues and and the
she was right on top of it
everything she does I also see
her enormous caring for the
children in our state and that's
exactly what we need right now
so I stand in strong support and
conferee had a chance to see her
early on in before I was elected
in communities visiting with not
only the families and and the
kids but also those who work in
and experience but most of all
she just has that passion
to do this job and that's really
what we need so thank you Mr
president and I know she will
first time meeting the secretary
and we had a really good
conversation and it's not easy
building a department from the
ground up she did bring
experience that New Mexico
needed
CYFD.
He is going to be critical going
forward and the work that's
going to have to be done to help
that department but anyway I do
congratulate you and and look
forward to working with you as
we go forward thank you thank
Strong support to secretary
again ski it's been a she did
maybe just two short weeks Mr
president that I've been able to
gonna say it again New Mexico
may New Mexico voters made
history we overwhelmingly
approved a constitutional
amendment that makes our state
the first state to guarantee a
voters voted for this
constitutional amendment it
almost got stripped out in
Congress our delegation got a
back in the president signed it
had a good visit while she was
there.
We talked to lever thank.
you're you're a good person for
what you do thank you.
Thank you senator was aware
center Maestas.
Thank you Mr president I just
department ever had and hope you
stay forever but it's been a
beautiful struggle to convince
of folks the what the main
argument that we.
That was that what that we were
to be implemented by leadership
and and tremendous foresight and
knowledge and so you not only
are you setting the tone for the
for the department for for
decades to come but providing an
example for the rest of the
twelve system really transform
the beauty of our state we're a
lot of folks Mr president come
here and say I want to help you
which is great but other folks
come and say Hey what's going on
how can we work together how can
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate center for
the a closed thank you very much
Mr president and again I think
present us as consent that weeks
you Senator Steinborn and
senator that is except for the
purposes of a call say no
objection Sentifi the other
close thank you very much Mr
confirmation of Elizabeth and
again ski.
All senators to your seats if
you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative zero on the negative
the reappointment of Elizabeth
and again ski as secretary of
Center by the thank you very
much Mr president I would like
to ask Elizabeth Groginsky
secretary of our early education
department stand and also the
Center how to meal Mr president
I hereby submit the credentials
Thank you Mr president pursuant
to senator Kirsten and executive
message number two dated
February second twenty twenty
three I move the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Stephanie but I regress to
and respect secretary rod Regus
she's been around a secretary
for two years but we know our
for many many years proud Lobo
merry to a local athletes of
course we're very proud of her
Mexico and I think all of us by
Parsons bar part bipartisanship
are very proud of what we've
been able to do last couple
years very proud of her work so
I stand ready for debate thank
Mr president I probably talked
more today than I have in a week
and a half.
But I I do appreciate.
and just appreciate you so much
thank you very much.
Thank you Sir what's Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
president and I to stand in full
higher end level she has no fear
in terms of taking on any of the
issues that are affecting our
universities are institutions
and as she moves forward a
personalities within any of our
institutions of higher learning
what she does is she brings to
the table those skills of
helping people to find solutions
to the issues that are affecting
and stand in full support of
this a particular nominee thank
you thank you Senator Campos.
Center how to meal.
Thank you Mr president I to
stand in strong support of this
nontraditional students like
myself she too is a first
generation college graduate and
understands the importance of
how education can become the key
to your success now what's
hunger and in institutions of
colleges and universities across
New Mexico and she has become
not only an ally but a very good
friend of mine she has the best
interest at heart for every
student I want to talk about the
in scholarships for students
because she wants to make sure
that New Mexicans like she and I
don't only ask will you go to
college but which college will
you attend because we're gonna
attend college thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator Malia Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr president I also
want to support in the short
what have you I have to say she
was one of the most creative and
thought full secretaries who we
care who came together to figure
out how we're really going to
listens she gets the barriers
and she's not like but this is a
barrier were staff she's like
okay let's think this one
through and we'll figure out a
way that's huge thank you so
and I do also stand in full
support of this country as well.
I just a have learned a lot
about the departments that I
didn't really realize before and
the air and this conferee has
been called has been collected
has had tremendous you know
grace in dealing with all of us
and I I don't think folks by
maybe everyone does but I might
got university presidents to
deal with an associations and
all sorts of different things so
I want to thank her for peace
keeping calm as we try to model
in your department as much as
this
The nomination and soon to be
confirmed secretary.
The work that you have done well
you've been in your position
straightforward very forthright
and you don't take any you know
what I won't say it.
But I really appreciate your you
know and I think that's you know
efforts that we have undertaken
many other venues and with
regards to hire read and you
know Mr president higher
education is an entity unto
a lot and for your leadership
and your willingness and your
gumption I just really
appreciated and there are many
who are not at their border
region levels but those worth
are doing so I just wanted to
share that and thank you.
Senator many of us thank you Mr
president I also like to support
you know this is when the
higher ed in the entrenchment of
those and universities and what
they're doing it in and bring in
new ideas because I'll say this
some of us that have gray hair
everything but should really
open ideas and and that's what
we need is someone as they lead
our educational system into the
twenty first century well some
cares about is his opportunity
matters to people whether they
succeed or not succeed by giving
them the opportunity is the
right thing to do so thank you
Moores to close a famous
presidents for as you just heard
from my colleagues this is very
well respected both sides of the
aisle and for those who weren't
in rules this morning her her
experienced in our own families
when our for our first person
view and our generation is able
to offer college and change
director of entire family so
with that Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting the negative by a
show of hands.
Senator is here seats where
voting on the reappointment of
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative zero on the negative
New Mexico state Senate Senator.
Senator Moores thank you thank
you Mr president thanks body and
if everyone will welcome our
to senator Neville.
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
president and members I move
that the Senate do.
Hereby reconfirm the appointment
president you know it's tempting
with this nomination just to say
at least two keys and drop the
Mike.
However I wanna of wanted spell
it out because you know that the
chamber of commerce talk about
house committed she is to
collaboration with the small
business community you know not
just the the business community
that means everything employment
wise boys and I didn't realize
how how many worlds I heard
Office touches I mean it's
economic development you know so
into the spaceport Center just
all these worlds that she needs
to be in touch with so I was
just so impressed and what I'm
really impressed about and I
mentioned this in committee she
London but she comes back to New
Mexico so I just I'm very very
honored to to present her
reconfirmation and will now hear
followed by Senator Hamblen then
Senator Hickey thank you Mr
president it is with great honor
that I stand here to ask the
development ventures and she is
the one of the most efficient
effective responsive and kind
secretaries that we have and I'm
her and allow her to continue to
work with us to do the great
thanks for New Mexico that she's
doing thank you Mr president.
Thank you center the regular
Senator Hamblen and Senator
keys you know I I am really
grateful for the departments in
terms of recognizing the
importance of outdoor recreation
but also for the secretary and
her incredible staff for being
other other corporations and big
businesses and we you know she
knows that I wrestle with that
because I always try to talk
about supporting local
businesses and so the fact that
leader and I commend secretary
keys for her staff and for the
work in the vision that she has
and and always appreciate that
we are able to wave to each
Thank you Mr president again
I don't want to make a pond but
here we have a leash a Keyes who
holds the keys to the future of
New Mexico.
is as tough as any jobs at all
of you and you're all got tough
jobs no question but hers
literally the the keys to the
families is so important and she
has stuck with it through thick
and thin and it's not been easy
I know so I greatly appreciate
future lies thank you Secretary
congratulations further debate
where Senator Campos thank you
Mr president and the so many
things of R. A. Binns said that
we start talking about the
secretary and she moves forward
to she does come from rural New
Mexico in Seminole county so she
knows for Sappey is she knows
things that always come to mind
number one she continues to go
ahead and be vivacious and how
that contagious approach to
everything that is her
and set up that business or if
you will to go ahead and have
that film maybe so along with
that those are the very
fortunate
she always works side by side
with her staff and so within
that she confers with them she
engages and takes their thoughts
the example that I request to
share because in her life this
is what she has done was a young
lady working in the office
upstairs she's very interested
well why don't you get a hold of
the secretary secretary keys
within minutes she was they're
not talking to me she was
talking to this young lady and
our own you can imagine what she
do does across the United States
she continues to be a very
strong advocate for our state
and has already been mentioned
Senator Kernan followed by
Senator Woods then Senator
Griggs Senator Pirtle Senator
Maestas.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president and I I certainly
she's not afraid to come and
stand with me and my
constituents as you did a couple
weeks ago and and supported us
as we celebrated our particular
another but you recognize the
need we do have our work cut out
for us going forward issues now
as we tried to diversify we all
know we're going to need to do
Thank you Mr president in and
again
thank you madam Alicia for all
you do I do read your reports.
we need to move our unemployed
people and our people that are
employed in lower wage jobs up
to a higher skill level to a
better job and that should do
Thank you Mr president and I to
stand in support of this
nominee.
It was a little it was a little
difficult moving my chair out
Mexico and she continues to work
hard and I look forward to
having opportunities to to work
with her to provide
opportunities for the southern
we can't stay dormant we can't
stay the way we are we've got to
bring staff and we've got to get
people excited about being here
forward to her state and four
more years and and making New
Mexico better thank you Mr
president thank Schecter thank
you Senator Griggs center Pirtle
followed by center my SS and
one no one on that can do a
better job than her thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
for staying for staying on the
job and continue to do the
tremendous work that you're
doing as you know Mr president
of bike four years ago I was a
name to a chair commerce to
division's incredibly well not
just the film division but also
been a policy leader in general
we were kind of hooked on Leda
and J. tip as and maybe tax
and growing what we have you
know we legalize the hemp plant
we legalized cannabis we allowed
restaurants to compete with the
affordable liquor licenses we've
and now we're going to put money
going to sing a song but a
services center took took that
took that from me but just want
to thank you for your service
and continue to work over the
next four years to grow our
economy
bill two couple years back on
this how the house floor and and
we'll get it done again thank
you.
Thank you senator messes with
Senator Diamond followed by
Senator Tallman thank you Mr
our rural communities bring
specially for the emphasis that
you've placed on spaceport
America I your enthusiasm is
contagious and so whatever the
project is that you're
or reception that they hosted in
my plus one last week was my
youngest daughter Reese and when
we walked away she said Alicia
keys is her name much like mom
to.
Since for this
Now the nation of renomination
and the I know I am I can repeat
not a lot of nice things already
I tried to get the funding to
find the software and hardware
to do dynamic scoring over tax
incentives so finally last year
she said what we'll do is
Articulated thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator Clemente any
further debate.
I
Alicia keys that you know this
very talented nationally known
whatever.
God bless Sir but we've got our
own Alicia keys and Tanya and
that the they do hereby
reconfirm the appointment of
Alicia J. Keyes secretary of
economic development.
senator Munoz until returns the
chambers of the purpose of call
hearing no objection.
Senator steer seats if you wish
to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five the
affirmative zero on the negative
the reappointment of Alicia
Jennifer Keyes as cabinet
Mexico state Senate Senator
o'neill.
Thank you members let's all rise
and knowledge what a great job
secretary keys.
Taking us to the next order of
business Senator Peter Wirth
thank you Mr president unanimous
that we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
report read in so for the reader
I'd like to just read the one
rules committee report unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee report seeing no
objection were on that order of
business committee reports the
makes the following of re
appointment James Jim Kenney as
secretary of the environment
department for a term commencing
on January first twenty twenty
chairwoman Senator.
Mr president I move the
committee report says we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
we go that our business
confirmations and I yield the
center how to meal hearing of
Jackson center how to mail Mr
president Is Your by some of the
credentials of James Kennedy who
is the consideration for
executive message number two
dated February second twenty
twenty three I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
reappointment of James Kenney as
secretary of the environment
is this is our last conferees
today in this long list of
incredible secretaries at the
governor has provided for us
when when James Kenny started he
innovators he has done so many
things different in that
department he has continued to
measure employee engagement he's
our citizens that have limited
English proficiency in the
rulemaking and the permit
process their department has
reduced climate emissions they
and cannabis businesses to start
up his department has sent
thirty seven million in grants
to our communities all over the
state for water and
staff that he use to crawl
through the sewers to check
COVID and our congregants care
facilities.
But probably the thing that
cleaning up our P. fast
situation with cannon Air Force
base they're cleaning it up in
Texas why aren't they doing it
who's just been devastated by
this issue so we've got the
perfect person and James Kenny
he's done so much for this
department and I will end by
part of the fifty great
engineers that have gotten out
of temple he stands out as one
of the only handful of public
sector honorees highlighting a
senator Stewart Senators we're
debating the reappointment of
James Kinney as secretary of the
environment department Senator
Lopez.
when he came in severely
understaffed and Anne we haven't
still giving them the tools that
he needs to keep our beautiful
state of where it needs to be it
inclusion of everybody and and
then the production of rules
that really balance the needs of
our state I think that he really
has been a wonderful wonderful
I rise in support of this
nomination also.
Of you know secretary kini when
I first made a phone call for
you to come and visit us down in
the south valley.
air conditioned place we sat
outside we had a a table you
know some water and other things
that the residents were able to
provide for us but you were
that particular stretch of of
the area environmental issues
and such but just with you being
present important to me my heart
also
a phone call shows your
commitment to the state and it's
not just
every part of our state is
important if you just being
there with us and community
really made a difference and I
Lopez with Senator Campos.
Thank you Mr president course
members of the Senate it's
always great to go and stand
before each and everyone of you
as we continue to fight for a
issues that are adversely
affecting our environment here
in New Mexico so this particular
nominee continues with high
levels of innovation is very
there are some contentious
meetings and times when people
fully don't understand but this
individual continues to clarify
become so much more pristine
under his leadership thank you
very much Mr president thank you
Senator Campos with Senator
McKenna followed by Senator
to in strong support for Mr
Kennedy our secretary of the
environmental Department again
for another four years and I
mentioned this in his meeting
he has written a book on it Mr
president so we are so fortunate
to have such a an expert helping
New Mexico fight to the federal
but at the other day called
secretary can in my office and
and I have to call the state
police because he said he was
eating a donut so I thought I
got other Barrick's need to make
sure that we're missing the
time and listen to everybody
that's involved in what's going
on and how we move that around
in New Mexico I appreciate that
because we as legislators talk
appreciate that when when you
can teach me and teach us about
environment issue so thank you
Mr president thank you centerman
yes we have Senator Rodriguez
followed by Senator Griggs
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
does Mr president we appreciate
it very much and I just a Senate
to continue to confirm this
great qualified individual we
are so fortunate to have him
can't ask for more what can I
say I run out of words because
you are truly absolutely
wonderful thank you Mr president
thank you center the rest
Senator Griggs followed by
The secretary has always been
willing to stand and talk about
issues and he and I have talked
about several to believe we're
the I'm I'm.
I don't know that it really
worked out great to be
considered right behind
like is in the best interest of
of our state
I certainly hopeful that we can
we can have more productive
Not just unbending philosophies
and so he's faced with the
challenges it maybe not all the
secretaries have but I'm I'm
have sure thank you Mr president
and thank you Mr secretary.
Thank you secretary of Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr president and and
country and I truly believe that
the false that forever deal is
going to be a forever deal and
I'm I worried for ethically
about that and all across the
figure out how to break that
stuff down and and make it less
dangerous but it used to.
and and came over there and and
and got with that discharge
permits and different things and
and we've got more work to do on
that.
And hopefully we can figure that
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president Sir
earlier this year I had one of
my borderlands communities who
was facing a challenge within
secretary's attention within
forty five minutes was resolved
and I want to thank him for the
work that you've done my
constituents thank you there
were some to desperate people
down there who really needed
immediate help and we think
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president and I stand in support
and I also appreciate the the
personal attention that the
secretary gives when there's a
need in the community you
about is being able to
communicate and reach out and
and that's I certainly respect
that and I thank you very much.
Thank you senator and any
further debate senators.
thank the body for the comments
the stories and the support of
secretary Kenny with that I
asked the Senate do hereby
confirm the reappointment of
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
is here on the negative the
reappointment of James Kenny as
a secretary for the environment
apartment return to mention on
January first twenty twenty
three to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection or on that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president so just for the
you Mr president also would like
to make an announcement Senator
menos thank you Mr president
would you like to go first no
you go ahead Senator thank you
line to get the spread sheets
from the exact so five o'clock
today for capital make sure that
is the drop dead deadline if not
Thank you Mr president thank you
sending us.
And as soon as that I may be
able to just Senator Moores a
question.
difference between the
university New Mexico football
arena and the New Mexico state
Senate chamber.
What is the difference to New
Mexico football are you know and
Thank you senator Morris.
In that order businesses senator
third reading absent we got our
business committee reports.
Seeing no objection.
The reader to read.
and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman.
objection the reader to read.
Senate bill two forty nine to
pass on this referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three ninety six do
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman.
adopted as rural reflect their
acted upon individually the
reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill twenty has
sentiment just thank you Mr
president asked Maez consenus as
the reader be allowed to read
all the committee reports and
the vote on them with mon motion
and the General reflect their
vote upon individually hearing
Senate bill three eighty one do
pass.
Senate bill twenty four do pass
respectfully submitted senator
George when you also chairman.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted in the journal show
they're acted upon individually.
under consideration and reports
say with recommendation that it
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually hearing
no objection the reader to read.
Senate bill three seventy seven
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee.
Senate bill three sixty to do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three fifty I do
pass and thence referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three fifty four do
Senate bill three fifty to do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three twenty three
do pass on that's referred to
the finance committee.
Senate bill three oh six do pass
Senate bill for forty to do pass
as amended and that's referred
to the finance committee.
Senate bill four thirty four do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three thirty eight
do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three thirty three
pass respectful respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino I move the adoption of
the committee report Mister
president Senator is we have a
acted upon individually.
Richard right Mr president your
Judiciary Committee to whom has
been referred Senate Joint
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
committee report has been
adopted by like ten ounce of the
members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed in open session Center
memorial twelve with certificate
of correction.
number one on that order
business third reading of
legislation center semantics
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
says of annexed explained thank
you Mr president members of the
Senate senators Stuart Ingle and
I are co sponsoring this
appropriations act twenty twenty
one at the federal level there
was a new designation
established call the roll
emergency hospital as a new
only instead of closing under
the act rural emergency
hospitals can received enhanced
payment upon meeting certain
requirements two types of rural
hospitals may convert to a rural
sixteen hospitals in the state
that have fifty or less budget
and approximately four of those
hospitals are seeking this might
health to establish the rules
and regulations and which to
apply and I would ask my co
sponsor if he has any comments.
this bill you know New Mexico as
all of us know is extremely
rural state.
And you know without.
Not only for the health care but
to general mate business make up
and the school systems that are
there and in any industry that
is there and whatever we can do
and the thing about it is is
this is this is this particular
piece of legislation along with
the federal health has a real
chance of benefiting many of our
Thank you Senator Stefanics how
we are open to debate and
questions thank you all right
Sir debate Senate bill two forty
five.
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the rules been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in a negative in
the negative by show of hands.
Seeing no objection he will be
excuse Senators we are on Senate
bill two forty five to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
comment to show how of how the
support is on this bill Senator
Campos has volunteered some of
his eight by ten autograph
glossies to these hospitals.
I thought of thirty five thirty
Madam president very much and
Senator Campos is is ABS
absolutely move the more
generous centers here on the
floor.
item Senator Hotmail madam
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate but the
record show that all options for
placing Senate bill one eighty
seven on final passage have been
my two expert witnesses in the
chamber and tells those experts
are my two expert witnesses
madam president are Kim Chavez
Cook and then Baur.
Center how to me to explain the
bill.
Vigil offender statute currently
applies to all felons except
Fallon D. W. Y. requires judges
to impose mandatory prison terms
that a person who repeatedly
possesses drugs is not an
incredible Fallon who needs to
be taught a lesson they're
suffering from a health problem
that requires treatment not
who are criminalized for their
addictions they lose years of
their lives sometimes decades to
being incarcerated people
struggling with addiction madam
president feel targeted by
criminalized makes it impossible
to break the cycle and gel
doesn't help madam president
family members of people
struggling with addiction
struggle to find treatment beds
incarceration making it possible
for people to get the help they
need to get healthy and without
madam president I stand for
questions.
president I do yes thank you
madam president and and senator
I I a did not haven't seen this
bill in committee and so I had a
Senator help help me out with
what kind of amounts of the
drugs would someone need to have
on them for to get a felony
conviction for.
Name it federal consent our
favorite drug lately
with that would be a felony just
for them possessing any amount
there are in the home and and
you know they are you know
they've got some young.
Adults that they
Thomas present etcetera so.
What you're trying to do is to
make sure that people who are
simply using.
distributing whether they catch
them distributor not.
Madam president not a lot it
that's case by case.
Thank you
Payments for personal use when
they've actually been
distributing
and then they would fall under
this otherwise I'm not sure
there's anything I can object to
it all.
Thank you the next we'll hear
from Senator meetings.
The members and with the bill
sponsor the good center you'll
please you you madam president I
Madam president no that's
already in the law.
Okay and so this bill madam
president this bill is not.
a D. W. I. which would then lead
to a felony is is that correct
madam president Senator no.
Thank you and and then present
And then when I when I pull that
up that's that's what I see I
see
driving under the influence
what would you be able to just
walk me.
Yes but but Madam Madam presence
Senator but what we're doing now
is we're taking out that D. W.
Y. existing part of the law
offender if you have a felony
DWI conviction is that correct.
Madam president that's been
since nineteen ninety seven.
The existing law that you're not
changing.
You would have a fourth DWI
conviction which would then be a
felony the first second third or
incur if there's a prior felony
conviction on top of that you
could put you know get the
habitual offender stamp
essentially
You still have those either I
convictions.
But you would no longer be a
habitual offender in and and my
understanding that correct or am
is president of the state verses
that my and that case was
nineteen ninety seven at us and
M. S. C. dash zero one zero okay
great then presence there so
from Santo my Estes.
Thank you madam president I just
want to stand in support of this
bill we heard it in us back up
couple weeks ago and the
so Mister Bennett president with
the gentleman yield.
You you Senator Hotmail madam
president I yield yes it does so
madam president Jim it does this
up lower the penalty for drug
eighteen year the eighteen
months we have no misdemeanor
possession even residue on a
pipe is a felony or a major
crime in the state of Mexico
nine years for a simple
possession but but maxim out
eighteen months thank you madam
president thank you Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you madam
president.
whether the resources available
to help these individuals when
they
It throughout the state drug
addiction I think is a root
cause of many many problems in
treatment of the recovery
programs that we need and I
think the senator for bringing
this bill and I urged the body
to pass it.
president I move that Senate
bill one eighty seven do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the role has been
called and all those present
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Sanchez voting no
Senator Diamond voting no.
Thirty in the affirmative I in
the negative Senate bill one
criminalizing addiction has on
especially women who are
incarcerated at three times the
rate of men for simple drug
possession incarcerated mothers
separates families continuing
Let's continue on number three
on our calendar is Senator
Duhigg.
Thank you madam president I ask
Senator Duhigg to explain the
bill.
And then present ask unanimous
consent to bring my to experts
and that they are secretary of
this body because we've seen it
for three years now and and one
eighty is simply a pared down
version of last year's rendition
which was Senate bill six which
many years.
All the changes that are in this
bill are born from actual
experiences that are election
administrators have been
navigating many of them have
judiciary hearing on this bill
of the changes that are in SB
one eighty are really needs not
wants these are technical
nonpartisan changes to our
election code the provide needed
long bill and and we've heard
all heard what's in it before
but I want to spend a little bit
of time walking through what it
does.
Some of the most important
changes and these are changes
madam president that would have
election this will move it up to
the Monday following the county
campus.
This bill also increase the cap
on what clerk's compay poll
workers on election day from two
retaining coworkers and keep in
mind the in many counties madam
president
these are primarily folks who
were are in their seventies or
older and who are working
incredibly long hours.
return to county clerks so that
every vote is counted and it
also clarifies the interplay
between public records elections
and protecting our national
In adopting the time lines that
were so well for absentee
ballots and twenty twenty are in
addition to adopting those
timelines of this bill also
reinstates a number a number of
rather than just their name
address and your birth providing
for secure preprocessing of
absentee ballots by county clerk
staff given an opportunity for
have folks doing this critical
work late into the night when
we're all tired and more likely
to make mistakes.
Madam president another twenty
twenty temporary fix that this
bill would make permanent is
This bill madam president also
make sure that the vote
tabulators visited that the
manually hand counting a portion
of the paper ballots and
comparing them to the electronic
results produced by the these
machines are so there are
election administrators and our
mailer be sent to voters prior
to every election so that every
voter New Mexico knows all their
options to participate and also
requires a mandatory training
have employees to spare they can
still find this training in a
way that does not burden on.
This bill will also make
permanent the secretary of
an amendment that was offered by
I don't see in here but Senator
Moores in the rules committee
that directs the secretary of
state to develop a program be a
rule that will allow elected and
big bill I didn't hit every
granular change that we made in
this little monologue but but
those are the high notes and
with that I stand for questions.
move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill one
eighty is amended.
The reader to right.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one eighty as
page forty two line eighteen
after important insert sent to
the voter by the county clerk
this is language that was put
lot of of absentee ballot
request forms are being sent to
people's homes are pre populated
many times it has information
that's incorrect either the name
in the receive another one and
they don't realize that it's not
from the government they get
concerned that somehow the one
that they sent in before didn't
count and so the this creates
tons of confusion this would
have madam president this is not
a friendly amendment this would
this presents real first
amendment issues are and I think
is as most likely
twenty twenty election and I
know because a lot of heartburn
for some the county clerk's
because people are getting and
for some folks were came in
because they were getting
these folks even if they send
things out that are frustrating
and.
In confusing for folks they they
still have a constitutional
right to do so so that's why
So with the sponsor of the bill
yield Senator Duhigg to yield
certainly so Madam presidents
Senator.
We have lots of disclosures on
Can we at least if we don't do
this one would it make sense to
have a disclosure on the non
government mailings this is
where a non government mailing.
have that amendment before me so
I would have to see what that
amendment would look like before
I could could tell give you an
answer on it but if that
amendments coming I'm sure we'll
people pretend to be a
government we ought not let them
pretend to be government that's
why this particular amendment
makes sense and it made so much
Three hundred and sixty five
days ago or so.
So I'm just I think this makes a
lot of sense because because we
want to know truly want to know.
Election integrity.
And that's why in this
particular case I think it makes
a lot of sense to at least
identify and I believe this does
And which ones not and so if it
comes from the county clerk it's
clearly from the county clerk is
not from County clerk's clearly
not from the county clerk I
think that's important so in
Thank you Sir further debate
senator Morris thank you madam
Rotom are to rise and support of
this this was in last year's
challenge in the courts but we
already have first amendment
issues that have been upheld are
doing with polling places where
you and I madam chair not
allowed to go and pull on
exercising second amendment
right in that same time zone
around our time
Distance own around a point
location so we do have these
these
effort last year we've continues
to try to make this a bipartisan
bipartisan bill this year and
hope that the sponsor and
secretary of state will take
work with us on on some of these
issues and I think this is one
of the very simple issues that
we have asked for to try to make
this a bipartisan bill madam
chair madam president thank you
president I I will just add that
I I think a similar
thing is been done and and at
least one other state it's been
held up as being constitutional
I find it kind of ridiculous
play one on television but I
I've never heard that before
madam president and it just is
amazing what can change within
just one simple here a year ago
right and this year it seems as
though some of our concerns and
some of the small issues that we
have that my County clerk of
brought to me are just gonna be
left out and we're we're
amendment number one to Senate
bill one eighty as amended and I
ask for a show of hands.
Senators we are voting on the
Senate floor amendment number
Senator pope folks know Senator
Campos folks know Senator
McKenna votes no Senator Sedillo
votes no Senator Duhigg votes no
Senator Hotmail votes no Senator
Hamblen votes no Senator moon
Senators souls votes no senators
to phonics votes no Senator
Padilla folks know Senator
I apologize Senator Pinto your
Senator Pinto folks now.
And senator Craig Hemphill votes
amendment number one to Senate
bill one eighty has failed to
pass the.
Senate Senator Pirtle thank you
madam president members of the
body.
thank you madam president just
as a point of order I don't
think senator Sanchez has it
yet.
But I can start.
No no you can want you can wait
Looks like you've been skipped
Senator Sanchez.
Right.
Senator share to expect to move
the amendment first thank you
madam president president I move
Senate floor amendment number
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator share share share to
explain amendment thank you
madam president so right now
between Senate bill one eighty
absentee voters are required to
provide the last four of their
social security number.
And that is verified.
Under existing law which isn't
changing under this same day
are both voting times for we
don't have as for other voters
to have any kind of idea at all
when they show up to vote and so
what this does is it just put
Thank you senator share Senator
Duhigg madam president this is
an unfriendly amendments are we
have we already have.
time so we do have a slightly
higher standard for ID when
someone is doing that but
otherwise I implementing this
Other debate on the amendment.
Seeing none Senator share to
In reality.
If we had somebody that was
willing to cheat.
And because you could feel my
with different addresses you go
to different polling places so
you I mean it's it's not that
hard to turn turn our elections
into frog.
driven by some kind of weird
system of tyranny.
Then we should fix it.
We should make our voter system
look like a competent.
You walk up you show your ID you
get about your vote end of
discussion.
I've never understood why this
was a problem I've never
Doesn't matter she's registered
to vote today and voted today or
if you register to vote five
years ago and voted today
So.
I think this is important it's
important to all of us because
what we want.
We're criticize all very give
your voter fraud conspiracy.
But.
The other side did the same
thing.
gubernatorial elections across
the country.
So both sides.
Don't think that it's good while
our current thing and and this
sides have a conspiracy theory
group and you know what probably
both sides are right on some
level.
This fixes that.
And that's what we want to we
got people out here that are all
wound up don't matter who all
wound up because we've not had
good elections we don't trust
them.
This is the part that makes it a
trustworthy election.
This is the part that says.
Okay I lost I accept.
This simple thing fixes
everything.
As far as people not having an
ID.
So the same people and can't get
can't get pharmaceutical state
needs.
Absolutely they can.
I I find that to be a straw man
argument always have.
But the reality is even if three
people in New Mexico.
Can't have an I. D. the rest of
We have another chance here.
Mr floor leader to have some
honest.
Bipartisan cooperation.
bipartisan vote like it did last
year the people of New Mexico
believe that we did the right
thing.
When it comes out here party
line vote.
deliberate of body.
And try to figure out how to
make the people of New Mexico.
Confident in our elections.
And that's all this does madam
president.
We do this this simple amendment
in and everybody believes our
elections.
Then I don't accept the loss.
And that's what's happening all
over the country we can fix that
here we don't need to split
things.
confidence in our lections so
with that madam president I now
move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill one
eighty is already amended and
ask unanimous consent
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill one eighty as
amended.
Three be at your seats and raise
your hand if you vote no.
folks know.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
No.
Senator Pinto folks know
Senator side current Hemphill.
No.
Senator Hickey folks know
Senator Wirth votes no Senator
Hamblen votes now.
Senator moon Jooss folks know.
Senator Stefanics vote no.
Senator Padilla votes no.
Senator Stewart.
By a vote of thirteen in the
affirmative twenty three in the
negative.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one eighty
citizens.
president just revise and
disappointments really madam
president last year we had a
bipartisan bill we worked in
good faith because a Republican
election bill because our
Republican needed it that and I
think a lot of heat from my
party then a lot of the
advocates on our side of the
aisle for working with your
side I'll say how dare I work
with the Democrats in come up
with election bill but I made a
commitment last year that I
because our Republic needs
extracted.
And by not working with us and
some very minor issues that we
asked to put in this bill I
think and and quite frankly
madam president we know what the
vote is going to be on this and
it makes our Republic very much
weaker by not working with us on
this in very good faith you
don't need the votes of twenty
three votes madam president.
But.
easy for us to vote against this
bill because that's what our
party wants that's what the
advocates in the anti election
deniers and all those folks are
are side want to do you want to
against this bill from this year
because it doesn't work with us
and that's just a shame addition
arson courage you all in the of
twenty three if you on the other
side that you can do this you
can continue to win every single
Caution you that power has
responsibility.
And you guys have a power and I
hope I hope you start exercising
it in a better manner manner
madam president members of this
chamber thank you.
I don't know on page one seventy
three no constant.
So on page one seventy five
what I'm I'm looking at the
the executive director of the
LESC committee that you and so
on page one seventy five.
Line for.
It this is it inserts the
and so I'm just curious Madam
chair will the senator yield.
Please email Sir do that yes
madam president shields.
partner survivor suffrage this
is more for education that it
is.
I I think it's a great bill and
I don't I don't have any of I'm
gonna vote for the bill but I'm
if if the person the person who
was in this program if they
moved and did not let the the
alert that the secretary of
state's office
Gosh what's that called.
This confidential substitute
address program and therefore
they they could be so the
certified because of that.
de certification I guess I'm I'm
looking at what it would mean
to have a a different
decertification and what's
already there there's one two
all three all three reasons for
decertification make a lot of
sense and I I support them I
just didn't know what.
With the number four was
Madam president Senator so I I'm
I'm asking the ask the secretary
of state what if you can think
of.
language in there in order to to
make sure that this program can
be maintained as best I can.
Madam president this this
participants you know people who
participate in this program.
It's dangerous to decertify
them.
I know I know that they're going
in most circumstances because a
victim of the of the survivor of
domestic violence
continues to be at risk.
And madam president Senator
secretary of state for the that
no one as far as she knows no
one has ever been to
nobody's been to cert cert
certainly nobody was decertified
up who I worked with in in the
program it's my concern is just
with number four.
when in particularly.
Critically individuals who are
operating in a state of fear
I think language like this when
could raise of a specter of fear
because if you can't tell them
why they might be decertified
and they're relying on this
confidential address program
if you don't I think it's a good
bill I just have that little
concern.
Madam president that would not
be a friendly amendment okay I
concern me has it has a former
advocate thank you.
Thank you any other debate on
Senate bill one eighty Senator
guy Ecosse.
Then present with the.
heard the bill trying get some
understanding I tried to prep
for a bill for this session and
I was told it already takes
it taken off I understand final
set sends it to secretary state
office that is taken off the
voter rolls Mr then president
Sir.
the the Social Security
Administration is is a big one
where if someone has died
they're getting that information
and they're getting them off the
rules.
can I get a huge amount back
because they no longer live
there and are deceased how would
that work.
Madam presence Senator I'm not
sure that my expert witness can
president does not necessarily
mean that those voters are
deceased and it might be that
the.
If they did work recently
deceased that they have just
out and madam president center
I'm getting calls from people
are offended because our level
internet and deceased.
Madam president R. the secretary
of state's office gets monthly
updates from vital statistics
are they get there on the social
correct with they're the ones
doing the less maintenance.
Madam president Cyril talked my
County clerk but madam secretary
Madam etcetera etcetera.
President then president yes.
One final question for you is if
I were to go to.
may be an out of state in no
longer eligible to vote madam
president and center in our
state.
Madam presence Senator yes it's
tracking that and secretary of
state's office get the list of
those folks.
Madam president Sir I yield I
president center thank you.
Thank you senator.
Seeing that no further debate
Senator Duhigg to close Senate
bill one eighty.
that the record show that the
role has been called in all
those present voted in the
affirmative except as voted in
the negative by show of hands.
Senator Baca center Baca votes
no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt both snow Center
for.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
votes no etcetera do heck.
Senator Duhigg both CS Center
guy across
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill votes yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey votes yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan votes no Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez votes yes into my
Estes.
Yes centerman yes votes yes
internet bill.
Center Neville both snow Center
o'neill.
Senator Pinto both CS Senator
Pirtle.
The center part of the snow
Center pope.
Senator Sanchez both snow Center
smitteez.
Senator smitteez votes no
Senator DL Lopes's.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez both
CS Center share.
soles Senator also votes yes
interested phonics.
Santo Stefano expo CS Center
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart both CS Center Tom in.
Madam president.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino in a fit
of.
Bipartisanship by voted
as amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Duhigg thank you
madam president thank you
members of the body and thank
you especially to my co sponsor
senator Hermio.
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill one ninety two
senator Munoz madam president I
ask unanimous consent the Senate
for the record let the record
show that all action for placing
Senator Munoz to explain the
bill madam president this is
Senate bill one ninety two is
the known as the junior bill or
consent to let my expert witness
Marie Chavis on the floor.
Wishard expert witness Marie
Chavis we Chavis seeing no
So sentiment yes our is that it
with that will stand for
questions.
Right debate on Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety two.
bill one ninety two Senate
finance committees funds to for
Senate bill one ninety two do
now pass and athletic then this
can send send it records show
the role has been called all
ninety two two year seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
The thirty five in the
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety two has duly passed the
All right moving right along the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
two senator Wirth thank you
madam president ask unanimous
consent the Senate the rules be
suspended the recreational
bill thank you madam president
so this bill continues the one
thing that the United States
nineteen we passed a.
Comprehensive bill that for the
first time defines some key
terms coordination being perhaps
working and so this bill does a
couple things it closes some of
the the loopholes that have been
used since we passed the bill in
provision that I'm sure members
made well members may want to
talk about and that deals with
the prohibited period and
clarifying who can contribute
here or being narrowed one comes
with the definition of
expenditure and we litigated
this are right on the New Mexico
secretary of state challenged a
nonprofit group that was
advocating for and against
candidates are was the
allegation but in fact the the
Herrera from Santa Fe in the
federal District Court that was
upheld by the tenth circuit the
created these windows
When during a certain window
you start mentioning candidates
in those windows and then that
triggers all kinds of disclosure
requirements but outside those
windows.
expenditures that's the first
section of the bill the second
section deals with our the
second big section I put it that
for not not in this pandemic
expenditures this this new
section creates a segregated
bank account and this is a bill
we had two years ago that pass
this chamber overwhelmingly just
segregated bank account it will
not be used for independent
expenditures so it requires that
account to be used if one of
these entities is not clearly
with independent expenditures
committees being created right
before election.
And there was kind of a loophole
that allowed them not to
and what's important about this
section and section seven of the
bill it makes it very clear
that.
Now during the prohibited period
contributions during that period
we we narrowed the bill thanks
and I think Senator Stefanics in
the rules committee originally
lobbyist hello this employer
incumbent or candidate campaign
committee or political committee
so if an individual sense you as
an unsolicited contribution you
out Senator Ivy Soto for the
work that was done in terms of
the timing of the prohibited
period there was an issue in a
clarified in this bill as well
so that's kind of an overview of
what it doesn't have to stand
for questions.
Is there debate on the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
Senator share is the reason for
debate can we know twenty three
thirteen you don't have to to
pay.
All right saying no debate
Senator Wirth to close thank you
records show that the rules been
called in all those present
voting affirmative except those
going in negative by show of
hands centers we're voting on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute percent full forty
Senator share this voting no.
Senator Woods voting no Senator
no center Baca voting no Senator
Brandt voting no senator Sanchez
voting no Senator Diamond voting
no.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative ten and the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
there were some that want to
explain about.
I'm sorry yes Senator Moores
that for a minute president I
just wanted to give simple free
political advice of what we just
for you home and return those
checks because I'm sure they're
gonna be advocacy groups on both
sides of the aisle trying to
test us on that so be careful
about that just my personal
Thank you.
All right we moving on next to
Senate bill two fifty Senator
Burt.
And then present I know I think
So madam president.
I don't get to do this part.
Well have some fun.
Madam president I move that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill two fifty on
final passage has been taken is
makes it fair for firefighters
because right now some of our
firefighters are at a different
the survivor benefit than others
Right is there debate on Senate
bill two fifty.
Seeing no debate mmhm Senator
have another piece moving
through on our National Guard
spoken all that and this is just
the right move it brings parity
and it it helps these families
remain whole when something
thank you the job Senator.
Well I hope you have a song to
Grisham bill on the floor.
President I move to table.
thank you madam president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show the rules
been called all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
Buy photo thirty six in the
So much madam president I just
want to add that the
firefighters are very grateful
for the bipartisan love that we
show them today and thank you
all.
All right thank you.
eighty eight Senator souls thank
you madam chair I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill one eighty
eight as amended on final
is to make the aroma of Chile
roasting the official aroma of
the state of New Mexico and I
would like to please have my
three experts come in and join
All right certain farms please
the ex has scored the experts
into the chamber.
green Chile in roasting the
official aroma of the state of
New Mexico they've been doing
lots of research on this and
they are prepared to answer any
amendment has the amendment then
distributed.
amendment move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill one eighty eight a reader
to read Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill one
simple it simply strikes
of green Chile roasting in the
fall and inserts in lieu thereof
one of my favorite smells and
that is derriere madam president
important to my constituents
thank you madam president.
A debate on the amendment first
we'll go to Senator souls madam
chair let me check with my
French version or the cattle
version.
We'll get you an answer in a
minute.
we do changes to Chavis counties
err they're here to have to
change the state bird from the
road runner to fly since those
are pretty common in your county
for insects madam president then
president I've been a Chavis
county flies are much more
common there than anything else
so as members of president so I
don't know if I can support your
Seeing none of senator Sanchez.
David woods.
Thank you madam president I was
you go see I have a pair of
rubber boots hang on the back of
my truck if if you want to take
any samples there's plenty of
samples there if if you're aware
of what they're here smells like
Thank you senator president at.
For thank you Senator Pirtle and
madam president.
Thank you senator other debate
on the amendment.
Senator Woods.
I was contacted by a newspaper
column one this came out in the
very much the derriere that the
we spoke of by Senator Pirtle in
my part of the world and we do
have very little.
president thank you Senator
Baca.
Thank you madam president with
the sponsor of the amendment
please yield.
Madam president I yield ills I'm
madam president I would pose
in fact is what he's smelling.
Whole.
And madam president the.
Chavis counties per near Texas
All right any other debate
center contact us.
In prison with the kind
gentleman yield which one.
Estes but I will yield.
Hails thank you madam president
actually just wanted to visit
because of you a little bit
and the amendment I'd left
earlier in I want to tell you
there's a bipartisan solution to
the best parts of the calf.
The best parts of Chile
recommend that to the body it
does bring us to compromise so
with that are you thank you
amendment ought to act like a
Calpine hit the dusty trail.
Right any other comments on the
amendment seen on center pirtle
the woods and a lot of it is due
to things that we put in place
here and unfortunately it might
be a Roman that we we will have
the pleasure of smelling anymore
in my district and see huge
eighty eight it could also test
room that's as much as one madam
president in a voice vote okay.
So if you vote yes a if you bow
E. a E. you'll be adopting the
amendment if you vote no you
will not be adopting the
amendment.
Those suppose name.
Okay that was resounding that
Madam president with the sponsor
yield yes madam president.
Madam president can you let me
know how much are.
Just a moment madam chair.
depending on a great cultural
interest how much is coming in
from Mexico and other places it
is been on the decline in the
recent years but is still a
major agricultural crop.
the department of tourism use
this in their advertising for
New Mexico.
Senator sells madam chair let me
check with my experts.
Madam chair that my experts
indicate that out lots of the
tourism for the chili industry
in particular comes in in the
fall but we have particular
tourism department in
conjunction with the AG's
secretary works on promoting
chilly year round in the state
and people come to the state
thank you any other debate
Senator chi it goes.
Madam chair with the center
yield for a question for ms
expert witnesses you madam chair
of course.
Madam chair my experts indicate
that it is not eighty one part
Madam president center I
appreciate that and purse
research center how to meals
issue with the
Of true.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you madam present with the
sponsor yield.
Madam president yes we will he
yells thank you madam president
share it with others it doesn't
need definition.
Member center but it has to have
a definition the book is a state
official Roman and then the room
scratch and sniff for Roma in
the blue book in New Mexico.
Madam chair my experts indicate
no it's not going to go into the
of that aroma the is available
already.
Then present can you experts
tell me of any other state in
the US has in a Roman official
room.
we're expert witnesses tell me
where they came up with this
idea.
Please don't say the bathroom.
in the just a agreed for me to
tell some of the short story
about what happened I was
visiting their class on a and
enrichment day in November and
was engaging them about all of
I love the smell of Chile
roasting and from that it
morphed into do you want to help
me let's do this and make it the
official aroma of New Mexico and
that's kind of where the main
do have a quick comment first
and then I'll ask the sponsor to
yield
it you know I I think of the the
bill that Senator Diamond
brought forth and how the just a
do I did submit my green my
cheese ball and my jewelry in a
recipe and celebrating of this
but I would also like to commend
the sponsor and his experts
because this is just we're all
understand how a bill moves to
committee and then the debate on
the floor I'd like to commend
the sponsor and his three
experts for doing that if you
all will join me in that that.
you madam president US sponsor
will you check with your experts
to see if they prefer red or
green.
Madam president all three of my
Mexico and our state so thank
you madam president thank you
sponsor.
Thank you Senator Hickey.
Thank you madam chair with the
sponsor yield.
actually a stem science.
Now why do I say that I just
learned that there's something
called Scoville units what are
Madam president let me check
with my experts.
Madam president my experts
typically have a Scoville unit
of between one thousand and
eight thousand Scoville units.
Thank you by sponsoring
consultants and what number
Experience thank you.
Some people I know some people
that think ketchup is hot and
other people that you need to
have been at odds and manage
just fine.
Yes thank you madam president
will sponsor you please madam
president yes ills thank you
Just a minute madam chair.
roasted in New Mexico lots of
times we now see them in the big
metal bands with the big burners
but people do do them the on the
broiler in there I've been they
roasted using solar energy
concentrated solar energy in New
Mexico at one of the labs.
Sir McKenna.
Thank you madam president thank
tourism department to share all
these ways thank you madam
president thank you Senator
Padilla.
Thank you madam president I
experts have opportunity to meet
the official chili king of New
Mexico.
Madam chair yes the chili can
make sure to introduce himself
I that's what I thought madam
president with that madam
president trying to look around
Senator pope over there
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator serve on this.
Madam president judging everyone
addressed me today you know the
I did take them to my office
they have lunch my office in the
and ice cream in my office so I
think the all of the women
My office in the enjoyed lunch
and ice cream.
Madam chair thank you senator
Munoz for hosting them that
really was very nice thank you.
check with your experts how much
is this legislation going to
cost us.
Madam chair mice but my experts
which will actually bring money
into the state.
Thank you madam president thank
you Senator Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair will my
colleague please feel for
Madam chair to my experts do
know that it is Senator
Steinborn all right Hey kids
welcome and and I just want to
Patchen all the chili producing
people in the state you know our
chilly room is magical and
mythical and special and
spiritual and any other
thank you for carrying it thank
you kids can work.
Thank you senator for at.
The present with the sponsor
yield yield madam president yes
it does.
Present Senator.
Yes we do think it is I don't
know about the strong just
things that have been talked
about are not usually considered
to roam as they are more
considered odors.
Senator Brandt madam president
Senator my Estes.
Thank you madam president will
the gentleman and acts for deals
madam chair yes we will.
Santa Fe.
A rabbit there was a cartoon
character back in the day.
If you could usher Act experts
madam present my experts said
regretted making a left turn it
Albuquerque I think in the end
up in hatch.
Was the scent that he smelled
madam president of by at the
All right you know for the time
today.
Senator Diamond the madam
president I don't need to
quite awhile and inevitably
there are people out there right
now making little jabs at us for
wasting our time heard the
legislator but I think it's very
important that occasionally we
and I will support this bill
whole heartedly.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you with the sponsor you.
Madam chair one of my experts
has grown green Chile as a
science experiment.
Madam chair my experts says yes
he did pick Kelly off of it As
You expert witnesses ever
roasted chili.
Madam chair he said of course.
can you ask you expert witnesses
if they I contacted of.
For some Aussies Gucci guess
perhaps because of perfume for
Madam president I are you
talking about making the aroma
of some sort of a perfume is
that the question of then
Madam chair and and senator I
think you can get all of the the
chili juice you want by any of
the roasters are things are out
of the bag after you bring it
economic development of that
potential.
Madam chair and let me check.
Madam chair I experts have
indicated no have not contacted
the best smelling aroma chili
comes from his belly.
Okay before we start on the
chilly ward now perhaps we
should the.
Senate bill one eighty eight as
amended it was amended in the
business committee where we took
off in the fall to make it just
because Chiles roasted all year
round so it should be one eighty
negative by a show of hands.
Centers we are on a vote for
Senate bill one eighty eight as
amended.
Senator Moores votes no.
Senator Baca votes no Senator
Brandt votes no.
Senate Senator souls thank you
madam president let me introduce
you to my experts a little bit
more first is Jay's days if
miss issues classrooms I've got
the wrong Mrs Fisher's class and
he wants to be an aerospace
engineer next I. R. Samuel
Center souls I apologize I
seeing no objection let's go to
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator souls thank you madam
president I'm sorry I've I've
messed things up a little bit
and got ahead of things again J.
an architectural engineer and
also wants to go into computer
engineering and Bryn levy is in
Mrs Campbell's class and really
wants to be an astro physicist
With them is their teacher of
that we've been working with is
been my liaison who is up in the
the audience here is Mrs
Kayla Atkinson is here with them
also and if you give them a
round of of support.
And hopefully everybody will
continue to promote and talk
about the wonderful things that
makes New Mexico great like the
smell of Chile roasting thank
you madam president thank you
all for your support.
thank you madam president just
before we go to the business on
the table in nabbing eleven
fifty nine am I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM.
The Senate will come to order
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Amendment madam president asking
is consent that the rules we
suspended the record show that
the journal's been read in full
and approve subject to revision
messages from the house but no
objection we're going to
messages from the house.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill one eighty
twenty nine and request the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal show the message from
the house has been received.
House bill one sixty five as
amended by the house house bill
eight as amended by the house
house bill one fifty nine in
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president's
unanimous consent we go to that
our business.
Committee reports.
bill two twenty six has had it
under consideration report same
of recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator George when
on them with one motion and the
General Fleck their act fund
individually seeing no objection
the reader will read all the
committee reports Senate bill
two ninety seven that it do
George when you lost chairman
senator Munoz reduction the
committee report.
Members we're adoptions
committee report to call those
Madam president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one oh six
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
multiple multiple funds we're
madam president thank you mass
unanimous consent the Senate the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
act on them with one motion with
the June reflect their act upon
individually seeing no objection
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman Senator Ventus moved up
three reports are adoption
committee reports close in favor
president unanimous that we're
going on a business introduction
of legislation seeing no
objection were on that order
business introduction
legislation reader to read.
facility's Management Division
of the General Services
Department with the City of
Albuquerque and the metropolitan
redevelopment agency of two
Senate chart resolution one have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
rules committee thanks to
Judiciary it's.
Senate joint resolution
fourteen.
Senate joint resolution fourteen
have been read twice by title is
by Senator Gonzalez a memorial
honoring New Mexico's bilingual
multicultural Education Act and
requesting the governor to
proclaim twenty twenty three as
committee placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial sixty.
House bill one sixty five
introduced by Representative
Nibert.
conforming amendments to other
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight house bill one
sixty five house bill one sixty
I haven't read twice by title is
Senator Steinborn an act
relating to economic development
creating the creative industry
division in the economic
development department creating
to the tax business and
transportation committee tents
to finance house bill eight.
House bill one fifty one
introduced by Representative
Christine Trujillo and act
fifty one also one fifty one
have been read twice by title is
ordered for two Senate Education
Committee sense to Judiciary
house bill one fifty one.
for testimony by interactive
video providing for implied
consent to a laboratories
laboratory analysts appearance
House bill one seventy two
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and act relating
to towards clarifying that
abatement shall not apply to
assault or assault and battery
Judiciary Committee house bill
one seventy two.
House bill one eighty four
introduced by Representative
McQueen an act relating to the
setting term limits for
commissioners adding
requirements for appointment and
removal of commissioners house
bill one eighty four house bill
one eighty four hundred twice by
House bill one ninety seven
introduced by Representative guy
eagles and others and act
relating to fishing increasing
the time for free fishing days
designated by the state
Senate conservation house bill
one ninety seven.
House Bill to twenty nine
introduced by Representative
nine House Bill to twenty nine
have been read twice by title is
ordered referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee house bill two twenty
nine.
motor vehicles amending sections
sixty six dash seven dash four
oh one NMSA nineteen seventy
eight being laws nineteen
seventy eight chapter thirty
chapter sixty six article seven
NMSA nineteen seventy eight for
the duration of a national
emergency declared pursuant to
federal law or an emergency
declared by the governor
House bill two seventy have been
read twice by title is ordered
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee house
bill two seventy.
House bill two seventy four
designating the first Tuesday of
February each odd numbered year
as Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian day
house bill two seventy four
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
Thank you madam president move
us as consent that Senate
memorial forty six be removed
the president's table that it be
referred to the Senate Indian
role Affairs Committee to yield
and this is this is the
appropriate action so certainly
supported.
So can can you repeat that
please Senator Pirtle.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that Senate memorial
remove that from the president's
table.
And referred to Indian rural
cultural fairs Senator Wirth and
then president said Purnell
that said moral forty six be
printed.
So seeing no objection we will
print Senate memorial forty six
and refer it to the rural Indian
unanimous consent here and then
let members know about Monday so
this is an emergency bill Senate
bill five seventeen and it's
Senator Baca has seen this the
new title will be relating to
public peace health safety and
welfare and acting the route
sixty six centennial commission
commission providing a delayed
repeal so that'll be the new
bill and what I would ask is
unanimous consent that the
referral currently to education
All right everybody got that.
From Senator Padilla to Senator
Campos.
To rules Madam spinouts.
on the floor eleven o'clock on
Monday thank you announcements
from committees.
Senator then yes thank you madam
chair I hope everybody got their
to let me know if something
happened you can get in so we
can help you with that because
you're not here Senator Gonzales
also know that I think he got
catch up on a whole bunch of
stuff and then start working on
the budget because it's about
time to wrap that thing up as as
we get there and so we will be
in Senate finance probably
during some of the four sessions
you Senator Duhigg thank you
madam president the Senate rules
committee will meet on Monday at
eight thirty in room three
twenty one we're gonna be
please look at the Senate rules
procedures on the what's
happening page thank you thank
you Senator said about this
thank you members of the Senate
Judiciary Committee will meet
two hours and look for the bills
we could move quickly please be
on time for thirty Senate
Judiciary thank thank you other
announcements Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino thank you madam president
that we rolled it's an
appropriation bill shouldn't
take much time then we'll have
built by low.
Seeing no other announcements
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president thank you members
everyone have a little down day
