Confirmations. So I'm gonna hand
the gavel over to our vice chair
who cares for confirmations.
There you go, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
actually, before you get
started, I just, for anyone who
uh was waiting on Senate
Memorial 6, that has been uh
rolled at the sponsor's request,
so we're not gonna be hearing
that today.
And good morning to
representative Chandler, who's
out there. We're gonna go to the
first item on the agenda, which
is John Wertham, appointment to
the Western New Mexico
University Board of Regents. I
want to welcome you and your
Senate sponsor, Senator. Good
morning, Senator.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
Honorable members, it is with
great pleasure and joy that I
bring this.
This, uh
Potential regent to this
committee, Mr. John Wertheim.
Uh, is an extraordinarily
talented businessman and and
legal mind.
Uh, as, as a high school kid, he
was a world world debating
champion.
And he left Santa Fe to go to
Yale.
University, John spent his
lifetime protecting New Mexico
from those who wish to take
advantage of its resources, its
wealth, and its sovereignty.
John's intellect is only
outmatched by his personal
generosity and dedication to New
Mexico's future. He's a
tremendous leader, uh, Mr.
Chairman, born and raised here
in Santa Fe. He's been uh
nominated by the governor to be
a regent at Western New Mexico
University.
We, we, uh, we hope you can
consider his um his nominee is
Cori, and I'm proud to present
and be able to sponsor the next
chapter of John's service to our
state, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr.
John Werthein.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
But
my, my great grandfather was a
machinist in the Santa Rita
mine.
And um she didn't even know
that, so that my connections to
southern New Mexico and Silver
City are not why she asked me to
be on the Western New Mexico
board.
And a lot of folks know me from
politics, but I want to
highlight a couple of things
about uh why I think the
governor asked. We didn't have a
lot of time to talk about it.
But for one thing, I really have
a vision.
of New Mexico, um, I recognize
the importance of our
constitutional universities. I
think the founders of this great
state had a vision. They had a
vision, they wanted to forge a
new West out of the old West.
And to do that, they felt that
they wanted to endow our great
public universities of which
western New Mexico University is
one of them.
And I think nowadays this, the
Senate and the, and the House of
this great uh state have created
a network, a web of
interconnection between the
universities isenator Neville
pointed out in his confirmation
on Friday, hearing San Juan
College student students down to
western New Mexico. Western New
Mexico itself has a campus at
Gallup that especially helps
train teachers. I personally
know of a young man who was a
student at at
Western and mathematics and got
a, a two-year degree and then
moved on uh to New Mexico State
University to finish off his
mathematics degree. So I think
the universities in New Mexico
are like the Musketeers, it's
all for one and one for all. And
that's why I said yes to the
governor when she asked me to do
this.
From the standpoint of my
background, a lot of people know
me from various quarters, but I
really have a lot of financial
experience.
Um, I study portfolio theory and
financial markets with the late
David Swenson, who was head of
the Yale Endowment. Um, I took
my first financial accounting
class at the Yale School of
Management. I represented the
state Investment council and the
Educational Retirement Board and
the PERA is a special assistant
attorney General on securities
fraud matters, and I've
represented the taxation and
revenue Department. And all of
that is what I want to bring to
bear in dealing with uh
What has been happening in
Western New Mexico, and I think
Senator Neville put it very well
when he basically laid out a
plan. We're gonna set the
groundwork to get a new
president at Western New Mexico.
We're gonna maybe have to do an
independent audit ourselves so
we understand what happened
financially, but it's important
that we not pretend like we know
the facts just from the
headlines that we've been
reading, and then we go in there
with an open mind. My goal is to
listen to people.
Uh, and to hear their stories
and to get to the bottom of the
facts and then move forward with
progress for the university.
Thank you so much for that. We
do have some organized support
and they've signed up to speak
on your behalf. I have Sarah
Koplik, who's on Zoom. Good
morning, Sarah.
Good morning.
Um
Uh, shall I, uh, good morning,
Mr. Chair. Members of the Senate
Rules Committee distinguished
guests.
My name is Doctor Sarah Kolik,
and I am the director of the
Jewish Student Center at the
University of New Mexico.
I'm honored to be here today to
tell you a little bit about the
president of our board, John
Wertheim.
As you know, he is a
distinguished attorney.
But what you may not know is
that John really cares about
university students.
And has volunteered countless
hours to help them.
During the pandemic, we weren't
sure that our center would make
it as the parent organization,
which underwrote all our
activities collapsed.
And every other program reliant
upon them failed.
I asked John if he would join
our board.
Would he help us survive?
Without a moment's hesitation,
he agreed.
And so we got to work.
Updating our bylaws, building a
strong caring board.
Fundraising, etc.
John and his wonderful wife
Bianca joined us for Shabbat
dinners, attended our event.
And any time a student found
themselves in crisis.
John lent a hand.
John is my mentor and friend.
I rely upon his wisdom.
He is a bedrock of expertise and
leadership.
Not just for us.
But for our entire Jewish
community.
He steps up when no one else
will.
He is an incredible advocate.
We are so fortunate.
The past 18 months have been
very difficult for Jewish
college students.
Even here.
They are experiencing a tidal
wave of hatred.
It's hard to watch our young
people lose friends.
Be ostracized by their peers.
And face hostility from
instructors and strangers alike.
Through it all, John carved
countless hours out of his very
busy schedule to give up
himself.
Providing advice and expertise.
Listening compassionately to
every student to every painful
story and showing that he really
cared.
He never turned away, not once.
He always asked
What can I do to help?
How can I make this better?
I'm certain that if confirmed,
John will use his skills and his
big heart to benefit the
students of Western New Mexico
University.
Just like he did for our own
community. He won't let you
down.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Sarah. And then we
have one other in organized
support, Marty Chavez, if you
want to come up. And although
you've stated your name, if you
can restate it for the record.
Madam Chair, Senator, members of
the committee, thank you so
much. I'm Martin Chavez. Um, I
had the district honor in a
previous century to chair this
committee, the powerful Rules
Committee and serve on it, and I
very much appreciate that the uh
the job that you do for New
Mexico. I've known Jon Wertheim
for decades. He comes from an
incredibly distinguished New
Mexico family ranchers, bankers,
lawyers, uh, mixed, uh, mixed,
mixed family history, some R's,
some D's, uh, and uh
I've had the opportunity to be
on opposite sides with John.
He persuades with intellect, uh,
with thoughtfulness, but he also
had sharp elbows, and I think
that's what's needed right now
at Western New Mexico, so I
would wholeheartedly endorse him
and strongly encourage your
support.
Unless he married his high
school sweetheart. He's from
just up the road.
Thank you for that. Now we go to
members in the committee room by
a show of hands, how many of you
are in favor of this
appointment?
10 and the online.
And one online.
And in opposition of the
appointment in the committee
room.
none any online.
None. And with that, we'll go to
questions from the committee.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you.
I'm sure.
the morning time.
And
Um
I'm, I think, and correct me if
I'm wrong, aren't you involved
in some litigation currently
affecting the university and if
so,
Hey, hello.
Are you gonna sort that out?
If I can ask you to turn your
microphone on. I keep on
forgetting that. I'm sorry. I'm
a newbie at this, um.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Townsend,
um, actually it's my brother who
was involved in litigation that
is resolved, um, it, it, it was
actually a whistleblower case.
That, uh, and I'm just speaking
publicly because I, I was not
involved. My brother's actually
in the room because he's
supporting me, um, but his
client was one of the first
whistleblowers that complained
about some financial
mismanagement at the, at the
university, but that case was
filed in 2018 and was settled by
the university.
Um, uh, and it's a public
settlement. And so that is
resolved and that's my brother.
It's easy. We look a lot alike.
We look like our dad to you as I
think Senator, you know, my
father and so we, we, we were
fine lawyers, we all look alike.
We could probably, uh, trade
with each other like twins if we
really wanted to, but that's my
brother.
Oh
I'm sure
senator,
uh, when I had problems if your
brother was here and not
supporting you, so
that's, uh, I think that solved
that problem right off the bat.
Um,
That are
For time, you're, um,
Your outlook on
On the college. What do you, I
mean, what do you believe?
correct steps are.
To get the university to where
we can all, um,
Feel comfortable in the
leadership, the management, and,
and the historical operations.
Mr. Chair, Senator Townsend,
that's an excellent question,
and I really think that uh
Senator Neville laid it out very
ably, the basic plan that he
laid out on Friday during his
confirmation.
The first step, this is what I
took from his presentation. The
first step is to listen to
people, to go down there and
start talking, um, create some
relationships because that's not
my strength. I, I don't know
the, the, the people down there,
and I think the senator
mentioned that that's not
necessarily his strength either
right now. So it's gonna be a
fact finding mission, but
obviously we've got to get a
presidential search process
undergoing very quickly, um, and
that's, that's gonna have
Standards to it, um, and then as
far as the financial issues, and
we have to, I'll just expand a
little bit from my introduction.
Uh, there is a pending piece of
litigation filed by the Attorney
General of New Mexico, they
could invalidate the payments.
That I know, uh, Senator Duha
asked about in Friday's hearing,
um, so it is possible that those
payments would be invalidated.
I'm not going to prejudge, uh,
what the outcome of that case,
there are clearly questions that
need to be answered.
Uh, dealing with the Open
Meetings Act, dealing with other
things. I think it's a good move
for the governor to appoint a
lawyer onto the board of regents
at this stage so that we can
navigate pending litigation,
other kinds of things like that,
and also the operations of the
Open Meetings Act going forward.
And so that's gonna be the plan.
Ultimately, I do think we're
probably gonna need an
independent investigation of
some sort, but the senator said
was a forensic audit, maybe kind
of like a forensic audit where
we get down to the brass tacks
of.
exactly what happened, but I
don't want to prejudge the
facts. I want to go in with an
open mind.
Thank you for your time,
Senator, um, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Braley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, and it's good to
see you here. I have uh Grant
County, my district, and so
we'll be working closely
together in Western. I will, I
will, I, I appreciate your
introduction because it's true
that the media headlines have
not been kind to Western, and
while some of it may be fair,
the ultimate victim has been the
school itself and the students
themselves who have gone now for
far too long without any
leadership. I think the
university is currently being
run by a student regent and a
professor who kind of
Self-nominated himself into the
position of president until
there's some sort of leadership,
so we needed a board. We need,
um, we need you guys to take
your time in finding the right
president. You don't need to
rush into that, that understands
that the community that
understands that we have a
little bit now of damage control
and uh to what extent we don't
know.
Um, but I appreciate you coming
in and kind of uh agreeing with,
of course, Senator Novell, I
think is a great appointment on
there as well. I look forward to
working with both of you when it
comes to fighting for our
dollars in the budget and
whatnot, but um I am here and I
hope this entire legislative
body is, is to, to rebuild and
to move on and to recognize
Western for the amazing school
that it really is. And um I
just, I appreciate your
leadership and stepping up into
this position, and I look
forward to working with you. So
I have no questions.
But just to congratulate you
and, and express my appreciation
for you taking this position.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Duhek.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Sandra, Mr. Wertheim.
Uh, my brother told me terrible
things about you. OK. Um, so,
uh, so regardless of, of whether
that payment
To Mr. Shepherd, uh, what, what
happens with the AGs suit.
Do you think it's, it would be
appropriate for Mr. Shepherd to
continue as a professor, uh, at
Western and uh continue in that
community.
Uh
Your chair Senator Doha, it's an
important question.
And I do have my um
Let me just put it this way.
If the AG wins the lawsuit that
secondary contract.
We'll also be declared invalid.
OK, so it is in some sense.
Um, because that his continued
employment at the university,
Doctor Shepherd's is based upon
the meeting that took place that
is being challenged by the
Attorney General.
So that is under legal question
mark right now in that
litigation. And so the Board of
Regents is going to have to
decide whether we stay neutral
in that litigation, whether we
take a position, that's pretty
complicated stuff, I think that
that's one of the reasons why
the governor asked me to step
on, and I don't want to prejudge
any of that. I will say that if
you just, uh, and I tried to
watch the public.
Comments in front of the border
regions in December of 2024 to
hear what the community was
saying, and, uh, and also some
other public things where um
where Senator Brantly was, was
speaking very strongly. I think
her point, I, I just want to
reiterate it for a second.
Western New Mexico is an
important critical step, and
sometimes we in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque don't pay enough
attention to Southwestern New
Mexico and southern New Mexico
generally. And so that's an
important point that
That has got to stop as we go
through this entire affair.
Uh, we have to pay equal
attention to the great
constitutional universities in
this state.
But
Um, I think that those
complicated issues are going to
get either resolved in the
courts, and one of the things
that concerned me about his
continued appointment is that he
was ostensibly appointed to the
School of Business, but if you
listen to the faculty of the
School of Business.
They were part of the group that
voted unanimously a vote of no
confidence, and they did, they
were not consulted in that
appointment. So that, that
bothers me. That does not seem
the way things should go. Now
what, what the remedy for that
is, you know, I don't want to
prejudge any of the facts or
what's going to happen.
Thank you. And
You know, as you said, I don't,
I don't think any of us know
exactly what has happened so
far, but
But a sense that I have gotten
from what we have heard about,
what's occurred, it was that
there was kind of a profound
Lack of
Regent's holding the
administration accountable and
each other. So, how do you,
what, what will your plan or
approach be holding both the
administration and your fellow
regents accountable going into
this.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Dee.
I think the plan is with the
role of a board of regents is
similar to the role.
Of a um board of education in
our various school districts.
The role of that is to create
policy.
Uh, for the university.
And so the first step is gonna
be picking a new president.
And that president is going to
have to, uh, we, we don't want
the administration working
directly for the Board of
Regents. That's not
The way things should go, the
way things should go is the
Board of Regents as a
policymaking body.
And then the, the administration
works for
the president. And so, obviously
that is what needs to be fixed
first and then the Board of
Regents.
I would assume that if we had an
independent uh investigation of
what happened that arising from
that, we would get
recommendations for changes in
policy.
Um, that would hopefully
Uh, remedy a lot of this. I
mean, a lot of the facts that
have come out are kind of just
making sure the proper approvals
are followed when there's
purchases of furniture, let's
say. These are standard things,
but maybe the policies were not
as clear as they needed to be.
And so I, I do think that's the
basic answer. An independent
investigation, appointment of an
effective new president.
And then looking at policies
going forward that the
university would adopt, and
hopefully those would become
best practice models for the
other universities in the state,
because I've definitely heard
complaints that, you know, that
may be western New Mexico has
been singled out unfairly.
And so we want to be sensitive
to that. We want to adopt
policies that could benefit the
entire state and the other
universities as well.
Thank you. And
Uh, so
It seems like a lot of the
The new regions for Western, uh,
have
The governor's picking a lot of
people from the outside.
Uh, people who aren't
necessarily in that community
and might have ties to, to that
community, but, but didn't,
didn't go to Western aren't
aren't super involved in in that
community, which I don't think,
which I think is probably a good
thing in this circumstance. But,
uh, but given that,
How
How are you going to be keeping
tabs on what's happening at
Western, given that that's prob
that's not where you live,
that's not a community that
you're involved in on a regular
basis. I think I might be making
an assumption there, but
Go ahead.
But
Mr. Chair, Senator Dewey, it's
an excellent question. I do
think you'll be pleasantly
Um, pleasant, pleasantly
surprised to hear the testimony
from my co-regents who will be
testifying later this morning
because I think that they have a
lot of ties.
Uh, that, that may be a senator
Neville and myself do not have.
Um, that being said, I, I really
have a commitment to, uh, you
know, I think we need to have a
lot of in-person meetings.
Um, uh, a lot of the meetings
that were, including the one
that is subject to litigation
happen over Zoom. I think we
need to start, uh, really
getting down there sooner
Neville said on Friday, talking
with people, meeting with
people, and really, you know,
making sure that we have a
presence. Now, I do think that
having at least a couple of
outsiders.
Um, is important, just like in a
public, when a public company
goes through a big scandal. They
have fraud or they have some
governance issue. What do they
do?
They appoint independent
directors to come in and help
guide the public corporation.
And that's the model I think
here is the, is the governor has
decided to pick a couple of
independent people who can maybe
uh bring a fresh perspective on
things, um, but, but the
important thing is to keep an
open mind. We're not coming in
with an agenda. I haven't spoken
with my other regents, um, the
governor didn't give me any
marching orders.
Um, she knows that I'm a person
that doesn't just take orders,
and so I'm going in there with
an open mind, but I think the
independence will help build
back quickly the, the, the, the
credibility of Western New
Mexico here in the legislature
and with, uh, you know, it's
important to not be adversarial
with the
Attorney General of the state
and the state auditor, and so
we're going to rebuild those
relationships.
Great. Well, thank you very
much. I think you're an
excellent pick.
Uh, and yes, no, I'm, I
appreciate the, the approach the
governor is taking on this, uh,
I'm glad you're gonna be there
to help figure out what's
happened and, and what's going
to happen going forward.
Thank you, Senator, and I have a
couple of questions. Um, so,
what qualities do you believe
are essential for an effective
region and how do you
demonstrate them?
Um, Mr. Chair,
I, um
I really, I'm one of these.
People who believe in listening
to people and trying to chart a
course that is not just from the
top down.
Um, but instead is a kind of
active service. I think that
that's what you heard from
Miss Cod look, even in that tiny
organization, what I've tried to
do is try and exemplify service
to the organization.
Um, and, and
That can be tricky in a
circumstance like this because
we're going to need to
potentially uh make some
difficult decisions and
difficult findings.
But I think if we can rely on
being there to serve and, and
committing the time and energy
to understanding the issue as
well. It's really a model of
service leadership that I would
try to bring to the
Try to bring to the Board of
Regents, and that's good to
know, servitude leadership
rolling up your sleeves and
getting involved in the work
and, and really working with
those who helped lead the
university, no, absolutely, Mr.
Chair. Very good, and I'm a
first generation college
student, and so my next question
is, many students in New Mexico
are first generation college
students. How can Regents help
create a more supportive
environment for them.
Yes, I mean, I, uh, Mr. Chair, I
think that's critical,
especially for Western where you
have a lot of non-traditional
students. You have a lot of
working moms and dads, um, you
have, uh, perhaps the highest
percentage of first uh to
college people in the entire
state system here in New Mexico.
So your question is really
important, especially in light
of the student body at Western.
Um, and I think that we really
have to make sure
That
Um
The fact that these issues have
occurred does not become a, an
excuse to starve western New
Mexico of the resources that it
needs. It's also important to
recognize that, for example,
Western New Mexico is a, uh, New
Mexico center of leadership in
early childhood education. The
programs run out of the
university are critical for
giving people the tools in in
southwestern New Mexico to, to
actually be the first in their,
in their uh family to
successfully go.
to college. So I think it's a
matter of making sure that this
controversy doesn't starve the
University of resources.
But in order to do that, we got
to do our job and, and get down
to what happened, get to the
bottom of what happened and make
sure that the, the, the this
body has, has faith that the
university is running well, and
that again is going to come down
to a new president, um, but I
think there's a lot going well
at Western New Mexico. We don't
want to lose that, and it really
becomes building these programs
all the way from early childhood
on up, by giving people a
chance, uh, at a college
education, and it may not be a
four-year, it may be a
A degree certificate, um, you
know, Bja and I have a, uh,
Have a nephew, uh, not the one
that's in the, in the room with
me today, but, uh, but a named
Crier who's who's been 12 years
in the US Navy. College wasn't
for him when he was 18, but his
dream is to retire from the navy
and, um, and then go to college
in his 40s after he's retired
from the Navy, and I think
there's different models for
different folks.
Thank you for that. And Senator
Block. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
um,
Thank you, Senator this for
sponsoring Mr. Wertheim, uh,
pretty impressive resume, I
mean.
Harvard UNM Law.
Um, Harvard.
Yeah
You couldn't get into Harvard.
We, we like to say, we like to
say Harvard's too easy.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
John, congrats to you and your
family for being here. Um, I, I,
I like the, some of the comments
that I heard um from yourself
and uh Senator Duhey got an
outside eyes looking in.
Just a couple, I just want to
get your thoughts on a couple of
things. Tell me what, uh, you
think.
It sounds like the number one,
when you said the word
credibility, uh, that, that
jumped out to me because I think
that Western
Needs to gain their credibility
back with the legislature, um,
Uh, with, with the community,
uh, with the students, and, uh,
when you said building those
relationships with the auditor
and attorney general. I, I
couldn't agree more. I is that
your number one?
Priority or challenge.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Block.
I, I think it is, it is a very
significant challenge. It may be
the largest challenge that we
face because we've got to do it
on a short timeline. That means
that really even before we can
get a new president in, we're
we're going to have to be
finding out, getting to the
bottom of what happened.
Uh, that's the first step in
getting the university back on
track. I do, I do think that the
answer is yes to your question.
And, but we have to do, you
know, we have to walk and chew
gum at the, at the same time. We
have to also be pushing forward
on a new presidential shirt
simultaneously. I think that
just a new slate.
Of regents will do a lot to
clear the air with the Attorney
General and the state auditor.
Um, I've known both gentlemen
for a long time. That doesn't
mean that
Um, but, but, but I think that
if they see action, I believe
that both uh General Torres.
And um an auditor Maestas will,
will respond. We'll say, hey,
these guys are working on it.
And, and that will help clear
the air enormously just this,
this new slate. So I will say,
you know, people can beat up the
old board of Regents, but they
were willing.
To resign in mass and give a new
direction to the university.
They didn't have to do that. I
mean, it's very hard to remove
a, a member of the regions. And
so what they did is, I think
they saw, you know, whatever the
outcome of getting to the bottom
of this means, they saw that the
university needed, needed a new
direction. And so they, they,
they, they reside in Mass, which
again they did not have to do.
They could have stayed on. So,
um, I guess that's the answer to
the question, Senator. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, John.
I, I agree with you. I think
that showed a lot of leadership.
from the border regions to
resign in mask. It was the right
thing to do to kind of clean the
slate and provide some type of
um
baselining, so to speak, at the
university to get it back on,
on, on track. Um, as an
attorney, can you, can you just
tell me your thoughts on the
difference between illegal and
immoral and unethical behavior
and
And how are you, uh, may have
held someone accountable for
maybe not someone uh doing some
behaving illegally but more of a
morally and uh
And an unethical manner.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Block, I
mean, it's a difficult question,
but I think we can start from
the beginning of members of the
Board of Regents and members of
various public bodies around uh
New Mexico. I mean, we have a, a
fiduciary duty, which of course
is a fancy word that you have to
treat.
You know, when I signed this
oath, I mean, I got this oath
from uh Secretary of State to
loosen the mail a couple of days
ago that I'm gonna need to sign
and notarize.
Um
And what that oath says is I
commit to the Constitution.
But what it also means is we're
operating, we have to treat the
university as well as we would
treat our own affairs.
And I think if you really live
up to that duty, there's not a
lot of separation between
ethical and legal.
Right? I mean, you're not going
to do something illegal to
yourself.
That would be crazy. And
moreover, if you're a person of
character, you're not going to
do something that is ethically
suspect for yourself. So it
comes down to having the
character and I think that the,
the new Board of Regent, I'm not
saying the old Board of Regens
didn't have that character, but
I'm confident that the new board
does have the character to make
sure that there's not a big gap.
And, um, and, uh, but the, the
reality is can be addressed with
a lot of procedures, like the
Attorney General's complaint
talks about
you know, a rolling quorum,
which is mean people making
decision making without a public
meeting.
Maybe that happened, maybe that
didn't. I'm not prejudging the
facts.
But the reality is, is we need
lots of training.
Um, I, I was encouraged to
realize that there's an
organization that helps give
more training to regions, I'm
certainly gonna need it. I think
all of my co-res are gonna need
it. So process can fix a lot of
the legal problems, making sure
that the procurement process was
followed, making sure that opens
the Open Meetings Act is
followed carefully. And then,
then you don't get into these
problems to begin with.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sir. I think, I think
that's uh spot on because what
you're talking about and you
didn't say it, but I, I know you
believe it it's, it's
transparency.
In the university. And I think
if you have transparency, which
I, uh, listen, I'm an outsider
looking, looking in, you're an
outsider looking in right now,
but I think that transparency
issue, um, really got a lot of
people in trouble where they
just thought they could.
Um
Kind of act above, above board
or below board, I should say,
when it should have been acting
above board. So I look forward
to uh supporting you, sir. I, I
think looking at the mix, I
think the committee would agree
looking at the mix of uh
The regions we have now, it's,
it's a pretty good mix and I
think it gives a lot of people,
um, I, I don't know if the
technical term is a warm fuzzy,
but it gives us a warm fuzzy
that Western will once again
find some great days ahead of
it, and I think you're going to
be part of that. So I want to
thank you and your family and I
know you're gonna be welcome to
Mustang Nation, uh,
wholeheartedly with open arms.
Thank you, sir, and I look
forward to your support. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. What's the will of the
committee?
It's energetic. I move that the
committee advance uh John
Wertheim forward to the full
Senate for confirmation as the
as a region for western New
Mexico. Thank you so much.
There's been a motion to move
you forward for a full Senate
confirmation. I'm going to ask
for a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's Senator
Bergman's is excused. Senator
Block.
Hi.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara meal.
Senator Duhig.
Then it Townsend to explain as
well.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is a strange session.
And um
And I think it's worthy to note
that
Former chair of the Democrat
Party.
was elected by 4 Republicans.
Even when Marty Chavez stood up
for you.
Thank you.
And
with 6 in favor of your
confirmation. You'll be moving
forward for a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Congratulations.
Thank, thank you all so much.
Thank you.
We're gonna move on to the next
item on our agenda, which is the
appointment of Joseph Dean Reed
to the Western New Mexico
University Board of Regents, and
I'd like to welcome your Senate
sponsor, Senator Ramos. Good
morning, Senator. Good.
The
I'm sorry, I thought I pressed
that. Sorry about that. Uh,
today I bring Mr. Dean Reed
forward to uh become one of our
new border regions.
You know, you've seen me stand
up on the floor, asking for this
board and, um, Senator Duhague,
I really do appreciate you
moving us forward and putting us
at the beginning of the line
once, once they were nominated
by the governor, I appreciate
that. Um,
I, I take great pleasure today
and in bringing Dean Reed with
all his experience and being
From, uh, being.
A an alumni from Western New
Mexico University.
Dean Reed has accomplished many
things.
Some of his first
accomplishments was graduating
from WNMU in 1983 with a
Bachelor of Arts, and in 1984
with an MBA, both earned at
WNMU.
So he knows Doub endy very well.
He's also served as a WNU board
uh secretary.
He's also served as a double NMU
Albuquerque chapter alumni
president.
And uh he was.
Respected enough to be our fall
commencement speaker at WMU in
2004.
He was inducted into the Student
Hall of Fame at Dublin in 2003.
And has uh
Has became a heck of a business
person throughout the state of
New Mexico with many
accomplishments.
Uh, he started off his career
with the US division as, as a US
division director of the
National Accounts Hospital sales
at the Mayo Clinic labs in
Dallas, Texas.
He also has experience as a VP
of sales?
Uh, or Carl Carl's, I'm sorry.
Yes, Carl's diagnostic Miraka in
Dallas, Texas.
And he was also regional sales
and operations director for
Advanced respiratory, uh, in
Texas.
He's a, I, I totally respect Mr.
Dingre.
And uh ask you today for
For, uh
For this committee to move them
forward to the Senate floor so
that we can get him working as
soon as possible.
You know, W NME has spent a lot
of money.
fighting these
Fighting these accusations and,
and uh and uh.
I guess our accusations.
by multiple
People, multiple entities and
we, it's time to put all that.
Behind us, they spent over $2.7
million defending themselves.
And that's definitely gonna hit
their budget.
I know, uh, Mr. Dean Reid has a
lot of
A a lot of experience in budgets
and uh, you know, that's gonna
be a big challenge.
So I bring Mr. Dean Reed.
board today, and I ask you to uh
move them forward and uh get
them through the process so we
can get them working as a, as a
group.
you better double NU as soon as
possible, and this time I
turned.
Turn it over to uh Mr. Dean Reed
or any questions at this time.
Thank you very much, Mr.
President. Thank you, Senator.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. I'm
sorry. That's OK. Good morning,
Mr. Reed. Good morning.
Thank you for your time. Uh,
thank you, Senator Ramos and,
and John, thank you for your um
earlier words.
This is an interesting time for
the university that has seen 15
presidents, and we now seek our
16th president since opening
this school in 1893 as the
teacher school. You know, having
been a graduate twice of this
university, uh, it hits home,
uh, the press that we've had, no
one likes it. Uh, it does, it
doesn't, uh, advance the
university to where it is.
Uh, I just retired last year
after 40 years in healthcare and
healthcare became so um
stringent that I thought
anything would be uh more
enjoyable than than pursuing
that. So when this opportunity
arose, I immediately expressed
interest in it. I know graduates
like Senator Ramos is from
Western, uh, Mr. Morales, your
lieutenant governor, is also a
Western graduate two time, um,
and I'm heavily involved in the
alumni association and what that
means to you is,
I I was at an alumni meeting
last month in February.
And even though there is the
zoom possibility I choose to
meet in person. Uh, I believe
there are things you can't
measure on a Zoom or a team's
call. You can't measure culture,
you can't measure the vibe, you
can't measure the room, and I
met with several business people
in Silver City, and I asked the
question.
Where are we standing? How is
Western doing? And it's a mixed
bag of responses you can well
imagine. There are people who
Who, um, obviously are
disappointed, and there are
those that support uh the past
president. Uh, I think John said
it best. I, I'm, I'm the type of
person that looks through the
front windshield and not the
rearview mirror. I can do
nothing about its past. We can
impact its future. I think we
can do, um,
some good and obviously it's
gonna take time, and that's my
goal, that's my dream to serve
the institution that served me.
And it's going to be an arduous
task. We're going to be under
the microscope. There's going to
be some challenges, there's some
good headwinds, um, but I'm
confident based on the talent
that I see on the Regents, that
that's a great starting point,
and I'm just honored to be here
and humbled, and uh thank you
very much for your time this
morning.
Thank you, Mr. Reed. We do have
some organized support in favor
of your confirmation. I'm gonna
go online with Mr. Logan White.
Um
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
As a former protalis Ramm, WU
Mustang, and loyal New Mexican.
Thank you for having me speak
today on behalf of Dean Reed.
It's both, like I mentioned, in
honor and a privilege to be here
in front of you, um, I don't
know how many of you know my
background or my past, but over
the past 40 years of my life, I
spent it in Major League
Baseball. The last 25 years,
I've been in the front office as
the assistant general manager,
vice president for the Los
Angeles Dodgers and currently
work for the San Diego Padres.
Uh
A lot of my friends chose to
By
In northern Arizona up in
Payson, Sedona, Prescott, and
those places.
I chose to purchase a house in
Silver City, New Mexico 5 years
ago, because you see, I'm a, I'm
a former WNMU person. I love
Silver City.
I love Grant County. I love the
heal a wilderness. I love
everything about that area, and
I love the state of New Mexico,
and I really appreciate
everything you're trying to do.
To make this right.
As I move forward,
Uh, 2019, I was inducted into
the Major League Baseball
Scouting Hall of Fame.
And when I was inducted for was
my ability to evaluate players.
And when I look back, I, all my
years of evaluating players and
talent, I thought,
What is the most important
things that make up
Talented people that are going
to make the highest level, play
at the highest level, and do
well. And that is number one,
they have to have the talent.
2, they have to have work ethic.
3, they have to have discipline.
Or they have to have integrity
and honesty, 5, they have to
have trustworthiness.
They have to have courage, they
have to have competitiveness.
They have to have unwavering
determination.
They have to have high
character.
And when I look back at some of
the greats in the game.
Even though they were leaders on
the team, and got the fanfare.
They were always great
teammates. They always had a
servant attitude.
They always were looking, how
can I help my teammates? How can
I better the team? How can I
help better the situation that
I'm coming from. And they were
also great leaders.
And you're probably asking, what
does this have to do with my
talk about Dean Reed. Well, I've
known Dean since the early 80s
when I was a student and I
played baseball at Western New
Mexico University. Dean was not
an athlete, didn't play
baseball, but he was our student
council president.
Any event that was happening on
campus where it needed extra
people setting up chairs or
doing whatever the task might
be, you would find Dean. Dean
was always there willing to lend
a hand, again, that self-serving
attitude, not, not self-serving,
unserving. He was very generous
with his time. Matter of fact,
Dean would even broadcast our
baseball games in the sporting
events and donate his time. And
he was just so gracious to all
of us. And over the years, you
guys have already heard
his resume with his professional
business career, and you see
that, but when you look at it,
you're gonna see a man of
consistency. You're gonna see a
man of talent, work ethic,
discipline, you're gonna see
those things. And Dean is the
epitome of that, and I, I'm
honored as a friend to have
watched him grow, see him grow,
and the man that he is today,
the father, the man of faith,
everything that he is.
And
Moving on with his legacy, Dean
mentioned that he has 2 degrees
from Western New Mexico
University that
he has 2 degrees from Western
New Mexico University,
if I can get you to wrap up, Mr.
White.
Yes, it's
And, and in Dean and Dean's
behalf, his his granddaughter is
a student at Western New Mexico
University.
And that shows the legacy. And I
do think it's extremely
important for us to have
somebody of Dean's character,
integrity, that has a background
and understands Silver City and,
uh, Grant County and that area
of the country. Thank you, Mr.
White. Thank you.
But I do see that Judge Stan
what what occurs in the ADM3
here to speak on behalf of the
just hearing support, OK. And
going to those in the committee
room by a show of hands, who's
in favor of this confirmation?
67, and online.
And one online, back to the
committee room, and in
opposition of this appointment.
none any online.
Thank you. And with that, we'll
go to questions from the
committee. Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, and,
um, thank you, Mr. Reed and.
Congratulations to you and uh
your wife, Vicky. Um, it's an
interesting um mix to have you
and John here today with his
background and yours.
And, uh, looking at your resume.
One of the things that stands
out on here that uh John didn't
have.
I, uh, you have Harvard
publications.
Um
I thought that was pretty cool.
Um
So Mr. Reed, uh, I want to
think, uh, my good friend
Senator Ramos for sponsoring
you, I don't think you could
have found a better sponsor
both.
Mustang sitting there, but you
heard John's, uh, testimony, and
I thought, uh, it was excellent.
Um, and I'll ask you the same
thing about what do you see as
the the biggest challenge as a
region to get the, the, the
credibility.
Or the perception.
Of, of getting the credibility
back of uh this great
institution.
Mr. Chair and Senator Block,
thank you for the question. Um,
it is a big question. Um, I'm an
avid reader, and in the book,
leaders and Legacies, they talk
about, do you want to be liked
or respected. It's a difficult
question.
And one that gets confused, but
I think 3 things are gonna have
to happen.
When, when I go back to my
western days and reading Stephen
Covey, who wrote the book Seven
Habits of Highly Effective
People, number 5 stands out,
right? First, seek to
understand, but I think John
said it will too. I, I think our
job is to land.
and get a lay of the land first.
Understand the budget process,
hear from the faculty, hear from
the administration, hear from
the students, do our own
research.
And quickly come to some
conclusions and then apply what
we think might be the
priorities.
Obviously, we need a leader. We
need a president, and the 16th
president will be certainly one
of those top 3 things, 4 things
that we do.
But uh I think the first thing
is to dig in quickly. I agree
with John's assessment also. I
think we should meet in person,
um, I'm connected to the
business people in Silver City,
uh, several of them, uh, the
young lady that's done my taxes
for the last 42 years as a CPA
there. Uh, they have input and
they know what's going on. It's
a small community and Senator
Ramos lives there and
And so does Luis Terrazas
representative Terrazas, and so
I think the first thing Senator
Block is, is to see what we
have. I just don't know what I
don't know, and with this
appointment, I think we can dig
in quickly and start to
establish priorities.
And really a, a, a quick SWOT
analysis. What are our
strengths? What are our
weaknesses? What are the
opportunities and threats, and
then prioritize them. Did that
answer your question, sir?
Um
Logan
But
Athletics
Mr. Chair and Senator Block,
thank you for the question. Um,
you know, when I was in Western,
uh, as a student from 1979 to
1983 and my bachelor's, I ran
track at Western for 2 years
until they took away the track
program. It just wasn't that,
uh, as successful as it could
have been. One of the challenges
Western faces in athletics is
its geographic location. We're
not on an interstate system. Uh,
we don't cross 40 or 25 and, and
we're in a little bit of an
isolated area. So it's difficult
for teams.
when we used to travel and
track, you know, I would have
to.
We'd go to Portalis in Colorado,
and so there are some challenges
there. And again, Senator Block,
I apply the, the same principle.
I think we need to look at where
we are.
What we're doing.
And then apply the 4 R's. What's
right, what's wrong? What's the
recommendation to fix it, and
then who's going to be
responsible for those changes,
and um I think it's worthy
looking both at academics and
athletics, and again, feedback
from the community, feedback
from the students and really try
to assess.
Are we headed in the right
direction? Are we investing our
dollars wisely, and should we
pivot or change, and I think
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you guys for being here. Western
is great. It's been poisoned by
politics. We're gonna get it
right back on the right track.
First time I'd heard your name
was actually from Senator Ramos,
who's very excited about this,
and he has been calling for the
appointment of leadership at, at
Western throughout the entire
legislative session and a
chairwoman here had assured us
that as soon as she got named,
she would put you guys on there
and so thank you for, for all of
those who have prioritized this,
this appointment. Um, I'm
excited to serve with you.
I, I have, I share Grant County
with Senator Ramos, and so we
will be working closely
together. In addition to not
having leadership, we don't have
a baseball team.
And so Senator Ramos and
especially Representative Luis
Tarasis have really been pushing
for that, and so once we kind of
figure it out and get all moved
in, I'm gonna tell you that's
our top priority. We're gonna
celebrate Western over our first
baseball game and get this on.
It's a, it's a community that
has been known there's huge
investments in Little League and
then all through, all the way up
to their high school and you had
uh Mr. Logan White on your Zoom,
and so I'm gonna reach out to
him to help too. We've got to
turn this around, but I'm
excited to have you on this.
I think we're gonna have a solid
uh board of Regents. I'm also
excited that you are a Mustang
and so you know Western and the
chairwoman had had mentioned
earlier that we were having some
appointments from all over the
state, but who knows Grant
County, who knows Silver City,
and who knows that university
and between you and in the
appointment of our student
regent. I think that we have
some people that are so rooted
in that school that they, they
know the history and um and
because of that, I think you
guys are the right picks to to
uh, you know, head out to what
make, you know, Western uh.
with us and so we're excited to
have you on here. I have no
questions, but to congratulate
you and I look forward to
working with you guys. Thank
you. Thank you so much. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Reed.
Um,
Oh
So you all are gonna have to
find a new president. I, I would
imagine.
It might be a kind of hard to
recruit for that position right
now, given recent history. Um,
so what is, and, and
understanding that you all as a
board need to talk about what
this would look like, but what
are
At this point, do you have any
kind of vision of what that,
that search is going to look
like.
Mr. Chair and Senator Duhack,
thank you very much for the
question. It's an excellent
question.
Uh, and, and I've been in the
position in my career where I've
hired over 250 personnel in
various roles in leadership and
sales.
And I think to choose the 16th
president.
It's, I'm, I'm really concerned
and, and I know the other
regents will be about quality,
not speed.
Um, I think it's crucial that we
find someone who has expertise,
um,
And has the bandwidth to
take perhaps to your point.
Not the most enviable position
to walk into, however, um, I do
believe that my experience has
taught me, uh, sometimes it's OK
to start at ground zero and it's
a great place to rebuild is when
you're at ground zero, and I
don't, I don't, you know, the
university is doing fine. The
morale is good. I was there last
month.
Uh, enrollment is up, um, I'm
eager to meet the
administration. I'm eager to
meet a lot of the faculty. Uh,
they all want the same thing
that we all do, and that is a
next great leader to guide us.
And to lead us to prominence and
excellence, um,
Uh, a lot of degrees are hanging
on that.
And so I think uh I I've been so
impressed with the regions that
have been nominated, I think
it's to Senator Block's point,
there is a good mix of
experience.
Uh, that we need, um, but I, I
think
I know there's someone out there
that will want this job and will
be the right person, and we'll
be patient and we'll do the
right thing, and I think again,
we will pick, uh, I think the
worst thing we could do is speed
hire the first body that comes
in that simulates that they
might be able to handle it.
Let's take our time. Let's pick
the right leader, so we can
start a legacy for the next 10
to 15 years that uh can move
forward.
Thank you. Uh, I, I appreciate
what you said about
Going in person to meetings and
that you can't measure culture
over Zoom. Uh, what, what do you
see as uh the Board of Regent's
role in kind of setting the
culture of the university.
Mr. Ting, Senator, thank you for
that question. I'm a big fan of
uh
Peter Drucker. He was an
economist considered to be the
the the 21st century economist.
Uh, I learned about him at
Western through a professor
Dorothy Blaylock, who taught
micro and macroecon and graduate
econ.
And Mr. Drucker speaks and still
in his book, the effective
executive he talks about how
culture eats strategy for lunch,
and so I think culture is
crucial, and I think it's up to
the four regions that have been
given this task to set the bar
high to establish that culture.
I think we have to be in person.
I think we need to meet people.
I think we need to shake hands.
We need to do a lot of
listening, um, and we need to
better understand where this
university is, and that's going
to take a little bit of time,
but we'll pressure.
ourselves and, and expedite that
data, but I think that's where
it starts. I think you have to
show up, be there, be seen, not
for the point of being seen, but
for them to understand that this
is going to take a collaborative
effort of many, not any
individual or single person's
going to solve these challenges
that are in our headwinds of
Western. And so, um, I agree
with John. I think we need to
show up. I was very pleased to
know that here that John lives
in Albuquerque. Uh, I live in
Albuquerque, so we can have
coffee morning, day and night.
and then uh hitch a ride down to
Silver City and, and we'll make
sure that uh I, I introduced him
to a campus that I love.
Thank you. I'll, I'll also ask
you the same question I asked
Mr. Wertheim, uh, about
accountability. How, how do you
plan to hold,
hold yourself, your fellow
regents, uh, and the incoming
president and administration
accountable.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair and and Senator Newhi,
it's a great question.
Accountability is easy to say,
it's hard to do at times, it
rolls off the tongue. Yes, we're
accountable, yes, I'll be
accountable. Um, but I was
raised, um,
by parents who instill that
quality, who said things to me
like in high school, you'll
treat the principal and the
janitor the same way. Uh, I grew
up in Anthony, New Mexico and,
and, uh, I, it was a tough area,
and I think the accountability
comes from within. I think Jaw
needs to hold me accountable,
Senator Neville and the student
region.
We all have to hold each other
accountable, and I think you do
that by being transparent,
honest, and, and I think the
more meetings in public to
receive feedback from the
general public, the
administration, the faculty,
and, and, and most importantly,
sometimes the students, right?
It's their institution. I think
that's how you hold
accountability, uh, we're gonna
make mistakes, everybody does.
Uh, this will not be a perfect
runner we zip through and 3
years later we're on the cover
of Time magazine as the comeback
university of the.
year. It's going to take time.
Uh, we will stumble a little
bit, but we learned from our
mistakes, we'll recover from our
stakes, but my accountability
really starts, uh, from the way
I was raised, and I instill it
upon myself. Um, my dad used to
say,
When you make a decision,
Do the right thing and, and I
used to ask him, how will I know
if it's the right thing? He
says, you'll know.
And I believe that.
I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Guyless.
This chair center and uh
appreciate everything you're
done trying to get at Mr. Reed,
I, I thought this is one of the
hardest points to come into with
all the issues that Westerns
have, but I did, I was going
through your resume and I, it's
really, really trying to like
you until I saw that Jamie
Quinones, uh, from Lovington
Schools. Uh, how's that
association in um port how was
that made? I uh that is my
district.
That's a great question. Um,
He's referring to Jaime
Quinones, who was one of my two
college roommates. I had 2
roommates, Leo Wickstead from
Albuquerque, who was 6'8, and
played basketball, and uh Jaime
Quinones was my other roommate.
Uh, he lives in Lovington. His
wife, as you know, of course, is
Pam is the school superintendent
down there, um, interesting.
story, uh, I called Jaime Javier
the first week because I thought
that's what his name was. He was
so bashed he wouldn't even tell
me that I was calling him by the
wrong name. Uh, fast forward 46
years later. Let me see if I get
this straight. I was Jaime's
best man at his wedding. Jaime
was Leo's best man at his
wedding, and Leo was my best
man, so we've been brothers uh
ever since, uh, we're all
Mustangs, um, but that's, that's
how I don't coach Q, uh, what a,
what a football coach he is.
He's got 5 state championships
under his belt.
Um
Just really a nice, humble guy,
but we're, we're best of
friends, we're brothers and uh
uh I do have a few Levington
shirts, but I don't wear them on
the campus of Western. I, I know
better than that.
From his turn, center and Mr.
Reed, I appreciate that. Uh, Pam
was at my wedding, but she
wasn't my best man, just stating
so I've known the family,
but I, I figure if he's gonna
extend himself uh to give you
some credibility here. I think I
will use that as the main
sporter, uh, but I do want to
say Miss Karen, Senator, uh, I,
I do appreciate.
Totally appreciate you risking
yourself going into an area
that's got so much negative
publicity to it to make it
right, and I think 3 years from
now, we'll be looking back so
grateful to these individuals
have stepped up to fill that
void.
Because that
University deserves.
recognition for what it's
already done, and I just pass
problems, so put that on you.
Thank you. I look forward to
supporting you on the floor.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Before I go
to the will of the committee, I
failed to mention two letters
were sent in in your support and
one was actually from one of
your roommates, Leo Wisad sent
in a letter he's a retired
Federal Bureau of Investigations
agent, and then the second
letter came from Kirk Patterson
from Gibson Ruddock and
Patterson, the certified public
accountants, and with that, what
is the will of the committee?
Motion from.
Yeah, Senator Townsend. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I'm a Senate
Rules Committee for the
appointment of Joseph Dean Reed
to the Western New Mexico
regionboard of regions.
There's been a motion to move
you forward for a full Senate
confirmation if I can have a
roll call, please.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senor Stephonics is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami.
Senator Block
I
Senator Doig.
The vote of 7 in favor, you'll
be moving forward for a full
Senate confirmation later this
morning. Congratulations.
Gonna move forward to that next
item on our agenda, which is the
appointment of Kiana,
Rachel Huerta to the Western New
Mexico University Board of
Regents. Welcome again, Senator
Ramos.
Mr. Chairman, it, it gave me
great, I mean, it just makes me
feel so darn good to see uh this
young lady being nominated to
the board of Regents or student
board regent for the border
regions.
She's accomplished so much in
her time.
As a young adult.
Keano was born and raised in
Grant County, New Mexico.
And she graduated my home, I
mean, she, she, she was raised
in my hometown of Hurley. So
that even gives me greater
pride. I got to see her playing
around as a little kid with,
with her, with her siblings and
she's just been a great person
since she was little.
She's a sing the national anthem
for Little League events and
just about any other event that
she can uh show off that
beautiful voice that she's got.
She served, she served as a
councilwoman for the town of
Hurley from 2023 to this year.
It is an active member of the
Silver City Kiwanis.
As the leader singer of Sire
band Kiana showcased her passion
for music within the local
community. For many years, even
though she's only
I, I, I don't even know how old
she is, but she's in her young
twenties for sure.
Um,
Kiana's pursuing her education
at WNMU, is dedicated is
dedicated to the nursing
program, which she is a level 2
nursing student. In addition to
her studies, she serves as an
ASWNMU senator and vice
president of the Student Nurses
Association.
In a free time, which I don't
know what, what that means to
her. I don't think she knows
what free time is.
Kean enjoys singing and is
recognized as local Tejano
recording artists under Shelly
Lares.
LMD Productions. Her commitment
to both her community and her
artistic endeavors reflects your
dynamic spirit and dedication to
making a positive impact.
To everyone that she reaches out
to and everyone she speaks to.
If you meet Kiana on an
individual basis, you're gonna
know that she's a, she's always
a happy positive person.
And she's been that way since
she was a little kid. She, she's
inherited this from her family
down in in Grant County, which I
know very, very well.
And I know she's gonna do a
great job, uh, for WNMU. I think
she'd be a great representative
for our students.
And I'm really looking forward
to see the great things she does
for the rest of her life.
She's done so much already and I
just can't say enough positive
things about Kiana Huerta.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and this time I'll turn
it over for, for questions.
Miss,
go ahead. Good evening, um,
honorable members of the
committee and Mr. Chair as well,
um, I'm very happy and honored
to be here with you guys today,
um.
Right now, there's uh it's a
very.
Unprecedented and weary time,
um, it's weird on campus, and as
a student I can speak on behalf
of um
My peers that
Right now, um,
Very unfortunate what our campus
is going through, and
I know me and like many others
have a vision for Western, um,
and that's greatness.
And
It's unfortunate right now to
see whole
Groups on campus, unsure if
they're able to make it into the
next fiscal year with how we're
headed. Um, and I hate that my
university is going through
that, and I'm hoping that my
presence here will um give the
university ease that we're going
to be headed in the right
direction and um give the
university ease as well that um
myself and my other regent
members will be transparent, um,
and hold each other accountable
because um we just need that
presence of
Honesty and and surety to make
sure that our campus just stays
bright.
Um
This isn't my first round with
uh politics before or being
involved with the committee or
board, I was appointed to my
accounts um council back when I
was just 18 years old and a
senior in high school. Um, at
the time, our municipality
didn't allow chickens within um
ordinance, and I didn't think
that was very fair. So
So I decided to put um
Become a registered voter, put
my letter of interest into the
council and I was appointed my
senior year, um, a year later, I
was elected, um, after proving
myself to the town and its
residents. Um, we did get the
chickens in as well
but yeah, so.
Um, apart from being a
councilwoman, I also served as
an ASW new senator working on
student fees, um, and I do, I'm
very familiar with campus life.
Um, I'm very familiar with the
campus needs and also the
direction the community wants to
see the campus head in as well,
um, one of those big baseball,
but yes, um, and yeah, that's
all I have for you.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
we don't have anyone signed up
in support or opposition. Do you
have anyone here in the room you
want to speak? No, not at this
time. I have my mom, but she,
she doesn't want the hot seat
right now.
All right, uh, those in the
committee room would like to
raise their hand to indicate
support for the nominee.
Senator Harvey is much better
about counting, but a whole
bunch of you,
uh, anyone online? All right.
Uh, anyone want to raise their
hand in opposition?
Seeing that I'll go to members
of the committee, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Kiana, um, congratulations. Um,
By far you are.
More well qualified than the
previous two that have been here
this morning.
Um,
I think what's impressive about
you. Well, let me just say this,
um, when I was uh talking to Mr.
Reid when he was sitting there.
I talked about how students and
alumni feel about their
university when their university
is going through this, and you
talked about that and I, I
greatly appreciate that because
I think students do care about
their administration and deeply
care about their university,
whether they're freshmen or, or
seniors or or graduate students.
I think your role, and let me
know if you agree or not. Your
role as a regent.
Um, you're gonna be the glue.
That keeps the regions, um,
together. You're gonna be the
glue and the liaison between the
regents, the administration, and
the students, because you're
there.
Uh, do you, do you agree with
that role?
Yeah, and I'm, I'm very eager to
take it on as well. Um, yeah,
I'm on campus as a nursing
student, um, I want to say all
my waking time. So just that
presence, I'm, I'm, I'm eager to
show the student body and and
the staff that I'm there because
during this time, um,
Even though it's been unsured,
the staff and faculty have made
it to where the students feel
safe and the students feel
supported, and I would love to
show that same.
Support back.
Oh, Madam Chair, and, uh, what's
the biggest challenge?
OK
What's the biggest challenge
facing the students.
At your university right now.
Madam Chair, I would say, um,
It's probably the morale. Um,
it's, it's frustrating, really
is. It's frustrating.
And it's just uncertain because
a lot of the
Clubs and a lot of the
organizations we appreciate on
campus are
Unsure themselves um with
funding especially and
A lot of the students like me
want to see our campus grow,
want to see the opportunities,
um, that make our campus great
continue to keep coming in. Um,
our campus is very unique, a
Hispanic serving campus, um, one
of the greatest ones in
education, one of the greatest
ones in nursing, and it's
important to the students that
we keep getting resources that
support our education, that
support us not only in school
but
Advancement of our own careers
in the end, and that's really
all the students are looking
for, it's just
resources and help.
And just that next step into our
careers.
Thank you for that. Um,
Madam Chair and Ken, I gotta
tell you, uh, you sitting here
and the way you are.
Presenting yourself and your
ideas. I, I, I'm just
I'm thrilled with the future of
this state and country if, if we
had more people like you.
I think we'd have a lot less
problems.
I really do. Um, where's your
mom and dad?
Your mom's all the way back
there, OK, because she didn't
raise her hand in support
I don't know if there's
something going on there or not.
Well, your mom should be very
proud. And um I think you are
gonna be, again, you're gonna be
the glue that holds this whole
thing together.
And um I, I see an incredible
legacy that you're gonna leave
at Western and very, very proud
to support you. Congratulations
and nice job, mom, great job
raising her. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator
Braley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Ramos, and it is a pleasure to
see her. I am excited, girl. You
go, I mean, you are clearly
someone who is a world changer
and you started early, so thank
you for your leadership and your
courage to get on your local uh
council for, uh, your
councilwoman there in Hurley,
which I just think is awesome. I
also think it's important that
we're talking about all your
academic achievements and
success and the impact that
you're having on Western, which
you were nominated as the
the best artist of the year for
the Tohono Music Awards in 2024,
and so I know you're kind of a
hometown, a celebrity down
there. It's awesome to see you
just advocating for your
community. You're a great
champion, a great cheerleader
for that area, you're gonna do
great for Western. I'm excited
to work for you and with you
there down there and uh
congratulations.
Thank you, San.an guy goes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator, and it is such an honor
to have you here. I'm looking at
your resume and very impressed,
especially at your age. I know
you're gonna be our next
generation of leadership in the
state, uh, it has gone through,
I was going through it and I
highlighted a couple of uh
youngest.
official in New Mexico, uh, for
the town of Hurley as
councilwoman. That's incredible
because I mean, we're always
looking forward.
The so step up and fill those
voids and being Hispanic, I
really appreciate that. I did
have a question, Miss turn.
Senator, I was busy reading and
writing, uh, something came up
about Shelley Ladders. Did you
work with her for her? What was
that connection?
I, uh, she's my producer, so it
was actually I was singing the
national anthem at the Tejano
Lordsburg Fiesta, and um as I
was singing, one of her
promoters sent a video of me
over to her.
in San Antonio, and from there
we started working together,
producing music.
Well, thank you for that, Ms.
Stern,
Well, thank you for that, Ms.
Sternen her and uh and uh, so,
uh, she came, um, I'm not a
really, really good.
Mexican cause I, I don't listen
a lot. I, I, I will start
looking for your stuff, uh, but,
uh, she came to Lee County, and
there we're on an entry float
coming in, and she's standing
with me and I was back when I
was in the house and past your
dad, what do you guys do?
Shelley lots.
OK, what do you do?
singer, I did not know that.
They said any male up there
wants me right where you're at.
Now, which was great. I mean,
uh, once I knew she sang for us
that night, so, uh, knowing that
you're associated, you've got
your own uh best artists in the
year award, uh, now I'm gonna
have to start following you, but
it's just, uh, when you don't
know or live in that realm, it's
um
It's really a joy to see it
happen. Uh, I will start
following you and your music
but, um,
I did wanna talk earlier is
talked about
Two things, uh, I was worried
about you with center block
because you had enough um
function in you but you were not
a veteran.
can be military. I thought he
would have caught that, and he
would enlist you today, uh, but
I, I appreciate everything that
you did in your paperwork you're
opening on us, but uh it was
said that being the only female
so far nominated that you were
gonna be the clue. Actually,
2nd of 5 boys, only have
daughters, so I'm gonna say
you're not gonna be the clue,
you're gonna be the boss. I hope
that they're, they're uh willing
to accept that because of the
curfew from the women's side is
different than from Maite, so
we're gonna need you there, so
not just for the youth and for
the students, but for that
woman's view because uh my wife
makes me way better than I am by
myself, so I just wanted to
Thank you for everything. I look
forward to support you on the
floor and uh I look forward to
From, from mind this lotless
that she was in Lovington, New
Mexico.
100 years ago, but uh it was
really unique that I got to meet
her and her dad. So, uh, thank
you for all you do. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, Senator.
So you think the national
anthem.
Yes, Mr. Chair, I do. Would it
surprise you that I was uh I, I
rode the elevator up with the
guy this morning that was
telling me all about you. And he
said, I wouldn't be doing my job
unless I didn't leverage my vote
today on you singing the
national anthem in the Senate
chambers this morning.
Stayed there.
I wouldn't mind. I love you.
I'm, I bet we can get the music
keyed up in the right key just
for you, so.
Uh, you're an impressive, um,
Not only as a reach of.
But as many have mentioned here
today as
Hey
Bright future.
Or
Not only the university, but the
world.
And
I think you ability, um,
Hasn't even been tapped yet.
And anybody that can get
chickens move forward.
Has no problem in the world
today.
And I think that is just pretty
cool.
Um, is that.
That you didn't think it was
fair, or did you just love fried
chicken
I love eggs. You love it. That's
even better. I do too. Thank you
very much for uh allowing
yourself to, to.
be used in this row, and I think
you will, uh, do a good job and
it's not only that, many people
will, will also uh be very
thankful for your leadership.
Thank you very much and I look,
I look forward to you seeing
this morning.
Thank you, center, center Duhe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank
you, Senator and Miss Huerta,
um, I, I echo what my colleagues
have already said about uh
Uh, be very impressed with, with
what what you've done so far. We
have had all the student regents
to come before this committee,
this session have been amazing
and just give me
Total faith in the, the future
of New Mexico. Uh, so thank you
for
Giving me faith, um, and for
your, your willingness to, to do
this public service. Um, one
thing I, I kind of wanted to, to
mention for, for all the
Uh,
the regents. So we've gotten 4
names from the governor so far.
My understanding is we're not
gonna get the 5th name during
this session.
Um
I my read of the, the
constitutional provision on this
and the case law interpreting
it.
If that person is nominated
after this session, they're not
going to be able to serve. It
would not be the kind of recess
appointment where they could
serve prior to confirmation,
because the vacancy occurred
before the session. Uh, the
vacancy would have had to have
occurred after this session for
that recess appointment to work,
and so I was very much, I just
want
Our regions to keep that in
mind, um, because if someone
gets nominated and then comes
and starts serving with you all,
I think, and whatever actions
you guys take or challenged on
the basis of that person not
being able to constitutionally
serve.
Uh, I just want to flag that for
you all. Um,
And maybe it'll change, maybe we
will get a last minute thing.
But, uh, but thank you again,
Ms. Huerta. Um, I am so
impressed that you, uh, got
appointed a while senior in law
there in high school to, to
start serving your community
and, uh, I look forward to
seeing what else you do going
forward.
Thank you, Senator for a second
time, Senator Block. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, real quick, uh,
Kena, do you have any, um,
To be a conflict of interest
here, but do you have any ties
to Espinola?
Mr. Chair, um,
say no.
true.
Oh
No
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Church, I mean, uh, Senator,
she actually does before I get
the will of the committee, I've
met her, her senior year while
she served as the lieutenant
Governor of the state of New
Mexico and the LDZ program. So
it was nice to work with her in
a group of Hispanic students
from all over the state who are
willing to take on the next
level of leadership. And so when
you were elected Lieutenant
Governor, I told you big things
were going to come your way, and
I'm excited to see you sitting
here.
Um, the passion that you had as
that high school senior in the
LGZ program, I can see it still
burning today. When he came up
to tell me about you and your
nursing program, I am so proud
of you, and I'm proud to stand
by your nomination. Before I go
to the will of the committee,
there were 5 letters sent in
your support that I'm going to
read out the names on who were
in favor of your appointment.
One was from Gloria de Leon, the
co-founder of the National
Hispanic Institute, um, former
senator, Saya Correa Hemphill.
Raouluerta, the Grant County
Chief Deputy Assessor and the
last is from Nanette MD. And
with that, what is the will of
the committee?
Did you pass. There's the motion
to move you forward to the
Senate for a full Senate
confirmation. I'm gonna ask for
a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley. Yes.
Senator Gallegos with honor,
yes.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefanis is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Yes, ma'am.
Senator Jarami.
Yes.
Senator Doha.
With a vote of 7 in favor, you
will be moving forward to a full
Senate confirmation later this
morning. Congratulations my
friend.
I'm gonna hand the gamble back
over to our madam chairwoman who
will finish off the items on our
agenda. Thank you,
Ms. Puerta.
I have a confirmation from um
The lieutenant governor that he
expects that this morning, so be
prepared. OK, thank you.
All right, uh, Cha Chandler,
come on in. We're gonna do HB
298.
OK.
Good morning. I'm sorry. It's
obvious I have allergies. Um,
good morning, Madam Chair and
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, I'm here to present
um in conjunction with Alison
Nichols and Rebecca Martinez of
I mean the New Mexico municipal
League, some changes and updates
to the municipal code. The code
has not seen much work since 19.
78, and some of the procedures
are outdated and misaligned with
other um statutes. So the
revisions will provide
municipalities with clearer
operational guidance and support
for local governance, um, there
are some other proposed
statutory updates that focus on
mayor-council forms of
government and try to address
some issues that are frequently
brought up in questions that are
being sent to the municipally
um, you know.
subject matter experts and
lastly, I just want to emphasize
these do not um impact home rule
municipalities and um with that,
Madam Chair, we are available
for questions.
Great. Thank you. Did we have
anyone sign up on this?
Mm
All right. We have
Uh, Leanne Melancon, the city
clerk of Clovis, who's on Zoom.
Go ahead, ma'am.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman
in Committee. My name is Leanne
Milonson. I am the city clerk
and finance director for the
city of Clovis. I serve as the
chairman of the Clerk and
Finance Legislation Committee on
behalf on behalf of the
municipal clerks, we do support
HB 298.
The updates will provide
municipalities with clear
operational guidance. Many
changes in government have
occurred since the 1978
compilation.
The potential change in elected
officials each election cycle,
and the unfortunate turnover of
clerks can lead to limited
knowledge in municipal
governance, a newly elected body
does look to the clerk for
guidance and a newly appointed
clerk would benefit from the
updated chapters, mentors for
the clerk and finance officers
are constantly providing
information and guidance to
other clerks in relation to best
practices based on this chapter,
the clarification of the
organizational meeting and the
clarification of the filling of
vacancies.
We'll provide a clear and
concise path to be followed to
allow citizens to have full
representation from their
elected officials, updated
guidelines on calculating
quorums and clarification of the
recusal process will also assist
for streamlined meetings and
transparency. We ask for your
support in this first step in
updating and clarifying Chapter
3. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we didn't have
anyone sign up in opposition so
I go to members of the
committee.
That are blocked, followed by
Senator Branley.
Uh
Representative, thank you. I
just, just a quick question
here, um, I think you're a
lawyer, right?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator,
yes, that's correct. OK. So, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative
sits here in the event that a
home rule municipality has
adopted procedures in the
municipality charter that
conflict with the provisions of
Chapter 3, all that stuff.
The, the, the charter shall
govern. How did, how do these uh
municipalities change the
charter?
Uh, um, Madam Chair and rep um
sorry, senator, uh, through
elections by the population, so
there would be something on the
ballot in the municipal election
or county, I'm a county
official, former county
official, and that's how I know
you are um senator, and it would
be through the ballot process.
The people choose to change it
or not. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
That are well. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative, for bringing
this forward. We know that
sometimes when we pass policy,
especially when it comes to
these election changes, that
it's our intent to capture
everything. This is clearly just
a cleanup bill and I wanna thank
you for bringing it forward.
It's gonna be important. While
it doesn't seem like it's big to
us for those who's who's
impacted by this every single
day our municipal clerks, it's a
big deal that we get this across
the finish line to help them. So
I see this as a, as a very easy
cleanup bill and I appreciate
you bringing it forward. Thank
you.
Anyone else? No.
um, as a former city clerk, uh,
I appreciate this. Um, when I
was reading this,
I wondered
Is this just general cleanup or
was just something specific
happen somewhere, uh, that is
informing some of these changes.
Curious to know that.
Madam chair members of the
committee, thank you so much
again, Rebecca Martinez with the
New Mexico Municipal League, um,
and it's also great to have a
fellow clerk, uh, as you know,
I'm a retired, um, municipal
clerk. So we represent the uh
cities, towns and villages
throughout New Mexico, um, at
the New Mexico Municipal League,
so we get calls inquiries on a
daily basis, uh, related to
chapter 3 and how it relates to
the procedures that um are to be
used and enacted by
municipality.
So this is nothing more than a
cleanup, um, oftentimes we uh
with these questions, we've just
compiling answers,
clarification, judicial uh
clarification that's been made
over the years, so we're simply
coming forward and starting to
chip away at at the much-needed
amendments.
All right. Thank you very much,
uh, Senator Harmeo.
I move to do pass on chair.
All right, we have a motion for
Du pass, uh, sorry, did you
wanna debate on this, OK?
Uh, we don't, we don't do
seconds in here.
Uh, they're not they're not
necessary under Mason's. Um,
All right. Is there any
objection to the DuPass motion?
Seeing them, they show all
members present voting in the
affirmative, you have to pass.
Thank you.
It was your presence there,
Senator,
share
the got the unanimous about,
uh, all right, uh, HJM 5, I'll
be sitting in for Senator Deen.
All right.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee
Housetrit Memorial 5 supports
the proposed federal
administrative action uh with
withdraw 1,640,810 acres of
federal land from mining all of
it in the peers well, and I'm
going to yield to my expert
witness for some more comments.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Ralph
Vihi. I'm a local resident, a
generation from Pecos, my great,
great, great, great grandfather
settled in Pecos in 1855, and he
was the first Hispanic
territorial governor of New
Mexico.
So that area that he's developed
with the,
um, it's very special and, uh,
uh, a dear place to us. We've uh
had past mining, um, in the late
20s and 30s, where um in the 90s
they were doing reclamation and
uh runoff event caused a major
spill in our river, uh, killing
off 90,000 fish.
Um, not to say that we don't
need mining, but this is, these
are the headwaters of the Pecos
River, which feeds many
communities along the way and is
very special, um, the most
visited wilderness, um, in the
state.
And the Pecos River attracts,
um, the water, the upper Peco
watershed attracts many people
throughout the summer for
outdoor recreational activities,
um, the wilderness area is
pristine, but it's still
recovering from um hermit's peak
Canyon fire. There's a Jaroso
fire that's come over, so it's
just not mining that is uh uh is
a factor in this area, um, this
area, um, we've gotten recent
ONRW protections, uh, along the
Pecos River from the wilderness
to Dalton.
To try to maintain the quality
of our water, and that's what
we're trying to do at the end.
It's quality of water. We have
tons of support from land grants
to SEAs outdoor recreation,
local government, the governor,
um, last week, the state, um.
Land commissioner Garcia Richard
just um did a, a moratorium on
2000 acres within the federal
withdrawal, so there's plenty of
support in the community. Pecos
wants to maintain that pristine,
um, area, and we feel that the
traffic, the fire danger, and
everything that comes along with
uh more type of extractive
industry in that area would only
harm the headwaters.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you.
Uh, we did have
They have one person signed up
and support Max Trujillo from
San Miguel County, who's online.
Go ahead, mister, mister, yeah.
Morning, Madam Chair, and, and
members of the committee. My
name is Max Trujillo and the San
Miguel County commissioner. I'm
also a regional field manager of
her for Hispanics and enjoying
camping, hunting in the
outdoors.
Um
I just, uh, you know, I, I was
watching, I'm, I'm joining via
Zoom and, and enjoying the
committee hearing on some of the
regents and um some of the
comments made uh regarding
culture, um, in New Mexico and
how important it is, and this is
one of those things that um
One of the parts of New Mexico
culture that can't be ignored,
um,
The Pecos River is the only uh
native river in, in New Mexico,
um, the headwaters are so
important to so many people, um,
I, I hope
That you can see that.
This waterway is so important
not only to outdoors and, and
outdoor recreation, um,
agriculture, um, culture,
historic, uh, value. This is one
of those icons that um
You know, that we must do
whatever we can to preserve, uh,
we've already had contamination
in this, in this.
River, um, and we don't have
another.
And we don't have a plan B, if
you will. This is
The Pecos River, this is all
we've got. If, if we damage this
water where
we might be you, thank you, Mr.
Trudeau.
Um, sun were joined by another
expert,
introduce her.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Benita Gonzalez,
co-sponsor on this bill.
Apologize ju juggling a few
bills this morning.
All right, so we don't have
anyone signed up in opposition.
Members of the committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
Madam chair move would do pass.
All right. Is there any
objection to that motion?
All right, then let's go ahead
and do a rock.
Senator Bergman's.
Yes.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara.
Senator Doha.
Yes, and unfortunately with uh 4
in opposition, 3 in favor. That
does not pass.
Are there any other
Motions or
We'll just have this, uh.
So.
OK.
Let's do it all covered on that
one as well.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Block.
I
Senator Brantly,
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig. Oh, Senator
Bergman's. Yes.
Senator Doig. No.
That, uh, I'm figure memorial
table represented.
All right, and that is all we
have on our agenda for today,
uh, Roses in recess.
