Students from the Wild Friends
program based out of you and M.
With a little help from us and
just again, Super excited it can
really help further extend the
reach of our of our government
that may have limits and doing
things like bird counts and
Other types of science
collection. So with that, I'm
gonna turn it over to the wild
friends. Experts here to tell
you a little bit more and I'll
start off with Julian Rodriguez.
Madam Chair members. The
committee thank you for the
opportunity to become behalf
some Memorial one. My name is
Julian Rodriguez and I'm a
senior at the Academy Technology
in the classics here in Santa
Fe, and they represent wild
friends helped draft this
memorial.
Memorial. One first asked to
create a working group amongst
the agencies like New Mexico
Department of Game and Fish, the
state land office and state
parks division, as well as
interested groups such as New
Mexico Natural Heritage, and
this memorial. Also asked to
create a pilot project focus on
monitoring bird species across
Mexico.
Working group would be
responsible for effectively
determining how to use this in
science across the state and to
the finance system, Science of
how State Agencies use
volunteers to collect data
without using state resources
and says that science is
important because the agencies
are often understand,
understaffed and lacked the
resources needed to effectively
collected data required to
engage in scientific process.
Mexico as a state is built on
science, so to support center
Memorial One is supporting
Mexico and his future and
present.
Thank you. Well done. Now we'll
turn to maximum, Maximo
Snodgrass,
remember?
My name is Maximus address. I'm
in eighth grade at Central
Academy of Bilingual Education
in Real Rancho.
The world friends, students
across New Mexico voted to work
on the topic of citizen science.
Helped draft this legislation,
and now we are the expert
witnesses for it.
An example of citizen science is
a group or community that comes
together to help anyone or
Who needs help collecting that,
for example, the Great Basin
Bird Observatory as a citizen
science project that monitors
population changes with pinyon
jays across the Southwest.
This isn't science is important
to me because I love can sorry
opportunities to help my
community and state But more
importantly,
Toby, others with a passion of
helping, like mine help find
ways to also help their own
communities and state.
In summary on behalf of myself
in the world, friends I hope you
will.
Vote to pass Senate Memorial
one. Thank you.
Okay, Now we have Ashlyn
morphine. Morphine. Ah, madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Hello. My name is
Ashlyn Morphine, and I'm 1/7
grader at Sandoval Academy of
Bilingual Education located in
Real ranch in New Mexico. I am
here today to ask for your
support and our citizen science
memorial. This memorial will
come at no cost as state
agencies will use existing
resources as confirmed by the
fiscal impact report.
This memorial is important to me
because it can give me more
learning opportunities in the
future. The pilot project will
give me the opportunity to be
able to see many different types
of birds that I may not be able
to see otherwise.
The pilot project is important
to me because birds statistics
have significantly dropped in
numbers over the years.
And
And over the years, birds are a
vital part of the new Mexico
ecosystem and citizen science is
the way we can start solving
this problem. Thank you.
Yeah. Now
go Taurus, Madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Torres. I'm in the 12th
grade at the Academy for
Technology and the classics in
Santa Fe. Um, Citizen Science is
applicable in many different
ways whether it be students
taking a field trip to a state
park or
You know, retired people just
going out in their free time and
counting birds.
Um, for students and especially
younger ones. Something like
this can be vital for fostering
a love and care about the
natural world and its well
being, Um many people who want
to give back to their community
and nature specifically, really
have no idea what they can do to
help and especially in a state
with with such a diverse
landscape.
This project not only allows
people to explore their home
But I also know that they are
contributing to the betterment
Morial that will ultimately help
us to reach the goal of
preserving preserving the
environment and New Mexico is
loved by many across the country
for its natural beauty and
remarkable landscapes. And so
citizen science can not only
help the environment and bring
youth outdoors, but it can
contribute to our economy, which
can be seen by the fact that the
state of New Mexico received
$2.3 billion.
Direct to our spending and 2022
and birding is a highly popular
hobby currently.
Um I hope you can all find it
within yourself to support this
memorial, but also in doing that
support New Mexico and its
future. Thank you for your
consideration your time and
thank you to our legislative
sponsor, Senator Stein born
Great. Thank you so much.
I understand more than you want
to follow up with anything
before we go to No, no, man, I'm
sure they did a great job and
and I'm just going to turn it
over to Ashland for final words
of art.
Okay. I'm sorry, madam Chair. We
stamp for questions. Thank you
so much. Um, we I know we have
one person on Zoom, Who's here
for public comment? Was there
anyone else in the audience who
wanted to give public comment?
Come on up.
Sure come on, up and and
Good morning, Madam Chair
committee members, Camila Romero
Within Mexico State Land Office
Land office stands in support of
this memorial, the opportunities
for students to participate in
science and data collection can
lead to good.
Management of state trust land
and promote interest in stem
careers throughout New York
school. Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair.
members of the committee Melissa
Bernard and here representing
the Sierra Club Rio Grande
chapter. We are in strong
support of this bill. We think
the sponsor and these marvelous
young people for bringing it
forward. We think it is a great
idea to leverage the expertise
of our community members and
environmental monitoring and
other pursuits. So thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee.
I'm I'm here on my own behalf.
I'm Tasha Young. I'm a friend of
the wild friends. I have a
pollinator protector.
License plate on my car, and I
just stand in total support of
this memorial. Thank you so
much. Senator Stein, born in the
wild friends, I hope you get
time to read this memorial
because, unlike many of the ones
I read it was actually written
by people like the experts who
are testifying today It has
their words in the memorial.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
audience? We have Glenn
Wiggle online. Glenn if you can
hear me, go ahead.
Yeah. Good morning, madam Chair
and senators. My name's Glenn
Weichel. I'm an engineer and
data scientist. I'm also a
former school board member.
That's new. Mexico faces
immediate and existential,
existential threats of time.
climate change. We need science
more than ever to understand how
to protect our land, water and
wildlife for future generations.
as you know, so well with
strapped budget.
Your state agencies struggle to
find and keep talented science
professionals are state science
programs need support from
willing citizens to do their
work to do their best work?
Crowdsourced Science is a proven
solution for reaching reliable
scientific conclusions from data
collected by people with less
side to Vic training, as you see
in front of you, citizen science
engages students enhance on
science projects.
Generating data required to
solve important problems as a
teaching tool. Citizen science
projects are an excellent way to
inspire students to learn more
science and even to inspire them
to pursue a life. Long career
and science. Please pass Palace
Memorial one. Thank you for
listening, right? Thank you.
Would anyone in the audience
like to raise their hand to
indicate support?
And, uh, we didn't have anyone
sign up an opposition Would
anyone like to raise their hands
to indicate opposition?
Saying that I'd be kind of
surprised if we did.
Alright Committee members.
Senator Hermia. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman and thank you to the
world friends for bringing this
forward and as the woman, the
last woman who spoke in the
committee room, talked about you
quoting in here and I want to
read one quote that really stood
out to me is encouraging youth
to be involved in stem science,
technology, engineering and
mathematics and conservation
efforts by bringing out the love
for nature.
And so I'm the chief of staff
for Los Alamos National
Laboratory, and we have a huge
environmental division where we
focus on the environment and
species. And so Senator Doody
Canada unique experience right
before the session started, a
Roadrunner came right up to her
window in my house came into her
house, and so on the pueblos
natives believe that's a sign of
good luck and good fortune. So I
was a little jealous that
happened to her. And so I just
have one question. Whoever wants
to
Literate can
Is. What do you plan to do after
the memorial has done? What will
you do in your community to
enact this memorial to be part
of the solution? What will you
do when you go home?
Personally, I'm trying to get
projects done at school. I have
a whole bunch of wildflower
seeds. I really want to get
planted at school to support
people populations. But as a
school for our class, we're
going in the spring with the
wild friends to state lands to
participate in the pilot project
monitoring bird species, So
that's how we're going to do it
as a class and just really I try
to think of how I could get my
friends more outdoors involved
in nature.
Madam chairwoman. I think that's
a great idea. Senator Stewart
really wants to predict Protect
pollinators. So you talking
about bees and doing that
project? That's something I
think all of us are very
thankful for it. Madam Chair, no
other questions. I just want to
thank you for coming up here.
All four of you did an amazing
job presenting. I'm thankful
you're not running against me
for Senate because I think I'd
be here now. Whole lot of
trouble if you did.
Thank you, madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, senator Neighbor.
Thank you, madam chair and
senator and experts, um
I noticed that the memorial is
specifically directed to this
one program and
I know throughout the state, uh,
there are other organizations
that
Maybe don't do so much of the
science in but do provide vital.
Were helpful services to our
state parks and other public
lands. Uh, federal and state.
Yeah, And I was wondering, Uh,
do we do we have any
opportunities for other groups
that are similar in nature to
this?
Madam chair and members of the
committee. We hope to get other
state agencies involved such as
the game and fish. The Forest
Service, the Bureau of Land
Management and anybody else who
wants to get involved in it.
Thank you, madam. Chair in,
Senator, Um
The
The projects that I personally
have been involved in, Uh
Ah!
Both on some federal lands
specifically wildlife refuge and
state lands, Bottomless Lake
State Park and the young.
Um, man, that, uh
We take out there basically, uh,
have an opportunity to see how
Invasive species like salt
cedars have
Encroached and how they impact
the environment. And why, Uh, we
have undertaken a lot of efforts
to try to reduce and
Keep the invasive species at
bay and and I know that those
those types of species exist
throughout the state.
And so if you're looking at
birds, I heard somebody mention
their interest in birds.
We have a number of challenges
with with respect to maintaining
Certain populations because of
the change of environment due to
Invasive species. We have even
some animals such as feral hogs
that come into areas and changed
the landscape.
And change the ability of that
ecosystem to sustained native
populations of both.
Plants and animals, So I'm
pleased to hear that you all are
studying some of those things
and and hope that you all will
have a better understanding of
how how things work and maybe
some things that we need to do
not only as a state, but, uh, as
even prep private landowners.
What we need to do to
Make sure that we keep
Keep those things in balance.
uh, affect all of us. As the
landscape changes due to
Some
Just
I'd say mistakes, but we didn't
know they were mistakes at the
time we brought in salt cedars
to maybe deal with erosion
control and all of a sudden they
got out of hand. Likewise, some
others they impact farming
operations impact a lot of other
things that we need in society.
So I'm pleased that you all are.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Yeah.
So
Good morning. I'm so sorry. I
missed your presentation. Just
running like crazy this morning.
So, uh, what schools are you all
from?
Madam chairman. Members of the
committee. Um Julian and I are
from the Academy for technology
in the classics and Ashlyn and
Maximo are from Sandoval Academy
of Bilingual Education.
That's great. So so let me ask
you that question about what
friends? I just love wild
friends been working with them
forever. So my best friends or
people who helped the Wild
friends program there they are
sitting in the audience. Um, So
how did your schools get
together to do this
presentation?
What's the interaction between
schools like
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee. Um, there wasn't
really anything like with the
schools working together. It was
mostly wild friends who helped
us put it together and helped
our schools come together.
So, Madam chair, So each of your
schools have a wild friends
program. So how did those
programs interact?
Well, wild friends is a program
based at all. Madam Chair
members of committee. Okay,
Friends is a program based out
of you and M. And so we don't
have a specific wild friends
program at our school.
Although that would be something
that would be wonderful to have.
But essentially, our teachers
were contacted by wild friends
took a vote on what we wanted to
work on and then
Wrote the memorial, etcetera,
etcetera. And then some of us
were asked if we wanted to come.
be expert witnesses and, yeah,
All right. Well, good, nice
organic organization. So, um so
well, Thank you for caring about
this. Thank you for caring about
wildlife.
Ah, I'm pretty frustrated up
here. I've been trying to get
just $50 million into our
wildlife quarters plan. You
know, we have a We spent two
years we have a 700 page plan to
stop wildlife collisions around
this state. We have 11 different
areas of the state or the
highest priorities. Uh, projects
on each of those costs roughly
40 to $50 million each, because
when you're changing
transportation, it's expensive
and it takes planning way ahead
of time. So I'm a little
frustrated that we have once
again failed to put enough money
into the project to fund to even
start the first project, so we
are applying for grants to the
federal government because
there's lots of money for
wildlife quarters at the federal
government, so
We will need your expertise and
and like Senator had, amigo
said, Get busy. We need people
ready to take over from us. Not
him. Me. So thank you, all of
you for bringing this forward
and you two senators type.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Not as much fun as it sounds
like it.
sounds like tell.
Thank you, Senator McKenna.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning. Good morning
colleagues. Good morning,
Senator Stein, Born in wild
friends. I too regret I missed
your presentation. But I love
our technology because I can
watch it on Webcast.
Yes.
So I'm a longtime admirers of
wild friends.
So you you You have me one right
when I saw you on the agenda.
I'm so proud of what the program
does. I think I learned about
wild friends at, um
A post legislative session.
And I was just marveling is so
proud of the Union law school
for what it does.
And, um, I really applaud you
for being
At your age and being fully
engaged, and I can just tell
from your presentation.
That you live this every single
day.
Um
You know, uh
I was at a meeting. I think it
was. It was an Albuquerque City
of Albuquerque, Um, consortium
meeting
And a very, uh
A problem member from Ysleta.
Um, we were talking about the
mountain ranges and how we need
to be very, um
A lot of forethought before we
build.
Things for humans right because
we impact everything around us.
So the problem, members said. We
really need to think about the
Sandia Mountains as a shrine.
A shrine. I really like that
word, because I know when I wake
up in the morning and see them.
They're very centering to me.
Um And then he also said,
because we were talking about
Um
Kind of moving some some areas
and
And bringing in some new, um
residential buildings.
He said. We also need to think
of the earth as a living being.
You know it breathes
And so with that, um, I just
found that those ideas very
comforting. And so I thought I'd
pass them on to. Well, friends,
um, really proud of you. I can
tell that this is going to be a
lifelong endeavor for you. So
thank you for being an
environmental Stewart.
Thank you, Senator.
And so
This is the fourth time that
I've seen wild friends present.
I have to say every time I am so
impressed you all
Frankly usually know our
procedures better than a lot of
us. Do. Uh, you're always
incredibly well prepared,
Incredibly well spoken, Um and I
am really impressed that you
guys actually drafted this
yourself.
Ah, Usually that's people think
that we're up here, actually,
right in the laws were usually
not. It's there's some really
smart folks up upstairs who do a
lot of the writing for us, so
for you all to have actually
drafted. A lot of this
yourselves is incredibly
impressive.
Um
I love that you are. I think one
of the maybe, uh from the lady
from the Sierra Club said that
you're you're leveraging the
expertise of our community.
Uh and I think that is a
fantastic approach.
My have a bunch of brothers and
they all this one is an avid
birder.
And
If getting the benefit of
Everything that he's seeing and
being able to use that in
concrete ways and state
government.
Is just a really smart way to go
about it. They also I think
there's a lot of fun for the
community because they get to
actually be involved and engaged
in these things.
Um
So I think it was Hugo, who had
said you kind of felt kind of
helpless about what's going on
with climate change, and that
this is kind of a concrete way
for you to take action.
Which you're absolutely right.
And I hope that you all keep on
taking these concrete actions
going forward, because that's
what's gonna make a really
significant difference for the
future. And it's only with folks
like you doing exactly what
you're doing here today that we
are going to be able to
meaningfully address climate
change and and have a
A world we all want to live in
in the future.
So I am so sorry that we don't
have a quorum here today. And so
we can't actually take a vote on
your memorial right now. Um, but
what I will do is I'll try to
see if I can
Wrangle up a couple of votes
outside of the once once we end
and see if we can at least get
get this passed out onto the
floor for you, but thank you and
and and next year we will
schedule you before the next to
last day, so that we don't have
some of these, uh
Practical issues that we end up
having it at the end of this
session, But thank you all so so
much for taking the time to do
this and taking the time to come
up here and educate us. This is
really as wild friends really
is. I think that usually the
best part of rules every year,
So thank you so much Mention
Senator Stewart.
So you know we could move do
pass and then vote on it. And
then you'd have the start of
your paper that you're probably
taking around on the floor and
getting everybody else to sign
on to it, So I moved to pass,
All right. Um, any objections?
See none.
You don't quite have a do pass
yet, but, uh but we will. We
will contact some of our other
member's and and record their
votes as well. Thank you all so
much.
All right, and I think we are
doing on the floor now so that
rules is in recess. Oh, and
actually real fast. You all can
go everyone, because this is the
last meeting of rules. I just
want to take a minute to think.
All of our fantastic staff. You
all have been amazing this
session. You guys are the reason
