Good morning, everybody. Thank
you for being here this morning.
We're gonna get started in just
a minute. Uh, with
confirmations. But I wanted to
announce we had put bills on the
agenda, uh, cause at the time we
weren't sure if all the regions
were gonna be able to be here
this morning. They are, so there
is a, there's almost no chance
that we're gonna be getting to,
to any bills today for anyone
who was here for bills. Um,
also,
Anytime there are 2 mics on in
here at the same time. The folks
online are hearing uh a lot of
echo. So please, when you are
not, anytime you're not
speaking, please make sure that
your mic is off, uh, and that
includes our, our presenters at
the table as well, but we're
just waiting for our sponsor to
arrive and then we will get
started with uh the confirmation
confirmation of Victor Reyes.
And
here.
Good morning members. I am here
this morning, uh, for the
reappointments of Victor Reyes
to the University of New Mexico
Board of Regent student
position.
Uh, I was honored to carry this.
appointment back in February
2024. Uh, Mr. Reyes is someone I
personally have worked with and
he's worked for me over the
years.
And it's exactly the kind of
person I think that we want
serving on our border regions.
What's nice about the
reappointment is he can now talk
a little bit about what he's
been doing at the university and
I'll turn that over to him in
just a minute.
Uh, he is, uh, at the University
of New Mexico School of Law.
Uh, scheduled to
Graduate in 2026.
And is in the top 8 in his
class, uh, this past summer, he
Uh, worked as an intern for US
District Court Judge Kathleen
Cardo in the Western District of
Texas, uh, prior to law school,
he was the deputy.
Superintendent of the
regulations and licensing
department from November 2021 to
January 2023. Uh, he served as a
legislative director for
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham,
on November 2018 to January
2021.
Uh, and prior to that, uh,
worked.
Uh, for the Democratic caucus
and worked in our office when I
first became majority leader 9
years ago. So I certainly know,
Victor well and think this is a
great reappointment, and I think
it would be appropriate to yield
to him and get an update on what
he's been doing. Uh, he's
currently vice chair of the
Student Success Teaching and
Research Committee at on the
Regent's vice chair of the audit
and compliance committee as a
member of the finance and
facilities Committee. So with
that I yield to Mr. Reyes.
Worth, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, it's very, it's
an honor to be in front of all
of you again today. Um, last
year serving on the board of
Regents representing students
has been one of the greatest
honors of my life, and it's an
honor that I've taken extremely
seriously. Um,
One of the benefits of having
had the experience that I've had
both starting in the Senate
caucus, um, you know, working
under some of the, you know,
greatest minds of, of the
finance and the budgeting
process and then going on and
running, helping run a
department, um, when I was at
regulation and licensing and
working the legislative process,
um, for the administration is
having that experience and it
gives me the opportunity to look
at the budgets that gets put in
front of me with a very
critical, which I think is what
the, what the, what the citizens
of New Mexico with the students
of the University of New Mexico
deserve, knowing what that
fiduciary duty and that
responsibility means. And so
I've
made, I think, a, a reputation
for myself as being one of the
people that sits down, looks at
the numbers and looks at what
that means for the lives of our
students, whether that means and
what it costs to get healthcare
services on campus. What it
means to make sure that the
basic needs of our students are
medicine that the programs are
supported at their adequate
levels. And so being able to be
that voice for students, having
that experience, I think has
been a great benefit to the
university and one that I'm very
proud to be a part of. Um, I'm
very
regards to serve as vice chair
of the Student Success
Committee, the STA Committee,
which looks at looks at student
issues, technology, research,
and in that committee, we look
at everything from student
outcomes, which we just spoke
about.
last semester to our graduation
to the programs, making sure
that students have the support
they need. Uh, I'd love and I'd
be honored to continue to do
that work, um, I stand open for
any questions. I hope that the
members here know that I'm
committed to being accessible
and open and transparent and I'm
a straight shooter, um, it's the
way that Senator Wirth and
others taught me to be and it's
the way that I will be for the
rest of my career.
OK. Thank you, senator. Thank
you, Mr. Reyes. We have one
person signed up to speak in
support, uh, Kristen Elder, who
I believe is on Zoom.
Hi, thank you all, um.
Or giving, giving me this chance
this morning we're having,
we're, we're, we're not getting
very clear. We can't hear you
very well.
Let me, um
Let me try.
Using an earbuds to see if that
helps.
Can you
Can you hear me now? You know,
try, try turning off your
It looks like you don't
necessarily have video on, but
um
there's anything you can
Can turn off and still have
audio on, try that.
OK, I'm I'm sure. I don't, I
don't know if I did sign up
appropriately, but I believe um
the president of the graduate
Professional Students
Association maybe associated
students of New Mexico might be
here today. I know that he was
trying to make it up for class.
Sure. So why don't we go ahead
with him while while Miss Elder
figures out.
Uh, the audio on her end. Thank
you.
honorable members of the
committee, um, my name is
Michelle Rivera Ramirez, and I'm
the uh president of the graduate
and professional Student
Association at the University of
New Mexico. So we are the
graduate student governments,
uh, at the university in New
Mexico and um I would like to
speak in support of Regen raise
as, uh, you know, uh, to
continue his tenure as regent.
Uh, the reason for um me
speaking in support is because
Uh, I have worked with uh
Victor, not only at the
university and in Mexico in my
capacity, but I'm also a 3rd
year law student, so
It's been an honor and a
pleasure to work with them.
Um
You know, uh, today is a Monday,
and um I know for many of the
attorneys when you guys were in
law school, um,
You know, when you guys got a
free day, you know, you would
make the best of it and um
I use this free day to come up
here to Santa Fe to speak in
support of Victor because it
really is important to not only
Graduate students, uh, in my
capacity of representing them,
but also all students at the
university in New Mexico because
Victor is very open to hearing
out the issues that uh
All students based at the
university in Mexico, which are
many.
And uh
has always been open to anybody
who
brings up an issue whether it's
at the border regions or to him
in person. He is always an
approachable person, and
somebody that is really easy to
talk to, and I think those are
very important qualities to have
in a leader.
And in a region of
Flagship institution of the
university of New Mexico.
Uh
So
To reiterate, I think Victor is
a great fit for a student
region, uh, at the university in
New Mexico for the qualities of
being very open and be very
caring about the issues of
students.
Uh, at the university in New
Mexico. So, with that being
said, thank you very much.
Thank you.
I want to try for over again.
Silver, go ahead. It looks like
you're muted right now. There
you go.
OK. I, can you hear me OK? I've
switched my phone.
You know, I think it's a problem
on our end, um.
Go, go ahead briefly and, and
we'll, we'll
We'll try to figure out, try to,
try to make it out. Thank you.
OK.
Well, I'm just calling in in
order to support Victor's.
Um, nomination or renomination I
guess. Um, my name is Doctor
Chris Elder. I'm faculty senate
president at the University of
New Mexico. And in that role,
I've had the opportunity to work
with Victor, not only in his
role as co-chair of the Board of
Regents SA Committee with the
focus on student success.
But, um, in my role as an
advisor to the Board of Regents
as well.
And I have always, in addition
to everything everybody else has
said, I have always been so
impressed by how smart,
thoughtful, and insightful
picture is he doesn't.
Walk into a room or
In a meeting with his mind
already made up.
Um, he asks really great
questions. He makes sure all
voices are heard, uh, before he
weighs in on uh something him
himself, uh, you know, after
doing his own.
Due diligence and research, he
still keeps an open mind to make
sure he has heard from.
From all voices, and he's not
only a leader on UNM campus.
He's a leader in our local
community and within the state,
and I hope
support, support him in this uh
renomination. Thank you.
OK. Thank you, Doctor Elder. All
right, we did not have anyone
sign up in opposition. We will
go to members of the committee.
I have Senator Townsend first on
the list, who else would like to
be on the list.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, to
see you again, Victor.
Um
One question that I think has
come up that
I
you go
You have the opportunity to
address that.
You have been involved
politically with the governor uh
and I've worked for her and, and
I'm happy to report that I've
had the opportunity to work with
you as well, but I know that has
brought some questions up and I
would give you the opportunity
to address that and, and how it
may or may not influence your
your role as a regent.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
I, I appreciate that question.
Um, you know, I was honored to
have the opportunity to work uh
in the administration, I think
that I was able to do a lot of
really important work for the
state of New Mexico, but it
wasn't just because of the
people who were on the 4th
floor. It was in large part
because of people who serve in
the legislature that I was able
to do, being able to have that
dual role where I was both a
person who was accessible and
accountable to the New Mexico
State legislature, both the
In the Senate. And, you know,
and was able to bridge that
bridge, be that bridge to the
administration and also a bridge
to all of the constituents that
each and every one of you
represented was one of the
biggest, um, responsibilities
that I've ever shouldered and
one that I took very seriously,
and I'm very proud of the work
that I did. I hope, Senator,
that you felt that when you were
the minority leader that I did
everything I could to try to
bridge those gaps and try to
make sure that the minority
voice
was always respected and it was
always heard.
I'll also say that.
The student region position is a
very unique one. It must, in
order to get to be for me to be
before you today, I had to be
nominated by the by one of the
student bodies, student
government organizations, then
be subsequently nominated by the
president of the university,
then the governor and then to be
at to be sitting at this table
here before you today. I'm
really proud that I have my
colleague, Mr. Rivera, President
Rivera here today. I know that,
um, that Anthony Tomaevsky, uh,
I think was trying to make it
here today, but
I know that he has communicated
that I had to support. I've
always been accessible to the
undergraduate student body,
office hours, attending student
government meetings. Um, it's
just my brand of leadership.
It's who I am, um, I and it's
and it's something that, you
know, regardless of what my
political affiliation is,
regardless of what my background
is, I serve the students of the
University of New Mexico. The
fact that, um.
I also have, you know, Chris
Elder, the president of the
Faculty Senate speaking on my
behalf is, is another great
honor because.
I think that
When you become a regent, you
have to hear everybody.
And the success of of everybody.
I believe in having winners and
winners, and that's always what
what I've, what I've tried to
do, I've always tried to to be
that person, the the things that
I've been able to accomplish
some of my proudest legislative
kind of um partnerships have
been with members of the
minority, and it's, and I, and I
hope that that continues, I've,
you know, I was very honored to
have.
Um, the support last
confirmation from members of
the, of the New Mexico Senate.
And uh and I hope that that
continues and and I'll, and I'll
work every day to earn that
support.
Madam Chan and uh
Senator Worth, Victor, I would
uh.
I would tell you that I believe
that to be true. Um.
I, um
When I was minority leader in
the house. We worked together on
more than one occasion.
And you didn't always get me the
answer that I wanted.
But, uh, you always were
responsive, and I appreciated
that.
Oh
One of the other things that I
think is
It is important to me is that
Um, Madam Chair, uh, senator.
Mr. Reyes is the
On, on campuses across
The United States today.
Providing a safe learning.
Experience.
To
Um
Many
Different action
A letter to the President of UNM
not too long ago.
Stressing the fact that
With um,
With the just population on, on
her campus that I expected her
to provide a safe atmosphere.
For them. I'm not Jewish.
But I would have written the
same letter for almost any.
Um, group because
I think it is crucial that our
universities provide that.
Do you see that as being
something that is equally
important to you, and do you
believe the university has
upheld that responsibility.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
it is extremely important that
every single student at the
University of New Mexico feels
safe. You have a right to feel
safe in your classroom, you have
a right to feel safe on your on
your on your campus. And that's
something that I'm absolutely
committing to doing whenever I
can. I'll tell you that I'm also
not a member of the Jewish
faith, but it was uh last
semester, I was honored to be
invited and attended a.
a Sabbath celebration with um
the Jewish Jewish student
organization on campus. It was a
very um meaningful thing to have
that invitation, and I hope that
it made them know that I, you
know, that I will always be
there for every single student.
No one deserves to feel unsafe,
um, and I do believe that the
university that we've done a
good job of making sure that
everything we do keeps that
safety of every single student
in mind.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair, thank you, Mr. Senator.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, Senator Wirth.
Thank you for joining us. Um,
Mr. Reyes, I wanted to tell you
that I really appreciate that
last answer that you just gave
Senator Townsend. You are well
rooted within the Democratic
Party, both with political
campaigns and officially, and
when we balance that with an
appointment to a flagship
university that is meant to
represent all New Mexicans, it's
very important that what you
just said that you will, you
will give fair consideration
that those political
considerations aren't going to
interfere with your duty to
represent the
the best interests of all
students. I thought that was a
fantastic answer you just gave.
My question is actually, perhaps
for, for Senator worth more or
even our chair may know is, is
really the timeline of this
student regent position. So, uh,
how long is this appointment?
Madam Chair, Senator, um, it is
2, it's a 2-year appointment.
It's a 2 year. That clarifies
things a little bit. I was
thinking maybe it was a 4, and
so if a student were to graduate
because this is a reappointment.
How does that work with student
appointments on that region.
Does the student have to be
continually and a full-time
student of the university if
they leave, do we then reappoint
someone to that position.
You know, Senator, I, I feel
like we had this come up, uh, in
the past, and I think that there
was they carried over even
though they had graduated, but
it was a priority to get them
replaced.
With someone who who was a
current student.
That's interesting. Thank you,
I am, I am reaching into the,
the dregs of my memory for that,
it could be incorrect. OK, thank
you guys. That's it, that's all.
All right, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
So happy to see you here,
Victor, um.
Uh, you've grown so much since,
uh, we tried to teach you a few
years ago how to do stuff.
So, uh.
And, and I mean that seriously.
I mean, you've really um uh gone
to the next level in your
education and in your um
Your understanding and knowledge
of politics and your responses
to it, so I just appreciate
that.
But I actually have a question
for you about your time as a
regent.
Uh, and that is
I'm wondering if the regents
have ever discussed.
The issue at the state that I've
been working on forever.
And that is
How are we preparing teachers in
the college of education to
actually teach students how to
read.
Um, so, have you all ever talked
about that? Has it ever come up?
Because certainly, um, you, the,
the colleges of education have
had a directive, uh, from
numerous.
Of our cabinet secretaries and
education, especially the last
two, and I'm just wondering what
the response has been at the
region level, if, if you can
discuss any of that.
Certainly, Madam Chair, Senator
Stewart, um, yes, absolutely,
that's something that comes up
when we talk about what the most
uh where our investments need to
go and what, in what places we
need to go, and I hope that this
next this budget coming upcoming
budget will be the first that
I've had the chance to work from
the beginning process through
it, and certainly, um, in our
school of education, college of
education, making sure that that
Those investments targeted,
making sure that literacy and
literacy preparation is a
priority is something that I'm
very passionate about and I and
I know that you are, and last
year when I was sitting in this
chair, it's something that I I
mentioned and it's it's a
commitment that I, I fully
intend to hopefully see through.
And so, and if you don't feel
that that's, um, being
sufficiently done at the
University of New Mexico, please
give me a call, and I would love
to connect you and and have a
sit sit down conversation with
whoever it is that we need to
talk to to make sure that we are
all on the same page because
again it's.
The success of the University of
New Mexico is the success of New
Mexico, which is why this
university is so important and.
That includes making sure that
we are having the educators
prepared to make sure that we
have a literate. Well, I, I very
much appreciate that answer. Um,
some of the deans of college,
uh, uh.
Of education has been telling
our current uh secretary
designee that
We better put it in statute
because they're just not doing
it, Professors are just not
taking up the mantle of using
the science of reading, so we're
doing that.
And, uh, putting in statute,
what needs to happen. There's
always pushback.
From us telling professors what
to do. That's how they feel
about it. We know better than
you. Stop telling us what to do,
uh.
But, uh, we have struggled year
over year over year, uh, we have
now, uh,
Given.
Almost all of our K through 5
grade teachers training that's
called Letters Language
Essentials for teachers of
reading and spelling, uh, what
they say to us is this is the
best.
Uh, professional development
I've ever had. Why didn't I
learn this in college.
So that's where we're at right
now. Why are they not learning
it in college. I really
appreciate your comments about
that, and I hope you continue to
talk up in positive nature about
what we're doing cause, uh, some
higher ed will not like what
we're doing. And it's really the
last resort is to get the
college of education to produce
teachers that will teach reading
day one. So thank you for your
answers. Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Sandra Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
And uh thank you, Senator Wirth
for sponsoring Mr. Reyes, uh,
Mr. Reyes, I think you're lucky
to have Senator we sponsor you.
I have come to.
I get to know Senator Worth and
respect him, and I think having
him by your side is uh.
It was a very, very good idea.
Um, I have just one, there's one
thing in your questionnaire
here, and it, it doesn't have an
example, but let me just, I just
saw this.
Let me just read your question
17 real quick.
Have you or any entity uh in
which you were held in interest,
uh uh interest.
Ever filed a petition of
bankruptcy or a petition of
bankruptcy filed against you.
You said no and yes in here I
can show you that. I'm just
curious why there's two answers
on question 17. Is the answer
no? The answer is no. There must
have been a typo. I'm sorry. I
was, I was doing that while also
trying to study for my exam at
the same time. So my apologies.
No, the answer is no. No,
appreciate that, uh, Mr. Reyes.
I want to thank you for coming
by the office.
For a very in-depth conversation
for about 2 minutes is all we
had.
Well, thank you for that. Um,
Law school, you're very busy,
are you not in law school? I am
in law school, yeah
Law school, you're very busy,
are you not in law school? I am
in law school,
over here somewhere.
Uh, come in, um, speak on your
behalf.
You know, as a student region,
Um, how would you?
Um
Coordinate
Partner with the undergrads at,
at UNM being in law school.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, I
appreciate that that question
very much, um.
So
I'll start off with the, with
the being the being busy and
just, just be quick because I
want to get through your yeah,
so I, so the way that I do it is
I just make sure that I'm on, on
the, on main campus as much as I
can be, I'm there most day, all
day every Friday, and I have
office hours, uh, depending on
what folks' schedule is that
semester. I met, I met, I began
my the this academic calendar
year, meeting with the associate
students of the University of
New Mexico, the undergraduates.
you, Mr. Reyes. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So you have office hours
and that's how you plan to do
that. Yes, sir that's good for
me. OK.
Um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Reyes, what,
what issues since this is a
reappointment and you've already
have been in the position, what
issues have the students been
talking about?
With you that are, that are a
priority for them.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, one
of the big ones that I'm, uh,
that's really on my, the front
of my radar right now is the
cost of student health services,
um, and making sure that that
remains an accessible like an
accessible service for students,
um, the basic making sure the
basic needs, everything from
making sure that the local food
pantry has the adequate
resources that are there, uh,
making sure that our faculty,
you know, one of the things that
it's interesting, you would
think that these would be maybe
exclusive issues, but students
really care about being able to
attract.
and retain qualified faculty
because they want that level of
education. And so that's been an
issue that I've been very
adamant about uh making sure
it's a priority, but there's any
number, and I, you know, we only
had 2 minutes this morning, but
I, I wanna have a longer
conversations with you about
some of these issues if, if
you'd be interested. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Reyes, absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You
know, you said something, um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Reyes, to
Senator Townsend that, that
really caught my ear.
You said, quote,
You have to hear everybody,
unquote, and I greatly
appreciate that.
Because I feel in this country,
if we're not talking to each
other and we have different
political views or stances on
whatever issue.
That's uh.
That divides us more than it
brings us together and talking
to people about our issues and
our differences, I believe it's
a good thing for the country,
it's a good thing for the state.
It's a good thing for the
university, it's a good thing
for our young people, I think
you would agree with that,
correct? I would agree, yes.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um,
When you mention the word safe,
safe is not about free speech,
Madam, Madam Chair, Mr. Reyes is
I think, Madam Chair, Senator, I
think, uh, I think safety is,
is, is encompassing. I think
people feeling like they can
express their opinions, could be
um a way that students feel
safe. Um, but I think it's a
much more broad encompassing
terms. It covers everything from
making sure that we have
sufficient campus officers to
make sure that, you know, that,
that our students feel safe
walking back to to their cars,
um, and
that you know that that level of
free speech doesn't get to the
point where if people do not
feel like they can walk to class
uh without, you know, the fear
of being targeted. So it's, it's
very encompassing, but I would
say that free speech is maybe a
component of that. Thank you,
Mr. y. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I would agree. I would also
agree, and I hope you would that
the exchange, uh, Madam Chair,
Mr. Reyes, the exchange of of
ideas.
Is free speech should be
protected.
And it's not a safety issue,
whether, you know, you and I
agree about
Everything from baseball to
constitutional rights to foreign
policy, to welfare reform, to so
many different issues.
Those type of ideas, that's not
safe, that's a free exchange of
ideas protected under the
Constitution. Would you agree
with that, Mr. Reyes?
Madam Chair, Senator, I think we
can call it uh many things we
can call it different things,
but I think we both agree on the
basic, the, the basic premise
that folks should have the right
to speak freely and express them
regardless of what that that
viewpoint might be, and people
also need to be able to feel
safe and so I'm not sure if we'd
agree maybe on on everything
that is encompassed within one
term, but, um, I think we agree.
I think we've at the foundation,
we agree. OK, that's the answer
I'm looking for. Thank you, Mr.
Rees, Madam Chair. You know, um,
Senator
and brought up Jewish students.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, Mr. Reyes,
I don't know if you know this,
but
My family on my dad's side is
Jewish, very deep Jewish roots.
Paskenazi.
Uh, when I was
Um, lieutenant colonel over in
Europe, I get to visit
Auschwitz.
I get vision uh Dachau and um.
I never really
took um
Really into deep account my
Jewish roots until I walk
through the barracks.
Walk through
The, uh, the gas chambers, uh,
the ovens.
Uh, where potentially my
ancestors may have been killed.
And I bring that up because
we've seen a radicalization on
campuses.
Uh, with
Palestinian movement.
threatening a Jewish students
here at UNM and across the
country.
My question to you, uh, Mr.
Reyes, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Reyes, did you speak out
publicly?
In support of Jewish students
and against
The threats and the radical
violence that they
had that was well reported even
at UNM against Jewish students.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, I
spoke out in making sure that we
were doing everything we could
to so that everybody was safe.
I represent
Ah, I, you know, I think, you
know, one of the things that I
mentioned, I represent all
students, and but that doesn't
mean that one students, one
group of students should make
another group of students feel
uncomfortable. The way that I
made sure that our Jewish
students had felt supported, was
meeting with them individually,
making sure that they had the
resources that they needed in
order to to feel safe.
Going and breaking bread with
them on the Sabbath, making sure
that I was able to show that I
was supported and that they
belong to a university where
they felt that they belonged. I
appreciate that, Mr. Reyes,
Madam Chair, you know, because
it reminds me, uh, back in I
think the late 70s when and and
again, um, the Nazis
demonstrated in Skokie, in
Chicago Jewish community.
Um
I obviously do not favor their
political viewpoints or anything
or
Or any of the radical viewpoints
that I've seen from the, the
Palestinian movement, Madam
Chair Victor Reyes, because
I will tell you in Afghanistan
when I was there doing
humanitarian missions for Muslim
people and half my life saved by
my Muslim interpreter has a
profound impact on me.
And I would also want to let you
know that I support
Groups, no matter how disgusting
they are.
To demonstrate
Under their constitutional
rights, which I fought for and
protected for over 25 years in
in service.
For them to do that, and I would
hope you would feel, uh, the
same, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Reyes.
Madam Chair, senator, I, I, I
believe that everybody has the
right to express themselves, um,
and I, and I understand that
university campuses are one of
the places where our students
feel the most empowered and safe
to be able to do to do that
expression. And so I'll continue
to support that. Thank you, Mr.
Reyes, Madam Chair. Then lastly,
you know, UNM was in national
news when Riley Gaines came to
um UNM and I didn't get a chance
to talk to you about this, but
I, I looked it up real quick
when you said you have to hear
everybody.
Turning Point USA was turned
away from UNM. It's a
conservative, um, student group
led by a man named, uh, Mr.
Charlie Kirk.
And they were turned away from
UNM, um, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Mr. Reyes, do you know why they
were turned away from UNM?
Madam Chair, Senator B block, I
believe that that was before my
time, but what I do know is that
following that incident and I'm
I'm trying to be careful because
I, I think there might be
pending litigation on that,
which I'm would be, uh, which I
would be um unable to speak
about directly, but what I will
say is that
Following that incident, one of
the things that we are making
sure is that student groups,
regardless of um what
affiliations they might have,
um, or perceptions people might
have of them even that they have
the space that they need to to
participate on campus.
Madam Chair. Well, Madam Chair,
Mrs, when did you get to UNM?
When did I begin at UNM? I
began last fall, so not fall of
24, but fall of 23.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Reyes, uh, this event happened
during your time there.
And I don't believe, Madam Chair
or Mr. Reyes, uh, that is
pending litigation anymore since
the case was, uh, UNM lost.
Because it turned out that UNM
was charging uh conservative
groups.
Uh, money for security fees and
they didn't charge other groups,
uh, which uh was a violation of
the Constitution, uh, Madam
Chair, Mr. Reyes, do you agree
with that ruling? I, I agree
that students shouldn't be held
to pay disparate fees for for
their participation on campus.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Reyes, and then, uh, just lastly
here, uh.
Madam Chair, Riley Gaines was
physically
Violently attacked by students
at UNM and had to be removed and
go into an area where she could
be protected.
Did you speak out publicly
against the violence and the
threats against Ms. Gaines.
Senator, Madam Chair, Senator,
um, I, I did, I did not, uh,
while it was not.
Again, I was at the University
of New Mexico, but I don't what
I meant, and I apologize for
misspeaking, but I think I meant
to say was I wasn't on the board
of regents at the time, um.
I, I don't believe in violence.
Or attacking or certainly,
especially when it comes to
physical violence, it's one of
the things that I've worked very
hard on in the Board of Regents
just to make sure that we have
the policies in place. I asked
to be on the audit committee in
part because I think making sure
having that fiduciary
responsibility is important, but
also because the audit committee
looks at the um dean of
students, that office,
disciplinary, hazing, Title 9,
you know, any number of issues
that go before that committee,
and I wanted to make sure that
we were creating a campus.
In a community where everybody
was felt safe and nobody felt
targeted by violence, including
our guests. Thank you for that,
Mr. Reyes, Madam Chair. Um,
again, just real quick, I'll,
I'll ask you, um.
And I don't want to say yes, no,
cause I hate it when members of
the committee ask or tell a
witness yes or no, uh, Madam
Chair, Mr. Reyes, um, and by the
way, your resume is most
impressive, most impressive, I
really like it a lot and I like
you as a person personally we
met.
I had a nice conversation in the
office that we'll keep quiet.
Um,
But will you today?
Will you today, Mister Ayes,
Madam Chair, Mr. Reyes.
Will you
Condemn
The violence
That students at UNM.
Uh, perpetrated against Jewish
students.
Uh, Riley Gaines and other
groups.
Their free speech to demonstrate
under the Constitution of the
First Amendment.
Protected by many Americans, who
sacrificed their lives.
Will you condemn those acts of
violence against Jewish students
from Palestinian radicals and
against from those radicals that
threaten violence against Riley
Gaines.
Madam Chair, Senator.
I think the the the
I think it's just to, I think
the best way for me to do this
would to be to say, I think that
violence, whether it's on a
university campus, whether it's
in a community, uh, community
organization, wherever it is, no
one should feel that they are
the victim of violence. And I
think that I, I feel very
strongly about speaking out
against violence against against
everybody. Thank you, Mr. Reyes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
will say that this country
Has radicals on both sides, Mr.
Reyes.
That have done some awful things
when I think of some of our
history, Madam Chair, Mr. Reyes,
in Greenwich Village.
Back in the 1970s with the gay
uh gay community, what happened
there?
Um
In the south
The 50s and 60s that we saw.
Fire hoses and dogs and
lynchings.
Um, I think, and I believe Mr.
Reyes, and you can agree or not,
I hope you agree that no matter
what your political position is.
What your opinion is.
We should all
Respect everyone's right under
the Constitution, no matter how
much we vehemently disagree.
With their stance on an issue as
long as they're being nonviolent
when they threaten violence or
commit violence, Mr. Madam
Chair, Mr. Reyes.
That's a different issue for me,
as what happened on the campus
of UNM and what's going on
around campuses of of this, this
country.
Um
I'll just say, Madam President,
Madam Chair, and um.
Mr. Reyes, that
I think you have a phenomenal
resume.
I think you're a good man.
We have disagreements
politically.
But who really cares in the
grand scheme of things? We both
bleed American red, and we both
love this country.
And I think uh having Senator
Wirth next to you?
There is a lot of weight with
me, and I look forward to
getting to know you. I would ask
that you really speak out and
protect those students.
Uh, that have had violence
committed against them or
threats, uh, directed at them.
And uh
I hope I have your commitment on
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Reyes.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gayos.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
was Senator Worth, uh, and, and
there are some questions I had
that you've already answered.
You're doing a great job. I'm
also impressed with your resume.
Uh, and I'm gonna lump.
Two questions. I actually had 3
on a on education, but I'm gonna
love these two together, so it's
just trying to get an
understanding of your
background, your experiences,
and how it's gonna help at UNM.
Uh, one of the things on your
resume is livestock board and um
Being in El Paso, I didn't know
how you got on livestock or, but
it's good. I think uh I, I
appreciate ranching farming, but
I'm looking at from it and
cultural capital outlay, uh,
council.
Uh, on your experiences there,
your duties, and what you've
done on those two organizations,
how does that relate to what
you're doing as a student
region.
Madam Chair, Senator Gay goes, I
appreciate that question, um.
I'm very proud to be first and
foremost on the livestock board.
I do come from an A family, um,
and that is very and my, my
family, um, has, uh, a ranch in
New Mexico, um, and so that is
something that we are all very
proud of. Um, my, my extended
family does and my uncles and my
cousins, um, and I, like I said,
I, I grew up in an A family, so
something I'm very proud of, I
asked to be on that committee
because I understand the
importance that the livestock
industry plays to the state of
New Mexico, and the way that I
use my
experience there is making sure
that.
The rulemaking, the policy
process, if that's something
that I can be helpful with to
make sure that the success of
the industry, and also just to
be an advocate, you know, I, I
like to leverage my knowledge of
communities across the state.
I've been in the, I've been in
every, you know, every, every,
I've been in every county in the
state of New Mexico, and I'm
very proud of that. There's not
a county that I can go to in the
state where I can't call
somebody up that I know, uh, for
a cup of coffee for
conversation, and people still,
even after I left the governor's
office, still call me and ask.
need to have for help navigating
their issues.
And I will never not answer that
call. I'll never try to not get
back to people. And it's if I
can help them in any way, I
always will. And so that's the,
the attitude and the commitment
that I bring to the livestock
Board.
Um, the public school Kalopo
council,
the um.
The, the other committees that
I've served that I've had the
honor of serving to you, I
chaired the um the I shared the
um public capital LA council at
at uh the DFA does as well, um.
And I think that understanding
of the importance of capital, of
how capital gets funded, of how
projects get done is very
important. One of our priorities
right now at the University of
New Mexico is creating the
infrastructure that we need to
have the healthcare workforce
that our state that our state
expects and demands, um, and so
that has a huge capital
component that I hope to ask him
when I'll take this self this
selfish plug to be able to plug
for that capital project for the
University of New Mexico. I
think it's a game changer for
the state and I'm very proud to
support it.
Very proud to be um part of the
team on that, um, but having
that understanding of the way
capital projects get start from
start to finish. I think it's
something that is a, it's a
unique skill set, I think for a
lot of regions, and I think it's
an important one that I come
into this uh this job with.
Thanks, uh, Madam Chan,
um, vice chair and then Senator
Worth, uh, and, and I, and, and,
and reading through your detail,
looks like you're building.
Taking building blocks and, and,
uh, going in a great direction,
so, uh, and, and I am not a
Democrat, so it, uh
Sort of uh
I, I think I'm, I'm curious on
how you're doing this, but I do
want to tell you there's one
point when you're running for
Congress that I would have voted
for you, you know, take your
quote, uh, you'd put, I'm
running for Congress because I
don't think that we can wait for
change any longer. If our CD3, I
would have voted for you. I'm CD
too, but I agree with you, we
can't wait for change any
longer, but I appreciate what
you're doing, and Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, I will yield. Thank
you, Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Mr. Hayes.
Um,
New Mexico has one of the
highest rates of, uh, student
loan defaults in the nation.
What
What can or what, what should,
should the Board of Regents be
doing anything to address that.
And if so, what?
Absolutely, um, well, first, I
think making sure that tuition
remains accessible and
affordable. You know, the
opportunity scholarship is, is
is an incredible tool and asset
and something that I was proud
to help at the beginning, you
know, um, I was, I worked with
Senator Smith to help get the
the beginning, the building
blocks of that embedded within
the budget, um, and so I was
very proud of, of my work to
work with him to get that done.
But it's not enough. It doesn't
cover every single student, and
it certainly doesn't cover
graduate students, um, and you
know, I'm somebody that I pay
the full cost of tuition out of
pocket, and so I feel it very
heavy, and I feel whenever I
have to take out a loan, I feel
it, and it hurts, and I, and I
know what that means about
compounding interest and so
making sure that one, those
tuition, that tuition remains
affordable, that we don't stack
on any fees or um added costs
that are going to end up
amounting and then make
sure that we're leveraging every
single scholarship dollar at the
end, um, to make sure that we're
covering what we can, even if
it's backfilling on the back
end. I don't think that we
should have one single dollar of
accessible funds that doesn't
get expelled and given to
students, um, even, even if that
period is done, even if nobody's
applied to it, it's our job to
find those individuals. Um, I'm
very proud to be working with
the graduate Professional
Student Association, this
session on passing the graduate
scholarship Act, which is going
to extend the ability.
For students to use that
graduate scholarship act to
cover for the full cost of
attendance at a graduate
program, um, but
Some of the people that have to
pay tuition are some of the
people that have the hardest
time doing so. And so continuing
to look at that way and
analyzing who's not getting
covered, why are they not
getting covered and what do we
have available to cover those
costs is something that I, um,
it's, it's a big part of my
portfolio of work on the student
success, technology and research
Committee.
Thank you, I appreciate that
answer. Um,
So the university gets
significant uh state funding,
um, and we're also seeing uh
financial mismanagement
scandals, uh, popping up in in
the news. What what financial
oversight reforms, uh, do you
think are necessary?
I take, uh, you know, I've said
it several times today, but I
take my fiduciary role very
seriously. And I think that
Um, and it's, and I'm very lucky
that I have the budget uh
experience and expertise to be
able to be part of that
financial oversight. It's why I
asked to be on the budget
committee, it's why I asked to
be the vice chair of the audit
committee because I think it's
the most important job that we
can do, um, and so,
I think this, I think that I
think efforts to vet and make
sure that people, when we're
sitting in this chair,
understand that fiduciary
responsibility is what I would
recommend of this body, make
sure that they do, um, and that
they look at those numbers that
they don't just that they, that
their mission is not to be
agreeable.
But to be, um, but to be
thorough.
And to be comprehensive whenever
a number comes across their,
their, their um their desk
because these numbers have
faces, they have names, and it
is public dollars, which means
public trust, and, uh, you know,
I, I, I, it's again something
that is of the utmost importance
for me.
Can you repeat your question,
Senator? I'm apologize and I had
my microphone off too.
So, uh,
So UNM puts a lot of money into
athletics, um, but there are
still some academic programs
that are underfunded.
As a regent, how do you approach
striking that balance
to try to strike, um, I will say
that
I recognize the importance of
athletics, um, not only.
Does it, do I think that the
success of athletics increases
the values of the degrees that
we all earn, um, and it has the
ability to be a great form of
marketing and communication for
us, and it's also just part of
the student experience, right?
One of the things that I hear as
the student region is, is how
important student athletics are
to our students and how, you
know, I'll tell you that the
most emails I've ever gotten
were when we were in transition
between athletic directors and
people wanted to make sure that
we got that decision right, uh,
students in particular, but I
also make want to make sure that
our academics are funded at
appropriate levels. And so
striking that balance is a um,
is it time staking process, and
I think it just goes, you can't
look at one thing in isolation.
You've got to look at what the
returns are, what we're getting
back from athletics, what we're
getting back, um, that we could
then be investing. And I hope to
one day put our that our
athletics program is on the path
to where, um, their
self-sustaining, they're
they're, they are living off of
their returns. I know that
that's gonna also take.
Investment, but
It should never come, but any
programming, you know, should
never come at the cost of the
the quality of education that we
do, so.
For me, I, I guess the answer
would be just making sure that
our academic programs have the
support and the resources they
need and that be the the that
that that side of the house has
the first bite of the apple.
Right. Thank you very much. And
I will also thank you, uh,
Members, I, I got in a car
accident a couple of years ago.
My back's been kind of messed up
ever since, and I bought the
most horrendously heavy massage
chair ever, uh, and, and Regent
Reyes very kindly helped me move
it.
And it was miserable for
everyone involved, um, and I
just got to sit there and watch
cause of my bad back, so thank
you for that as well.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stefani.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, I moved the reappointment
of Victor Reyes Junior to the
University of New Mexico Board
of Regents.
So we have a motion to move uh
Victor Reyes on to full Senate
confirmation. Are there any
questions or comments before I
take a roll call vote?
Oh,
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
would just like to explain my
vote after please, you got it.
Thank you, sir. I can have a
roll call.
Senator Bergman's uh yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez. Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
With the vote of 9, yes, 1
excuse, I'm gonna then head to
Senator Block to explain his
vote. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Reyes, I want to just let you
know that um I, I think you're
gonna do a great job, but your
commitment to call out the
violence against all students no
matter what their political
views are, uh, meant the world
to me, especially today with
what we see on America's
campuses. Um, so I really much
appreciate you, uh, committing
to that and uh we look forward
to holding you.
Uh, account to that as well, and
uh I wish you the best, sir.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
So that vote again at 9, yes, 1
excused, we'll see you later on
the Senate floor for full
confirmation.
And apologies for my tardiness,
my real full time job got in the
way of some Senate work, so I
had to take care of something
with that, we're heading on to
the next item on the agenda,
which is the appointment of
Christina Campos to the
University of New Mexico Board
of Regents. I'd like to call up
Ms. Campos and Senator Campos
her Senate sponsor.
Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Vice Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, members of the Senate
Rules Committee.
It is indeed an honor and a
pleasure today to bring before
you the
For consideration, uh, the
nomination of Christina Campos
to the New Mexico, uh, the
University of New Mexico, Board
of Regents.
I, I've been reflecting quite a
bit in terms of how to describe
Christina and in it possibly the
best way to get started.
is to talk about how throughout
her life.
She has truly cared about
others, and one.
Prime example was during the
Uh, COVID period.
She took on the job of ensuring
that the entire community of
Santa Rosa in the county of
Guadalupe.
A what
They needed in order to
Make that through a several year
period.
She put everything aside to
ensure that individuals
were well cared for.
That if their families were
struggling, that she was able to
assist.
And most importantly, as she
went through that period.
She brought forth her
credentials or.
Activities and of course for
her leadership.
And what does that mean to not
only a community but into the,
to the entire state.
It means that when there's an
individual who is able to apply.
Every ounce of who she is.
To ensure that others are cared
for.
We know that as a member of the
UNM Board of Regents.
She definitely would apply.
Things very similarly.
But Christina brings to the
table.
are of course the credentials, a
degree from the university of
New Mexico.
A master's in business
administration and healthcare
administration.
From Regis University.
Over 20 years.
Of leading a rural hospital.
And ensuring that the resources
that were available.
Were there
As a cash reserve, but at the
same time that those dollars
were going to be used.
Efficiently
And whenever needed to provide,
if you will.
The emergency services and
equipment and operations.
Along with that, as she's moved
forward through that career.
Or at least 40 years.
She, along with her husband Jose
Campos, former.
New Mexico representative.
Continued to offer everything
that they could in the business
sector.
Promoting a small community.
But more than that, continuing
to ensure that every individual
was provided, if you will.
And these are people that worked
with them.
With employment and the benefits
to help them continue.
In the community itself in
service.
She continued to reach out to
ensure.
The community had vitality.
Moving on a little bit.
Christina has been recognized at
the national level.
At the state level
And at the local level,
For the work that she has done.
That means there have been many
awards over her career.
That she working very closely
with the members of the
Guadalupe.
County General Hospital have
earned.
And she never once.
took it upon herself that this
award was going to her.
It was always an investment in
the employees.
The doctors
Nurses
And most importantly, the people
that they served in that region.
Mr. Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
members of the Senate Rules
Committee.
I could go on and on, but the
message that I'm trying to leave
with each and every one of you.
Is that
Miss Campos.
As dedicated her life.
To students.
To people in the community.
To people that have worked under
her leadership.
And she wants to continue to do
that.
And to do that at this level.
During a time when the
university of New Mexico.
is going through some.
Groundbreaking change.
When it comes to health care
services when it comes to
academics.
When it comes to athletics, when
it comes to building a new
infrastructure.
It essentially means that
This individual is not only
prepared to do that.
But she has the skills, the
instruments.
Credentials and most
importantly, you're going to
find very quickly.
The acumen
To go ahead and carry that
forward.
So with that, uh, Mr. Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, members of
the Senate Rules Committee, if I
can defer to Miss Christina
Campos at this time. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Chairman. Um,
this is an incredible honor to
be nominated to this uh Board of
Regents. Um, I am a graduate of
the University of New Mexico.
Uh, I started UNM, uh, when I
was 16 years old, uh, and left
when I was 20 to marry.
Uh, I was told by my husband
that we would go to Santa Rosa
for 6 months.
We've been to 40 years.
Um
And I left without my, my
degree. I had one incomplete,
but in those days there was not
an opportunity to do online
courses and so for 10 years, I
stayed with that incomplete. And
finally I realized that the
value of the education
regardless of the job that I had
at that time, I was just helping
to run the restaurant. Uh, and I
had begun working at the
hospital as a volunteer, and I
wanted to be a role model to my
community in terms of education.
Education is everything. That's
one thing people cannot take
away from you.
So I went back and found one of
my old professors, and I
finished my incomplete, so I'm
finally in 1995, I got my
degree.
Um
It was never my intent to become
an executive at the hospital.
Uh, but I was asked to go back
and to help because the hospital
is in crisis, and I was a
finance officer for a while and
then I became the CEO in 2004.
Um
It was scary. It took a lot of
courage and I, and I pray daily
that that I would have both uh
the courage to make the changes
that I could and, and uh the.
The wisdom to know that there
are a lot of things that I could
not do anything about. But
through working every day,
through showing up diligently to
doing, you know, the right thing
for the right reasons on the
daily basis, being physically
sound, being responsible, being
a steward.
Uh, for my community, being a
servant leader.
Um, making sure that we have the
resources that we could use to
provide the healthcare that my
community so desperately needs,
and partnering with the
university in New Mexico.
Um, UNM has been present in my
community for many, many years.
They helped us in 1993 keep our
hospital open. Uh, when the
doctors left overnight, they
helped us equip and staff and
furnish our Hospital.
They provided me some training
back then to help passel Livy,
which is uh up for election
again for about the 4th time. It
was the 1st time a Mil Levy had
been passed in my community. Um,
they also allowed me to serve on
committees and on healthcare. I
thought it was very important
that the rule perspective be
recognized at UNM, uh, having
been from Albuquerque.
Um, a graduate of Mazana High
School and been at UNM. I had a
certain level of frustration
that out in the communities of
New Mexico, there was a great
presence of uh Aggies.
Uh, which I had planned to be an
Aggie until my mom didn't let me
leave to Las Cruces at the age
of 16.
But I was frustrated that UNM
didn't have a strong presence in
the communities in the rural
communities. And so that was one
of the things that I worked
towards is, is developing
residency programs, working with
them, uh, and one of the
programs that I helped developed
also was the was the health
extension role officers program
whereby UNM works with extension
officers, uh, to create these
connections with the the health
Sciences Center to help recruit
providers into the community,
uh, to help bring nurses into
the community.
And just keep that sense that
with the.
You and him being the only.
Medical school, not the, not,
well, MD, we have the deals on
Las Cruces also, but with UNM
being at that time the only
medical school I felt they had a
responsibility to serve the
entire state.
And to break down those ivory
towers and reach out to people
in eastern New Mexico, northern
New Mexico, western New Mexico
and southern New Mexico as well.
So that's been part of my
career.
A mon now to to be nominated to
this committee of border
regions. I, I feel very much the
weight of importance of it.
Uh, I was thrilled to tour the
new facility that should be open
by the fall, and was really glad
that I felt at home, that I
understood, whereas, you know,
40, 34 years ago, I didn't
understand the importance of
that facility to that to our
state. I understand it
completely.
And I know that you and him has
to be the role model in the
creation of many more health
service jobs in our community.
And then that education also not
only extends to healthcare, but
to engineering, to teaching,
which is so important in our
rural areas, um, health
sciences, um, everything, name
it. They have a role to play in
the community and I'm eager to
help push that role out into the
rural areas.
Thank you.
They give us compost. Now, we
did have 3 people who signed up
in support of your confirmation.
And I'm gonna ask them to come
up to speak on your behalf,
they'll have a couple of minutes
each. Troy Clark, Dan Weeks, and
Doctor Mike Richards.
And although I call out your
name when you speak if you can
restate your first and last name
for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
members of the committee, uh,
Troy Clark.
Uh, I would say first and
foremost a respecter and
supporter of Christina Campos,
as well as the
President, CEO of the New Mexico
Hospital Association.
Uh, I stand here today one in
full support of uh Christina's
nomination.
She has been described as exuded
the exemplary service over many
years, over 20 years as the uh
hospital leader in her
community.
Uh, you know the size of Santa
Rosa, uh, New Mexico was not
great yet her impact and
influence in her community.
For our state and for our nation
has been, uh, a key component of
Christina's uh career.
And part of the American
Hospital Association board,
she's been part of the New
Mexico, uh, Hospital Association
board, and has done a tremendous
Uh, amount of value for
providing healthcare services,
standing up for uh the need for
healthcare in our rural areas as
well as our state.
Christina comes with great uh
abilities.
Healthcare is complex. He has a
great ability to deal with
complex problems.
But doing so in a way in which
she listens to all sides and.
Identifies avenues as she
mentioned when she took over uh
as the, uh, helping at their
hospital, they were in financial
difficulties at hospitals not
only still there today, but they
have a new uh physical facility,
uh, which took place under her
tenure.
I believe that she has the
abilities that you are looking
for as a regent to be able to uh
tackle complex issues and do so
in a way that is hearing uh of
all perspectives and get
navigating through those tough
waters to find the best outcomes
that we stand in full support of
Christina's nomination. Thank
you, Mr. Clark. It's Dan Weeks
or Doctor Mike Richards. Very
good.
So, Mr. Chair and honorable
members of the committee, I'm
Doctor Michael Richards, the
executive vice president of the
UNM Health Sciences Center, and
I stand here in strong support
of Christina's Campos's
nomination to the UN and border
regions, as you've heard, she
has an extensive, um, history of
leadership and healthcare
administration, um, as a
hospital CEO, but what hasn't
been mentioned is that she
brought that hospital to
national recognition with it,
with a top 20 community
hospitals in the United States.
Um, this Campos clearly has a
commitment to public service and
governance, and you heard from
Mr. Clark or her um work for the
New Mexico Hospital Association,
but Miss Campos was also a
prominent member of the American
Hospital Association, and she
was also given their board of
trustees award, that is the most
significant hospital association
in the United States. You've
also heard her strong commitment
to community and rural areas. I
believe that she does have that
commitment and it connects to
her.
Um, role, um, as a statewide
leader, but also to the mission
of the university to build the
healthcare workforce for all of
New Mexico. Again, I think that
she is a proven leader who
embodies all of the missions of
the University of New Mexico.
She has a strong record of
leadership, governance,
advocacy, and a deep commitment
to advancing education, health
care, and public service for the
state. Thank you for the
opportunity to provide support
for her. Thank you for your
comments, Dan Weeks.
Dam is Hianzu.
No? OK, so he's not in going to
the committee room by a show of
hands, anyone in support of the
confirmation.
showing 5.
Any in opposition of the
confirmation.
Any online?
Seeing none, we're gonna take
questions from the committee
starting with standards of
family.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, and Senator Campos, and
welcome to the committee.
Um, Miss Campos has, uh,
been very involved in health
care in our um state, not just
in her community. So I would
like to ask, uh, Miss Campos,
what your vision is that could
still be accomplished.
by the University of New Mexico
to
Better the access to health care
around the state.
Uh, thank you, Senator, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, one of the issues
with access to the state is the
lack of adequate staffing. That
is the biggest issue. And I
think that UNM would play a
central role in that. They are
the educators. They are the, the
breeders of staff, and I think
being able to provide them with
the resources, uh, and the
directives, uh, that is the
responsibility of, of a board is
strategic planning, uh,
fiduciary, uh, responsibility,
oversight and and setting in
that setting the goals and how
to find.
Ransom
But until we grow our staff,
our, our, uh, healthcare staff
all the way from farm techs and
lab techs to, uh, neurosurgeons,
uh, and specialists and everyone
in between, we cannot improve
access in our state. I know
there's a lot of uh campaigns to
to uh recruit providers from
other states, but other states
are doing the same thing to our
providers. So that would be the
big role is expanding
educational opportunities, uh,
partnering with local um
community colleges.
as well as they have another uh
parts of New Mexico to ensure
that students who are interested
in all areas of New Mexico can
access those educational
opportunities.
Go to school and continue to
serve our community.
Thank you and um in the past,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Campos, um, I have
inquired whether or not the
University of New Mexico
Hospital could become more
involved in the healthcare and
our state prisons.
And I don't think this is an
easy, um,
Answered today, but I would ask
you to take that back.
to discuss uh with the
university. Thank you, that's
all today, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to visit with you about
something that's not specific to
just you as a UN regent, but
really I hope that
All UNM regents and frankly all
in a mess you regions would
consider, and that is you
mentioned.
The Aggies, I'm a proud Aggie,
and one of the things that we do
here in the Senate is we have uh
healthy kind of rivalry between
the Aggies. In fact, we have a
basketball game, which you have
either the Aggies or the lobos.
And that's healthy and that's
kind of what breeds a strong New
Mexico is, is that rivalry, and
I would guess that most students
see that.
As a healthy rivalry and she.
What I've seen in the last
couple of years though, is more
of a, a destructive competition
between our two flagship
universities and in many cases
there's been political targeting
on both parts by not students.
But administration.
That is keeping this going and
so I wanna tell you that I
attended the ball game between
NMSU and UNM here and coming in
thinking this is gonna be a fun
rivalry in all of New Mexico get
on board.
I was very disappointed and what
I would, what I'd see, and I
will tell you was in the wake of
what was a violent exchange
between students that had
already happened and instead of
de-escalating that situation, I
saw adult leaders in
administration.
And right before kickoff that
had refused access to NMSU to
allow to use a practice field,
an adult call that is very
untypical, especially during
during a bowl game to not allow
them to have anywhere. When the
bus arrived, they weren't
allowed to park on campus
because they didn't know if they
had firearms in it. Remember,
this is what was left of
A good, a good team who would
deserve to play.
And the sun, we could see that
they had intentionally set a
band.
And blazing temperatures in the
sun when there were plenty of
seating available and all of
those little calls by
administration only unfairly
targeted students, and I would
venture to guess it's done by
many universities, but these are
calls that are made by adult
administrators on the ground.
That are only adding fuel to a
fire so I wanna say this, do
you, do you believe as a regent,
what role can regents come in
and provide leadership when
administrators aren't.
And specifically when there's
not a violation of policies.
But when they're only adding to
Disagreements and and and
fueling temperatures and feuds.
How can the border of Regents
come in and say we will not
tolerate this and instead try to
unite.
Oh, thank you, Senator and
Chairman. I think that leaders,
regardless of whom you're
leading or what you're leading,
are responsible for setting the
example.
You set the example of collegial
relationships, um, you set the
example maybe getting together
and having some uh cooperative
meetings, uh, and very public to
show that the regions from the
universities are working
together, um, you know, I, I
mentioned that in centers of,
um, we're very, very proud to be
lobos, but we're surrounded by
Aggies and they're mostly our
beloved friends. And, and my son
himself chose to be a cowboy and
graduated from, from NMHU.
Um, I don't think even those
seem like minor divisions that
we shouldn't be focusing on the
divisions. We should be focusing
on working together. And, and I
think it's very important that
the leaders said that very
example.
Um, a peacemaking, of being
above the fray and not falling
into the fray, so I'm, I'm
saddened to hear that it was not
a good experience and I would
hope that in the future it would
be a lot better.
I, I think in recent.
You know, times with all border
regions. I, I think that when we
don't see leaderships from our
administration, we're, we're
gonna count on those regents to
come in and provide leadership
and guidance, and I will say
this to both you and M and NMSU
was that you could use Florida
for an example, when Florida and
Florida State both do well,
Florida does well.
When, when Texas and Texas A&M
do well. Texas does well.
When you and him and NMSU does
well. New Mexico does well, and
it's gonna take leaders to come
in and, and really provide
guidance that this, we've got to
get this back to a healthy
rivalry where the students want
it, um, but I believe that we
are on a course in which it's
going to take real leadership to
get that done. Thank, thank you.
And, and if I may, uh, you
mentioned the basketball game,
uh, when my husband was a state
representative, although he's a
proud lobo, he very proudly wore
the Aggie uniform and they won.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Bergman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for being here today. I do
really appreciate your
background in healthcare and
bringing that to the Board of
Regents and especially rural
healthcare. Um, as we know,
there's a shortage of medical
providers all across New Mexico
and the states.
Um, and the country even, and
I'm just curious what your
thoughts are on expanding
residency programs and medical
training opportunities to retain
more graduates for New Mexico.
Yeah, I think it's, it's a
crucial that, uh, residents get
trained in the rural areas
because they choose to stay that
way, so, um, many, many years
ago when in 1993, when we went
through our crisis, it was
residents who helped to stay
open, and some of those
residents are now uh leaders at
the university, um, John Leggett
and Valerie Romero Leggett were
two of our residents that that
were out in Santa Rosa, and it
was before they were married,
uh, since then we have made
those programs official, and we
have a continuous
Presidency program in our
community. Although we don't
offer a whole lot, we are the
only rule emergency hospital in
the state, uh, but we thrive, we
figured out how to do it. And it
has been through those residency
programs that we thrive, and we
actually partner um to make sure
that the residents have housing
in those areas and that they
stay and, and 11 measure of what
you're saying that is so crucial
in the success of the health
care system in New Mexico that
that proves that you're right.
is that all of our doctors in
centers are from UNM.
Every single one of them, they
either were residents or they
were students at UNM and it's
because of those residency
programs and placing them in
rural areas, that's important.
So I think it's gonna be very
important to, to, um, advocate
for expansion of more residency
slots, and it's not just at the
state level, it's at the
national level. And make sure
that those residents are trained
in the communities that we hope
that they will serve.
Thank you. That was, that's all.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congratulations, Miss Campbell.
Um
One of the greatest failures of
this legislature.
Continues
And that is our failure to
address education and to
provide.
education.
Um
That measures for the rest of
the United States.
2/3
Of the graduates of UNM.
will leave
And go to
Jobs outside of
New Mexico.
That is a failure.
On our part as legislators to
provide opportunities for those
graduates.
How do you see your role as a
Reg, helping us to correct that
misfortune.
Well, first of all, as a region,
you know, our role is, is very
delineated in terms of strategy
and policy and absolutely no
micromanagement, um, but I
think, you know, one of the
things that that that they're
doing right right now and the
two of their goals that that
they have is addressing the
substance use disorder
throughout our state, not only
in terms of clinical care, but
also in developing the programs
and the specialties to provide
care to people, so it's a, it's
both an education
aspect to it and and an economic
development aspect to it by
creating more jobs that way,
addressing social needs in our,
in our communities and educating
people. I mean, it's it's all of
it, and I think that's 11
important thing. The other goal
is expanding the healthcare
professionals in our states,
the, the training opportunities
that are available.
The reason I think that's so
important is that these, these
two goals weren't made in a
vacuum. They were made by
looking at what's going on in
New Mexico.
Uh, acknowledging that we do
have serious issues with
substance use disorder
everywhere, not just in
Albuquerque or along the Rio
Grande corridor, but everywhere
and creating programs to address
that. Uh, and knowing that our,
our medical staff shortages are
everywhere and, and it's not
just to focus on medical, people
will leave our state if we don't
fix our medical system.
And it's not just doctors that
will leave, it will be the
people who need access to those
doctors. So, I think continuing
to do that, looking at what the
actual needs of the community
are.
And then developing programs to
address them so that those
providers or those experts stay
within our state is a way of
keeping our students here.
I appreciate that, um.
Um,
senator.
I would just encourage you to,
um,
Help us
Um, and I mean that, I mean,
sometimes you, sometimes we have
to be led, um,
To the right path, but we
We pick and choose.
Um
Our misfortune.
And
Small communities like Santa
Rosa, like Artesia.
are, are
Under stress for a variety of
reasons.
But there's nothing that we need
in New Mexico that will solve
our issues better than good
jobs.
And we should not be jealous of
one community or the other
because one community has a
industry or jobs or whatever, we
should celebrate.
The fact that good jobs are in
New Mexico and opportunities
exist for our graduates. I, um,
Other
Let me ask you one, you're not
kin to that guy next to you, are
you?
By marriage.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Duig.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you Miss Campos.
So given the size and complexity
of UNMH's healthcare system. How
will you approach oversight and
accountability for financial
management, patient outcomes,
and regulatory compliance.
I, I think in the process of,
of, uh, setting strategy, uh,
and I think it's under the
legislature does also is that
you set goals.
Uh, for accountability set goals
for qualities, set metrics, and
then you measure those goals,
um, and your progress towards
those goals, so I think, um,
understanding what the current
status is, uh, getting in there
and digging deep. I have not
looked at their finances, uh,
to, to know what is happening,
but, but getting a very good
understanding of it, uh, getting
an understanding of what the,
the expectations are, and then
holding people accountable to
reaching those expectations and
moving.
For. So, so, so it's, it's all
of it, and it's not just in
quality, it's in finances. I
think that's, that was part of
our success at our hospitals is
that we had a process for
setting goals.
Uh, and delineated delineating
them, assigning those goals to
people who would be held
accountable to them and then
measuring them on a regular
basis, not just once a year.
Uh, you know, if you're waiting
too long to measure them, things
have gone south.
For too long that you can't fix
them, but staying on top of them
and and partnering with people
to be better.
So that would be the way that I
would, I would move in that
direction.
And Mr. Chair, Ms. Carlos, thank
you. I.
I can't remember the name, it's
it's like.
leapfrog or tree frog or
something there's some rating,
uh, that, that is done
nationally for hospitals and and
UNMH consistently gets some of
the lowest ratings, um.
And so I think part of that is
the population that they serve,
they serve some of the, the
hardest hardest folks, um.
But
And I think there is definitely
some some room for.
Or improvement, uh.
There that
That I look forward to you, uh,
Really aggressively pursuing.
Um, Medicaid covers about half
of New Mexicans. How should UNMH
navigate financial
sustainability, given its
reliance on Medicaid
reimbursements.
It's not just uh union that
relies on Medicaid, the vast
majority of rural hospitals in
New Mexico rely on you on
Medicaid programs, so I think,
um, you know, leveraging those
Medicaid dollars against local
dollars, making sure that the
community has skin in the game.
And has pride in the in the
facility. Um, I think also, uh,
being good stored so the
finances make sure that there's
no waste.
Uh, no fraud. I think that's so
important and it's, it's not
just for the health sciences
centers across all universities.
But, um, also being innovative
in the in the
The programs that are being
developed at UNM so that we
start not just serving the
community of New Mexico, I think
you may, it's really important
that we do that, but I know that
that when my husband needed
brain surgery and it was not
available to him. We, we went to
Phoenix, and it's not to say
that that UNM should have done
it. We found one doctor in the
country that was willing to do
that surgery. But I think also.
Improving the opportunities for
UNM to become a center of
excellence and programs that
would draw patients from other
parts of the country and that we
could build both their
commercial or Medicare or
Medicaid would be another way to
leverage our funds that are
going into the university.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, um, Senator Ms.
Campos.
So UNM health sciences is is a
leader in medical research. How
should
The regents, uh, support
expansion of research funding
clinical trials and innovation,
especially given maybe some
uncertainty, uh, regarding
federal, the availability of
federal funds to do that work.
Yeah, that that's definitely
gonna be a challenge, and I know
that's a concern because of the
role in research and, and, um.
That's gonna, I'm gonna have to
learn more about that, a whole
lot more, I think it's uh those
research stars that we're
talking about being in question
are not just the health science
center, but our national labs as
well.
Uh, so it's gonna be interesting
to see how these large
institutions throughout our
state pivot.
And adjust to potential future
changes, but, but it is a
concern.
Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator. I
like the fact that you represent
rural New Mexicans, and I have
one question for you, as
somebody who represent a large.
Area of my district is rural
northern New Mexico. Students
typically attend a smaller
college or a branch campus as a
region, what could you do to
make it easier for these rural
students when and if they decide
to transfer to the University of
New Mexico.
I think partnerships with some
of the local community colleges,
um, and, and also, um, you know,
it sounds it's pretty simple,
but field trips.
Bringing those students out to
the to the campus, to UNM to see
how it is. I remember when I
graduated from, from high
school, uh,
How, how relieved I was that I
had had a friend who had taken
me the previous semester to
classes with him, uh, just to
see what it was like. And I
think that importance of, of
rural people, cause they're
they're, believe it or not,
there's still people from Santa
Rosa that will not drive in
Albuquerque. Uh, but getting
them out of the rural
communities into the urban areas
creating these partnerships with
the urban universities, not just
UNM but maybe New Mexico State
and the community colleges to
have these bridge programs would
be.
very important to do that.
Thank you and and I don't want
to speak on behalf of President
Valderas who's here, but I'm
sure that Northern would like to
have those conversations
northern New Mexico College, no
longer a community college, but
a 4 year institution on how to
bridge those connections between
you and him and Northern, and so
with that I'm gonna head to
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move
we approve this uh contrary to
move to the floor of the Senate
or to be a UNM region. Thank you
for that before we take a vote
on that Senator Block, do you
have a question? Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, uh, thank you,
Senator Campos, Mrs. Compos,
just a couple.
Questions here to, to kind of
just go off of what Senator
Stefanik said.
Um, I, I got to, uh, be honest,
I, I owe you an apology, uh,
Mrs. Campos. I thought you were
the senator's daughter, not his
wife.
So I apologize for that. I'm his
cousin's wife.
Um, you know, as, as a region,
I, I want to talk about because
in Sandoval County, Mr. Chair,
uh, uh Cam Campos.
You and M merged with SRMC and
there's been some challenges. I,
I don't expect you to know some
of the details, but I would ask
that you take a look.
Uh, when you're on the, uh, when
you get confirmed here today, to
take a look and reach out and
and take and talk to some of the
workers over at Sandoval
Regional regarding some of the
issues that we have had since
the merger with UNM Health.
Uh, that's, that's, uh,
important, uh, to do that. Um,
Mr. Chair, um,
Miss Campos, I gotta tell you,
you know, 4 years ago, and I
remember it to the day I went to
your restaurant there.
I had the best avocado BLT that
I still remember to this day, so
that that right there is enough
to confirm for my vote. Um, but
on a couple of things here.
I want to ask you, um, Mr.
Chair, um,
Miss Campos, how, how will you
go about if you have a
disagreement with the president
of UNM.
On any type of decisions or
policies, how would you go
about, um,
Trying to remedy that or
mitigate that.
Well, first of all, I think it's
always important to disagree in
private.
Uh, unless it becomes an issue
that that is too big that you
can't ignore bringing it to the
public, but um I think um the
ability to disagree with
somebody respectfully is very,
very important, uh, and also as
a member of the board of
regions, you are one of a board.
It is the board as a whole that
makes decisions.
Thank you for that answer. Um.
Mr. Chair, um,
Miss Campos, can you tell me in
your resume the acronym FACH E,
what that means? Yeah, it's a
fellow of the American College
of Health Executives. Awesome
board certification.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
Miss Campos, the, the last thing
I'll ask you is the
question I hope the other
Uh, 3, talked about when they
get up there, um.
Parisa, Erica, Dolores, and
Ronald is the same thing I
talked to Mr. um Reyes about um
because this is a a leadership
position, and I think the, I
think the students look to you
as a leader in all the other
regions around around the state.
Um,
Will you make it a commitment to
speak out against violence or
threats of violence on campus
against various student groups,
no matter what those student
groups may stand for. No, I, I
definitely, violence is never
the answer, and it can never be
condoned.
Perfect. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. uh Ms. Campos, I want to
say congratulations to you for
being here. Um, the rural areas
that you spoke about.
Um, are near and dear to my
heart, especially in Sandoval
County as a previous commander
because I think.
They are
Um, I think they're left behind
a lot on some of the policies
that we think work maybe in
Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Las
Cruces, or Rio Rancho, but they
don't work for
Uh communities like took and
Carry, Clayton, Artesia, Santa
Rosa.
Uh, Cuba
Um, or some of the charitable
partners as well, so I would ask
you always have those in um.
ask that you always think about
those, uh, communities, and I
know you will be out in Santa
Rosa for 40 years, uh, when it
comes to some of the policies
that come down from from UNM and
I appreciate you being in
business and having people
working for you like uh Senator
Townsend said, if we have good
jobs here in New Mexico, so many
of these problems.
Go away, cause when people are
working, they're not getting
into trouble and I want to
appreciate.
Tell you, I appreciate
everything you're doing out
there. And, uh, you have my full
support. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
And with that, we have Senator
Stewart who.
As that we take a vote on moving
or advancing this Campos onto
the full Senate for
confirmation. If I can have a
roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez.
He asked him to explain my vote.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
Senator Lopez to explain her
vote.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
congratulations, Miss Campos.
Actually, um, I've known her
since we were at the University
of New Mexico, just a few years
ago. And I know you'll do a
wonderful job.
Um, I'm glad I'm here to be able
to vote on you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, with the
vote of 10 yes, you'll advance
to the Senate for full
confirmation. We'll see you
later this morning.
That I'd like to call it
Patricia Green Williams, who's
being appointed to the
University of New Mexico Board
of Regents, along with her
Senate sponsor, Senator Pinto.
Good morning, Senator.
You got a cheering section,
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee.
I am honored to
Present Miss Patty Williams up
for uh.
For the regions for you and him.
And I
In my capacity where I work and
who we work with.
It is very important that you
have a collaborator, um, an
advocate.
Because working for the nation
is where
I have had that relationship
with her, and it is crucial to
have those
type of people who can bring
people together and have those
hard discussions and also be
able to
In some sense, have
sportsmanship. I think is the
theme that we're looking for
here, um, as we talk about the
uh our higher education
institutions.
And
Her expertise has been
invaluable to me.
And even changing
administrations.
In my
District with my leadership in
the Navajo Nation. I'm glad
she's been consistent in being
able to represent our people in
that capacity, especially for
the area and the issues we have.
Um, and especially I'm hoping
that she will be able to raise
the voice of our Native American
students also, and I'm very
pleased to.
Present her. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, uh, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Patty Williams, um, I mourn the
fact that I was not born in New
Mexico, but I have lived here
for 6 decades. My father was in
the service, a lieutenant
colonel. He was also a nuclear
physicist, so when I was 5, we
landed here and stayed here. And
um so I've lived here quite a
long time. I love New Mexico. I
love UNM. I have 3 degrees from
UNM. My undergraduate degree is
in anthropology. My master's
degree is in.
and my law degree is in law. Um,
I'm a civil litigator, um, um, I
practice is primarily
representing governmental
entities.
primarily the state of New
Mexico through risk management
department. I am represent UNM
frequently and I have for a long
time. And so that gives me a
unique point of view to some of
the policy things that need to
happen at UNM. Some of the
things that work and some of the
things that don't work, and the
good thing is, as a policymaker,
um, as a regent, um, I'll be in
a position to put some of that.
um,
information into action. Um, so
I'm
Really excited to be nominated
for this position, and I stand
for any questions. Thank you.
Thank you for that before I go
for questions, there were, there
was no one who signed up in
organized supporter opposition
of your appointment, but I just
want to see a show of hands in
the committee room. Anyone here
in support of the confirmation.
12
Singing 7, any in opposition.
none any online.
Signon, we can then go to
questions from the committee.
Senator Block.
I, I, I think Senator Stefaniks
was to shared her hand up first.
I'll.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, and Madam
Chair, thank you, Senator Pinto,
and welcome to the committee,
um, Miss Williams. We had an
interesting conversation in my
office, and I think that some of
the expertise that you bring to
the table is very important. I
was impressed with the uh risk
management, the uh special
education.
And understanding the needs of
our total community and if you
were to assess
What you could offer.
To the University of New Mexico
with your skills, what would
that be?
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, I, I think you have
to when you come into a new
position like this and are very
enthusiastic, have to know the
parameters of that position. And
what I can offer as a region is
policy information. It's not an
operational position.
Um, you don't hire and fire and
that kind of things you can look
at.
And evaluate budget decisions,
policy decisions, and direction
and mission.
And so, I don't know enough
right now to know that what what
is needed at the at the facility
right now, other than what we
read in the paper, and sometimes
that's wrong, as we also know,
um, so I am happy to hit the
ground running and tackle those
policy and budget decisions that
the regents are, um, charged
with executing and oversight of.
Thanks.
Great. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you, Mr. Williams, just,
just real quick, uh, your
education background, uh, kind
of intrigued me, uh, especially
when it comes to this position
as a region, and I appreciate
the time that you and I have
spent in the office and talked
about uh.
Your father and and uh my career
is uh very similar background,
which drives me to my point of
And, and I don't know the
answer, so if you don't know it,
that's fine. I'm just curious,
but your, your father was in the
nuclear uh side of things as a
physicist for the country and
how do you as a region see?
Your role as shaping future, um,
undergraduate, uh, graduate and
PhD areas of new areas of study,
whether it's AI, machine
learning, um, nuclear
engineering, um, systems
engineering, other other
emerging technologies that are
critical to the economy today.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, I believe that as a
flagship university for New
Mexico. Um, UNM has to be on the
forefront of innovative
technologies, career paths and
other um ways to keep New Mexico
current in the development of
new technologies, the use of new
technologies, and jobs that
involve those new technologies.
I will tell you that when
I was an undergraduate at UNM,
the computer stuff was a stack
of weird cards that had square
holes in them. That's, I have a
phone that's like Star Trek now.
And the fact that we can keep up
with that kind of thing, and
that I believe that's one of the
missions of an educational
institution, especially in a
state like ours, which has this
long legacy of very interesting,
um, relations with both the
military, with
the nuclear industry and with
Uh, indigenous populations, I
mean, we have this strange and
unusual mix of things that bring
us to a position of being
extraordinarily strong, if we
capitalize on those. Thank,
thank you that's a great answer.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, uh, because I would,
I would argue and advocate that.
What we have here in New Mexico,
Senator Townsend talked about it
with, I think he said 2/3 of the
people uh graduate of our young
uh students are are leaving the
state.
When we have, um, we are really
a, uh, I would say a mecca of of
definitely the nuclear, uh,
piece here and the other
incredible things that the labs
do, like our chair works over at
Los Alamos. I work.
Um, with our, our partners down
at the Kirtland Air Force Base
uh area in the massive mission
partners we have there doing
incredible things. So, um I
think partnership with industry
is, is huge, but you can't have
partnership with new and
emerging technologies unless you
draw them into New Mexico
somehow. Lastly, as a lawyer,
I've asked the others, and I
want to make sure that, uh, I
have your commitment, Mr. Mr.
Chair and uh Miss Williams about
speaking out and your commitment
to make our students feel safe
and to protect.
their rights to be on campus, to
advocate their position,
whatever their position may be,
whether it's the left or the
right, that uh we definitely
don't have the university
picking and choosing who can
come to the campus and
protecting our students from any
threats of violence or acts of
violence based on their uh
political ideologies. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doohe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
Miss Williams, um, given that
UNM
is one of the biggest healthcare
providers in our state,
especially in Albuquerque. What
role should UNM be playing in
helping to address the
behavioral healthcare capacity
issues that we have.
Thank you, chair. Um, that's a
really important question
because you and Em is such an
important component in the
delivery of healthcare in New
Mexico, their budget, as you
know, because you
approve the budget is huge.
They have a huge mission.
And behavioral health has been
decimated, in my opinion. I'm in
the state and we have seen the
effects of that lack of
provision of services, um,
ripple out, um, with problems in
substance abuse and recovery and
um things like uh transplant
abilities in our state. And so
not just behavioral health
because that's one component,
but.
medical health. I think UNM is
key.
To, um, trying to use innovative
technology, um, to solve those
problems and make the most use
of the budget that this
legislature gives them, and I
know you all know that for every
25 cents the state pays.
Um
75 cents comes from the federal
government for Medicaid and
Medicare, and that's going, that
has to be protected.
For our our constituents in the
state are citizens, and I think
that that could be quite
threatening to the delivery of
healthcare effectively.
In a manner that New Mexican
citizens deserve.
And I'm willing to protect that.
Thank you. And
Mr. Chairman Williams, I'll ask
you the same question I had
asked of uh Regent Reyes, given
some of the, the recent
allegations about financial
mismanagement, what kind of
financial oversight reforms do
you think should, should be put
in place.
Thank you chair. I think that um
there are measures and in fact
whole departments at UNM to deal
with fiduciary responsibilities,
audit responsibilities and um
Critical uh physical management
of the funds that, uh, flow into
the university, I think that the
um bill that's here this session
that requires uh
legis legislative oversight and
providing a fiduciary and uh
training for regions is a good
idea, um, as an attorney we
represent some other, um,
institutions and uh
Governmental entities and our
firm has trained regents or
board members or commission
members, um, on their fiduciary
duties. And so I take that very
seriously. And there's uh
A lot of safety net built in, it
looks like to me at UNM. I
looked at that personally, I
mean, given the news, I don't
know all the facts on the
western, um, news thing, but um
You have to look at the, at the
checks and balances within the
system in order for the
institution to function
effectively and with the proper
amount of
Um, respect for the funds that
come into the institution.
Thank you. And you mentioned
that you're uh a registered
lobbyist. How, how will you
Approach
Potential conflicts of interest
that might arise.
Between your, your regent
responsibilities and you're
lobbying work. Thank you, chair.
Um, I lobby for a one client.
I've only lobbied for one
client, um, for almost 2 decades
now, which is the Navajo Nation
Council. The Navajo Nation
Council is a legislative arm of
the Navajo Nation government. So
I see my role very different
than a
Other kind of lobbyists that
represents a special interest
group, whether it's a nonprofit
special interest group, a
for-profit special interest
group. I see my role as
fostering government to
government.
Um, communications and
relations, and the good news is
UNM has a Gallup campus that is
very, very responsible and
receptive to the needs of Navajo
citizens who live in New Mexico
and um go to school in New
Mexico. I do not foresee.
Any conflict between supporting
this financial institution, and
my responsibilities as a
lobbyist for a sovereign nation
in the state that UNM would
serve, but with that caveat as a
lawyer with my, um, rules of
professional responsibility and
ethics, I am always on the
lookout for a conflict. That's
the reason I can only represent
the Navajo Nation because they
have their finger in everything.
Because as a government, they
have water interests. They have
energy interests, they have
educational interests that
sometimes can conflict with
other um tribes, nations and ah.
Entities. And so I have to be
very careful about that, and I
will commit to you that I will
remain quite diligent about
making sure no conflicts arise,
and if they do, I will address
them in accordance with my
professional responsibilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I'm just so excited, Miss
Williams, with your appointment,
um, you know, I've worked with
you for many years. I just want
to thank you for your work that
you've done with the Native
American community, the Nava
community work with you on
impact day. Luckily for all of
us, we don't have to do that
anymore, uh, so you know, I, I,
I have, uh, I now have friends
that have graduated from Navajo
Prep.
And at UNM, studying the nay,
studying to be a teacher.
I know that you and him has a, a
good, uh,
They have, they have several
programs designed for Native
American students. Can you talk
about those and and tell us if
they need to be expanded, and
whether or not you think they're
working well if you know that
I'm sure.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Senator. UNM has had a deep
commitment to the fostering of
the development and retention of
indigenous language and culture,
not just for Navajo, but for the
22, uh.
Puebloss in New Mexico. I think
they do a good job on that. And
the undergraduate level
throughout the satellite
campuses as well as on main
campus, and that's very exciting
because indigenous language is
such a touchstone to the
development and retention of
culture for, um, indigenous
students. We also have a
fabulous program at UNM Law
School called Pre-law Summer
Institute, which is the absolute
Best program for preparing
indigenous students.
Who are entering law school.
To, uh, be prepared for the
rigors and the, um, structure of
law school throughout the
nation. It's an unbelievably
successful program, and, uh, it
has created, I think.
4 generations of Native American
lawyers that are serving nations
and governments throughout the
United States. I believe that
using
The power of the institution to
foster and develop.
Those kind of connections with
our unique population.
Um, it's very important and
would absolutely encourage that.
I have not heard that there's a
need for something different
than what they have now. I'm
sure that we, um, will probably
be hearing requests for at least
continued funding for those
programs to bring that element
back to serve New Mexicans,
indigenous or otherwise.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, thank you so
much for that answer. It's just
very exciting to think of you as
you reach and there with your
background, I think your
background has been needed for
many years. So thank you for
being willing to step up and
thank you, Senator Pinto for
bringing a Miss Williams
forward. Thank you, Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Senator
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. And um
I'm sorry, I was not here for a
couple of the others, uh, but
this would be a question that I
ask of each one.
UNM is a Hispanic serving
institution.
And
Over the years,
There have been budgetarily some
cuts.
To certain programs that
actually
have been in place to support.
Um, Hispanic students since UNM
is quote unquote, a Hispanic
serving institution.
One of the areas was the Centro
de la Raza.
Um, there have been other budget
cuts that have been proposed
over the years.
Um
And it's to other support
programs that support the
diversity of the university.
And
And your role as a regent.
Do you feel that you could
override the president's
proposal.
Um, thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I don't believe that
it's the role of the regents to
be involved in operational
issues.
I think that the role of the
regents would be to make sure
that the policies reflect the
Hispanic surveying Institution.
And as you know, I'm very
sensitized to the needs and
responsibilities that the state
has to minority populations, and
I would certainly look at
policies and budgetary, um,
issues related to continuing a
very robust um,
Um
Provision of services and
programs to that very important
section of our New Mexico
citizens, and I actually don't
think our Hispanics, even a
minority now, aren't we? 51%.
Hispanic, we're right up close
to the thing and it doesn't
matter. Um, even if they're half
the population or all the
population or 10% of the
population, every New Mexican
citizen deserves an education
that is tailored to their
cultural.
Intellectual and geographic
needs, whether it's rural,
whether it's urban, whether it's
native, whether it's Hispanic,
whether it's white.
Um, and the University of New
Mexico is in a.
Excellent position to make sure
that those interests are being
fostered.
So, I don't think I can
override.
An operational decision, but we
can certainly have oversight and
over a direct report and can
certainly question where
The um
Impetus for those kind of
decisions that's coming from.
You know, and I appreciate that
answer, um.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair.
Mr. Williams, because I know
over time,
I think
There needs to be more
communication.
On the role and the job that the
regent has at the university,
always liking it sort of to the
superintendent at our public
schools and the school board
that's selected.
You're elected, you're
appointed, um, to serve in that
role for oversight.
But um
I would still hope that even if
you serve on the budget
committee.
That there would still be
attention paid.
To the different um
organizations that are there to
serve.
Um, the different, you know, the
diversity of the institution,
because they, they provide a
very important role, and
without, I know El Centro de la
Raza, there would be a lot of
students who never would have
made it through the university,
Mister Chair, Madam Chair,
without that support.
And many a times it goes back to
culture.
It goes back to acceptance
within the institution, because
if you don't see a professor
that looks like you and
understands you.
Um, there's, there's a big
difference, and it's part of K
through 12 and even in higher
education, cause I know, I
experienced it at UNM.
Um, and I think there are others
who have different experiences,
of course, but
If you're a quote unquote a
minority.
There's a different attitude
sometimes that does come across
from those in higher places.
Of uh importance at the
university.
I put importance in quotes.
So I would just hope that you
and the other board members,
regent members would pay
attention to that.
Because it's very important and
not maybe just at UNM but at
Northern and MSU, Highlands and
all the other higher ed
institutions.
Um
It's something that we have to
pay attention to and not just
because you're a board of Regent
member that oh.
I'm kind of divorced from that.
You're not. You also have to set
policy and direction for the
institution.
And if the president
Provost and others are not doing
their job.
I also think it's your role as
as Board of Regents members to
question that.
And that's for any institution.
So I just wanted to mention that
Mr. Chair, and I'm glad you're
there too. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Stewart.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I move that we
approve Patty Williams for Board
of Reaching at UNM to go to the
full Senate floor.
Thank you for that thing. No
other questions or comments, I
will take a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez. Yes.
Senator Stefani.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 9, yes, 1
excused, you'll move forward to
the Senate for full confirmation
later this morning. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Before I move on to the other um
items on the agenda. I'm gonna
hand over the gavel back to the
chairwoman for a few remarks.
And members, I just wanted to
let you all know.
The floor has been pushed back
to 11:30. We will be getting
through all our conferees today,
as I mentioned when we started,
we're not gonna be doing any
bills, um,
We're not eliminating anyone's
time in here cause Regents are,
are important positions and we
want everyone to ask everything
they, they wish to, um, but
It sure would be nice if we
could.
Get to Florida in the next hour,
uh, if we can't, then we will
just go late to floor.
OK,
Go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. So we're gonna move on
to the next item on the agenda,
which is the reappointment of
Erika Velarde to northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents
with her Senate sponsor today is
Senator Trujillo. Good morning.
Good morning, um, thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you members of the committee for
having us here today.
Um, I am so happy to be here to
represent and sponsor Miss
Bellardi. We have known her,
our, our family has known her
for many years, and this is just
a real honor for me.
Erica Rita Velarde holds an
associate of Arts degree in
business administration from
northern New Mexico Community
College and a bachelor of
science degree in mechanical
engineering from the University
of New Mexico.
She earned both degrees as a
single mother of two.
Erica began her career at the
Mexico Department of Education,
where she describes uh uh where
she describes as her time there
pretending to be civil. um, it's
obviously an engineering joke,
um, she's a civil engineer, but
I will say that as I was reading
her uh resume, which is pretty
extensive, uh, that one of the
things that popped up is that um
while it uh and MDOT she was
reviewing boring logs.
And I suspect that that means
like drilling, digging, um, but
it sounded, um, quite boring.
Um, she then found her calling
with Mnerd at the Energy
Conservation and Management
Division as a mechanical
engineer where she worked for 5
years, um, then taking a
position with the general
Services department as the state
engineer.
In this role, she initiated the
state's first energy project
saving taxpayers more than a
million dollars in utility
savings, and I'm sure many of
you have seen those, uh, solar
panels um around over the top of
garages where cars park, um,
it's been quite a savings uh
here in Santa Fe, uh,
specifically. She's been vice
president for the Northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents
for the last 6 years.
And she's earned a number of
awards, including 2019, the New
Mexico Association of Energy
Engineers,
energy manager of the year.
In 2017, the New Mexico
Association of Energy Engineers,
energy engineer of the year, and
then in 2016, she earned the
young engineer professional of
the year. I do want to point out
I had an opportunity to speak
with President Balderas this
morning, who is here in the
audience also, and I'm sure
we'll uh be available for
questions and comments, but um I
think it's important to note,
particularly with.
some of the
Uh, um, financial challenges
that we've seen, um, in our
higher ed institutions that uh
Northern has had 2 years of
clean audits, which I would
expect nothing less from a
former state auditor, um, with
that, madam, Mr. Chairman, I
will uh um turn over to Miss
Falarde to speak. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning. Uh,
good morning, ladies and
gentlemen, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Erica Rita Velarde, and I am
honored to be sitting before you
all today.
I am the proud granddaughter of
Alejandro and Tomasa Velarde. I
am also the granddaughter of
Jose and Rita Romero, who raised
me until I was 10. I was gifted
my middle name Rita from my
grandmother, and that is why I
use it in all I do in order to
honor her and to remember her
example.
I am the daughter of Philip
Beard and Lindo Quintana, who
are here to support me today and
every day.
I am the mother of Ariana
Gonzalez, Davina Gonzalez, and
Lucas Carrillo, who are here
with me.
I am the big sister to Perla
Ramirez and the Antia to Selena
and to Javier.
I am a wife to a supportive
husband, Michael Carrio, and
most importantly, I am a doting
nona to Giovanni, age 4, and
Salem, almost 3.
I am a first generation college
grad and the first woman in my
family to attend college. I am a
Santa Fe native. I'm a
productive, excuse me, I'm a
product of the New Mexico Public
schools.
I am in New Mexico licensed
professional engineer.
I am a former Santa Fe Fiesta
Princessa.
I am a suicide attempt survivor.
I am a leader.
I am a wealth, a former welfare
recipient.
I am a former Section 8
recipient.
I am a domestic violence
survivor.
I am someone who leads with
love.
I am a sexual abuse survivor.
I am a former single mom.
I am a former state employee.
I am a feminist.
I am a believer in redemption.
I am a proud Chica.
I am a woman who has survived
multiple miscarriages.
I am a warrior for justice.
I am someone who has made bad
choices.
I am passionate.
I am a bleeding heart.
I am a survivor.
Now, why have I shared all this
with you today, especially in
this shining moment.
Because I am a great believer
that representation matters, and
many of the things I mentioned
can be viewed as stigmas in our
society.
But these things have shaped who
I am today.
I could highlight only my resume
and my awards and
accomplishments, but I'd rather
sit before you all as genuine as
I am every day.
So many people believe that they
cannot make it to a certain
leadership role, or be
successful or educated because
they didn't come from the right
pedigree, or because they have
encountered many hardships or
severe traumas.
My story says, yes, you can see
se puede.
You see, I believe that
vulnerability and self-awareness
are my superpowers.
I wish that more of us felt
comfortable to be unafraid to
open up to others, so that they
know that they are not alone.
The last bit of things I will
share with you is that I'm a
graduate of Northern New Mexico
College. I am a proud regent for
Northern New Mexico College.
I've had the honor of filling
this position for 6 years now
and in my own humble opinion, I
think our board has done a great
job getting through COVID.
Then the sudden departure of our
president to a year of interim
with an interim president.
To finally being able to make
major progress with the
leadership of President
Balderas.
In my tenure, I have served as
vice president of the board as
the higher and as the higher
agent region coalition
president.
One of my best memories I have
and I will forever keep is
handing my daughter her degree
20 years after I walked across
that exact stage.
As regent, one of my most
important votes was when I voted
against increasing tuition in
2021.
I was the sole no vote.
It is important to me that
anyone and everyone can access
Northern.
Because northern and its
professors changed the
trajectory of my life.
It is a gem in a beautiful
community that needs the love
and support that guidance that
Northern's professors, faculty
and staff provide.
Northern isn't just a school.
It's a lifeline for many like
me.
And I promised to keep that in
every decision I make, and every
vote I make as regent. Thank
you.
Thank you for your comments. We
didn't have anyone who signed up
and organized support or
opposition, but I'm gonna go to
the committee room and ask, is
there anyone here in support of
this reappointment.
Center but uh President
Balderas, would you like to say
a few words? Please come on up
if you can come to a mic and.
Although I called you out, if
you can state your name again
for the record.
Hector Balderas, president of
Northern Mexic College and
former House member of many,
many generations, I guess, ago,
um, not only do I stand in
strong support, I do want to
draw attention to.
The exceptional journey and life
story of our region and I think
it's.
The really the driver of so many
of your questions here this
morning about taking
responsibility, whether it's
fiduciary or.
Uh, having tough conversations.
As you can see, she's personally
vested.
In that organization and that's
rare, usually training.
On responsibility and compliance
is not gonna have the same
impact unless you really are
wedded and, and responsible for
the students and the community.
So from an oversight standpoint,
I'll say that she's personally
and professionally vested.
And I will say that she's got
some experience in what a storm.
Uh, in terms of what Northern
has been through, the
challenges, a lot of times
regions aren't prepared for the
amount of risk management and
difficulties of potentially an
embezzlement or
When you have to terminate a
contract.
Since I've been there, we've
added uh a general counsel, so
we have general counsel, she has
legal counsel all overboard. I'm
a certified fraud examiner. I'm
probably one of the few
presidents in the nation that
has indicted officials but also
um championed some of those
oversight entities. So, we have
a very healthy dynamic between
the board.
And the executive and we stand
in strong support.
To not only have a strong
experienced uh individuals, but
she has been through challenges
and so now that we're
experiencing double digit
enrollment growth.
Um, our senator left out the
other half, which I think she
did the right thing. Northern
had not had a clean audit in a
decade.
And so to to have that quick
turnaround, I champion our board
of Regents for having that
aggressive uh direction and
oversight. So, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Chairwoman, thank you for
having me and sharing some
insight. Thank you, President
Balderas. Now by a show of
hands, how many in the committee
room are in support of this
country.
Or reappointment, 1234.
8. Any in opposition?
I know what about online?
Then I then go to questions from
the committee.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I, I'm going to ask you an
odd question. Oh, actually,
you've been here, so you'll know
exactly why I'm going to ask
you. So, um,
Miss Falarde, we are trying very
hard.
In the legislature and with the
governor's office and the public
education department to do
something about the fact that
only 25% of our elementary
students.
Our proficient in reading.
So for the last 4 or 5 years, we
have been spending $20 million a
year.
To retrain teachers in the
evidence-based, science of
reading.
Uh, so some of the deans of the
colleges of education are
telling us that.
We'll have to put it in statute
because they're just not being
as successful, um, as they want
to be in changing the
professional uh aspect of this.
So, so we, we have a bill this
year and I'm, my question to you
is, have the regions talked
about this or is this a subject
that the regions are talking
about, thinking about, because
for the last 2 years, uh, every
college of education has been
under a
directive from the sector of
education to improve the way we
teach teachers. They get out of
college. We have to retrain them
all because they have not
learned how to teach reading. So
if you could comment about that.
Yes, uh, Senator, Madam Chair,
thank you. Um, first off, I
wanna say it's great to see you
again. I don't know if you
remember we went to San Antonio
together for a solo retreat like
years ago. Um, this is actually
a subject that we've been
talking about myself and and um
our our board president as well,
um, I, I want to say about a
year now that it's been on, on
our horizon and and on our
conversations, um, to me, it's
something that's very close to
my heart because my oldest
daughter, um, she's
almost 25, and when she was in
2nd grade, she was having a very
hard time reading, um, sight
words were not for her, and now
that I understand and know the
um
The, uh, all the, the science
behind it, we had been doing a,
a disservice to our readers for
so long. Um, she was not at at
at at grade 3, so, you know, in
the past, you know, certain
things were, were, were floated
to not, you know, advanced
students if they were not
reading proficient at each at
grade 3 and she wouldn't have
been and that was something that
was very, uh, as a, as a single
mom, that was, I went out and I
bought on Phonics.
uh, we did that at home, um,
and, and that helped her. But
that is exactly where we're
headed now, um, and where we
should be headed now nationally
is, is back to this phonics and
and understanding how the brain
actually works and how we learn.
So that is something that's
important to me and something
that we will continue to push
and and hopefully we can get in
line with what is is not only
expected of us, but it is, will
serve our students best.
Thank you so much for that
answer. Appreciate it very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um,
Thank you, Senator, for
sponsoring. I, I think we got
just an incredible candidate
here and.
I just want to ask you a couple
things. I, I talked to the
president offline here and I'll
I'll get to this in a second,
but I think the president said
enrollment has doubled, what's
the enrollment of uh Northern
right now.
I want to say we're up into the
1400s yet, yeah.
I
block
we uh I'm,
um, my first year back we
experienced a 13% enrollment
growth in the last semester
spring to spring, um, nearly 24%
enrollment growth. We were under
1000 students.
And we got there, so we're right
hovering a little bit under 1500
students, and that's without.
Any real statewide online uh
investment with which we think
is coming very soon.
And so we're, we've been focused
really on compliance and capital
infrastructure improvements.
So that when the legislature
chooses to strategically invest
in our.
facility in our organization
that we're excitedly uh scaling
up, um, and so that's without
any scaled investment. Um, so
about 1500 students. Thank you,
sir. Uh, thank you, uh, Mrs.
Vilardi. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so, um, ma'am, how long have
you been a region for there
again?
6 years.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and under that, during that time
in 6 years, have you seen any,
uh,
On the associates or bachelors,
you guys have a master's program
there? Yes, we do. OK, on the
master's side as well, the
graduate side. Have you seen um
academic programs either added
or eliminated. Yes, we have.
Uh, thank you, madam, Mr. Chair.
What, which ones Madam?
What days. I'm, I'm sorry,
Madam, we have eliminated, um,
some computer degrees. I believe
there was a math degree, um,
Those are the only ones that are
coming to mind right now, and we
did that through a very
stringent process based off not
only um um enrollment, but also
through the advisement of our
our faculties and it, um, the
other thing is, is that we also
ensure that if we are closing a
program that the ones that are
still in that program, have the
availability to finish out and
graduate.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Do you see now, uh, Mr. Chair
and Ms. Vilardi, do you see now
with the enrollment.
Growing very nice number, by the
way, uh, because I would argue
that those students.
Uh, some may not want to go to
UNM or New Mexico State and get
lost in the shuffle because of
large numbers, so they want to
go to a small school.
But they want to be engineers,
uh, they want to go in in
computers and stuff like that,
so when I was talking to
President Balderas.
He showed me that, and you have
a mechanical engineer in your
PE, which is just awesome to
have up there, it's a small
school.
Uh, but it looks like you have a
bachelor's in electro mechanical
engineering technology, which is
not doubly.
Uh, and information engineering
technology, uh, a credit which
both programs are accredited.
Do you see any growth in the
stem side at Northern based on
the new enrollment of 24% to
reach out to those students in
Espanola and and uh other areas
that want to have that small
school experience in those
technical degrees because it
worries me some some kids just
are a little scared to to go to
Albuquerque, Las Cruces.
Uh yes, actually we, we do, um,
you know, being that we are sort
of a feeder to to the labs, you
know, up, up, up the hills, so
we do see a lot of of more
interest in that we also um have
been starting to go out into our
local high schools a little bit
more and and and be more of a
presence, um, and, and bring
those students onto our campus
to let them know, and so they
can see that that that
opportunity is also there for
them.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I, I want to say thanks for
doing that to reach out to the
local schools because
If you're an engineer, math,
computer science, software
engineering, you're going to get
hired.
Just like that, um, in industry,
especially in the Albuquerque
area. Hopefully they stay in New
Mexico, so I would ask that you
continue to focus.
On those rural high schools and
our tribal partners to pull the
talent that's there because I
think we're wasting a lot of
talent.
Uh, cause you and I have kind of
similar stories in our
upbringing. Um, so I look
forward to reporting you. I want
to thank the President for being
here and the senator for
sponsoring, you definitely have
my support. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
And uh,
Millar, thank you for for
sharing these intimate details
with us this morning in your
intro, ah.
I wrote down vulnerability and
self-awareness are your
superpowers. Um, and that's
amazing. Uh,
I really appreciate you.
Setting that example, uh, for
everyone else who is looking at
positions of power and thinking
that for some reason, because of
something in their background,
that's not accessible to them
and, and you are an excellent
example of the fact that that's,
that's not true.
Um, you mentioned you're a first
generation college graduate, uh,
what, what kinds of things is
Northern doing to ensure that
the first generation students uh
are are succeeding.
It is, it is the culture. It's
the community, Northern just.
I don't know how to explain it
without tears. When I went from
northern northern had these
faculty and amazing professors
who want you to succeed. They
want you to succeed more than
you want to succeed.
And when I went to UNM because
it was so big and so vast and
thank you to research institute.
It's a different.
feel
I felt so out of place.
I felt like I talk about, you
know, what is it called um
syndrome, um.
The Impostor syndrome, thank
you. Complete imposter syndrome.
I didn't feel like I belonged
there. I didn't feel like I
could do it there.
Because at Northern I had been
so supported and and had been
so.
Just.
Watered like a little plant,
right? And, and then, and that's
what Northern does, and we do
that without even trying it it
the the faculty that we have in
Northern, they're not there.
To make money, they're not there
to.
Get their research published.
They're there because they care.
That's why it's so important to
keep Northern strong in
espaniola because northern New
Mexico.
Deserves people who care.
A deserve people who want them
to succeed and who believe in
them more than they believe in
themselves.
And that's what Northern is, and
you don't even have to try to
make it that way. It just is.
Mr. Chair, Miss Valette, thank
you. Um, I'm getting all choked
up now too. It's very moving,
um.
Uh, you mentioned that you were
the only person who who voted
against a recent tuition
increase.
Uh, given the tuition and fees
are, are continuing to rise. I,
I think everywhere.
What kinds of measures should
res be taking to control costs
while also not compromising
quality.
Uh, well, I, I serve on the, the
subcommittee for Finance and
facilities, and that's something
that we're we're very important
to us is watching our fiscal
house and making sure that we,
it's sort of funny, right, when
you have a bigger budget, you
kind of.
More things get kind of lost in
that bigger budget and when you
have such a small budget and you
have to tighten that belt all
the time and you have to figure
out your priorities. It helps
you a little bit more understand
what is that priority. And so
what we are doing is enable and
ensuring that we're not.
Being fiscally top heavy and
fiscally heavy when it comes to
administration and different
things, but also ensuring that
we're paying our faculty and our
professors, what they deserve
because we also want to make
sure that we keep them, um, so
it's, it's that fine balance of
of being able to ensure that
we're not increasing tuition and
fees, and we're not making that
on the backs of our students
that we can figure out our own
fiscal house before we do that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, Senator.
Um, kudos.
For your opening statement.
Um
Secondly, um,
As you have grown so quickly.
Double digits.
How has your
Uh, graduation rate been
affected. Um, I think it also
has been in in a positive manner
as well. I don't have the actual
um rate or or percentage rate,
but it has also gone up as well.
Um, that, that's the amazing
time, right, to watch all of
those faces walk across our
stage and know what they have
accomplished and know what's in
front of them. So it's great to
see that increase as well.
Oh
Thank you for that. Um,
Mr. Madam Chair, Senator.
What's the, what's the biggest
challenge before
Highlands today.
In order to address the needs of
the surrounding communities.
Uh, well, the, the needs of
Northern are no worries, uh,
chair, sorry, uh, senator, the
The community, it is like I said
Northern is is sort of like the
center of the community, I
think, and what we've been
talking about is, is creating
more partnerships at the local
level and bringing it more into
that that center of espanola,
the center, uh, of that
community and, and creating
partnerships with the city, with
the county, and, and seeing how
we can, uh, one thought I've
had, if I may put a plug in is
that I would love to use some of
our unused space on our campus.
As, as an incubator for, for
local industry, for local
people, because, you know, a lot
of times you might have somebody
who wants to open up a business,
but rent in the city is too
expensive. If we can figure out
something in the unused part of
our campus where we can supply
rent, obviously we can't go
against the anti-donation
clause, but a lowered rent where
we're keeping services in our
community. We're also creating
economic development within our
community, but we're also
bringing more people and place
and and faces on.
Campus.
I appreciate that so.
I think you're well suited to
continue the growth in the
College that you feel so
emotionally attached to.
And quite frankly have been
successful in attending, so I
look forward to supporting you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. And I'd like to
just make some comments and no
questions, but I'm so thankful
for your leadership and your
tight to community. My father
was a custodian at Northern New
Mexico College, and he told us
the thing he saved last to clean
or the chalkboards back then, it
wasn't even a dry er race sport,
because he was it hurt his heart
to know he was gonna take down
what all of those minds came
together.
He saved that for the last, and
so I often wonder what that
custodian, my father would say,
knowing that his son became the
senator to represent the
beautiful Espanilla Valley and
northern New Mexico College, my
title the college is also that
after working with the
University of Wyoming's cheer
team, I became Northern's first
cheer coach, and worked with
Northern student athletes for
some time and became vested in
in northern as well. Now this is
a plug to the senators here. We
are a rural serving institution.
but we don't have a dormitory.
And so, which is really odd when
you think that we're trying to
recruit students from rural Rio
Riba County to come and get an
education at their closest, um.
Un college which is is in the
county, we're bussing them to
and from we have students from
Southern Colorado who are
expressing interest in northern
New Mexico College, but we can't
house them because we don't have
dorms. And so when there's a
time for us to pitch for dorms,
I'd hope that all of you could
stand with us in the importance
of ensuring we can house our
students, uh, Northern has an
amazing partnership with trades
programs where they bring in
students from different high
schools, they bus them in to
learn trades, um,
Salamos National Laboratory is
partnered with Northern to
ensure that those students who
become certified in a trade, can
get a position within the
laboratory cause we're seeing
that there's not enough
tradesmen or women, and they
also partner with um science, we
have a top notch nursing program
at Northern and then my last
comment is I would love to work
with the Regents, my master's
thesis was on the literacy
crisis in the Espanola Valley,
and if we talk about grow your
own, partnering with our
teaching.
College, partnering up on how we
then get those teachers back
into the community, students who
look like them, who are helping
coach them and teaching, we
could have a big win for our
entire community. And with that,
I have no questions, just those
comments, but you make me proud.
And so thank you for all that
you do. Senator Dios.
chairman, chair, I just wanted
to, uh, just say a few things,
no questions, but uh I
appreciate you opening yourself
up.
Totally, I wish more of us would
could could do that, uh, I've
got family in the uh Las Vegas,
Las Vegas area, Gonzalez ranch,
but I do know that their family
from mine that have been
successful outside the valley.
Because of what Northern's done,
I've got um uh uh Deacon Eloy,
Roy Ball, his wife Anita, worked
there. I don't know if she's
still there or not, but I just
know that historically, you guys
have served the under
underprivileged in the area. I
just wanted to tell you that
I'll be in full sport, but I
just wanted to
Compliment you on going to the
point that you expose yourself.
I truly wish that all of us
could be as transparent as you
are. I'll be standing support.
Thank you.
Senator Stephanics. Thank you,
um, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, I
would move the reappointment of
Erica Rita Velarde for the
Northern New Mexico College
Board of Regents.
Thank you for that, Senator, and
before we take a vote, I just
want to note that Kit Carson,
um, Luis Reyes, the chief
executive officer also sent a
letter on your behalf asking
that you be re-appointed. And
with that, if I can have a roll
call vote.
Senator Bergmans.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantly is excused. Senator
Gallegos, Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara, yes.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 9, yes, 1
excused, you'll be moving to a
full Senate confirmation later
this morning. Thank you for
joining us and thanks for all
that you do. Thank you guys.
Next we're gonna move on to the
appointment of Dolores Lila
Gudule to the northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Rules
Committee.
It's great to be here, uh,
before you today.
As uh we present, if you will,
the nomination.
Uh, for appointment to uh
northern New Mexico uh College
Board of Regions of uh Dolores
Lila.
Gurule, and if I may just uh as
a, as a uh preface.
Uh, President Hector Balderas
over the the last many decades
has served as the representative
of the state auditor, of course,
the AG and many other statewide
uh uh initiatives and and
positions, but throughout all of
it, one of the things that he
continues to indicate regardless
of where he goes.
He ensures that there's going to
be accountability.
And the things that he was
talking about regarding uh
Dolores Grue really stand out.
And I'm gonna go through some of
those things today, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Rules Committee.
Because I believe that the
persona, if you will, uh, of
this person really goes back to
this.
Yeah, una persona
She is a person of the
community.
And what I really do is I go
through these uh nominations. I
try to reach in not only the
credentials, but what the
individuals bring, if you will,
to the position.
This individual is a lifelong
resident of uh Oosarko.
She's currently studying
information engineering
technology and northern New
Mexico College.
She has served northern New
Mexico, uh, college in various
capacities.
Including 4 terms on the student
senate.
And two of those terms as
president of the student senate.
She continues to be involved not
only with her job, her work.
With the institution, but she
serves with passion.
As she continues to advocate for
students at Northern.
She advocates for the youth, of
course, surrounding the Espanola
Valley, she has a lot of pride
in what she does there.
She also has a professional
career that includes working in
banking for several years.
And most recently for the uh her
involvement with the Los Alamos
National Laboratory.
He volunteer activities include
volunteering at her local
community center.
Her place of worship and for her
local water association.
She digs right into, if you
will, what the community really
needs. And that's everything
from education to water to
infrastructure.
How to go ahead and help and
whenever she helps with the area
of banking.
It means how do we help people?
Uh, become stronger with their
own personal economy.
She has served as vice president
of the board of directors of
Osarco Community Center.
She's a board member of the Del
Norte LOV Love Foundation board
of directors.
Secretary for the Ojosarko
MDWCA.
And as a volunteer firefighter
again, we're talking about the
grassroots involvement in her
community.
She has served is that in that
capacity with Jojo Sarko
Volunteer Fire Department.
She's married to her husband of
7 years, Edward, and they have
one son, Dante.
Mr. Chair and of course members
of the Senate Rules Committee.
This individual is the epitome,
is the pinnacle, is the example.
As we go forward of what real
community involvement and
investment happens to be.
She is accountable, she's
transparent.
She's articulate, most
importantly, she's passionate.
about what she can deliver for
the students there at the
northern College. So with that,
uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
Senate Rules Committee, if I may
defer at this time, of course,
to Mister Dolores Coroulet for
her statement. Thank you,
Senator, before we go to Msco
dela, I just want to welcome the
students, staff, parents, and
teachers from McCurdy Charter
School in Espanola, who came in
to listen to the appointment of
the regents from their home
college. Thank you for joining
us.
Let's go to life.
Thank you, Senator Campos, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, um, as
Senator Campo stated I was born
and raised in Oscarco, New
Mexico, um, I went to Penasco
High School and at Penasco high
school I graduated at the top of
my class, um, when I graduated
at the top of my class, I had,
um, family that had come before
me that that was kind of the end
of their journey that was their
reach, that was their end goal
was to get the high school
diploma, so I never really saw
my staff, myself past high.
Um, I immediately started a
career at Del Norte Credit
Union, and it was at Northern
New Mexico College, um, that
provided a very unique program
that I haven't really seen
anywhere else, or maybe I just
don't know about is the El
Puente program, and that's for,
uh, uh, it's a bridge summer
bridge program that helps bridge
students either from high school
into college or adults who have
been out of college, I'm out of
high school for a while,
bridging them into college as
well. So I took part in that El
Puente um.
Program
and that program gave me the
confidence to become a college
student at Northern, uh, since
becoming a college student at
Northern and I have had to take
baby steps because when I made
that decision to continue my
education. I was also a single
mother at the time, so I've
taken baby steps, um, and there
have been points in my in my
life where I where I felt very
burnt out and wanting to give
up.
Um, because they got very
difficult at one point I was
working two jobs and also going
to uh college at Northern, um,
because of the unique culture
that there is at Northern where
it's really like a family,
everybody pretty much knows
everyone there, and we have that
support system for each other,
um, I have so much support from
faculty from leaders of the
college to help me to continue
my journey, um, I've also
because I completed the
associate of Information
Engineering.
um,
the associate of software
Engineering that I'm supposed to
be graduating with this May, um,
that did open a door for me at
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
um.
To, um, an opportunity in their
procurement and supply chain.
And as I've
Progressed in that career. I've
also seen the seen the need for
engineers to also know project
management, technical writing.
So as I'm waiting to complete my
bachelor's degree at Northern, I
have the classes that I have
left need to be in person, and I
don't have the availability to
do the in-person right now
during the working hours that I
have, um, so I'm using this time
to take care of the virtual
classes that Northern is able to
provide in project management
technical writing, because I see
the benefit that that will also
provide.
my career.
Um, in the time that I served as
students Senate President. I, I
worked very closely with
President Balderas when he first
came, um, in office as our
president and I brought to him
many needs of the students, um,
that the students were voicing
and it's just such, such a great
joy to see, um, that the voice
of the students has been heard
by our administration. In fact,
I think today they're having the
grand opening of our of our
cafe, which we did not have a
cafeteria.
Since, um, before COVID, and
that was something that our
students have been wanting and
desire to have for many times,
but during that time, because
President Balderas and the
shared governance that we had as
um when I was a student senate
president open communication,
effective communication. He
also, um, immediately brought on
food trucks for our students as
well to be able to have a close
place to get something to eat,
um, something to snack on coffee
things, and that really brought
a lot of it's so small things
that.
really helped motivate students
to, to want to do their best
when they're in school and so,
um.
Working with President Balderas
and President Martin has been an
honor to serve, uh, with them
and to also be the voice of the
student at Northern New Mexico
College in my two terms as
student Senate president.
Thank you so much for your
comments. We do have organized
support, uh President Michael A.
Martin of the northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents.
If you can come up and also
President Balderas, if you'd
like to say a few words as well.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
distinguished members of the
committee. My name is Michael
Martin. I'm the president of the
Board of Regents at Northern
have been for the last 6 years,
very fortunate to work with
Dolores for the 2 years when she
was a student Senate president,
uh, very, very forward thinking
young lady, organized training
for all of the uh officers of
the.
In Senate, which is kind of an
appropriate thing right now, I
guess we're talking about
training for regions. She also
served on the committee.
President Select committee that
selects President Balderas.
And
Many, many hours didn't you miss
Girly going over the 30 some
applicants got us down to 555
finalists board interviewed, and
I'm standing standing here in
support of her and thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
President Balderas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of this honorable
committee, um, as you saw in our
previous uh regent appointment
candidate and then and, and if
this extends to
Miss Guerla as well.
They grow your own concept is
Not only out of necessity, it is
extremely inspiring.
To see the life path.
Of, of our type of leaders. Many
are are afraid sometimes to go
into Espanola.
Whether it's building new homes
or businesses.
The Rio Riba County does not get
the capital infusion.
At Santa Fe County might or Los
Alamos. Yet we are emerging as
the most trusted government
entity.
In the region for potentially
workforce housing and student
housing. We are also emerging uh
as pipelines uh innovative from
dual credit.
To trades to now uh engineering
because we have such a vital
United States national security
mission just.
Uh, a stone's throw. We're also
a stone's throw away from the
historical Georgia O'Keefe, uh,
megabillion dollar branding
industry that somehow we've not
been able to always transform
espanola.
It should not be a drive-by
community. I'm optimistic
because of the strong leaders
that are turning the corner and
Miss Goulet represents, uh, not
only a mother.
Uh, a professional
A student who is honestly
sharing with you her life
journey.
But these individuals, including
her, have such resiliency.
And I do think that's going to
be the characteristic of
Uh, the future direction of this
board.
Which is essentially a fancy way
to say that these leaders are
really emerging, solving.
Uh, their own communities's
challenges, housing insecurity.
Economic insecurity and food
insecurity, as she described uh
northern New Mexico College.
Had a food desert.
How does that happen in 2024 and
2025.
How when we're experiencing the
largest wealth generation and
wealth transfer in our country
and in the state of New Mexico,
do we have a, a campus that
doesn't have bathrooms, uh, that
are working and roofs that are
leaking, and I will tell you
it's
Uh, today, with the confidence
of this Senate committee, you
are selecting the right leaders
for this region board, and
they're on honor and pleasure to
work with, so, uh, I wish you
the best and I stand in strong,
strong support of our superstar
here, uh, potentially Regent
Goulet, and, and I want to thank
the legislative
body that that created the
student pathway for student
regions.
But in Northern, we don't call
them student regents. She has,
she will have every
inherent power to be fiscally
responsible, and if she's not
happy with the president, she
can fire her president too, so
she's a potential boss lady.
Uh, with your powers that be
here today. So thank you for
letting me address this
honorable committee.
Thank you Ericarita.
The.
Hello again, uh, chair.
Committee. Thank you. I want to
stand in strong support of Ms.
Grule. She is one of our
emerging leaders. Um, I'm so
honored to support her today,
and I'm so proud of her because
I've seen her blossom into this
leadership role she has made for
leadership, and I can't wait to
see you when you get out there
into the industry, and you're
leading other things and so I, I
do stand in strong support, and
I do want to also say I attend
national conferences for boards.
And we are one of the few states
that gives our students a vote.
Um, some states don't even have
student regents, and the
majority of them are just there
to watch. Um, so I want to go
off with what President Maldea
said, and I want to thank our
state for enabling and
empowering our students.
Thank you for your comments. And
so we have no one else signed
up, but I am gonna go to the
committee by a show of hands,
how many in the committee room
are in favor of this
appointment?
6 and now anybody in opposition
of the appointment.
thing and what about online?
No, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr.
I'm sure Senator.
You know, the
we let the
The challenge to affect small
communities.
Um, like yours, like mine.
Sometimes is a balancing act
between growing your own.
And bringing new talent in.
You, of course, are one of the
grow your own.
Supported by
Uh, your leadership.
Why do you believe you were
chosen as a regent.
I believe I was chosen as a
regent because I before um
any was given to me what the
students Senate, I always
volunteered and I always wanted
to make a difference, even if it
wasn't for reasons to grow my
own career or to have the power,
um, I always truly wanted to
make a difference, especially in
our communities, many of our
communities are in crisis right
now with no succession planning
succession planning, and many of
the small community.
organizations like our water
association. Everyone was ready
to retire and there was nobody
there to take their place or
know what we needed to do next,
so I think it's just really
important to set the example
always to always want to make a
difference regardless of how
it's going to advance you in
your own personal career or or
um
Sorry, um position.
Um, Mr.
Senator, I appreciate that
answer cause
What I read through your resume
was
You had been successful.
And that's probably
I mean, you had shown success,
and they look forward to you
being on the board.
What do you believe is the
greatest.
Um, obstacle.
From success.
For your college,
And what can we do to help you
in the legislature.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, um, the biggest
obstacle obstacle in our
communities as a whole is that
there's so many students that
don't have confidence in
themselves. Um, there is one, I
was one of those students that
didn't have that confidence and
I had the unique opportunity of
having leaders at Northern New
Mexico College help, uh, help me
to believe in myself, um,
because those people that I saw
as role models, they took the
time to learn about me. They
took the time to ask questions.
And they took the time to offer
their help in any way that they
could, um, uh, Regent Velarde
and President Martin are just
two examples of the in the
border regions that um really
took me under their wing. They
saw me as this very scared doe
that had no idea what I was
gonna come up against as the
Senate president because I was
terrified and they took me under
their wing and they really
helped, um, foster a lot of a
lot of the skills and knowledge
that I was able to obtain in
those two.
years.
Oh, Mr. Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I
appreciate that and I think uh I
think you're willing,
willingness to
Work before you had the
position.
And to perform as you
apparently have is, is really
instrumental in creating an
atmospheric of success in the
university. I look forward to
supporting your nomination.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you. Uh,
I think I'm gonna mispronounce I
I said your name the other day
and one of my staff, uh, laughed
at me and said, that is not how
you pronounce her name. So I
will not, uh, do the disservice
of of mispronouncing it here,
um, but thank you so much for,
for being here, for your
willingness to serve, uh, you
are a, a working mom and in
school and.
You were president of the
student senate and now serving
the student regent that you must
be a tired lady. I do, I do a
fraction of that poorly, and I
am tired already, so I'm very
impressed. Um,
You said that, uh, so that one
of the biggest obstacles is, is
the lack of confidence, and it
sounds like there is a, a really
profound culture of mentorship.
Uh, at Northern already, which
is, which makes a a a big
difference in, in, in, uh,
giving students that confidence.
What, what other kinds of
initiatives should the regents
be prioritizing to address that
obstacle.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, um.
I think there needs to be maybe
if it's possible more
internships provided to students
as they're in high school, um,
so that they come to college
ready to have that kind of
leadership skill instilled in
them and not be afraid of what
everyone's gonna think if they
get up and speak, um, or if they
get up and wanna wanna voice
their needs to our leaders of
the state, um, I think it's so
important because especially
even all of US senators, um, I
don't know if any of you have
ever.
consider, you know, who's gonna
come after you. Is there anyone
that's gonna be interested in
coming after you because it's
such a culture and society now
of influencers and online and
TikTok and all these things that
these students are following,
um.
People that are doing media,
which is great, you know,
that's, that's what the future
is headed toward, but I think
that it's really important for
all the leaders of New Mexico,
all the leaders in the college
to become influencers that are
as engaged in as motivated to
gain the interest of our next
generation to do what you do.
And to do it well.
Great. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, um, I'm not gonna screw
your name up either, ma'am, so
I'll just stick with ma'am if
that's OK. That's fine.
Um, you know, I'm looking
through your resume and
everything and, and listening to
your opening statement. There's
really 3 words, uh, that stand
out to me with you, it's uh
vibrant.
It's robust
In its tenacity.
And when I look at you as being
a valedictorian, and I hear you
saying about don't have
confidence in yourself, it just
blows me away that you are a
valedictorian, and can I assume
you have a security clearance
doing supply chain management.
Yes, sir. Awesome, thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, and you know, looking
through your resume and I know
you had a blip. I don't want to
talk about the blip, but what I
wanna just say to you is, how
did you, because that's that's a
big issue when you're young and
something happens to you, and it
looks like you have taken full
accountability and
responsibility and really built
a great life and um how do you
tell these young people who are
here, which I'm glad they're
here to see you with.
All your amazing experience, uh,
to get where you're at. When
things happen to you in life.
What do you tell them?
Uh, to help them through that
particular period of time
because you talked about social
influences and social media crap
and people talking trash and how
do you, how do you tell them to
put all that white noise aside,
all that just background noise
and um.
ahead, learn from the mistake,
recognize it, learn from it.
And go on to do great things.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and,
uh, Senator Block, what the
advice that I would give to the
young people that are in uh in
the room today is that when
things happen to allow it to be
an experience and to let it
teach you a lesson, not let it
stop you, um, so there's gonna
be tons of um speed bumps. Don't
let it be a complete stop sign,
just let it be a speed bump and
get your speed back up and keep
going again, because it's so
important, as I mentioned
before, yes, we have these.
influencers, we have this online
culture, um, but online culture
didn't build this building. They
didn't build this chair that
we're sitting in. They didn't
build the phones that you're on,
and it's important if you wanna
have a continued plan for
America for its state of New
Mexico for America that we
continue to have builders that
we continue to have innovators,
planners, um, project managers,
engineers, um, carpenters, you
know that at Northern New Mexico
colleges total devastation to
our northern communities when
our
Trades programs stopped. Um, I
have family that was looking for
a carpenter, couldn't find a
carpenter or electrician, they
couldn't find an electrician,
um, and so it's so important for
all of you to think about, um,
look around you, I'll always be
aware and alert of all of the
things around you and that
somebody built that and that
could be you one day to build
some of those things and to
invent maybe the next iPhone or
or something that's that's gonna
be a trailblazer for um your
state and for your country. That
that is a thank you.
For
Thank you for that answer. Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Listen, I, I didn't go to New
Mexico State, I didn't go to
university New Mexico and I've
sat here like us and looking
through these regions, but, but
I gotta tell you.
I am most impressed with the
region's at Northern.
It is just impressive, and I
really look forward to seeing
the greatness that you do to
bring, uh, northern uh to new
heights. Um, I'm just so proud
of you, uh, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And so I'm
gonna make a few comments. I'm
proud of you too, Miss Guruet.
You've always had your ear on
the ground of what the issues
are in northern New Mexico, just
not in Espanola, but in the
small communities that surround
us and I'm so very thankful for
that. I'm thankful for your
leadership and what you do to
stand up for students.
And to stand up for Nortenos in
general and to have students
from McCurdy Charter School
sitting behind you hearing what
you're saying is impressive
because you're leaving a lasting
impact on them, and who knows,
maybe you might be the one to
succeed me.
And with that, Madam Chair, I'm
gonna ask what the will of the
committee is.
Um
Senator Lopez Mr. Chair, I move
a pass.
So there's been a motion to move
Miss Cole forward for a full
Senate confirmation. With that,
I'm gonna ask for a roll call
vote.
Senator Bergman. Yes.
Senator Block. Absolutely 100%
without a doubt, yes.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantley is excused. Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Lopez. Yes.
Senator Stefaniks, Senator
Stefaniks is excused. Senator
Stewart. Yes. Senator Townsend.
So
Senator Jaramillo.
Yes.
Senator Doig.
On a vote of 8 yes 2 excused,
you will move forward to the
full Senate for full
confirmation later this morning.
Thank you so much.
We have one last item on the
list. That's the con the
appointment of Ronald Joseph
Lovato to the northern New
Mexico College Board of Regents.
I'm gonna serve as a Senate
sponsor, so I'm gonna hand the
Madam Chan, the essence of time,
I'm gonna move a little quick.
But next to me is Governor Ron
Lovato of the OKinga Pueblo, who
is up for for appointment to the
northern New Mexico College
Board of Regents, Ron has been a
community leader and somebody
that
People from the Pueblo and the
surrounding communities have
looked up to for years, a voice
for communities when sometimes
there has not been a voice that
has represented uh the pueblo or
northern New Mexico in general.
He not only served as governor,
he's the executive officer of
the State Corporation, which has
a major connection to Los Alamos
National Laboratory, and has
become a pipeline for Nortenos
for northern New Mexicans to not
only work for se, but
to partner with the laboratory
on their mission and provide
services to Los Alamos National
Laboratory. We've heard time and
time today that representation
matters, having Ron Lovato on
the board would definitely
ensure that we have
representation of our Pueblo
culture on the regions that can
talk to the needs and the wants
of students in our tribal
communities. And with that, I'm
going to pass it over to
Governor Lovato for comments.
Thank, thank you, Senator. Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
Senate Rules Committee. Good
morning.
I, I believe it's on. Let me
adjust.
Good, good, good morning. It's
uh it's my great pleasure to be
here. My name is Ron Lovato. I'm
uh.
Uh, spent the last 20 years of
my career, um, in O Winger
running the tech corporation,
uh, prior to that I worked here
in Santa Fe at Santa Fe Indian
School and um I was raised in
the valley. I, I.
Consider it my home, I'm a
believer in the valley, and I,
uh, I look to do what I can to
help, to help the valley, um,
with that, I'll stand for any
questions. Thank you.
Thank you, we did not have
anyone signed up in and support
our opposition, uh.
Uh, by a raise of hands, is
there anyone in the room in
support?
All right. 3 or 4. Anyone in
opposition?
See none anyone online?
No? All right, members of the
committee.
Governor, you are lucky that
you're getting us at the end of
our meeting, so you're getting
you're getting a a quick here,
uh, Senator Berglins.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you for being here today.
Just a quick question. I noticed
you are currently on the board
of the New Mexico Finance
Authority,
and I'm just wondering how
you'll balance that role with
the region role.
I'm not sure yet. I I don't know
the schedules of the New Mexico
Finance Authority. There's 2
committee meetings that are done
online and there's one that's
uh.
In person or online, so it's
once a month. I'm, I don't know
the meeting schedule of Northern
yet, but um I'll, I'll manage
it, Senator, thank you. Thank
you. And uh President Balderas,
we had you speak on the others.
I, I apologize. I forgot to go
to you for nodam Chairwoman, I
want to apologize. I didn't want
it to look like I'm not
supporting his eyes standing
strong, strong support. I know
you're.
Short on time. I will just, uh,
Note, um
His amazing business and fiscal
background.
And also, uh, we
are probably the only higher ed
institution that is so close.
To Pueblo culture and government
and so it's very important for
us, and I know the legislative
body to have tribal leaders um
that are our neighbors and also
northern New Mexico College is.
On a tribal heritage land,
there's a historical connection,
so it's a great honor to support
the governor here today. Thank
you.
Thank you.
That members of the committee,
Senator Stewart.
Man chair, I move approval of
Mister Lovato for an appointment
to Northern New Mexico College
and asked that we move him to
the Senate floor for further
confirmation.
All right. Seeing no other
debate. Governor, you really are
getting the, the fastest
confirmation we're doing in
here, um, let's go ahead and uh,
and actually, in keeping with
how fast we're going. Is there
any uh objection to that motion.
Seeing none, please show all
members present as voting, uh,
yes, and Governor, we will see
you down on the Senate floor a
little later this morning for
confirmation before the full
Senate. Thank you.
And members real, real quickly
before we, uh, go into recess.
Um, I'm going to do a motion for
reconsideration on SB 237. That
was Senator Stewart's bill that
uh
That stalled on the tie, uh, in
our last meeting and so I would
like to do a motion for
reconsideration on that.
Is there any objection to that
motion?
Right, see, none, that motion
passes, and so now we are back.
On that bill, we are going to
retake the vote on that bill.
Yes, Senator.
yeah.
Uh,
thank you for bringing this
forward.
I have been told that there is
one member of this commission
that is not making meetings and
is
And is holding up progress.
Are you aware of that and can we
address it? Can we fix it?
Uh, Madam Chair, I am aware of
it and we are fixing it. We have
I've appointed a new person, uh,
the speaker has appointed a new
person. It's kind of fallen into
disarray the last few years,
they haven't gotten a good
healthy budget, so I think it's
on the men, um, the two people
that have been appointed are
both excellent and so, uh, I
brought this in the spirit of
let's get their budget back.
to snuff and let's move forward.
So we're on the mend with this
commission. And I know the
concerns were based on that,
that it needs to be fixed and
quite frankly, I've been told
that one of
I don't know if I should say
this, but one of them might have
come from this side of the aisle
that had been appointed that
wasn't showing up and we were
Willing to work to get that
corrected. So if you have it
corrected on your side.
Uh, so be it, and we look
forward to supporting it.
And Madam Chair, I, I will work
with Senator Townsend on that
other appointment.
Senator Block, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, Senator
Stewart, for bringing this up.
The only question I had was, um,
on this, because it was a very
short, short film, um, and
As as a county commissioner in
Sandoval County, we, we budgeted
money aside for certain
holidays, MLK being one of them,
same thing with the city of Rio
Rancho, and this was, I think,
250K, is that correct, ma'am?
Uh, madam chair, Senator B
block, yes, and it, it's short
because it's just an
appropriation bill doesn't go
further. It goes to finance,
sits there, we fight to put it
in the budget. So that's what
that is. It's a simple
appropriation bill. And thank
you, Senator Sart Madam Chair,
do, do we know what is, is that
every year it's 250, or are we
growing that to?
Uh, Madam Chair, we're not
trying to grow it. It's a little
bit less than that. I put that
in there, um, cause I wanted to
grow it, but that doesn't mean
it will happen, uh, cause it's
not in the budget now, so, um,
it's, you know, it's, it's not a
growth thing. It's
They have been ignored. They've
not been able to do their work
in part because of the uh
commission itself and the
pandemic just ended their
meetings, so I'm trying to uh uh
get it back to health. It's the
Martin Luther King Jr.
Commission. They do all kinds of
work around Juneteenth. They
actually help and train
students. They're, they're gonna
have a march, uh, in March or
April, uh,
Down Central, uh, just as a
promotion of their commission,
so just trying to help them out.
Perfect. Thank you, Senator
Stewart. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I look forward to support.
All right, so.
I don't know if I actually made
a motion.
I'm sure I move that we passed
Senate Bill 237.
All right. Is there any
objection to that motion?
Seeing none, please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative, and Senator, you
