To call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator do hit.
Center guy our.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator o'neill.
Center to the Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo this year
Representative and now with
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
I'll Senators please report to
the chamber we're needing a
quorum.
We now have a quorum I Mr
Reverend David can Tana and
Revenue Debbie can done across
star administrative and as the
year in standing for the pledge
of allegiance to be led today by
senator cliff Pirtle thanks
allegiance in Spanish to relate
We're going to begin our prayer
by the blowing of the show far
as we do traditionally and then
we'll be reading from the
scriptures.
For the book of Colossians.
Heavenly father we pray without
ceasing and we ask that this
legislature be filled with the
good work and increasing in the
knowledge of god strengthened
with all power according to his
glorious might for the attaining
of all steadfastness and
patience joyously giving thanks
god of the lord Jesus Christ the
father of glory may give to this
session a spirit of wisdom and
of revelation in the knowledge
of him we pray that the eyes of
of his power toward us who
believe these are in accordance
with the working of the strength
of his might.
For the books the fusions in
hearts through faith so that
date being rooted and grounded
in love maybe able to comprehend
with all the saints what is the
breadth and length and height
and depth and to know the love
This purse from the book of
revelation grace be unto you and
peace from him which is and
which was and which is to come
from the dead and the prince of
the kings of the earth.
The book of numbers the lower
you and keep you the lord make
of our lord and savior you show
more money has she up Jesus
Christ amen.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all but I met the
let that.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Once again would like to welcome
morning apologize for the delay
but it's that time when lots of
things are moving around a
unanimous consent we go about
our business announcements
miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
throughout the session and I
really approve Preciado Senate
chaplain I just bringing
different voices and different
sounds but I heard this morning
it's just something that the
day and Espanola has agreed to
They are providing.
They are providing box dinners
for all of us which is very much
appreciated and senator Hermio
and just for the confirmation is
what we need to do is read in
the committee reports first and
then once we get those down I
don't think they're down yet
we'll make sure to get to the
confirmations and proceed
be served courtesy of I believe
Charlie markets Powdrell
barbecue for everyone so we
really appreciate all the.
appreciate so again yeah
different different one and then
just just for the members before
we jump into state this to give
everyone a heads up in the in
this morning session we're gonna
Padilla Senator Michael Padilla
I thank you very much Mr
president in his consent to
allow members to remove their
jackets hearing no objections
members are allowed to remove
chamber and in the gallery
center for the thank you very
much Mr president Ms consent to
excuse senator Clemente until we
return to the chamber hearing no
where money today try to fell
right off but I I just want to
thank our chaplain in the
reference came today that was
very unique and it was up
lifting and and I can tell the
him for that thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Brandt centre Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president I
have to of my most special
We do have further announcements
with Senator Kernan.
Elizabeth there from Austin
Texas analysts with that works
for the Texas elementary
principals and supervisors
association and Hannah is in the
kind of following in her
grandmother's footsteps which
I'm very proud of but if you'll
help me welcome my daughter and
granddaughter.
my son Benjamin Shendo.
He's a for those of you Aggie
he's a a you and NMSU Aggie so
Cleveland high school.
So please help me welcome I
guess.
Thank you Senator Shendo Senator
Hickey.
university of New Mexico couple
years ago I found that having a
graduate student to help me was
reserves and to process issues
around was very very
native New Mexican and
Albuquerque N. and T. went to U.
and them and then beyond that to
medical school and he is each
you about is reserves because
some of your gonna probably one
asking questions as afterwards
but he was also selected by you
the impact of estrogen on
metabolic disorders
particularly obesity and other
situations but he will get his
residency and finish that and
then have his Ph.D and then he's
going to go on and do
dermatology which is good
because we know we need to
Mexico she grew up in Wisconsin
just north of me and she worked
it did a lot of work after the
university of Wisconsin in
double masters one and M. P. H.
and the other one in masters and
community urban regional
planning.
write part of that
her work is now hold on zoo and
not a illnesses.
Like comment.
next time we're going to have
someone here in New Mexico who
can understand that and maybe
one day even find ways to
prevent it
usually identify a topic and
then I have the great luxury on
Tuesdays and Thursdays of of
therapy with them for me as we
go through can you believe they
Randy is going to stay in New
Mexico his wife is a family
practice resident and she was
and the
that with the R. U. P. the rural
it permanent this year because
of that kind of outcome and and
Randy will be here doing
research at the university of
New Mexico and we hope Rebeca
finds a really good job in the
I've been able to do this year.
Thank you Senator Hickey.
who attends Espanola high school
where she serves as a sophomore
class president she's a multi
sport athlete to play softball
volleyball and wrestling and she
has plans to graduate to
student body president he was
elected governor at a youth
legislative session last summer
and he wants to pursue a career
in government if I could have
members of the body and folks in
Thank you senator pope Center
Maestas.
Thank you Mr president Adams
because that entities my guess.
I have a with me though to
honor society link crew which
mentors freshman two plays golf
and will be attending Arizona
State University to study sports
medicine and nutrition and then
I also have us of Annika saw
crew and she'll be studying
forensic science at either
George Washington in DC or low
oil a Chicago university in
Illinois please welcome my guess
Thank you Mr president and
members so I'd like to introduce
my guest and it is so one eight
major in engineering mechanical
engineering.
And she's also a skier and she's
working with the a little bit of
resident I made a mistake last
night during debate and I want
to correct that here we were
talking about posting of floor
amazing clerk has been doing
that here in the Senate all
session long getting things up
instantaneously and so I think I
left the body with the
is a package of pecans I assume
that those because came from
where else Misia valley in fact
they came from Hobbs.
This Senator Kernan assures me
that there is of a very strong
pecan orchard in Hobbs we got to
talking.
And it strikes me Mr president
Permian basin and the millions
and millions of gallons of
produced water.
That if if if the price of the
reserves currently going on at
the New Mexico state and it New
have a two for one we could
clean up the water grow pecans
or other trees of any sort
whatever would grow and hubs and
motivated to think about all the
ways in which produced water
might be put to good use instead
of being considered a waste
product thank you Mr president
Hearing hearing no objection.
manager Marge leave aside just
in our husband Jimmy I just and
their daughter from star best E.
customs who heard me say where
I'm from and how proud I am to
be for Mesilla that they made a
I'm a proud native son of the
Espanola valley Mr president and
today is Espanola day and so
what's amazing about the
Espanola valley is we come from
always rises on the valley to
the west where they have just
set free all of our worries at
the night and we're the Rio
Grande the ribbons through
northern New Mexico to show that
lived in the valley for hundreds
of years prior to the arrival of
the Spanish in fifteen ninety
eight the area presently known
as Espanola was originally
Railroad known as the chili line
the area was re platted and
organized under the name I just
buy new on line the city of
that's what the other was
who take care of each other my
mom is behind me and family
raised us to believe that you
take care of family the Espanola
valley taught me that community
is family and there's nothing I
certificate are you going to
have a certificate and then I
believe other members would like
to comment on the celebration
Espanola day do I need to read
out the certificate you don't
have to read out certificate but
About our industry with the
railroad and then staying as a
city right now that is that part
of northern New Mexico a number
of our workforce working at Los
Alamos National Laboratory the
number of teachers that the
me in the gallery and those like
my father who are here in spirit
thank you Mr president Senator
may we do have others who would
like to speak to the certificate
and the celebration of the of
in New Mexico to the south
valley in my district when I
drive there and I I see the
commodities in the composite is
in the grandmas and grandpas in
the antis in the uncles and
drive through there and you have
higher education if you have
excellent sports teams you have
a modernization part of the town
you have the traditional area of
the town there's that the you
Mexico very very well and I also
want to say that I'm very proud
of Senator how to me Mr
president for his pride every
day that we come in here if we
lifts up that community the way
he does and I'm very proud of
his work here in Santa Fe thank
you Mr president.
should be proud of Senator a our
meal I mean he's a great Senator
great legislature always
hustling always triggers heart
always talks about is community
rode the bus.
me and let me back up and but
what a great family and what a
great community I mean I see the
low riders out there this
morning when I came in in the
fire truck and my all what's
best lamb ribs in the statement
that restaurant closed and but I
used to go out there after
sometimes of the session the
lambs I like them a lot and so
they have the best land reserves
great place of people can make
jokes but Espanol but we know
the treasures of there and the
people are there and and they
have a Senator that cares about
their communities thank you Mr.
she had the privilege of working
at Camino de Paz farm back in
two thousand two and three and
was there for about a year and a
half which is right next just
been Yola so she spent that time
Espanola.
Thank you senator and with
Senator Steinborn full by
Senator Lopez and Senator Woods
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
admiration for your new Senator
how to me and he is really the
academy if you look up the word
public servant and happy warrior
probably his picture would be in
that roadside stand that sells
chickens is open because every
time I drive through their
clothes and I just heard about
this place forever like that's
the major hiccup but so anyway
I'm one of the Jewish members
here and I I was out
unfortunately when the prayer
was read but I want to welcome
you as well to the to.
Senator Woods and centers the
Lopez Senator Lopez thank you
very much Mr president and I
rise to say a few words on the
certificate to recognize
along the Rio Grande the culture
the food is the same but what I
will tell you Mr president
growing up we we always used to
go through to go visit other
also has Seoul the alma and I
think that is what is so
soulful of what Espanola brings
to us here but is part of our
history in New Mexico it's who
from not just Spanish but the
blending of who we are here in
the state very very much and I
also wanted to add Mr president
that for that low riders and
know we can take care of cars we
know how to do some of the
mechanical work and such it's
not granted to the office but
then we'll just have it right in
their beautiful cars so I just
want to mention that thank you
As as the good senator knows I
lived in the Espanola valley for
about eight years and I really
enjoyed my time there of the the
means so.
I actually worked up in Los
Alamos a lot of that time as a
pipe fitter up there so actually
believe the amount of traffic
that goes to Espanola just screw
right on now it's just one right
after another going to work up
in Los Alamos at that time of
a lot re open to different names
but the bill Rio Grande
restaurant and and the Madam
medios and and some of those
Espanola Mr president thank you
very much.
Senator Pirtle.
it until until you go there and
I still remember the first time
driving through we went to a
nice mom and pop burger place
names Kulik Danny's place or
something or something like that
and you're treated like you've
lived there your entire life
and how's this how's your job
how's everything going and so
it's just really a a community
that is a true community is
really an inspiration to the
rest of the state thank you Mr
certificate and in support of
Espanola day I've had so many
students and friends over the
years from Espanola and I've had
the opportunity to to visit that
great valley over the years
district and he bring so much
love to the chamber that you
just you just want to visit us
when you look to see more people
like him and I also want to
thank his family for all of the
celebrating Espanola day thank
you Mr president.
Senator Pinto for by Senator
pro.
Thank you Mr president and I do
bus broke down.
In Espanola after I came and I
think that's when we actually
actually that time to they were
having a a low rider show at the
And we're sitting there with our
bus and cars are going by and
then the lights started
flashing.
before bus got there are bus was
sitting there and we had all
these low rider cars sitting out
there around our bus and they
were and.
We're talking to each other
Kind of worry that coats the
committees this back on the bus
and had to staff to wait on the
bus the rest of the evening for
less but that that seeing that
senator Hermio for begin this
fourth.
Thank you Santo.
Senator pulled followed by
Senator gave us thank you Mr
you know he's just a great man
he doesn't even need the title
to do that.
I know everyone here is proud of
him.
He never forgets where he comes
from.
And I can honestly say that.
He takes pride in where it comes
from.
And reminds me of friends and
family when I come home when he
But as you've seen this morning
we're proud of him as well.
So keep that in mind thank you
Mr president.
Sanchez deal I just wanted to
give some background I've been
traveling through to economy to
Colorado my whole life my whole
married life of being that I
president etcetera etcetera I've
been stopping through there to
eat for years and I can tell you
right now that Locle Cena is my
stopped there I actually go from
here there for just breakfasts
but it's just one of those
things that that whole Espanola
valley is really unique and the
Si no further discussion I just
want to thank all the senators
for the wonderful tribute and
celebration that you paid for
Espanola day and the certificate
that we're celebrating it was a
about my valley and to share
somebody kind words about me
thank you so much I'm gonna
first introduce our city leaders
on the rostrum because they've
got a rush upstairs for speech
Thank you soooo Martinez mayor
pro tem Erin is on the side
councillor.
Net Rodriguez and my high school
Jordan and yep the city manager.
Christine boost US planning and
zoning commissioner.
Standing behind me the matriarch
of our family the woman who
keeps us together through prayer
and love Clara how to be a
Chapman.
My sister Loretta Martinez.
And then Mr president just real
quickly there's the women from
Espanola with leadership Los
Alamos who are helping me on
recognized thank you Mr
president.
president so as I mentioned I
believe we have the rules
committee reports I'd ask the
reader when we go to that order
business just read the rules
committee confirmation reports a
unanimous consent we go to that
executive message number four
dated February twenty first
twenty twenty three and what's
the governor makes the following
appointment Robert Edward
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted to
Senators Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator.
Senate executive message number
four dated February twenty first
twenty twenty three the governor
makes the following appointment
Arsenio Romero PhD as secretary
Senate to get the executive
message number seven of which
the governor makes the following
appointment Robert Lewis new
Senator as a member of the New
Mexico highlands university
Senate confirm disappointment.
The governor makes the following
appointment Donnie James
Quintanar as secretary of the
Veterans Services Department for
a term commencing on January
respectfully submitted Senator
KTM Duhig terrible Senator.
Mr president of the committee
report Senator there's a motion
to adopt committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
confirmations and I yield to
senator Harmon meal we're on
that order of Business
confirmations Center Hotmail Mr
you'll to Senator Duhigg.
Senator Mr president I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment away sorry this is
Robert EDU sent to the as the
cabinet secretary for the
General Services Department.
Hearing no objection Senator
here to explain.
Mr president I Mr Doucette is a
long time state and county
administrator with over twenty
three years of experience.
This body just confirm time last
year is the director of the
Is a consummate public servant.
I'm sorry Mr president is bad
timing.
the entire state is lucky to
have him as the proposed US
secretary for the General
Services Department with that I
will stand for questions thank
you senator centers we're
Mr president centers I one of
Santa Fe sport of Mr sent I
wanted just to give you a little
background so I've had meetings
Hobbs area but he took the time
to come to our business to
actually deal with an issue in I
like the idea that that's in his
as he goes into the general
service department I actually
have Senate bill four ninety
seven that's not gone through
the house Senate yet but it's
I've worked on procurement bills
effort into to find in New
Mexico the very best that he can
so I stand in full support thank
you Mr president.
My apologies I wasn't there this
morning the committee I resent
another Canadian so it's just
kind of the dance as I think Mr
president that we do here during
these last few days.
in your chair for quite a few
your past years that the General
Services Department is the heart
of our state government.
What you do the services you
no and feel that you have the
heart of state government with
you and just hopefully anything
we can do to help you as you
kind of do the maneuvering
amongst in the you know between
state government and many other
facets also I'm just glad that
you're still here with us is
still willing to give of your
time and energy because it's not
do set way back in the days when
he was the assistant
superintendent of insurance and
those are pretty wild times at
you Mr president.
Thanks Center heck any further
debate senators.
You Mr president you would think
But.
What.
of Robert E. do sent.
And I ask unanimous consent that
the record show that the role
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting negative by
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Robert Edwards
said junior as a secretary of
the general service department
for term commencing on March
body to stand help me welcome
secretary to set.
consideration as secretary for
Veterans Services Department I
know you'll to Senator semantics
Senator CENIC's Mr present I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
it's my pleasure to introduce
Donna can Tana to those of you
who do not know him he is one of
my constituents and hails from
the Pecos area and I'm very
deployed a few times and
recently most recently he's been
at the local government division
of the department of finance
administration he has worked
help rural communities and I
would stand for debate and
discussion thank you thank you
sense of panic Centers we're
debating the appointment as
secretary of Veterans Services
just want to brag a minute on
this gentleman Mr Quintana did
help me just here recently and
he helped me with the honor
guard for my dad so I'm very
teacher they ever so often and
highly appreciative of your
server and thank you for serving
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you senator was with
during the hearing this morning.
In rules on Mr a colonel can
time as of the confirmation
bring to this position is a is a
really X. extensive background
in state government he's worked
for us in the military side of
things but he knows the
administrative side too he's
worked in local government
division Cory was described by
the secretary is former bus of
with the former secretary of
Veterans Services a John Garcia
said and I think it really
captures something about that
role that that I had not thought
veterans and their needs and
their issues are never ignored
by by whichever administration
he's serving so thank you Mr
president this is a great
supported in that maybe a lot of
people don't know this but
Donnie first time I met him he
was and economic development and
I said it as a commission on
economic development they may
not know that but he's been
around government a long time
they want to talk about a true
never wants to pick a fight had
let's have the discussion and
and that's a good thing and I
think this gonna be a good thing
for veterans who was there when
a congressional medal of honor.
you Mr president thank you
sentiment elsewhere Senator
Gallegos all of us center cut a
Hemphill Senator pope then
Senator Campos Mr president I
appreciate the opportunity stand
just want to go back in time
when I was in the house
Representative Bob Walley was my
office mate and we talked this
morning he wanted me definitely
forward any time that we have
the opportunity to raise our own
of from out of these small
communities to put him in
positions of power and I'm not
thank you Mr president I to
stand in strong favor of this
nominee for secretary the
veterans department I've known
the state on and it's such an
important role we know that New
Mexico is one of the highest
volunteer rates and and our
military services and so it's a
forward to working with you on
these very important issues
thank you Mr president thank you
senator credit Hemphill with
of the military and he's also
come up in the ranks within the
state government and I think
that's going to be so great for
the mission what he's gonna be
doing serving our veterans and
their families here in the state
we can work together in building
those relationships thank you Mr
president thank you senator pope
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president and to the
members of the Senate this
he has the energy has the
strength the as the vision he
has what it really takes to
continue to go ahead and be a
great New Mexican leader with
that Mr president I stand in
just want to reiterate to the
thank you Secretary I apologize
we did have several office
wanted to speak to it as well
Senator Lopez.
I'm sorry thank you Mr president
appreciate our conversation and
you know.
The work that you're going to be
doing of course is so important
as each this is for each of the
secretaries sitting there in
front of us and the others have
come through the chamber it's
for veterans I know we had
spoken about that
do we have our veterans here on
the Senate floor was senator pro
I'm Senator Brandt and there
been others of course in this
Feds but what we can do here in
the state of New Mexico to
assist the place that we have I
called the place the home there
in tier C. I know still needs I
Lopez any further debate
centers.
See none Senator panics because
Mr president the I'm sure that
all of us have very high
respect of our state and our
country and they deserve the
services due to them and we
asked the new secretary to
provide that.
Mr president I asked that the
negative by show of hands
Senators tier seats please we're
voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
twelfth twenty twenty three to
be served at the pleasure of the
governor has just been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate Senator fenics Mr
president thank you members of
the Senate and I'd like to just
Senator had a meal Mr president
Senator Stewart.
Mr president pursuit to state
executive message number four
dated February twenty first
twenty twenty three I move that
Hearing no objection Senator
Stewart to explain.
Mr present I'm so proud to be
the sponsor for Arsenio Romero.
old in his mother's first grade
classroom he basically hasn't
left educations cents he was a
teacher he's been a principal
it was so wonderful to hear
educators from all over the
state call in they call then
from Deming the Milton award
winner from Deming called in to
Deming I'm reminded about
superintendent Romero in Deming
because he was a poster child
for K. three plus they went all
does they moved their E. LA from
twenty four point eight percent
proficient to sixty nine point
six three proficiency improve
the graduation rate to seventy
most recently in Los Lunas so
this is what some of his
supporters have said about him.
going to focus on data that is
transparent and available to
pair up.
He's going to use that data
learner's attitude to the PED
he supports fully charter
schools there is a need they
fill a gap.
that promote certificates for C.
T. E. if we can pass that bill
off the floor to set it on the
plenty of students who just want
to go to work and if we can get
them out of high school with the
certificates that's really what
we need to do
chairman there there's lots more
I could say about a doctor Meryl
but in the interest of time I
will stop and answer any
questions.
Kernan in center by the.
Thank you Mr president it's my
pleasure to to support Dr city
role metal as our new secretary
needed and doesn't get rattled
by a lot of other issues but
stays focused on what's best for
children and what's best for our
schools and that means what's
of his leadership in some areas
in my own career and very
pleased that he is now going to
be leading the state of New
Mexicos education program and I
as we are moving forward with
education in the state of New
Mexico thank you Senator souls
we have Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president I stand
your work cut out for you but I
am so confident if you're gonna
do a great job I'm gonna look
forward to the Department to
I hope and I know it will help
all of us thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan center
by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
powerful appointment you heard
from Senator Stewart Mr
president this is an individual
that literally has made a life
life's work out of improving New
Mexico children's lives every
immediately any number of things
and I think you know Mr
president I I spent about I'd
say about seven of my twelve or
so years is going to K. through
with what's going on and I mean
I'm still very close to a lot of
my teachers even at this age
they they can't work on my
campaign what have you and so
they're very involved in the
schools down there as well and
Dr matter to take on this
additional challenge in your
life we are all here to help you
I want you to know that Mr
president I hope that you are
not shying in any way shape or
you thank you center by their
with center quite a Hemphill
followed by Senator Mimi Austin
center office thank you Mr
president hi to surprise and
strong support of Dr Romero for
this incredibly important
experience and his work
experience professionally.
making sure that every child
every teacher every educator
every administer administrator
has access to social emotional
his role as secretary of this it
department thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Hemphill centerman also Senator
Lopez you Mr president I also
want to thank you Mr Romero for
you we're here to help you if
you need anything you need to
let us know as legislators but
leaders and direction and lead
I rise in support of this
appointment also
Secretary Romero.
We wish you the best.
I know that your heart is with
The the sharing that you did in
front of a committee earlier
this week in in the house
regarding the special offices
down we both share that in
common with our children who are
on the spectrum.
We had conversations in our
hopes of we're we believe I
believe that our education
positions also have to take the
bite and move.
Our children can no longer wait
Mr president and I know in your
conversation your testimony in
education system it is about
money Mr president but it's also
about moving the mosaic around
and figuring out exactly what it
is is going to help our children
succeed.
About figuring out how are
teachers are trained what
supports we offer them but it's
also the other persons that
support right speech language
appointment if you but most of
all is for you to say thank you
and be willing to take this on
because it's not just you it's
also the family is takes time
up the ladder but is added on so
now you're taking on the state
and working with our tribal
communities Mr president are
tribes in we just passed a law a
language and it's also about
languages Spanish and others in
the state of New Mexico Mr
president so Dr Romero you're
gonna hear a lot for me and
others but I wish you the best
you Mr president Senator Lopez
Senator Gallegos.
Present also stand in support of
Dr Romero I got to here's the
testimony about him in committee
I've seen the.
Direction of different
secretaries and what I'm hoping
for here the drive America
you'll be the stability the
state needs we've had education
our children and not worry about
the political endeavors out
there I think that we're
fiftieth in the nation because
we as legislators kicked the
our positive education for still
our children and I stand and
support I thank you for all you
do and for your dedication to
our kids and our state thank you
middle.
And you know I think just the a
lot of flow what is being said
already and I really offer my
education is a student
attendance you know and how we
can work with that you know to
bring go you know that two of
they miss on that education part
and I really strong whatever
needs to be done you know
willing to work with you and
support on that part so again
second time I've stood in
support because we know he is in
New Mexico state was New Mexico
state board of regents of first
thank you for your service to
New Mexico and all the good work
on all the good work you've done
but my phone has been blowing up
with text messages an email and
phone call because there was a
lady in Deming who wanted to
speak this morning and rules and
integrity trustworthiness
reliability and often
Cystiscidae I could go on and on
he is someone that I personally
feel we would want in our corner
when it comes to advocating for
knew who are superintendent Wes
he was in our schools in our
classrooms he was visiting and
talking to all the staff
teachers and students to the
students he was like a super
if he continues to do these
things our state will most
definitely head in the right
direction I can only hope that
one day I will be the leader
that I have seen him be this is
not just in PED but in many
cabinets and I don't know if
that's a reflection of the
secretaries or of the executives
and and many of us have lost
hope or have little hope and
and so I pledge to you that we
will we will find anything that
I can do to help you be
successful as you can because
the more successful you are the
more successful New Mexico
and congratulations.
Thank you senator Senator Campos
thank you very much Mr president
of course thank you very much
the focus if you will on reading
and math and the future of our
students so that they would be
ready with a strong career
placement.
to be at the top of the good
lists when it comes to
education.
One of the things that really
stood out in that discussion
secretary so that he has my full
confidence to move forward and
let me just say this in closing
that unequivocally he is a
CNN center Stewart close.
Thank you Mr president first I I
want to thank the Senate I want
to thank the members that stood
department I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands thank you Senator
the chamber hearing no
objection.
Senator seats if you wish to
vote no please raise your hand.
commencing on March fourth
twenty twenty three to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
has been duly confirmed by the
New Mexico Senate Senator
Robert Louise Lou settle junior
the presented to the full Senate
for consideration to the board
of regents for New Mexico
highlands university I know
you'll to Senator Maestas
appointment of Robert Louis
unsettled junior to the board of
regents of the New Mexico
highlands university.
Hearing no objection center my
institution of our state Mexico
highlands was founded in
eighteen ninety three and it was
the normal school it was New
Mexico normal university until
the forties and it taught
little brother we have some more
of twelve or fourteen degrees
that first generation college
student is very valuable
Representative grew up but next
children and students who grow
up in Las Vegas Mr to settle
studied out of state went to
college at Stanford is a lawyer
by trade has its own law
practice he also ball is a
leader primarily and will add
tremendous be a tremendous asset
to Mexico highlands as a member
of its board of regents what
that'll stand for questions
school together when he was in
high school he and his family
moved to the Espanola valley
uses data could be the band
instructor and even at that
early on in age juniors and
support of this country thank
you Mr president.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I to
intelligence thoughtfulness and
just a delight to be around is
very kind and thoughtful but the
other thing he is is he somebody
Judy.
And he will he's just a
Judy and then the other thing
about him that I promised I I
said to I I got to know him
pretty well in our going to what
those summer institute but I
many times listed on the screen
the floor and talked about our
family connections to highlands
the at a university I know that
he's going to really be a great
contributor to that university
members of the Senate as I stand
here I take a look at Robert and
I know deep down in his heart
and as I spoke with him earlier
today I could tell through his
through and I resonated with.
He talked about music he talk
about talents talked about being
a role model he talked about all
the things in the aspirations
also be able to engage in
further future there's so much
that he talked about this
morning that his he went forward
with those thoughts one thing
will be passed on and most
importantly we can look forward
to many good things to come for
New Mexico highlands because of
his leadership so Mr president
Center by the thank you very
much Mr president I I don't
can't say that I really know
Mister the sorrow very well
however I do need to tell a very
quick story when he walked on to
it tells us so much about the
people that are coming through
here to be confirmed in and the
connections they have to New
Mexico so I just wanted to
acknowledge that you're because
loves you very much over here by
Center my just as close.
Thank you Mr president
Representative I was a.
Is a lawyer is a mariachis a
quintessential New Mexicans and
dated March seventh twenty
twenty three I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Robert Louis said
junior to the position of board
of regents at New Mexico
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voting the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands Senators where voting all
I just.
Of thirty three in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Robert to settle
as a member of the New Mexico
highlands university board of
regents for term madam upon
confirmation and concluding on
status give a great rate that a
plus.
much Mr president thank you
center Maestas I have to Senate
majority floor leader Peter
Wirth to take is that next order
of business thank you Mr
president Ms because I'm gonna
business announcements and
miscellaneous we're in that
and on third reading we're going
to do items one which is the
medical malpractice that'll be
me and Senator Baca item number
eighty which is the capital
outlay build out of the Center
one and that'll be it for our
morning session hearing set
Senator Rodriguez will do the
messages from the house in that
order business message from the
house retreat.
Is president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
rules and in those copies of
return same here with
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk
journal so the message from the
house.
Has been received.
Senate majority floor leader
transportation committee to whom
has been referred house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for House Bill to I forty seven
as amended has had it under
Benny Shendo junior chairman
Senator Shendo is present I move
a adoption the committee report
centers we have a motion to
adopt committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
referred house bill eleven as
amended has had it under
consideration report same of
recommendations that it do pass
as amended.
be allowed to read all the
committee reports I believe
there are two and that we act on
them with one motion but the job
reflect that they were act upon
individually hearing no
objection to reiterate.
committee with we have a motion
to adopt trigger poured all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed say the eyes have
it the committee report has been
fourteen is that it under
consideration and report same of
recommendation that a do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Senator William P. souls
house bill one eighty nine as
amended to to pass house bill
two eighty as amended to pass
Bill for eighty one do pass.
House joint memorial seven do
pass respectfully submitted to
senator William P. sold chairman
it the committee part has been
adopted the general reflect that
they're acted upon individually.
The reader to read.
Mr president Judiciary Committee
to whom has been referred to
rules and engrossed preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen Senator
in favor signify by saying aye.
Then do that again all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
Senate bill three twenty for the
reader to read.
Mr president George Disher
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate memorial thirty
eight has had it under
consideration reports the same
has been duly enrolled in a
co chairs Senator Hamblen.
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report have a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Senator majority is leader speed
or things that next order of
business thank you Mr president
unanimous consent to go that our
business announcements and
item eighty is Senator Rodriguez
AT want to Senator serve on days
and then we'll do the consent
calendar well we're on analysis
before we go into the third
reading I do want to make a
as a court appointed personal
representative in wrongful death
cases involving medical
malpractice I don't believe it's
a conflict but as I did two
years ago and as I did in
to be of the Senator Gaydos.
Yes Mr president centers I just
want to and I don't know if
anyone else learned it you do
the CLC proconsul on your desk
recognize in my nose Senator
Kernan and I were both on that I
don't know she's had done this
because how the chamber but I
just wanted to let the members
know where that came from thank
reading of legislation and we're
gonna start with item number one
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty three we're in that order
committee sub super five twenty
three has been taken it's now
subject to debate substitution
or amendment.
who is the president of New
Mexico trial lawyers will be
sitting here with me and Nick
audio who is general counsel for
the medical society will be
sitting with Senator Baca
I see no objections sergeant R.
as you please escort the expert
witnesses and provide seating
for them.
Into the chamber.
highlights of this bill and then
we'll yield for questions so I
will start Mr president Senate
bill five twenty three is a
clinics to obtain malpractice
insurance of this compromise
provide stability for current
practices it also creates more
certainty for new outpatient
the state's patient compensation
fund which provides lifetime
medical coverage when you're
under that fund with that ideal
for just a brief opening to
negotiation conversations with
doctors trial attorneys to come
up with that with a compromise
that is best suited to fit both
of patients who have been
what is in the bill thank you
Senator Baca senator Wirth thank
you Mr president do that summary
and then Senator Baca will do
the same and then we do have a
floor amendment in twenty twenty
that participates in the patient
compensation fund starting in
twenty twenty five there will be
a three year rolling at.
have access to lifetime medical
expenses that we paid out of the
fund in the event they are harms
with that ideal to Senator Baca.
Senator Baca.
hundred thousand dollars of
underlying coverage with the PCF
then covering the cost of the
next five hundred thousand up to
one million dollar cap by making
this change in underlying
the state or federal tort claims
act will be exempted from the
medical malpractice act this
will not change our state
facilities are treated since
they're currently covered by the
Senator Peter Wirth.
is present there is a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the amendment
Senate floor amendment number
Wirth to moving explained the
amendment thank you Mr president
move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate tax
business transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty three hearing
no objection senator Wirth
disclosure of claims against the
fund made by outpatient health
care facilities and we just the
word independent was left out it
independent facilities that are
in the bill all this work all
the amendment does add the word
independent in front of
outpatient health care
facilities and I'd stand for
number one to Senate tax
business transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty three.
I see no debate Center were to
close on the amendment thank you
Mr president move Senate floor
On Senate floor amendment member
number one all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
As opposed nay the eyes have
incentive or member number one
with that we would stand for
questions.
Senators so we're debating.
Anyone wishing to right.
Senator mantas.
malpractice cases for injured
and killed patients who alleged
malpractices so I need that
disclosure nothing in the bill
will affect my
Income directly renew my
about the history of where we're
at.
You know we're talking a lot
this session about
professionalizing the
legislature.
professionalization of the
legislature because.
The medical malpractice act was
not really substantially
modified.
Since nineteen ninety two.
That was thirty years.
Then twenty twenty one what
happened and I want to talk
about the process and procedure
would have been twenty twenty
backdoor discussions and then at
the end of that in our twenty
twenty one session we were told
in the legislature there have
been a deal.
And when that bill was presented
this legislature it was referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee rice at.
Those of us on the Senate
Judiciary Committee were told we
The negotiations have been so
delicate that all the
concessions have been so
perfectly done the bill was
perfect and that the Senate
Judiciary Committee could not
the hospitals years I respected
that process.
And.
To my discomfort agreed not to
touch that bill in twenty twenty
one and we didn't.
and the advocates for patients
we did all about twenty twenty
one.
Perfect compromise.
Not to be touched everyone
agreed.
raise and you all may remember
once again we were presented
with a crisis we're in crisis we
must change the changes we just
maybe in twenty twenty one
couldn't be touched by the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
And so in that special session
once again we act in crisis.
Without going through the
committee process and without
change the medical malpractice
act yet again.
An act that hadn't been touched
since nineteen ninety two in
twenty twenty one we're changing
it twice and here we are now in
Now.
Let's talk about our
professional legislature because
this bill didn't go to Senate
Judiciary Committee this year.
costs and colleagues they know
you work hard Center Bach and so
with I know you work hard and
it's not been easy I know the
governor so we're going hard but
this bill got rolled out
yesterday for the first time.
this perfect bill you cannot
touch this perfect compromise
it's all been worked out we were
told that twice and we stood on
the sidelines and allow that
perfect compromise and this year
Committee and say hands off I
can't touch it's a perfect
compromise because we've been
burned twice before the deal it
been worked out the compromise
perfect everybody agreed to the
And so what happens this year
the bill doesn't get sent to
Judiciary Committee.
Where lawyers like me practice
in medical malpractice.
of every bill and you all know
that process and experience and
it's a good process it's a good
experience we should be proud of
that I'm proud of that committee
I'm proud of you that serve on
it I'm proud of all of you for
The twenty twenty one with
entrust ourselves because we
were told the deal had been
worked out by everybody else we
didn't need a finger I hand in
the process we were told we
in these issues and it didn't go
to Senate Judiciary went to the
Senate tax committee.
And let's be honest there's
nothing in this bill about
taxes.
Nothing whatsoever.
negotiation this time with
specifically not to send it to
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Because they knew that this time
the Senate Judiciary Committee
might ask some questions.
If you look on the bill page two
line sixteen through eighteen.
It reads as follows.
New language added language.
not mean a lot of things to all
of you but just know the
language.
Health care provided is not a
being a prisoner in the
protected to present those to
act that's on page two.
pursuant to the tort claims
after federal tort claims act.
If you go to page five point
nineteen.
Thank language same preclusion.
Does not include individuals or
entities protected pursuant to
the tort claims act federal tort
claims act I can keep going
through the repaid it and re
done to information this bill
but you all know and Senate
minute talking about why that
language is in this bill this is
important.
With three quickly this bill
puts in new language into the
subject to the tort claims that
now that's that's presently a
practice here in New Mexico but
we're codified that we're
putting that statute and and
here's why this will be
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
That means if you or your loved
one goes to UNM hospital a state
facility.
you go to a private hospital or
hospital where you may be
insured under our medical
malpractice act now.
The recovery for damages.
Is capped.
is it codifies the federal tort
claims act that means in a in
our district on in Los crucis if
you go to a clinic of the
familia.
If you lose a loved one the most
they're going to recover.
This was recoverable under the
federal tort claims act that's
one million dollars.
value of life itself one million
dollars.
If you receive your health care
in those facilities.
We're creating two different
systems.
if you go to UNM hospital where
we go to one of these.
Tribal.
More likely could familiar
facilities you're gonna be
capped at seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
If you lose your life to the
medical malpractice at UNM
hospital your life will be
devalued by eighty three
percent.
your life as a result of medical
malpractice.
The recovery for your family in
the blue one to love the ones
you leave behind will be eighty
three percent greater.
federal tort claims eggnog
granted.
This is existing practice and
procedure.
But were repeatedly putting into
this bill for reasons there's a
And so now we come to the issue
that brings us here today which
is the purported Crisis of
inability to provide insurance
government by the jury system
and by judges were charged to in
many cases overturned the jury
verdict.
We repeat that judges are
empowered to overturn a jury
maximum recovery for a family or
a spouse or children.
For loss of income loss of
earning capacity loss of
enjoyment of life all damages
insurance you want to pay for.
The debate discussion is what
insurance can we get.
You can get any kind of
insurance.
But it seems arbitrary to me
we're gonna say the maximum
recovery can get is a million
dollars because that's as much
insurance as we want to pay for
that's the that's the premium we
want to pay for that's the
deductible we want to establish
expertise and professionalism in
this area we're gonna decide
million dollars is what is
recoverable.
This is not to sound immodest I
The jury was all entirely native
American everyone of.
At the beginning of the trial
they said they would never give
us one dollar.
For that death case because it
would never award one dollar.
For the loss of life.
Of a non native American patient
who died.
The jury awarded eighteen
million dollars.
that because.
The most that anybody wants to
pay for it is a million dollars
of coverage with three
occurrences they want to pay
that deductible that premium
life will be determined by how
much insurance we want to pay
for.
And I submit to you.
That's a heartless.
Gone.
Your time on this planet gone it
seems harmless to me we're gonna
say.
Most you can recover for that
in the fact that we didn't get a
chance to have a hearing in the
Judiciary which I think is
regrettable.
Let's recognize a few of the
things that this body doesn't
The hospitals in Los crucis the
two major ones are owned from my
perspective by multi billion
dollar New York Stock Exchange.
fact that in this year's junior
budget.
Let's be honest this year's
junior budget has a fifteen
million dollar appropriation to
pay for doctors.
Violation of the anti donation
clause clause or constitution
how many of us.
How many Mexicans have the
government paying for our
private business insurance those
This bill once again establishes
the responsibility of the
superintendent of insurance to
assess charges on doctors and
which exist and we all recognize
is deeply insolvent.
In fact my good friends in the
Senate finance committee I
believe it put somewhere around
seventy million dollars into
that funding last couple years
Despite the law the medical
malpractice act to on the
superintendent to do exactly
that assess surcharges on
doctors and hospitals to chair
this fund is solvent.
we're spending seventy plus
million dollars to make the
funding solve it and my
understanding from my friends
and finances were still out
there it's going to take.
And it's right here in front of
our nose.
We are subsidizing.
here let's talk about eggs to
add I I watch the the committee
hearing yesterday Senate tax.
Watch it carefully on this bill
Not one person got up to speak
about the words on the page.
Not one person that committee
got up to speak who was a
defense lawyer I get to litigate
I didn't hear anybody in the
committee yesterday who got up
to present who'd ever done a
medical malpractice cases a
lawyer.
There was a lot of
congratulations kudos for the
hard work and for the compromise
I did hear one person.
To get up to speak who's a
any of them yesterday.
We talk about professionalizing
the legislature and the
professionalism is right here in
I've lived it I've seen it I
have so much respect for all of
you and yet why don't we respect
ourselves why can't we have a
hearing.
In a committee that has the
expertise the experience the
When there was a compromise in a
work out there was perfect that
everyone agreed upon and didn't
last month's.
This so called excel beginners
and today I I can't let it go.
I can't just say yes.
Everybody worked hard lot of
compromises made.
want to be included in
discussions on medical
malpractice.
And as I said I have great
respect for the legal skills of
wrongful death cases so we
didn't trust ourselves to put
people with the expertise from
this chamber into that process.
I suspect we didn't have Dr
Why bills rolled out yesterday.
The committee in the afternoon.
Not a single discussion that
committee presentation about the
specifics of this bill and then
now we're here today.
we created for ourselves twice
in twenty twenty one and we're
doing it again and also made to
now because my only point of
this entire discussion for me is
we're gonna be here again.
which will congratulate
ourselves for will slap
ourselves in the back it was a
was a grand compromise I'm
telling you all right now be
right back here again.
Because the superintendent will
not charge hospitals what they
should be paying.
I'll be back here again.
And that's regrettable because I
starry decisis precedent you all
know the word precedent we rely
a precedent.
The medical malpractice act was
last significantly made in the
those cases guide me as a lawyer
for the court helped us to
understand what the act was
interpreted to mean between
nineteen ninety two and twenty
twenty one.
medical malpractice acting
twenty twenty one and then
there's another medical
malpractice act in the latter
part of twenty twenty one and
now there will be a new medical
malpractice act after this bill.
decide which version of the
medical malpractice act we
intended to apply to any given
circumstance it makes our job is
practitioners very very
difficult.
changing this long and and will
modify long and we do this in
many air other areas a law but
I'm gonna take as a
practitioner.
It makes what we do very very
in the statute what the cap on
damages maybe this bill
establishes a cap on damages and
then ties it to the CPR.
Based on inflation.
Based on.
What a deductible will cost what
coverage will cost.
Should we trust the jury process
or should this become simply a
dollars and cents transaction
and when you give thought to
ambulance chasers and money
grabbers and I I know all the
terms I I I didn't do plans work
until really the last five or
six years I did defense work for
fifteen years I was the guy
defending.
you're this is this discussing
and thinking these thoughts I
hope you'll think for a moment
what would happen if it was your
wife.
Or your husband who died.
In delivery.
How much is it worth for you to
lose to your family your income
capacity your earnings for
lifetime particularly very young
professional how much does it
All of those intangibles I
believe we should leave to
jurors.
And what people want to pay for
that coverage.
Mr we for for the last couple
years as well.
obtain insurance then they would
show us letters where they were
decline coverage.
That's pretty easy I can ask for
coverage this afternoon be sure
I'm gonna be declined of I don't
this case that those companies
who are saying they can't get
insurance really made the
diligent effort to do so.
But I realize that those
ambiguities in those
inconsistencies give me an
opportunity as a lawyer.
Should be that way.
We should be passing bills are
What we mean.
But I will look forward to the
passage of this bill.
To the third version of a
medical malpractice act in as
many years.
will see the litigation in the
years ahead over the
interpretation of this version
and I also know.
We back here again soon.
Those of you have heard me on
the floor say this repeatedly of
those in the caucus have to hear
from you all the time we need to
learn to trust ourselves.
Not all the outside groups not
In this case we didn't trust.
The committee process.
We didn't trust the lawyers to
review this bill would entrust
I don't know who came up with
this.
But I know they don't have that
expertise.
Thank you Mr president and Dan I
always appreciate my colleague
over to the left and he's very
intelligent smart
legislator an attorney and and
this you know the the the wife
of a physician and and and
that's why it's important to
kind of come together and figure
out what really is best for not
Don't particularly want to go
back in income to rehash what
happened in twenty twenty one
and we had several opportunities
there with some things and and I
now in what we have before us
which I think and I am not
afraid to say thank you and
congratulations for the work
that's been done.
Because I truly believe that
process is been with regard to
our physicians trying to find
coverage.
While at the same time making
sure that we are fair as a
point we have reached.
We have reached the and where we
can say this should work.
And it's my hope that the body
will.
Except the fact that that people
would listen to that I believe
to continue to receive the care
they need to receive from the
providers so thank you very much
and and I certainly stand in
support of this thank you.
I want to join in with Senator
Kernan and and appreciating.
negotiate agreements.
Between parties in areas that.
Prickly.
The some some areas where I know
little about.
It's important that we be able
to do that.
Clearly we.
And something needed to happen
so.
Let me start off by saying thank
you.
Align myself.
With some of the concerns that
were raised by.
Senator mantas.
Realize that there is a problem.
With malpractice.
There was a bill drafted in the
house went through the house
committees came over to the
Senate.
When we got to the Judiciary
Committee.
We noticed something.
Just real quick.
The.
The the bill at the beginning of
twenty twenty one was to go into
effect.
Emergency clause on it.
Did not command.
We just said that there's a deal
I do pass.
Immediately gone into law.
Around the twentieth of
December.
And around the thirty first of
December what we got out of law
The crisis would be in right now
would be even greater.
What we have today.
That's the committee process of
having people.
Who will not just listened to
the talking points.
Will read the bill.
They're not matching up.
It does concern me some.
Less than half an hour.
Because what happens when that
when that is the case.
On a bill of this consequence.
Yes.
I'm not decided yet I'm gonna
vote on this bill.
done.
By the leaders.
There is recognition of the
fact.
Ortiz piano Senator Hickey and
centre my SS.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and you
know I would certainly want to
thank the sponsors for their
This is a major problem for our
state.
And so the fact that the they
At all is is pretty amazing.
Very important and I'm I'm proud
You know we felt like we found a
solution.
And we.
Interesting Mr president members
of the body we've had some of
those opportunities.
Throughout the Shenzhen.
Where.
To to potentially then the bill
that would make it palatable to
the entire Senate.
But the other day when this
happened.
We had a solution we had a
Senator Vontaze comission
variety show those comments
because I remember.
With this compromise that fix
this supposedly was reached and
the compromise was reached.
And whatever compromise was
reached petition the debt.
And so.
This has to happen.
detriment and actually hope
there's no detriment to the fact
that that happens this way it's
too important our state it's too
important to communities like
you've done and let's just hope
that is we can take this out of
here we're gonna move forward
and we're going to we're going
to find that the issue is the
Intel legislators thank you for
your hard work because at the
end of the day.
Who are really really saving.
Receiving the doctors in the
communities.
process all day long and and
what happened by the end of the
day when I go home to my local
doctors when I got a call enough
the issue to stay in New Mexico.
If you haven't realized how hard
it is to get an appointment in
New Mexico.
For any person.
appointments to doctor's office.
Six to eight weeks wait.
That's a little bit long.
communities may not like it but
they did it and there's nothing
wrong with that.
Now if I going to talking about
the committee process was a
fall.
No but.
at the end of the day I want you
to Senators and know that I'm
proud of the work you did and I
appreciate it appreciated for
Center this panel followed by
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and I
want to thank the sponsors for
for the work they put into
pulling this together
going through committees that
have.
Substantive knowledge of the of
the workings.
That are being acted upon by by
the attorneys in the Judiciary
I do have some questions about
the bill itself I I and I and I
wonder maybe Senator a Buck or
senator Wirth would yield to my
question I was surprised to hear
that there were no malpractice
I do yield and it is an
incorrect picture the group of
lawyers that worked on behalf of
the trial lawyers include
lawyers that practice in this
fair although you know again
Senator Bach and I and we don't
really practice in this area
I've had some exposure to it and
I've seen certainly all signs of
malpractice were part of this
and we're negotiating.
This this deal.
And and Mr president to Senator
Wirth I'll stick with you then
since you've already yielded.
substantive changes in in parts
of the act other than the.
Outpatient independent
outpatient clinics is that the
case.
Senator serve on days that we
have a system that prior to this
bill had a patient going to one
doctor under the cap and a
to deal with and we're not
dealing with that here again
what we did that's important as
we kept these facilities under
is again address the immediate
situation we're in our I think
that that that was the the
trigger that that required got
doctors now independent doctors
are at seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars under this act
hospitals or at a set rate we
didn't we didn't go there there
was some suggestion that part of
assure you that was something
that.
We did not go there we were in a
very tight window to address the
specific situation and again
with the work of Senator Baca
Thank you Mr president and the
the yeah you know the the the
issue was when we first faced
this Mr president and senator
or a month or two months ago Mr
president this started last year
several months ago with trips
across the state meeting with
medical professionals.
their surprise not only not only
did they find they had a problem
they found in many cases it
could not even get insurance and
so
Obviously that created a a
having Lujan and losing the
lawsuit of that type in kind
they would be risking their own
homes and and things like that
and possible bankruptcy and you
malpractice act and helping
helping these independent
outpatient outpatient health
care facilities balance that
malpractice cases would actually
get the damages and the really
the money they deserve if they
were injured by this and this
this consensus agreement is is
really be all I have thank you
Mr president.
So Mister president and and
senator Booker Senator Wirth
would it be fair to say that
basically what this does is
Senator Wirth I miss present no
I don't think that's correct
what it does is it defines them
specifically on one of the very
important things was figuring
got years of corporate ownership
and you got hospitals getting
into this business the parties
but a lot of time kind of
working on how to determine that
but it defines them and then it
medical expenses so keeping them
in the fund was extremely
important and having a
definition was extremely
important so that we don't have
Wirth they're still in the fund
they still have to buy
insurance.
This is the lower level than
they would have if they were a
hospital.
independent provider who's at
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars under the frontier of
the current law the independent
provider has to get two hundred
fifty thousand dollars worth of
dollars and then the fun kicks
in the second five hundred
thousand dollars so that was
also a change that was in this
bill so Mister president have
just one final question for the
Senator Wirth Sims road to give
us just a second between senator
Bach and I'd the center box you
get that that may be a question
that senator Baucus dialysis
centers are they under this
independent provider provision
which would be a seven hundred
fifty thousand dollar cap.
Senator.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
president thank you Sanchez.
you sponsors of this bill.
as many of you know this issue
started to percolate as was
Myself and Senator Moores put
together of Bill that in
retrospect was a kick the can
down the road buy a little time
Then the.
Facilitation that our leaders
were able to step in.
Malpractice lawyers lawyers for
physicians working together to
work out all the technical
language and when I finally saw
I'm I'm not trying to use
hyperbole here but it the way
that it came together the legal
thinking the outstanding legal
fund is so critical.
And we other solutions when that
I handed it it didn't they were
involved to even talk to an
insurance company I think at one
point
to learn some things but
which was which was good to to
at least keep things level and
not have doctors leave but the
legal minds that put this
malpractice my father died of
malpractice that's my first
experience and I've been an
administrator of physician
groups health plans and I've
been dealing with that most of
And practically.
As well as elegantly put
together this solution I just
have a men's gratitude to you
and the people involved and I'm
We are still on the bait we have
center Mestis followed by
Senator Woods Senator Moores
center Maestas thank you Mr
president thank you members I
just want to take a moment to
the respective leaders in our
chamber R. for pulling together
folks to to come up with an
agreement but I do want to make
just some comments and on
negotiating a bill in Congress
and and so you you wonder how
that happens and why that occurs
and then you think of the the
line from Hamilton's musical Mr
torn between the the the my my
love and loyalty to the
committee process and and using
any means necessary to to solve
problems confronting New Mexico
peculiar that.
And I and I.
Uncomfortable many times when
I'm tasked with either voting up
or down yes or no.
Type stuff
nineteen ninety two there was
there was a column that when I
came in and seven everyone was
why I wanted to raise the cap
raise the cap it couldn't be
happy that that occurred and
then the governor was
uncomfortable with that
agreement and and vetoed.
And so we always got to be Leri
That's bad public policy so even
though the CPI I worry about the
CPI because you have to assume
that the dollar sign today is
perfect we still need to
raise it to nine and then to
twelve people are saying we are
raising it too much here is into
much the same people that were
complaining that we're raising
it too much of the same people
These things definitely needed
to be raised but I just want to
my final point Mr the Mr
president.
Is a wonderful word that comes
word but tort law was
articulated Mr president by the
the gentleman up.
The chair of judiciary and
that's and that's kind of the
truth
and car accidents in New Mexico
you have to have to be a legal
legally driving on the road you
have to have a twenty five
thousand dollar minimum policy.
in the exact same spot you were
before the crash.
Before you were T. boned before
you you know you know Brecht
your back of your neck or broke
Well remedy the the horrible of
injuries that occur in in these
malpractice lawsuits the
horrific loss of life and and
only part in the the other the
the driver only has twenty five
thousand an insurance.
That's all you get.
That's all you get and that's on
just in and of itself.
this chamber would have an
opinion because we know how that
correlates to our to our
everyday lives our insurance may
creep up particularly with
president in twenty twenty one
in my chamber we are concerned
with the the justice of it all
is it just that every single
victim of medical malpractice
consider the on it or or were on
knowledgeable and and uneducated
for numerous reasons of the
unintended consequences of that
bill.
unintended consequences no
matter how just or fair or or
right of bill is Mr president
might my god children's doctor
left the state.
better incomes in other cities
they may be happier in other
cities they may believe more a
higher quality of life in other
states transaction transnational
stuff when we when we pass bills
particularly the one in twenty
twenty one.
which had these negative of
unintended consequences so I
every victim is made whole but
we don't live in a perfect world
we live in the smallest economy
of of any state in the country
we have to be cognizant of that
and we have to do everything we
economic growth or does it
hinder economic growth so if we
do not pass this.
It will continue to hinder
economic growth because not only
will we be losing medical
opposed to eight or nine or ten
so anyway I I can I'm really
happy that this bill came
forward I want to thank the
leaders once again honorable
thanks for the opportunity.
You know to me were taken off
the ball a little bit I think of
ensure access to quality
health care for all of New
Mexican and it depends on our
ability to attract and retain
protection and the exposure to
potential on insured risk.
Are less than.
cruel study would also have to
address how changes to the P. C.
F. which is the fund that
Medical malpractice act of
nineteen seventy six.
Will affect malpractice
have to keep contributing to
because it became a very.
High risk pool.
I don't know a lot about
be a whole lot of people that
don't use it.
To pay for those that do use.
And when we start having
hospitals dropping out of this
Of the provider the small one
one drive unit have to go into
this fund and he's got a higher
risk because he can't spread
premiums and one reason is
because the the risk is so high
because of the present law.
Senator Wirth if you'd you know
just a second and conduct
explained the captain of
additional couple words for me
under the law passed in twenty
twenty one these independent
outpatient health care
facilities we're basically on
the same tractors hospitals and
Introduce him and and and the
independent doctors who came and
testified talked about what they
charge for procedures and there
locally owned business versus
it's just they're different
types of facilities and so I
think the the compromise here
has done exactly that to help
these independent Acilius which
partner yes Representative lots
of doctors in Santa Fe and so
they haven't kind of been pulled
into the whole corporate is a
nation of medicine that's going
on now and I respect that
tracks what we've done.
President yes and that's kind of
what I'm getting at you know the
there was an argument about
of law but I assume you can sue
for any amount you want to sue.
The most generally the
awards above the limits is a non
insured liability.
But most generally the
settlement will be within those
Mr president we do have further
debate senator Morris.
Thank you president Morales I
really appreciate for you being
here and and and leading our
debate today and I just want to
bill Senator Hickey this really
was a bipartisan effort from
many of us if you saw the crisis
that had been created I created
by this body I also want to
won I I mention this because
it's been dark bipartisan issue
and it's this isn't isn't the
end of it.
Senator Baca Brandt and I spent
challenge that they had going
against a very strong special
interest groups that have spent
a lot of money on political
campaigns and building up here
all the time as I think it was
and their patients really Mr
president come up here and fight
for this crisis that we created
but this isn't the end of it I
hope they they can stay active
needed a lot of reform are
because as a senator my Estes
mention this is an international
market market place that we're
facing Senator Wirth mentioned
and practice your in the long
term because they have the
ability to travel and go
anywhere because the doctors
talk about malpractice in the
macro issues that still need to
be addressed as we move forward
And our rates have been horrible
we are stepping that up and
still even if that big step up
we will we'll be behind Texas
and some of our competitor
states especially around the
country so we're gonna to
that step forward but it is just
one of the steps that we're
going to need and I'm gonna come
back next year and in order to
keep working on that because
actually let them actually
practice medicine make a living
not drive out of state because
we have for years been telling
them that they're not welcome
a difficult place to do business
and also place difficult place
to practice medicine so I
applaud the bipartisan effort to
get this word has been but this
is just the beginning folks this
Morris any further debate
centers.
Sen Michael Padilla followed by
Thanks Senator Duhigg any for
the senators for the first time.
C. nine Senator office for a
second time.
Thank you Mr president is again
as I'm trying to read through
a moment or two on page seven.
This is the a qualifying
requirements for an independent
health care outpatient
healthcare facility that that's
really what we're talking about
here.
And I'd like to ask
one of you all would like to.
Ryan answer my questions on that
this language the the the
language before that describes
what it is what it requires for
A million and a half on deposit
and then and then there's that
last clause has provided an
independent outpatient health
care facilities so we're talking
about again in the absence of an
required by this obsession why
would there be and absence of a
additional additional deposit
policy if it's required by the
subsection why would there be an
Thank you Mr president basically
the language that you're
pointing to Mister president
senator on the sixteen through
twenty tracks the language of
with with independent providers
were for this section.
Senator about us thank you Mr
the and and I'm I'm I'm familiar
with that because it is the used
elsewhere in the act and it
makes no sense.
sense of that well we used
elsewhere.
And I go well how bout we fix it
but we get to me since the it
makes no sense there it talks
about a policy is required then
in this line which is in the
They're they're they're County
and and then to qualify and then
and then it gets really here's
the other question I hope so
when will be able to answer
policy that only provides
coverage for three occurrences
and says it shall not provide
coverage important for not more
than three occurrences what what
what would what why would we
No you can't have coverage for
four or five or six occurrences
the language here says the
depositor policy shall provide
coverage for not more than three
occurrences what would we do I'm
just because why would we want a
three what what what why would
that make any sense Senator Baca
thank you Mr president I I do
appreciate the question because
you know it's going to kind of
simply doesn't exist we could
not find and the the health care
providers could not contacted an
insurance company who would be
willing to provide more than
dollars each was actually
something that was saw and asked
for specifically it wasn't
something that was regularly
offered but Mister president I
that is willing to do that so
when I ask the questions quite
limited to three separate
occurrences it really goes back
to the same answer because these
about this image for them up
there Baca I understand that
explanation but but I I hope you
would agree with me that's
nonsensical another words just
because they can't get a policy
that has more than three
See that ensures for more than
three occurrences and that's
absurd.
Right it's it's absurd when we
would want to have a policy for
let's just use auto insurance is
they are required to have more
the coverage for more than three
that's your point Senators they
can't get for more than three I
get that really sets the
argument was that the argument
And there's no logical reason
for that language in and I'll
grant you the center of the and
Senators this language appears
elsewhere the medical
malpractice act.
is new language I'm looking at
my good friend senator Wirth
good friends from college if you
smile at me we've you know we
should just be honest Center
were that I was there with us
line and as a personal
representative and and I just
can't think of any possible
reason why we would ever say in
statute you can't have.
More insurance than this this is
the most insurance you can have
And we are transaction
centerless unless you've got any
kind of possible explanation for
why we would ever in statute say
you can't have more insurance in
this.
asking want to sponsor sealed
I'm sorry we didn't a very good
job.
Representative second to ask you
to one of the two spots preps
Senator Wirth you know I I
understand Sir Bacchus argument
put a session state you can't
have more.
Then three occurrences of
coverage help me understand that
sent Wirth if there's if you can
you can think of any logical.
this whole line of questioning
highlights the extreme challenge
that we were under because quite
frankly I mean you're raising an
issue that I'm sure can be
argued both ways it's not we can
were doing things like
increasing the amount that the
fund would pay which would cause
triggers
and and quite frankly going
the road as senator Morris
mentioned to the extent we get
back into this so and rewrite
the whole statute and I don't
let me just and centers around
as you had a bill this session
doing here is trying to address
the specific situation within an
act that has challenges and I
will acknowledge that right up
front and I would yield to
are very complex and the medical
malpractice act itself is
complex but for that particular
question that you asked as to
why it is not more than three
separate occurrences really
but no more and that's that's
really what why why that is in
there it's a it's simply fund
limited and and that's the
efforts to try and explain away
something that let's just face
it but a good callers good
friends people I respect
licensing explicable right and
and the same was made this is
existing languages not existing
Now granted Senator Wirth
Chester it's copied from
elsewhere in the act that is
existing languages copied as
replicate here and it's absurd.
And and this again makes the
trying to answer this question
not to my satisfaction no
surprise of because in in a
committee process we would have
asked these questions we would
moment ago was the this existing
language it's not in the in the
response was also this committee
argue both ways there's no way
to argue that both ways it says
the policy here shall provide
And so I'm I'm not mean to put
you on the spot and I'm not
trying to make this a difficult
debate I'm simply trying to
point again we need to learn to
take the time and do this job
asked about the practitioners
that were in the negotiations
and so all you'll be the one to
Senators my what I've been told
is that the trial lawyer
practitioners to do medical
no that's not accurate all right
I I just I want to make sure the
information I'm getting Zachary
interactive but but I I would I
was so advise that the a trial
practitioners were were asked
not to participate in the
will tell you that Kathy love is
a lawyer who practices in this
area and was part of these
negotiations all along as we got
the trial lawyers and Nick Adios
hearing in in the chamber but I
assure you that all the
discussions that were going on
with the primaries were being
the bill I just don't think
that's correct.
Senator.
Is present and the question was
I I do recall a ms love and I
think Mr Vargas being involved
in the Goshen some point I'm and
my understanding was that at
times and critical stages of the
negotiation they were asked not
Agency president of risen twice
I think we've addressed the
issue here there are absurdities
in the medical malpractice act
all in here where I did before
we those of us that do this will
with little doubt in the next
two years.
We do have for the debate we're
Senators committee.
Thank you Mr Mr present
I just want to.
malpractice act is to help
ensure the safety and welfare of
people in New Mexico.
deposit well we're protecting
justice right if the
superintendent of insurance for
some reason by rural feels that
here she needs to require more
than one point five million.
With a dollar amount but that's
that's the goal that's the goal
of this so if in order to
accomplish the purposes the very
diluted you get four five six
and they're requiring the lump
sum well you you're not going to
reach you know what's what's
the.
That language there is just to
try to ensure that if you have a
malpractice act that's it not a
Senator bonus point could be
written a little bit more
clearly I have any perhaps going
to some grammar and some syntax
but that's all that's doing I
don't I don't see how that is in
that I miss reading that I died
I would like to hear from Santo
Boker Center worth but that
that's all that's doing and I
think we need to remember the it
justice so I I don't see a
problem with this site what what
I'm hearing though.
When we're we're talking about
further litigation.
and that's that's another
discussion but I I think on on
page on page seven it's very
clear to me as I read it this is
just taking care of the the
premiums a little little relief
valve.
I think is wise and employees
going there I don't see a big
problem with that so if I miss
I
no further debate senators.
Center were to close in the bill
thank you Mr president I'll go
good defense lawyers that he
faces in a court room he is an
extraordinary a lawyer in a
courtroom but he has taught me
something I've mediated and I
on have settled after a cash
basis been presented to the
whole jury and we're waiting for
a jury verdict and the case
settles well guess what the same
that it happened in the last
three days yeah out because it
puts us in a place where we do
have to expedite things but I
just would remind the body of a
vote and another one that was in
Senator Ortiz Pinos Committee
and after nineteen years here I
have learned that with these
issues between trial lawyers and
process again I just think it's
it's incredibly challenging it's
part of the frustration that we
all have that we're here for
sixty days and this is an issue
And what's important here is
they figure this out together.
And as a result I think our
state is in a position when it
Senator Hickey said we're not
just past putting a bandaid on
this and spending two years
studying this issue what we're
going to be able to do is really
focus on all the other areas
on that issue as well with him
so I have tremendous respect
for.
All my colleagues in this
chamber I I specifically want to
thank Senator Baca for the work
she was absolutely critical the
last forty eight hours and just
finally and I wanted to be any
misunderstanding you know there
staff and those other lawyers
rave Argus and Kathy love work
sitting in those meetings but
they were part of all of the
discussions that were going on
behind the scenes and part of
the language that came up with a
senator Wirth here it was just a
it was really a code
collaboration and I think that
you know it's been a it's been
heard said this here Senator on
several occasions were here back
fixing something we're doing
something it's it's recognition
and college meant that.
that is at hand and this body
should not paralyze itself in
the pursuit of perfection.
We should take action and I want
the governor for a for her
leadership in this I think that
we have a piece of legislation
that is workable and that really
will will bring health care to
malpractice all that's left for
us to do Mr president is to take
action and without.
I move the Senate tax business
the transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill five
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands.
All Senators your seats please.
Senator want this voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative to in the negative
ladies and gentleman Senate
center Baca.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of body.
So we're gonna move now on to
the Senate consent calendar
That's going to be Center rather
yes than item number seventy
eighty one that this Senator
want this.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
passage and that it is on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution I see no
it is approximately two point
two billion dollars in to this
bill that we see that you see
before you you have a copy of
general fund because this year
we have decided to walk to use
general fund dollars instead of
bonding as we normally do
thousand eight hundred eighty
eight projects their individual
projects of legislators and the
governor and the statewide
projects Mr president.
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five oh five as
amended amendment sponsored by
senator William E. share Senator
to move and explain imminent
Bill five oh five as amended
with emergency clause.
Seeing no objection center
shared explained so Mister
president this is a real simple
strike set out so that this will
be a great bill.
We have a debate on Senate floor
member number one and I yield to
send over there yes Mr president
it removes a Representative
health care center in Dona ana
county that the governor has
allocated individual funds for
and I would certainly implore
Senator Ivey Soto he was
reserves present will Senator
share yield cynosure deal with
pleasure Mister president
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president Senator have you
Senator Mr.
No I got very confused over the
last three or four hours here
I'm assuming that it would be a
lot.
president Senate committee
themes present center and I I
don't a lot of finance stuff.
so what I'd like to know is
The I understand the governor
different bill so we could make
this a bipartisan bill as usual
what is it with with their
budget was that be possible
center.
Senator sure Mr president a yes
that we want and so this is
where she decided to make this
to put this poison pill in this
particular bill risking billions
of dollars in capital that would
divisive issue inserted into
something that is traditionally
unanimous
and if there's an opportunity
that could have easily been put
out for the respect of the
minority and I think I would
to the minority to do some of
that I know would violate their
conscience and someone they
deeply believe in I would
separate that out out of respect
and and and I say that because
If you have further debate we're
on the amendment Senator
Gallegos.
The sponsor of the amendment you
Los crucis or is it does is
exact type of work agency
presentation.
Mr president and senator I don't
know if they do the exact kind
up a facility and I'm just
wondering if outsiders willing
to come in and spend their own
money on their facility why we
the state should make our
I I have in in that's part of
the point here why are we using
taxpayer money if private money
can do the same thing.
Because private money is doing
In a manner that is offensive to
about half the population.
But they're directly competing
with other enterprises that are
down there free enterprise is
economic reasons.
Senator Gallegos misprint Center
and take a step forward I
understand there's a satanic
group come Los crucis and I'm
Mister president senator I don't
know I don't know I can't answer
positively either way but
clearly there was a an article
Mr president center I was just
hoping to get more information
on that date it just
stand in support in with that
all you thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator gave us would
you have for the debate with
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president sponsor
This is the this is a capital
outlay request and normally
capital outlay requests come
Mr president senator this comes
from the governor's office.
Senator the.
don't I don't know that I've
ever seen the governor's office
request capital outlay or for
for a project of their own.
Thank you Mr president Seneal
I'll ask that that question of
of you as well
In your understanding of capital
outlay in requests we've had
across the state and they
request the dollars to to build.
Something show mission Mr
president center.
Center Greg's absolutely this
request is no different than any
other facility a request to
build facilities throughout the
state so it doesn't do anything
president and and senator is a
is this capital outlay request
on anybody's IC IP.
Mr president Senator Griggs of
the bonds are sold and they can
ascertain a fiscal agent and
proceed with that at this point
it's in its preliminary stages
because it has to pass first to
we receive requests from
entities and they've have these
they have these projects listed
on there I see I. P. and so we
out as well but I don't know Mr
president and and center for the
governor's office actually has
an I see I do that she list
would happen is requests come in
to us and to the governor's
office and then we allocate the
dollars to help build those
The the county of Dona Ana.
Would make a request to build a
facility.
county of Dona Ana has made that
request nor has the city of Los
crucis made that request in
order to to build this facility
within anyone's I. C. I. P. but
let me remind you that not all
projects come from and I see I.
P. a lot of these are individual
projects whether they're the
a request for the Alafia
distribution system it's a big
system to build water lines and
so on that doesn't cover and I
see I. P. it comes from me
knowing my district and that's
thank you I I think though in
many instances that some of the
challenges that we're seeing
with capital outlay.
Is the fact that we recognize or
isn't viable or can't be built
timely and I think that's when
we look at and senator Munoz
talked the other day about
project work vetted through the
communities and we're not part
of of an eye she I. P..
So I guess Mr president I mean.
trying to get at the point that
it looks like the process is not
being followed the way we
normally would do to construct a
be the state if it'll be Dona
Ana County or who it might be
which then if it's the if stated
in Mexico the challenges of
it would be nice to know that
would be nice to know if it was
the the city of Los crucis so
H..
It's not so much Mr Mr president
facility it is it's that it's a
facility at all.
And this this facility is not
one is following our normal
we going to be looking at next
time or the next time how are we
how are we going to be able to
talk to our constituents about
projects that they want when.
and then Senator.
Senator the share those are
those are my concerns about this
particular.
Project in and of itself so
I'm sorry thank you Mr president
my by my apologies on the with
the sponsor of the bill you.
Mr president yes I Williams
million dollars as the number to
build a facility.
Mr president of senator Morris I
don't know of any business plan
and they're in the reasoning for
approved yet so I would think
that once the funding is
approved they will proceed with
that but it is for
Representative productive health
care as a governor had been
talking about that all along
because they're such a great
you just said there aren't there
is not an architectural planned
yet are designed.
Mister president senator Morris
and not that I know of no so
Mister president senator no land
How is this there's no business
plan no architectural drawings
no of land purchase yet how do
they know it's going to cost ten
cost and sometimes it's it's
built in phases if it's not
enough then I suppose they will
come back soon if not next year
two request to finish the
additional phases I don't know
Some some is present senator
from your answer might be more
than ten million dollars if ten
million dollars is enough Mr
president seremos or it could be
less but it's that's where it's
until the funding that's
available we have we don't know
that information right now serve
our Mr president centered on
this so we just had a debate on
insurance Senator Rodriguez.
Mr president I don't I can't
comment on that on the
malpractice insurance question
that you have all I can tell you
infrastructure state bridge we
don't know yet whether only what
contractors going to build that
bridge to we have the funding to
do that it goes for an R. F. P..
bill so I just wanted to find
out how that conflict of
interest would fill into this so
this present we don't have a
plan we don't have designs we
don't know who's going to
operate it we don't know how
much you're going to cost we
quick then we're subsidizing the
entire process rural subsidized
by the land we don't know what
land we're going to do it we
don't know where it's going to
be we just know it's going to be
ten million dollars to do this
There's no business sense and
all the cap while is that we do
we get criticized if we are not
keeping a track of the crap
capital outlay if they don't
come to us with a plan if you
it this is a just a ten million
dollar check.
We don't know what.
We don't know what so I I send
strong support of this amendment
Sir someone to run a clinic we
don't know who's going to run
the clinic.
Someone is going to design a
clinic someone who is going to
sell all the equipment for this
we need ten million dollars for
this clinic we don't have a
business plan we have nothing we
have no protections on where
this money is going on like all
the other capital outlay
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator sure to close
on the amendment.
services reduction means you're
reproducing.
But in this particular case she
used the words abortion clinic
which is anti reproduction.
that she said abortion clinic.
If this is.
For a profitable business.
It's going to make money.
a building.
Even though they're going to
make money.
That's problematic.
Very problematic if it's going
to be a failed business is going
to lose money.
That plan.
That plan but there are other
clinics there.
You can get an abortion in
because it can happen today
right now.
Right now there's no dire need
for anything.
What it appears we're doing
simply taking ten million
dollars and don't up in the sky
Certainly there was question
about anti donation clause and I
asked that question but there
are a couple of things that we
can do with money we can.
an anti reproduction facility
it's an anti health clinic at
least for one of the people
going there it's anti health.
We walk in it's presented there
may be a question and then it
passes unanimously.
For decades and decades I'm sure
But this year it's not going to
be unanimous even if I'm the
only no vote it's not going to
be unanimous and that's because
there's something in here that
From the state out into the the
communities so projects can get
built so things can happen
infrastructure happens.
That helps our communities.
A lot of roofs on on government
buildings out there it's not
rude some private buildings.
But that's what this whole
package is about.
I heard the other day Mister
president the government should
not.
Stand in the way.
Get between.
government pushing our tax by
payer dollars right into that
the middle of that.
And that's just not right.
It's not right.
That once again we could have a
unanimous bipartisan.
Bill.
The past is super strong and
little poison pill right now
middle this to divide us again
and we don't need to that.
And we don't need a government
sponsored abortion clinic a
And I don't understand what the
problem is this year that we
cannot take simple amendments to
we will not be bi partisan we
wish to tear the state and half.
It doesn't need to be.
It doesn't need to be.
governor one this is a separate
bill.
But do it separately.
We're going to do it in this
bill.
To this project.
And that's very sad.
It's very sad but I will stand
here.
Those that can't help
themselves.
And that includes the women that
are being.
Worst into this decision.
is not freedom of choice.
And I feel bad for those women.
And as you know Mr president.
I stood for this for my entire
career here and I'm not going to
full today.
and unanimously put this out
there in the world.
And apparently we can create and
what what it Senator Wirth con
not coming to emergency bills.
But we have to divide us on this
bill.
On this bill at this time and
you'll know where I stand on
I consider this.
Serious serious crime against
humanity whether it's a crime
legally in New Mexico are not.
I want to make sure that we're
doing the right thing and I it
and I don't know how to do this
I'm frustrated I don't know how
love in my heart for the child
and the mother both.
I want to help both.
It's wrong for this body.
It's wrong financially.
It's wrong for this bill.
That all of this could go away
with this one vote.
The bill passes unanimously.
Senator Wirth has another bill
in the next five minutes and it
We don't need to divide
ourselves again.
But either way I would oppose
it.
I believe that there are.
Innocent human babies at risk.
And I also believe that the
person the gains the most from
abortion is the man.
And that's the one that should
be punished the most if he's
going to allow this.
I don't want to be insulted if I
don't want to act like I'm
coming after you.
I believe.
this right.
Mr president you know that I
can't surrender.
And you know that I won't
surrender on this issue.
And I would hope that on this
one issue.
One day.
We could come together.
That we can come together and
say that.
The innocent both women and
neither.
Are less than human that they're
both human and need our love.
To house taxed revenue committee
substitute.
For House Bill five oh five.
As amended without the emergency
clause wanted well I get up
in the negative by show of hands
Senators we're voting on the
amendment of senators here
suits.
Senator o'neill voting no.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator Pinto voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator had a meal voting no.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator could Hemphill voting
no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no.
I to fifteen in the formative
twenty three in the negative
senator member number one is
failed to pass the Senate.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and I
Moores Senator Brandt thank you
Mr president to sponsor yield
center there is need of yes I
yield Senator thank you Mr
president center so
certainly was told I had to.
Mr president Senator Brandt no
that's not what I said what I
did say is that at this point as
there's no funding available so
madam president you're saying in
the future.
Because I was told I had to have
a fiscal agent before I turn the
paperwork into the finance
that's I could come up with the
between that time frame I don't
need it when we passed the bill
because that's what we've all
been told for the eleven years
I've been in this chamber Mr
projects will be funded until
it's passed then there's no need
to have a fiscal agent because
if it doesn't happen if this
this bill does not get approved
and I don't have to have a
fiscal agent I appreciate that
because that'll really help me I
been I been trying to get a a
indoor shooting range in Rio
and so I really appreciate that
I'll be able to do that next
year I wish I'd known that
before this because then I could
put my money into that and
actually had that indoor
shooting range for the police
department the sheriff's
so thank you for that I I'm glad
that we all understand the new
rules about how we can do
capital outlay in the future I
hope everyone is hearing this
because this is the New World
got that Brian.
pass a bill here in the floor
that does not have a fiscal
agent that's exactly what I've
been told.
Just now I was told that just a
Back to the matter is you put a
different set of rules in place
for the governor than you put in
for the rest of us be honest
about it.
She's twenty seven views fifteen
of us.
I forgot how to do math Fuhrman.
To be honest.
rules for capital outlay we can
all fund whatever projects we
want and then find a fiscal
agent.
I'll figure out some kind of
business for you Chris I love to
have you in Rio Rancho tune with
this was move everyone to Rio
Rancho of this building new
lie everyone there are new rules
to play by.
So next year we better play by
the new rules.
We do have further debate.
what's not in the bill and so
MSNBC reported last night from
truth or consequences New Mexico
it's the third time this week
the national stories breaking
about the amount of water loss
is it being experience from the
gallons of water a year for all
the conservative you know
conservationists out there is
clearly a problem and it it
started the problem starts get
patients at the door because
there was no running water
additionally schools have been
canceled on more than one
occasion because the water goes
out in the towns you know we
have an aging population there
a submitted a capital outlay.
Was all of twenty million
dollars if you look to the
package is really a quite
reasonable right and in the
process I introduced
if they would match the nineteen
and the project has still been
denied.
This these talk to LFC.
have an emergency and the state
will have to commend to the
emergency but when we talk about
prioritizing things a ten
million dollar abortion clinic
days without water there is a
public safety crisis going on is
your C. and the that reasonable
requests of perhaps a Republican
submitted capital outlay
projects prioritized the city of
truth or consequences water line
above there's other towns.
But I would argue were not for
the greatest good if New
Mexicans funded and while I'm
I'm I'm we're fortunate that we
have the money to do so we're
We are for the debate senator
Morris the was president also
hoping center Ivey Soto would be
here Center Munoz is in here you
website and all the rain would
no so it's after this bill
senator if I remember correctly
Mr president right.
you did the bill couple years
ago that listed when we Sanchez
what on capital outlay and when
that information is available to
days following adjournment of
the legislative session.
And what that did time wise is
the governor has twenty days
citing period and then give the
it would become public figures
present thank you center I saw
that the most important for me
because I'm voting no on this so
that way all my capital outlay
requests Cobray in Silver City
projects I have in Eldorado I
appreciate Mr president.
Any further debate Senators we
did a further debate Senate
committee thank you Mr president
with the sponsor please yield
Senator Rodriguez do you Mr
of like well how much money is
going to water infrastructure
road infrastructure no do they
do they keep track of of kind of
some of the categories I know
Senator yes Mr president as
senator the the reason you see
this right on right before you
hear by county and by the way we
request that you have and the
only the request which which you
actually funded so they break
that down by county
I don't think that in this
system is actually a gear to
break that down for us in this
particular bill but I'm sure
that if if we look data that we
had a better I. T. system for
doesn't in my memory at least it
doesn't really get much debated
kinda is someone presents for
thirty seconds and we just kind
of go through so I think we have
probation certain finance here
and I'm I'm trying to figure out
if the overall I know the
overall process has changed of
five six years as far as house
Senate executive or or is this
have been made pretty much
within the same parameters in
the last few years for example
you know this year the statewide
example but then you have three
hundred and fifty million for
projects sponsored by individual
house and Senate members and and
then one hundred million for
additional allocations also for
tribal projects and I think
those thirty million in twenty
twenty two that went to tribal
projects and then
for projects sponsored for
energy projects medical
facilities there goes another
medical facility so it's not
unusual for what we're doing in
this one transportation projects
have a question on the statewide
stuff agency presents under our
those in and maybe it's just not
included in this document but
million did those come from the
executive or were some of these
In a team work from different
members coming together with
work Mister president senator
those were the governor's
individual allocations she was
willing to work with members to
look at individual requests from
a conciliatory way and offering
to help in whatever way she
could and so it came out of her
individual allocations and then
we allocated ourselves
those of Mr present center those
make sense I mean not not having
been involved in this the to
much you know I am looking at
those bigger statewide dollar
Sitting at the combine the
higher lower at everything
together so that that kind of
makes sense I did have a
curiosity question I was just
looking at the line items see if
a mental health facility and I
were in dire need of of a lot of
behavioral health services but
certainly we we don't have a big
capacity for inpatient mental
health at such I'm just curious
sixty eight million Mr president
Senator yes that's in Las Vegas
New Mexico the behavioral health
facility in Las Vegas in Mr Mr
present center is an existing
replaced if you ask me okay
agency presentation I I'm I'm
glad to see that you know it is
a it is certainly big line but I
pry a lot to suggest it would be
I think really interesting to
see kind of how much is spent on
different types of
infrastructure in in that way
other what what what is this
capital outlay what is this one
time infrastructure money you
know going to overall and I I
Senator Diamond situation is
seems incredibly dire and I told
all of my you know my mayor's
might town councillors everybody
county commissioners I told them
talking about in that you know
help me kind of put a theme on
that so once again I just I just
bring that up to see how much
you know how much of this is is
spent on water infrastructure
versus road infrastructure
and so I I appreciate the debate
thank you Mr president.
Senator Gallegos schools.
actually hope the amendment
would have gone through but I
was just gonna ask you some
questions going back to the
governor's ten million in Los
crucis Mr Mr president center
health this presents center do
you know why the governor would
be adamant on building a fifth
one in that area this presents
her Senator yes Mr president yes
for full spectrum Representative
health care
and the way it is now they just
can't serve people have to wait
decided that this is the area
where she has requesting this to
be built and hopefully we can
get it done to provide more
health care Senator goes Mr
would be sixty five portion per
clinic of for New Mexico
residents and that's a little
over one per week so Mister
presence there are we doing this
needs Representative health care
we do not want to discriminate
doesn't matter where the the
And senator Senator yes Mr
president centers.
Appreciate that thought that of
the numbers don't justify a
little over one per week I think
larger scheme of things some of
the big projects that were
statewide was that what I
understood shootin with her
large projects Mr president
center.
own individual allocations that
she is making this request I
don't recall seeing that any
that they didn't want it it
means that the governor herself
had decided that she would meet
her commitment to what providing
access for women all women.
guess I just wanted to stress
again that this is for out of
state non New Mexico taxpayers
are coming into the state going
on to a different subject Mr
and make me a spreadsheet this
presents center and I understood
that the governor got a larger
allocation than ever before to
be able to use and choose going
did is eighty one point seventy
two percent Democrat eighteen
point two eight Republican and
if we have statewide needs that
are non partisan they're just
area eight million one hundred
percent organs all Syria and I
had received absolutely nothing
in it is early county so what
that L. yield I just want to
New Mexico thank you Mr
president.
Saying no further debate.
Senator guess to close on the
bill.
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those vote
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands and is to our seats
where voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Mr president.
Not not trying to I'm just
trying to correct the board Mr
president that's the Sanchez
telling me that that is with
Without the emergency clause it
enough to come over to our
chamber with an emergency
clause.
vote over Mr president Senator
Senator for the units consent to
since we're starting over units
consent to excuse senator
Stewart.
Hickey stored in Hickey and I'm
Mr chairman Mr president.
In there for the if I could
please be excused Senator branch
office we both shared a glass of
emergency clause on this bill if
you wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no
voting no Senator Baca voting no
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no center
I'm sorry Senator Griggs voting
no.
Thirteen the negative.
Has tax revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill five
senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business Mr
president according to the next
item on the counter Senator
Vontaze Senator want this that
the rules be suspended and the
record show that all options the
state for placing House Bill
five twenty five on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
funds this is a bill unanimously
endorsed by the New Mexico
finance Authority oversight
committee and authorizes the
authority to make grants and
loans for water projects for the
water project and we do this
Say no debate Senator brought
this to close on the bill the
representative surveys heard
enough from me today so as
president a move that Senate
special requests Senator C. with
I'm sorry we just there I should
mention with the emergency call
that emergency clause creek
Senator tier C. centers.
with emergency clause has duly
passed the Senate Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president Ms center
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous we're in that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth I
bill one ninety eight that'll be
centers Shendo item to house
bill one eighteen of the Senator
Padilla item three house bill
two sixty nine of the Senator
Shendo item for house bill one
Woods so with that Mr president
animus consent we go about our
business third reading of
legislation and I would yield
to.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Shendo thank you Mr
president and members of the
body.
We talked a lot about Indian
education we have a
responsibility to ensure that
the American students have equal
project and CTE funds statute.
So that the nine secondary
schools in New Mexico funded by
the bureau of Indian education
career and technical education
act of two thousand six
encouraged members to a occurs
in members of the body to passed
house bill one eighty eight
thank you.
president consent to excuse us
Senator souls and Senator
Gonzalez to the return of the
chamber hearing no objection see
no debate we're Senator Pirtle.
record show the rules been
called all those present on the
from accepting those bills in
the next slide show hands
Senators we're voting to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hand.
I have to thirty five the
Fuhrman is in the negative house
bill one ninety eight has duly
record show that all action for
placing House Bill one eighteen
as amended has been taken is now
subject debate amendment or
substitution would yield the
Senator Padilla center excuse me
Senate by the I thank you very
Representative Serrato
representatives Hernandez in the
house and what we did is we held
a couple of town hall meetings
we had some folks come in from
out of state they were talking
focused on bringing all of the
various entities across the
state from an economic
development standpoint to help
them focus on that new
entrepreneur that's a creating
innovation innovative type
you this presents center I'm
just really curious you know we
have all these divisions and
economic development in a way
they're all tasked with helping
entrepreneurs so with this
existing structure of EDD.
Center for the I thank you Mr
president you have the you know
there are several divisions
within our economic development
department this one is going to
entertainment industry this one
begins brings a focus to
innovation and and things that
maybe we're not thinking about
today that would help us down
the road.
eighteen as amended do now pass
and ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the rules we suspended in the
record show roll then called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative for those voting in
the negative by show of hands
Senate committee voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Five thirty two in the
affirmative for the negative
house bill one eighteen as
amended has duly passed the
Senate center for the.
Thank you Mr president members
of money Senator Pirtle.
would yield to Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo thank you Mr
president the house bill two
sixty nine as amended amend so
New Mexico's commercial driver's
license laws to conform with
administration created national
drug and alcohol testing clear
and hosted receives reports when
commercial driver's test
positive on drugs or alcohol
tests refused to submit to
testing this bill will provide
their license downgrade or at
any time during your licensure
this bill also makes changes
related to commercial driver's
licenses and commercial driver's
line of trucks commercial
The effective date of January
twenty twenty four willow in B.
D. staff to implement the
required changes.
Thank you Senator Shendo
is amended do now pass I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the rules be suspended that the
record show.
All those present voting the
firm is that for those voting in
the negative by show of hands.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senate committee voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
and members of the body Senator
Peter Wirth I thank you Mr as a
unanimous consent excuse Senator
Padilla until he returns to
chamber hearing no objection.
has been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
would yield to Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president house bill one eighty
four changes the way that state
game commissioners of the New
Mexico department of game and
appointed to hold meetings
because I couldn't hold a quorum
so this add stability the idea
of the bill is to a deep hole
politicize the leadership within
Legislative Council would have
input from current leadership
here the idea is to bring
expertise those four seats would
include a rancher farmer C. to a
authority to appoint the
remaining three seats no more
than one from the same county
there were several changes that
were made in the Senate on the
side rather than assigning
congressional districts that was
Senate including that all seven
of the seats will now require
Senate confirmation and that
missing three consecutive
meetings will have then vacated
up but New Mexico spring port
very similar to how you would
remove the board of regents for
many of our universities these
are six year terms staggered
terms and they can serve no more
than two years and on the very
last page of the bill it sets up
how they will how does that
Senator Ingle
regional have any questions is
just an interesting thing to me
and see over my years here how
this particular game commission
Friendly towards money raising
that there was and it's going to
be interesting to see how this
this pandemic out and goes
amazing to me how this is this
particular Commission has
changed because I remember
several governors and no one's
interesting thing to see how
this changes things thank you
thank you Santo Domingo we have
further debate Senator Steinborn
thank you Mr president and I
don't need to channel lady to
the session about wildlife
management in the state
I'm not a fan of six year terms
of the state that because I
think a big lead in the on
right so anyway not a fan of
some I like I like hell in a
depoliticize is part of it as
well so it has its pros and cons
so I'll stop.
Mr president I move house bill
one eighty endorsed by men to do
now pass us in this consent of
the Senate rules be suspended
that records show the roll then
called and all those present or
Senator Moores voting no.
house bill one eighty for S.
thrice amended has passed the
Senate Senator Diamond thank you
Mr president Senator.
Mr president unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
explained about to present is
very simple bill what this
particular piece of legislation
does it simply increases the
amount of the legislative
New Mexico military institute.
Any debate senators are debating
house bill one forty five.
See no debate see no debate
called all those present voted
the affirmative step for those
voting the negative by show of
hands Senators where voting if
you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
Present value owner six years
Five out of thirty six Fuhrman
is in the negative house bill
one forty five has duly passed
the Senate corporate lingo.
would yield the Senator Woods
Senator Woods thank you Mr
president house bill one ninety
I will update the forest
conservation act to side the
correct federal laws to provide
act dates back to nineteen
thirty nine and more than thirty
five years have passed since the
last updates to the statute the
twenty twenty two fires are the
recovery the bill will qualify
New Mexico receive substantially
more funding through federal
programs.
eliminate long out dated
control after why our fires and
at that I stand for questions
Senator is we're debating house
bill one ninety five is twice
amended anyone wish to debate.
called and all those present or
the affirmative suffer those
voting the negative by show of
hands.
Senator voting senator Wirth
before we take a vote Mr
president consent to excuse
Senator Sanchez if you please
reporter chair.
Mr president.
Senate majority floor leader
rate or to take it to the next
order of business I thank you Mr
president Ms that we go that our
business messages from the house
around that order business
read in full and signed by the
office of the house in open
session return same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
the gentle show the message from
session and return same here
with respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal show the message from
certificate of correction House
Bill to twenty six House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety nine as amended
have been read in full and
submitted the cemeteries
McCutchen chief clerk.
Journal so the message in the
house is been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
sessions Senate have signed an
open session house bill four as
amended with certificate of
correction House Bill to twenty
six House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill to
bill two fifteen as amended by
the house Senate bill one sixty
as amended by the house and
request the concurrence of the
Senate to the house amendments
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the
house's concurred in the Senate
amendments to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate bill two forty
eight as amended by the Senate
Senate bill two.
Senate finance committee
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk.
That'll show the message from
the house been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
Also the message from the house
has been received.
to whom has been referred house
consumer and public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill seventy three as amended
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
committee reports and that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the general reflect that
they were acted upon
individually hearing no
objection the reader to read.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five thirty three do pass
respectfully submitted senator
George when you also chairman
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopting the journal reflect
they were acted upon
individually Senate majority
floor leader rate or to take is
that next order of business
introduced by Senator Lopez a
memorial recognizing the
cultural influence of events
seen yes money stolen senior
just walk in and see us and the
table that Senate memorial
seventy.
come back on the floor at seven
thirty and I also know Mr
president that are majority
caucus floor caucus chair has
announcements about a Senate
Senator thank you Mr president
the majority caucus will be
meeting at seven PM in the
Senate lounge once again seven
PM St Onge.
Any further announcement
get what you're looking for.
Our move are you ever since the
first and it is.
I think this is Senator Bob is
objecting.
will start up at looks like
about five fifteen that is about
thirty minutes or so to take a
little bit of a break from for
so we'll meet at five fifteen
and then we'll go until we
needed in the caucus.
room three eleven we have about
four or five bills.
and a couple memorial so it
shouldn't take us very long
thank you Mr president I guess
do House Bill five forty seven
which is the house omnibus tax
bill it passed through the
Senate tax committee this
president unanimous consent to
yield Senator Baca Senator Baca
thank you Mr president just ****
our surgeon arms leave the desks
as the are.
Espanola has provided box
dinners for us that I understand
are in the Senate lounge so
thank you senator Hart a meal
for that some members
whole.
Thank you Mr president Senator
Moores he was present Center
worth what give us a rough
estimate when you think we'll be
back on the floor how long you
the floor at seven thirty and
also to keep in touch with you
senator Morris just to keep you
so you all know exactly what it
is and and like I said I think
a.
No go to about nine thirty
