Continue where we were earlier
also just for folks listening in
we are.
waiting for Legislative Council
to finish up the draft on the
And we get that back down I
think we will a recess subject
to the call the chair I know
that Senate Democrats are going
to caucus and I would guess the
floor so that is the plan for
tonight
Mr president similar business
messages from the house we are
in that order business message
from the house the reader to
bill three sixty eight Senate
bill four twenty three Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill seventeen Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
here with respectfully submitted
of the site And Marty's
McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received
retreat Mr president I'm
the house amendments
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
the gentle so the message from
the house has been received the
reader to read Mr president I'm
house amendments respectfully
submitted Lisa Marty's McCutchen
chief clerk gentle show the
message from the house.
Has been received.
the Senate and returned same
here with respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk gentle show the message
substitute for Senate bill fifty
three as amended has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the house in open
session returned same here with
respectfully submitted the state
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business.
Thank you Mr president Ms
consent we go about our business
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty three as amended has
had it under consideration and
reports the same has been duly
senator Kerry Hamblen Senator
cliff R. Pirtle co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report we have a
in favor signify by singing more
of an alley but I just held off
on the Senator Hamblen.
I like to answer the members of
the body that Josh is the Senate
has signed an open session
next order of business thank you
Mr president Ms that we go that
our business messages from the
governor we're on that order
business messages from the
governor reiterated Senate
executive message number eleven
members of the Senate pursuant
to my authority under article
four section twenty two of the
New Mexico constitution I have
signed Senate bill twenty six as
amended SB twenty six and acted
our state in the direction of
the future SB twenty six as a
result of many hours of hard
work and collaboration between
the bill sponsor senator Roberto
general show that the message
from the governor has been
received the reader to read.
Senate executive message number
amended enacted by the fifty six
legislature first session twenty
twenty three respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
general show that the message
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president we're gonna go to
concurrence or three items item
number one is centers to
fan X. concurrence counter
sixteen Senate bill three thirty
myself and the third is Senator
Cervantes concurrence counter
number eighteen Senate bill for
twenty six is twice amended Mr
president Ms that we go about
our business concurrence an
a three thirty seven.
Senator if you can explain what
those amendments were Mr
president members of the Senate
they of the house amendments
sure that regional stakeholders
and stakeholder collaboration
was involved as well as changing
some words that changed
activities to programs and
seeking equitably balance water
uses in instead of.
Inserted consider public welfare
values balancing water users so
I would move to concur.
see no debate Senator Stefanics
to close on a concurrence I'm Mr
president members of the Senate
with the house amendments all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the Senate's concurrent with
the house amendments to Senate
bill three thirty seven as
Judiciary Committee said two
percent bill fifty as amended.
Senator field explain to us what
those amendments were thank you
Mr presidencies are friendly
amendments that were worked out
dwelling when that happens the
either a lawsuit can be filed or
arbitration if that's what's in
the agreement and the second
thing it did was clarify the
method of delivery to include
on the requests to concur with
the house amendment.
Scene and Senator were to close
thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate concur with the
Senate to concur with the house
amendment all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the sentencing occurred with
the house amendments to Senate
announcements miscellany we're
in that order business
announcements miscellaneous.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president
getting a list of the Sanchez
but I know the first item is the
House Bill three sixty three
which Senator Pirtle and I
Senator Pirtle for item number
one house bill three sixty
three.
Send Senator Wirth I believe
that's Center shares in the in
the building so we can give to
center share.
three sixty three as amended
Smokey bear license plate
Senator this president.
I ask unanimous consent that the
record show that all rolled up
yes the rules been called all
breath of what we're okay who
you know we're not going
anywhere tonight to run across
the room when I heard my name.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
so Mister president Smokey Baer
is a real New Mexican smoking
was found.
Hanging on to the top of the
Pause and everything was just it
was terrible terrible Smokey was
actually airlifted from there to
Santa Fe to a veterinarian here
Ranger from New Mexico game and
fish named ray.
Bill and his his wife Ruth
children.
veterinarian the nurse this bear
back to health and then they
realized they had a bear and so
the bear was.
Was
was employed doing his thing for
twenty six years.
He was the number one person
with the forest fire prevention
overwhelming millions of people
went to visit smoking every year
literally millions including me.
Smokey retired in nineteen
seventy five he died in nineteen
A New Mexican that deserves a
license plate so with that Mr
president I will stand for
questions thank you for the
three as amended amendment
sponsored by senator cliff R.
Pirtle.
It's center program moving
explain amendment mu Center for
amendment number one to house
bill three sixty three is
amended.
Shout out to Martin Fisher up in
eight council since we had a
little bit extra time we we
actually came up with a better
way of doing what I've been
trying to do and so this would
room for a detail so this not
only fixes the forty two license
plate bills that we're doing
this session but it'll actually
fix the twenty eight that we
it'll go to a decals we're gonna
use up all the you the the place
that have already been made but
moving on moving forward there
will be a universal special
plate that'll have a room for a
Thank you center Pirtle centers
ready made and senator member
number one to house bill three
sixty three as amended I yield
to the sponsor Senator.
debating Senate floor amendment
number one.
Senator I guess is present with
the.
Sponsor the amendment deal for
just a few questions Senator
history here in the legislature
of the past few license plates
are you saying that I would
still be able to have lesson
play bills but not the full
Promoting pick something you
would put that forward and it
would refer to the same section
that every other special plate
refers to and you would have to
worry about it because it would
Senator Wirth misprint etcetera
if I was going to the center
chair Senator Woods plate that
would have different color ties
then all we would be changing
correct and then there wouldn't
be that fee and the cost in
setting up an designing and
doing and an entire new plate
because the plates would already
exist the only design that would
these but I I think it makes a
lot easier it helps our our law
enforcement keep up and and be
able to identify plates and
realize are from New Mexico and
they had supported this idea.
Senator because thank you
that center I I do have
if I passed the center Woods
inch Center
the amendment please yield
Senator Pirtle deals are you Mr
president senator I too believe
in the future of agriculture
Senator Pirtle so Mr president
Senator Steinborn those bills
reference this sectional law
that we're changing it'll
reference back to this section
special registration plates
manufactured pursuant to this
section before June sixteenth
twenty twenty three any
remaining supply the manufacture
played Shelby depleted before
developing and issuing
would all then be put into this
new style Senator thank you Mr
president Senator so if I
understand this correctly then
the the current plates let's
their plate it would just be in
the form of the decals stickers
that correct Senate president
senator and Mr president center
which and brought of the Migos
but
yes that's essentially how would
eight or whatever size it is you
can transfer that to your next
vehicle and it would still be
illegal plate.
black license plate Senator
Pirtle so only the specialty
please refer to this section of
loss of the other ones were
actually created by the V. D.
themselves they have that
authority now to go through a
this section a law if if of I
have a list on my phone I can
name all all off there it's it's
quite lengthy but I believe
there's twenty eight I just
charity of the beneficiary of
the license plate and others
object to the the cost of doing
this and so they don't vote for
the plate itself although their
support of the agency so I think
who was present with Senator
Pirtle you'll Senator Pirtle
detailed I yield Mister
president so if you could we do
one of the I had some
conversations with some tribal
different public tribal the
sticker so that they could show
their pride in their own tribal
entities.
Senator Pirtle and Mister
president senator absolutely so
would just make a simple sticker
that then they could the either
the Mescalero Apache or had
Correa or Navajo or what of the
twenty two tribes and pueblos
they absolutely could do that
many of our of our great asset
that we have and we really need
to see the the novel symbol on
license plates and everything
president of the Amigos and he
said if this passes they're
going to leave the governor in
Detroit this year.
And not allow her back and then
they're gonna transfer all of
their assets to some other state
Further debate Senator Stewart.
Mr president I just want to
recognize what a beautiful
amendment this says I have
a perfect job on your amendment.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
Any further debate on the
amendment we do have further
debate on the amendment Senator
Griggs.
Smokey bear and
I'm.
You know smoking bears from.
The Lincoln National Forest and
if.
Thank you Mr president do you
know
Senator who it was that found
Smokey Baer.
Senator Pirtle Mr president I
don't.
With the.
With the other sponsor of
whatever it is that he's where
he yield please Senator share to
I don't know exactly who found
smoky clinging to the top of the
tree but it was a New Mexico
game and fish ranger named ray
will tell you who found Smokey
bear me guess was wrong great
and it's not.
It's not right bill.
But it's a it's a gentleman and
Chapman GW found smoky brought
in in and to wherever in large
and then I guess Ray bail well
to be in the guy guy from there
disappointed that neither one of
you knew who that was so I'm not
I'm not really sure how I can
vote on this just because.
Because I mean we've been doing
amendment sponsor of whatever
else that is show thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Griggs any further based on the
amendment.
you yield so.
My understanding was that there
was a crew.
From house called the snowballs
somewhere or held there so I'm
not sure about all these license
plate if we should
If the histories contradicting
the.
foundations that are sponsoring
them if they're legit and if
they choose to support them
there's the some contradiction
Si no further debate on the
amendment.
Center part of the clothes on
the amendment.
Thank you Mr president I'm not
sure who found Smokey bear but
Senate that the record show that
the rule has been voice voted.
Senator is is been requested up
senator member number one by a
voice vote all those in favor
now twice amended we're back.
On the bill.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
some time and to look at this of
Smokey bear who owes his fame to
the PTA's pueblo firefighters
firefighters and they were
recognized as the number the
number one firefighting team in
the country.
And they're the ones that have.
in finding Smokey bear is of our
full some modem.
And with this
inTaos with the tile snooze on
or in this and so whatever story
is right you know but of this
was brought up in this was also
brought up to.
you know I just want you to know
that there's another story to
that too.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Gonzales any further
debate on the bill.
Mr president I you Senator
Gallegos this presents center I
was just wondering if you could
give me some indication on when
they dropped Smokey's middling
And senator how I'm not quite
sure about that but I have heard
it many times both ways and you
know some you know as Smokey
it didn't matter you know both
would recognize you know Smokey
bear but I really know exactly
when that happened.
you thank you senator Angus any
further debate on the bill.
Si no further debate on the
bill.
Senator to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president first I
have in this is a serious
question.
Senator Gonzales.
Mr president and Senator no.
But I was very very aware of
because so.
know of us maybe in my ten years
old I always remember when he
transported the snowballs.
And of the snowballs were very
very highly recognized.
Mexico has had numerous heroes
to fight fires I know this the
tile snowball team what I did
not know is that they were the
after smoking was rescued
brought here to Santa Fe.
Nursed back to health by in New
Mexican.
Who is part of our game and
fish.
that we maybe could learn a
lesson from him today but he was
brought back after he retired
and died he's back in New Mexico
where he wanted to be but he was
great New Mexican Smokey bear
the of us came from some kids
song that was made.
And was never his name so with
that Mr president I now move
those present voted for Smokey
the bear except those who voted
in the negative by show of
hands.
Senator is more voting.
Before we go to the vote I yield
Please raise your hand spring.
Senator Lopez voting no.
Senator many of us are you
voting no.
Semenya's explains vote.
With the Senate allow me to
explain my vote to.
as well Mr president I just know
the Migos will pack an exorcist
case at a gallop will make sure
that you get home from Detroit
will make sure to Smokey the
to thank you Senators maybe he's
going back to the debate that
Senator Gallegos talking about
with Smokey the bear I had this
discussion as Smokey bear went
that I am I said well it's
actually Smokey the bear Smokey
bear not Smokey the bear and I
went on to explain you don't say
make you the Mouse or Donald the
So thank you Senator Gallegos
for mention of the the part
because I learned a lesson to.
We're going on to the next item
on the calendar item number
twenty nine house bill four
twenty four and I yield to
senator.
Sedillo Lopez.
thank you Mr let me let me go
through the bills on the
supplemental counter just lay
out the Senate sponsors servant
has a heads up item number two
house bill for twenty four
house bill forty is Senator
Rodriguez item six House Bill
three forty five percent of my
Estes I'm doing item number
seven house bill two to twenty
house bill one eighty one is
Senator souls a Levin house bill
four seventy one is Senator pope
twelve house bill four sixty two
item fifteen House Bill to sixty
two S. Santo Padilla and item
sixteen house Joint Memorial
seven is Senator hope with that
Mr present unanimous consent we
go about our business third
twenty four know you'll to
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
hearing no objection Senator
Sedillo Lopez to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr president house
bill for twenty four simply
amend section fifty dash seven
secretary of the of WSD has
statutory authority to appoint
members of the council and the
secretary of public education.
Nose to participate in the
council it also goes through in
With that I stand for questions
thank you center CEO of a
Centers we're debating house
bill for twenty four.
I
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
show of hands thank you Senator
I have to thirty for the firm is
here on the negative house bill
twice amended and we back to
center city Lopez thank you Mr
president House Bill three
seventy nine provides for the
smooth transition from the bird
production and consumption of
twenty twenty passing the EPA is
set to regulate the production
and consumption and of a H. FC's
and what happens with this bill
is it just sends up a transition
With that I stand for for
questions thank you Senator
Lopez Senators we're debating
house bill three seven nine as
twice amended is there any
love is detailed yes Mr
president I yield Senator Pirtle
and thank you Mr president and
senators so what exactly does
the bill do were moving towards
municipal codes are
Sort of they come in well I have
like seven to ten years they're
behind and so what this bill
Move to quickly it's sort of
it's I don't know how to
describe it it's it's a I heard
this it actually was when we
were in committee we had a long
discussion about this because
what can happen is if the local
if there's a patchwork of
different standards around the
state so the state just as
providing like a bridge to
whatever it is that the EPA ends
up doing with regard to
the manufactures wouldn't send
in refrigerants refrigerants to
fix refrigerated air.
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
Mr president so the reason I'm
in it because it causes a huge
cost on the consumer and
interestingly enough the company
that always has the patent on
the new refrigerant that's
that's required is do pot.
it's not about in my opinion as
a as a mechanic whether or not a
refrigerant is better for the
environment but it's about
basically ensuring capital gains
for a certain group of donors
is I found it quite interesting
again when I looked it up that
that is also owned by dupont and
wives Mr president do we have to
have a new refrigerant well you
look it up and the patent on our
replacing it was on the cost
over a hundred dollars you can
and so I I'm just hoping Mister
president senator that this bill
isn't just ensuring profits for
large corporations.
need the sponsor to yield we
heard this bill in Senate
conservation the positive thing
it does do is it allows the
senator legislation we do have
further debate Senator Ingle
thank you Mr president present
just to echo little bit of what.
Okay good senator from Rossell
the same refrigerant or you can
but it went from as she says
from eight dollars a economic up
two hundred and these things are
something that you can talk
certainly older tractors and
equipment it's up.
Something we have to be pretty
careful of here I'm glad to hear
Senator Stefano actual change
Because there is a tremendous
amount of money in this sort of
thing if you happen to be the
one that gets picked and I'm
sure it's always done in a very
what they're supposed to be as
far as their their environmental
protection thank you thank you
center and go any further
debate.
That house bill four sorry and
maybe it's I move that house
bill three seventy nine has
twice amended.
seats please were voted on house
bill three seven nine is twice
amended.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Munoz voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
members of the body you'll
notice Senate majority floor
leader Peter Wirth takes the
next order of business.
president is that we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous and ideal to
senator Munoz we're in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous seven yes.
something happens and and it
called not to duty and will pay
them so.
Thank you senator Munoz is there
any debater question on the
request.
twelve oh one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules we
suspend the journal show all
those present at this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session.
read in full improved Senator
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
anticipate a thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House Bill three ninety
five as amended on final passage
Senate this is a bill that is
they came over from the house
that is exact do bill could of
the of the bill that we passed
here Senate bill of two or
year's between the
people that Representative the
direct service providers in the
developmental disability
programs and the management of
do regular reviews of how much
is being paid for these services
and to compare the price with
other states so that we can try
to stay up and we can attract
amended senator Michael Padilla
thank you Mr chairman you
consent to skew Senator Duhigg
inTaos returns the chamber
hearing no objections so ordered
any further debate senators.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
rule is been called in that all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
house bill three ninety five as
amended has duly passed the
Senate's synergies of you know
thank you very much Mr president
and members of the Senate we're
gonna go on to the next item on
the calendar that's going to be
amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
no objections center there is
impaired unable to communicate
for example of the can have a
disability that affects our
ability to communicate like
on when the police runs your
license plate they would be
alerted to the fact that there
may be someone in the vehicle
who has the special needs and
impairments that's all it does
Senator made his famous present
with the Sanchez you'll please
Senator Rodriguez jails Mr
president yes senator I will
thank you very much and Mr
president center I I I certainly
discussed in committee I wasn't
part of any of that that didn't
hear this bill in committee but
it when when
When I guess at the end of the
Prepared to handle hippa
sensitive information when they
collect this this information.
Senator Rodriguez Mister
vehicle division would have to
do nothing more than just add
one field to their computer
system where the person
registering the car it would
just voluntarily be there that
impairment but also law
enforcement because many times
I'll stop a car and there is an
individual and I I've seen that
before or at least know about it
that individual inside the car
and the police drew their guns
on that person right away the
person couldn't speak couldn't
explain but it was it's this
kind of situation that we're
you in Mr president center do
you.
Are we where House looking at
the analysis we where if the
DPS have a response to this are
and even the Judiciary Committee
here in the Senate and I never
heard of the police I having any
adverse or negative comments
towards the bill I think to me
fire real quick at least
according FIR it says no
response was received from the
PS although that doesn't because
it doesn't mean that were part
of a discussion as a surly
the scenarios that he raised I
think that's quite appropriate.
but I just something about when
in and and whether it's
voluntary or not okay I want to
run X. understand this with
whether it's voluntary or not
the intake the person in Texas
they do a lot of the medical
stuff now maybe maybe there are
set up for it I don't know but
I I hope they are free to we're
says taxed Rav Commission for
deaf hard of hearing persons
this was only for debt for every
you know people that are deaf or
hard of hearing I I mean no
questions I I I don't see a
and then we're gonna be having
the the police officer that.
Has.
And then now we're looking up a
database of of autistic people
with autism and we're putting
that information into the police
report.
well maybe but I just
it when we connect a large
database of people with
disabilities and medical
conditions and then we're going
to put that in to police reports
so I don't know me at the the
agency present and and Center
any in any responsibility at my
concerns I mean are we going to
really putting people's of
intent of the bill I just I I be
a little more reassured if I
could have a response about the
concern Senator Rodriguez thank
individual or individuals in the
car have the special special
needs and special communicative
disorders it's no different than
hang they have to find something
showing that they qualify for
that and so this is no different
than that
I don't know how else to to
particular legislation Senator
Cervantes okay thank you Mr
president etcetera that that's
reassuring that they I think
they can intake this without.
uneasy knowing that you know law
enforcement it's it's it's kind
of like okay we're gonna have an
interaction with someone
but I also think maybe maybe it
maybe won't work out and maybe
it could potentially you know
bring some harm to someone are
somehow in some way you know
really appreciate it center
thank you senator Munoz is there
any further debate.
Si no further debate center with
regard to close on the bill
thank you Mr president I move
negative by show of hands
Senators tier seats please.
Senator Baca voting no.
I have a.
of the state we're going on to
the next item on the calendar
that's going to be so the item
number three House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for House
options for placing House labor
veterans.
And military affairs committee
house.
Thank you Mr president all
members of so this bill creates
a firefighter recruitment fund
and the fund can accept of
monies from the federal
government.
recruitment disbursements of
five thousand dollars to help
with recruitment retention of
firefighter statewide with
that'll stand for questions
thank you senator Masta centers
we're debating.
Senator was.
shouldn't do Mr president
absolutely.
Senator Woods.
Mr president and.
Senator I know your bill's says
call that out in your bill.
because that's very.
Prevalent for firefighters to be
If you made some statement about
EMTs then I could support your
bill a lot more.
If you would make the same
there are paid for factors so
I know what your bill says of
argued this in committee and I
fill the fund it creates a fund
so I'm assuming junior money or
anything can come in the future
it makes you feel really good
and does absolutely nothing and
if you would consider the ATM to
smoke thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator.
Senator Woods.
Any further debate.
Also recognize the fact that.
In New Mexico.
Fire protection is a huge issue.
double duty in so many ways
because they not only fight
fires of their community they
provide other public service in
the community but they get
deployed throughout the rest of
firefighters that will actually
help to support the volunteer
firefighters we have throughout
the state thank you very much
Senator so that we do have for
fires that devastated that my
County Los Alamos County and
then this summer the fire that
raged through northern New
Mexico in San Miguel County this
is a bill that we definitely
would certainly assist yield
center my says Dale Mr president
yes.
Mr president center my sister
would Smokey bear qualify for
this.
Learning why C. bear has been
working for us for decades so
I'm glad thank you Mr president
thank you senator Morris any
further debate senators.
expert witnesses are join me.
For the a final vote the work
card you can identify your
expert witnesses.
Yes yes thank you.
Release of us here started I
think in that this court our
expert witness into the chamber.
Senator my SS.
To close on the bill.
One.
Thank you Mr president I move
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called in all
those present voting the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands is we're voting to your
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Woods voting no.
Five of thirty six and
Senate Senator my SS thank you
Mr president thank you to my
experts and thank you members
would like to thank your ex for
for the service that you provide
to the people across the state
of New Mexico thank you.
you know you'll to senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president asking
Ms sent the rules we spent an
all action for placing House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill to twenty eight
consent to have Representative
Serrato here who is the sponsor
of the bill one of sponsors in
the house welcome Representative
chamber.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
owned with more than five
dwelling units
that allows a local government
to set up a district and then
for a property owners who elect
assessment as the tool to ensure
that the finance mechanisms of
that the borrowing is repaid
there's no requirement that any
create an alternative financing
mechanism that has the lean
attached to your property
assessment and there's
provisions in here to deal with
the ten governor was in the
chamber and voted for that bill
back then this come a long way
on so it's a good programs as an
alternative way to do this
financing which is done by
thank you senator Wirth centers
we're debating.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
Thanks for the opportunity.
Is that right Mr if the sponsor
would deal to a question Mr
president senator Steele
mistress and happy to Senator
Woods would you explain this a
mortgage is our priority place
in this mortgage the way this
still is set up Mr president
Senator so Mister president this
And so I Mr president.
The other liens that are on the
property we'll continue to have
assessment the jumps any liens
that's one of the big issues and
that was actually the problem
with the bill that I carried
years ago is that actually
created a a priority in stock
than the mortgage will be
subordinate to this.
So Mister president and senator
what this does then it says.
Then he can't he he doesn't have
to to make his
his yield subject to it I mean
trying to get at here Mister
president and senator.
Senator Wirth Mr president the
senior mortgage holder and any
the assessment so under no
scenario is a lien holder gonna
be forced to accept this unless
they agree to do it and so
that's real important that I
thank you Senator Woods we do
have further debate Senator
Gallegos.
This presents sponsor you
Senator Wirth the mistress I'm
happy to.
This proves Center as just
to be paid off by the procedures
that transfer.
Senator Wirth so Mister
president that's one of the
beauties of this it does not
will buy the house not the house
I'm sorry it's a five unit
commercial building the next
owner will buy it we is with
that assessment sitting there
So again it's good it's
completely discretionary but it
but the interesting thing about
this and that that that differs
from a typical mortgage which
does have to be paid off is that
this can run with the land.
that size you have to have
professional engineers or can I
go ahead and build it and not
have any kind of paperwork
behind it this presents Sir
districts and when they decide
to do that they will put in
place all the requirements
through rulemaking for exactly
what what will be required for
someone to proceed forward and
that's out there.
Misprision center would that be
the county assessors office or
zoning who would be the one
making termination this presents
Thanks.
will lay out exactly what this
would look like and also the
department can serve as the
administrator or contract with a
third party to assist with
that this will work and the and
the rules and regulations are
such to protect our obviously
the homeowners who are doing
this and it's going on the
property rules so it's got to be
done right.
the tax rolls and whoever Sims
tax rolls would have the
liability is that correct Mr and
present Sir Mr president that's
exactly correct it's a hundred
percent private financing and
A further debate Senator Ivey
Soto I thank you very much and
president and present will
sponsor you Senator Wirth do you
This bill does is exclusive.
To commercial property is that
correct Mr president it's
exceeded your actually correct
back to two thousand nine and
the pills to carry this ago
certainly an element of
president and.
Senator Wirth and the.
And that and the terms of this
up by the county but then any
assessment as a volunteer
assessment that the that the
commercial property owner would
would ask for affect of late in
Search committee.
The members with the majority
What does it mean that it has
priority superior to all lanes.
of that are on the property
those others lien holders would
have to subordinate their
interested have to agree to that
in other words so that's the key
to the.
all those private mortgages and
that was why that program never
really got off the ground the
key to this is that there is
agreements by those other lien
holders and the bankers
they figured it out after it
passed they were not very happy.
Okay thank you and and and
that's I guess if if Mr madam
president center if the F. it's
I guess real okay all right
thank members thank you further
debate.
Seeing none senator Wirth to
assent the rules be suspended
the record show that all action
excuse me the rules we spent in
the records show the rules been
called in those present voting
the firm except those voting in
vote no please raise your hands.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Brandt.
Voting no.
I vote of thirty five in the
affirmative three in the
gentlemen of the Senate.
Not seeing Senator moon Jooss in
the chamber.
Senator Muno superior I guess it
was the previous person in this
chair Senator Hickey.
Madam president.
that madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing.
House Bill.
affairs committee substitute as
amended
be put on final passage our
final passage be taken and that
is now subject to debate
a lot of insurance garbled in at
that essentially what it does is
allow.
Organizations who provide.
Budget.
either small group or large
group not just health benefits
but other benefits as a package
but in terms of health there was
it right in the bill to be sure
that any of these are the
individuals covered by this bill
in the hospital and has come
over and because of the
insurance things like me wise
multiple employer welfare
debate on the house labor
veterans military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five thousand
Senator Padilla thank you madam
chair president you consent to
Thank you madam president and
and Senator Hickey what would
you yield to some questions do
you feel center Hey I certainly
of to Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
certainly says so these employee
Whether or not they have to pay
for having a large number of
employees are a small number of
employees
small ones and then a couple of
large ones and in each instance
will have to have a different
right or or is there some of.
my favorite topic the law of
large numbers if a if if an
arrangement includes more than
fifty under the federal law
cost in small group which
traditionally is more expensive
because it's only
two to fifty the.
people then that would be come
under the small group area and
be a little more expensive
rather than if they put together
something that had like five
charge the they have to pay.
Based on the total number of
employees they have leased out
to multiple companies.
what call comes into and this is
what I wanted to be sure of a
small group classification
clarification and being sure
that the ACA applies and then if
of ten benefit areas under the
ACA would apply as well.
So in essence madam president
they they're allowed to
aggregate all the all the
That's correct okay thank you
thank you madam president thank
you further debate.
move that house bill two fifty
five as amended now do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that the role has been called in
labour veterans military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five as amended
to your seats if you wish to
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
mowers fotango Senator share
voting no Senator guy eight
goals voting no.
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Hickey thank you madam
president and senators thank
you.
We'll move on to item number
been taken is now subject to
bait a manner substitution.
Senator Ivey Soto to slow down a
little bit and explain the bill.
Yes madam president.
that uniform unclaimed property
act and adopts the revised
uniform unclaimed property act
and makes conforming amendments
throughout the statutes without
about to stand for questions.
etcetera etcetera the president
have to.
I'm gonna present sponsor would
you characterize this a change
in the uniformed claim property
Madam president were appropriate
yes.
So I'll just repeat that and
claim unclaimed property and I
guess that's what gives me a
little bit of hesitation about
it there should be some some
process and I think it's pretty
actually pretty happy with the
Thank you other debate on the
bill.
These uniform laws the longest
bills we have then there's
process that we've been having
to do this in the revised
uniform unclaimed property act
with that madam president.
I move that house bill one sixty
events centers we are voting on
house bill one sixty five as
amended to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Pirtle.
Voting no.
Senator Burt.
Q. boring keeps ago and thank
you very much madam president.
Okay moving right along the item
number ten Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president I ask
been amended are on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution of
solar to the troops Center souls
indicates that teachers generate
an additional multiplier on the
SCG this just expands it so that
if teachers move up into
principal positions or other
administrative positions that
Thank you is there debate on
house bill one eighty one.
Seeing no debate centers sold to
close thank you madam president
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
a Centers for voting on house
bill one eighty one tier seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hands.
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative seer in the negative
house bill one eighty one has
duly passed the Senate Senators
action for placing House Bill
for seventy one final passage
has been taken of that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution Senator pope to
term services department
department.
The bill outlines the
composition and duties of the
council and requires annual
reporting to specific
legislative committees and the
three thousand New Mexicans age
sixty five and older with
Alzheimer's and other dementia.
A number expected to grow.
their family member with this
disease.
What that madam president I'm
ready for debate or any
questions.
Is there debate on house bill
deaths amend present center do
you remember the number thing
dissipated the growth to be if I
remember right committee so more
Etcetera I appreciate I'm gonna
send support is you know I'd say
the state in committee my mom my
Issue because the department of.
Would answer any question I had
and we have that Alzheimer's
group out of Albuquerque that
would also commenting give me
and support I think that counsel
be a great all alternative to us
or for the state and I just
appreciated thank you.
Seeing no objection we will do
so.
Further debate on house bill
four seventy one.
dementia but the sacrifices of
the impacts of those family
members here in New Mexico and
around the world madam president
I move that house bill four
centers we're voting on house
bill four seventy one tier seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
duly passed the Senate Senator
pope.
Thank you madam president and
think about it.
Thank you we'll move along a
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
Senator Duhigg to explain the
bill thank you madam president
in mid municipalities that have
red light tickets under current
law if someone wants to
object one of those tickets they
have to request and actually go
in for an actual in person
to object to those tickets by
doing essentially a male and
hearing this is something that's
been done in other states and it
would reduce the burden both on
residents who are dealing with
See no debate Sir do hit close
thank you madam president I move
that house bill four sixty two
is twice amended.
senators were voting on house
bill four sixty dues twice
minute tier seats if you wish to
vote no please raise rents.
Senator Moores votes now.
Senator Sanchez spoke about.
Senator Baca votes now.
Senator share votes now.
Thank you madam presentation
members thank you moving right
along number fourteen Senator
Stefanics.
madam president ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing House consumer and
public affairs committee
substitute for house bill
I'm.
Madam president members of the
Senate.
What this bill deals with the
something called biomarkers and
trend in medicine it enables a
very personalized kind of
diagnosis to be made that not
only says a person has cancer
for example and that's cancer is
the disease that it's been used
of cancer and where it's located
and it speeds the the diagnosis
but also than the treatment of
of that disease
that that the insurance
companies will make this testing
and treatment of biomarkers
available to everyone those
that'll stand for questions Is
You get it right.
It just happens to be a.
Enjoyable night I guess it's
late thank you madam president
Who has seen.
Removed his kids for some reason
still Saint Patrick's day.
Okay yes I will still yield to
him he yields.
No and school.
Skill to supposed to be air
Who who madam president it's
going to be.
How more pleasant night and some
nights it appears okay
think they're very expensive of
Senator Moores just came over
and said these are very
expensive but so are all cancer
drugs there is really the
does designed just for that
particular kind of cancer and so
you wind up saving a lot of
money in the long run but each
individual.
believe biomarkers are much
broader than that so you get to
the test and and yes it might
say you have cancer specific
or any number of other things
that might happen out there and
so it's not just cancer.
But it's a lot of things that
that you may or may not get but
means our Mr madam president
center Casey cannot madam
president senator Senator
Stefanics reminds me that I
drugs to use or what treatment
to approach it with this would
narrow those down and tell you
exactly what you need to have
done so it's a it's a diagnostic
but I also believe it goes
beyond diagnosing a specific
thing it I'm I missing the word
that I want to say but it but it
let you know that you are likely
Parkinson's may be possible for
you or Alzheimer's or.
Marian thanks I think that's
what biomarkers me.
think what the what is able to
do is say that there are in your
system and in this location in
your system these molecules that
The concern that I have with
biomarkers.
If I understand them right now I
might not.
But the concern I have is that.
simply not going to treat you
for this one because we don't
want to treat you for two so
we're gonna let you die from the
first one instead of keeping
right thing here but that was a
concern that was that was
brought up in that it could be
used.
Without your consent so to speak
get it so we're just gonna go
ahead Lee to die from disease
number one.
So.
It from that perspective if
that's true.
But is there any safeguards the
state can't be used for
something else.
Senator Ortiz.
Madam president of the bill
before is simply deals with
Biomarkers as a way of
determining what the disease is
it doesn't go beyond that it
doesn't say you can only pay for
one you can't pay for two or
it will and and then the
assumption is that will speed up
treatment in Macon of much less
expensive in the long run but
that's all it does is just say
that that testing will be
is in the system whether it's an
insurance system where the
government system or whatever
system it may end up in that
that it could be used for other
purposes and we don't have any
very new technology is
technologies go.
So from that perspective.
Do we really want to mandate
something that is that New.
because it'll save lives and in
the long run save money we could
wait we could wait and after ten
or fifteen years insurance
companies were all find out this
would have been to their
to it and saying this is
something very valuable for New
Mexicans and you should.
Use your your leverage to to
make this available.
So I'm again just wondering why
we have to do this if it is if
it will save them money they no
doubt will do it on their own.
but at this point I'm just.
I don't think anybody in this
room knows exactly what a
biomarker does serious or how it
knowledge that because but but
what I do know.
Is that Mayo Clinic is right now
running.
And so I would I would be at
least think that we want to wait
for.
For some kind of study like that
before we jump into this and
mandated.
know what it is really going to
do doctors thinking well you
know we can really narrow this
down somehow so they're going to
prescribe it they have no idea
what the cost is.
to put in Los saying Val shall
do this.
I'm not opposed to biomarkers.
I'm not opposed to diagnosing
not I'm not a scientist I'm not
the doctor.
But I do know what Mayo Clinic
is doing.
And if they're not ready to do
it.
Thank you Senators metes.
Thank you madam president just a
few comments on this I I think
do something experimental at the
way I read the bill.
analisis the sponsor disagrees
it it says the these have to be.
Experimental the insurance
companies going to quickly say
well there's no defined clinical
practice guidelines for running
but I I do echo the concerns
from center share that I I don't
buy the argument that the
government you know we are going
to make a private company save
rails very quickly with me
and it brings me back to my my
comment about how the NHS does
this what we're doing I mean
this you know I'll make the
statement that this is going to
than than the the insurance
company that once again is a for
profit accord  you know the
council to their shareholders so
it's it's gonna make premiums go
hundred dollars a month for
premium I can't pay two thousand
dollars a month for I can't pay
three thousand dollars more or
we just can't spend you know
twenty five percent twenty eight
And so that's I think what we're
really talking about here that
there's no question to me is
going to increase premiums
and the we just we just have to
to be and established current
clinical practice guideline
you know we we do this with well
I think the best example is
certain cancers you do check for
opposing the bill just because
of my overarching principles
that I think is gonna make
payments to up and I think
that's what's really robbing and
destroying the middle class in
America right now is is that
present thank you all next year
from Senator Stefanics.
Thank you madam president and
I'd like to thank thank the
sponsors for this bill during
came forward who said that this
bio markers testing could be
appropriate in a small
percentage of their patients and
be appropriate for those hard to
diagnose cases to get the
appropriate treatments and so
Senator to see Pino was right
experience or a family member in
going through a diagnosis of the
disease this might pertain to
them in the future and again
very much Mr president thank you
sent us to FedEx we do have
further debate with senator
Morris followed by Senator
Kernan center Moores thank you
Mr president and just for the
testing requires a lot of our
equipment will look at it
differently if it's not required
but that's that's not here nor
there but these tests can be
thousand dollars for one of the
far more yes and so there.
Are very very expensive so my
question
Mr president center to see Pino
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I'm Mr
president and Senator Moores
Representative Garrett who's the
prime sponsor this bill in the
house.
Either unnecessary or un helpful
treatment.
But getting right at the at the
essence of it was so positive
that you wanted everybody to be
able to benefit from.
logging for it or behind it
because as president
the I cannot think of any
company in New Mexico that's
doing this testing are the one
this effort to get this done
required insurance agencies to
get it Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Mister president senator Morris
this it's been largely driven by
advocacy groups for those with
cancer.
Senator Morris agency present
has Presbyterian try course
we're taking a position one way
or another on yeah because these
are the type of things one we
also this kind of bills come
through there someone with some
financial interest behind
extremely sensitive technology
no mail does that Cleveland
Clinic does on there's a company
out of Utah that does a lot of
on
I just can't think of anyone New
collaboration to an insurance
company in the laboratory which
creates conflicts there so
that's what I was wondering if
they were trying to push this on
so that other insurance
companies would have to pay for
Kansas side is looking at this
it is how exciting new
technology it's not necessarily
depending on the cancer
treatment scope of practice I
would really be
per yes and we're really by
requiring that really drive
potentially driving up those
cost so I I just would like to
know more about this was behind
it before passing feel
where he census test is to a
company in Utah that I'm
familiar of what with also but
this is not a company in New
Mexico that does this even if we
pass this I think all these
tests would be sent out of state
in our strike or is looking at
this right now so this present I
I would propose this for number
reasons including the one stated
thank you.
Any further debate senators.
Seen we do have for the debate
Senator Griggs.
so if the sponsor would yield
please interdisciplinary Mr
president Senator Griggs I would
be glad to Senator X. thank you
To provide coverage for
biomarker testing.
Mr president centers at.
The debate is seeming to go
toward the fact that biomarker
testing is going to be required
to me like that the doctor
physician would have to request
for the testing to be done.
would be a step that would be
useful to him or her in working
with the patient.
Senator thank you Mr president
center and.
a as.
A normal provision in the policy
and if and if we're going to be
required as a provision in the
Because individual policy
holders to have to pay because
this provision is added to the
to the policy.
mean that we can make estimates
of one person one insurance
executive told
Representative Garrett that it
could be as little as fifty
appropriately this testing will
save a lot of money in the long
run because you're not going to
be doing trials to see if this
him started on it right away
before the cancer progresses and
it becomes much more expensive
to treat that's the whole point
of the bill is to try to reduce
beginning to use it now with
Alzheimer's Parkinson's lots of
other chronic diseases that
where the biomarker can help
ensure thank you for that that
answer and I've I think I've I
understand now better where
writers if they could be other
things offered as part of a
policy which.
More than likely would then you
know be that any individual who
Sold in New Mexico.
Require it to provide.
Mile marker chassis without
not trying to say that they will
it sounds like more likely they
will but of.
Are we in danger like we know
It is difficult to four chair
Mister president senator do you
see that at all or do you
believe that just on the other
end because we're going to we're
pay more on the insurance side
show they can be better treated
when the time comes in the and
Mister president etcetera I
certainly if that **** I
certainly understand that.
premiums might be at this point
in time shows restaurant center
I don't know anybody else is
going to debate I I don't know
but I I think that's the concern
Now we're might be cheaper later
but I think I feel better at
least feel better about where
you're headed on it because I
think I understand the bill
president thank you center.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Si no further debate center
anticipate a close on the bill.
want to to use the most
effective.
State of the art techniques in
diagnosing disease so that we
really the focus so Mr president
I would ask that the house
consumer and public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill seventy three as amended do
hands Mr president Senator
Padilla thank you Mr president
consent issue Center souls until
returns.
And just like that Senator.
Thank you Mr president love your
time by the way.
probably maybe less than ten
hours on the floor left in the
session we just do unanimous
consent to excuse any Senator
was absent from the floor for a
vote until they're in the
members from the chamber except
for the purpose of a call.
Seeing no objection Senator the.
Resident and then.
Senator Ingle voting no Senator
Woods voting no.
Center share voting no.
Pirtle voting no Senator Brandt
voting no Senator Burt voting
no.
By a vote of twenty in the
of the San we're going to item
number forty eight on the
counter that's going to be house
government elections in in the
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill two sixty two as
placing House governmental
actions in any Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
sixty two as amended on final
passage is been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution hearing no
objection.
office broadband access an
expansion of it is stood up that
was our original intention there
with advice in vetting from the
council The New Mexican Mexico
granted private entities that
are building out broadband
projects that are approved by
the council and the office.
Thank you senator for the S.
Senators we're debating.
Anyone wishing debate.
would deal for question center
by the idea of this present I
will yield Senator what's the
purpose of this bill is to get
the money out the door faster.
And that's that's the main
because it can't get out the
door for some reason and that's
the purpose of the bill is to
get the money out the door.
Going around to different
Senator by the president once
again the amendment absolutely
that's the exact purpose of the
bill.
Thank you senator would say no
for the debate.
Senate the record show that the
roll then called and all those
present voted to in the
affirmative those within the
next slide show of hands
Senators we're voting to your
seats please if you wish.
I.
Thirty six in the Fuhrman is
here on the negative house
government and elections
number fifty eight excuse me I
don't over sixteen and house
joint memorial seven and all
you'll to Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
House joint memorial seven is
requesting that the public
school capital outlay oversized
Task Force study public school
this will be done to for
assessments repairs adjustments
and replacements with that Mr
president I'm ready for debate
or any questions Senators we're
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield Senator Podio Mr
president I do Senator Brandt
thank you Mr president senator
so who are we asking to do the
study.
looking at this that is kind of
their overall job already.
Senator pope.
Mister president senator I I
served on that task force once.
for a couple years you know that
that's really what it does
already the they look at the
on set minimum standards for
updated and see what the the
state can help with that
this is kind of redundant not
needed but I I guess if we want
Mr president I move that house
Joint Memorial seven do now pass
and pass out of consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the roll then called in all
those present voting in the
affirmative except those voting
Senator share voting no.
Senator Moores voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Diamond voting no.
Senator Burt voting no.
Thank you Mr president Senator
Ingle expands vote.
Thank you Mr president federal
laws on this Kirk capitol
building committee for twelve
in and put things in our school
districts that of.
Well they need some I need some
study but the thing about is is
system in our school system now
and I don't think we're going to
do any better but I'm really
surprised that this is something
they've come up with and I'm not
being critical of any of the
dollars on stuff that we really
don't need to thank you.
Thank you Santo Domingo are you
able to Senate majority floor
leader.
Peter Wirth.
just waiting here for the.
Conference committee report to
get finalized we're going to do
the work that's up on the table
and then recess subject to the
gonna caucus just to go over
what was done in the conference
committee so guessing probably.
Thirty minutes forty five
be it for the evening so with
that I would yield the center.
Brandt are you on the are we a
bill still Senator Wirth that
yes correct we'll go back to
that order business.
are senator three tickets to
that order of business.
Thank you Mr president Ms
because that we go about our
business third reading of
legislation a of the Center
Brandt for house bill one
Being on final passage has been
taken is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objections Senator Brandt to
New Mexico National Guard on
state active duty to prepare
mitigate or respond to any type
of disaster they may be employed
See no debate Senator Brandt to
close on the bill.
Mr president I move that house
in the negative bunch of health
centers we're voting tier seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty seven Furman
is here on the negative house
our business messages from the
governor brown that order
business messages from the
governor the reader to read.
Senate executive message number
thirteen the honor roll Mimi
by the fifty six the legislature
first session twenty twenty
three respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
general show the message from
the governor has been received.
floor on that order business
message from the house the
reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the
house's concurred in the Senate
amendments to house
bill sixty two as amended by the
Senate house bill one seventy
nine as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate.
House Bill three sixty five as
amended by the house and further
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the
dually enrolled in a girl's
copies of Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as amended with
three thirty five Senate bill
three fifty one Senate bill
three ninety seven as amended
have been read in full and
signed by the officers of the
The reader to read Mr president
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the duly rules and
goals copies of House Energy
Environment and natural resource
resources committee substitute
for house bill one forty two as
house bill two sixteen as
amended house bill three eighty
nine as amended.
How's Education Committee
substitute for House Bill for
eighty one house appropriations
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk
journal show that the message
from the house has been received
elect an ounce of the members of
bill one eighty house bill one
eighty two.
House bill one eighty six as
amended house bill two sixteen
as amended house bill three
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take is that next
order of business thank you Mr
president Ms that we go about
our business announcements
miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
conference committee will go up
and adopt that report following
that I would yield to senator
pope for announcement on the
democratic side Senator photo
Senator pope.
Mr present we will have a caucus
meeting.
Immediately after.
Mr president Republicans will
also have a caucus in room three
twenty six five minutes before
the Democrats.
Thank you senator Morris.
president sent the Senate stand
in recess subject called chair.
Hearing no objections the Senate
