Three.
Senator but whatever your.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good.
Good morning.
I am pleased to
they were present this bill this
morning I think it's a.
Very important percent maybe the
only one that thinks it's
important but it's a I think
it's great this bill as the
Senate bill one eighty six
creates a permanent interpret
their run provided public works
committee to annually review the
state funded capital outlay
projects including the status of
projects already funded.
The
Committee would consist of
fifteen members.
I.
The figure that also point five
members.
Three from majority of the
majority party intent on already
party the reserves time of the
also five point three I members
three major to minor Finnerty
party.
The president pro tem and house
Majority Leader school select
the chair.
As well as the vice chair who
suits will rotate each year each
client by any on members of the
committee to appoint five
members with expertise in
architecture civil engineering
construction and public finance
no more than three.
Of the folks.
from the same party and the
committee will be staffed by the
Legislative Council Service as
well as the LFC so duties of the
Committee shown clue number one
coordinate with state agencies
number to hold hearings during
the interim to receive testimony
have proposed capital projects
number three evaluate projects
using a set of criteria for the
purpose of ranking and
prioritizing projects number for
the reviews scheduling and time
lines number five they will
determine whether each project
is sufficient funding to finance
the project number six the
committee will determine whether
the project can be fully
completed within the
authorization and implementation
cycle that number seven they
will determine as to what is the
most appropriate funding source.
So in addition Mr
Mr chair the committee will
review state capital projects
for which bond proceeds have not
been spent and make
recommendations to the
legislature for capital projects
that are shovel ready and could
be started immediately completed
within allowable time and within
available I proceeds.
and Mister chair and committee
members of nice research
indicates that.
Contact the help of the
LCS the legislative.
The council legislators.
The National Council of state
legislatures.
Are we are the only states that
Determines allocates capital
projects so we we do
those I can find no state
Give equal amount of capital
outlay funding.
To each of the legislature.
This results in a very
inefficient system The New
Mexico finance authority
authorized a study recently by
the council development finance
agencies that concluded quote
reforming in New Mexico capital
outlay process is the single
most important action that could
catalyze economic development
finance in New Mexico.
Let me repeat that before me in
New Mexico for outlay process is
the most important action that
could crystallize.
They could catalyze excuse me.
Economic development finance in
New Mexico the chaotic and
fractured nature funding capital
projects lease billions of
dollars sitting idle often for
three years as you know we have
three and a half billion dollars
sitting on sitting idle because
is not enough money to start the
project as you know somebody
just for million Bucks to get
under the house in the first
year so hundred thousand sits
there and I can remember was
only two three years ago there
was only a billion dollars
sitting idle now it's.
Three point five or three point
three billion depending on what
source you are looking at this
money could easily have been
spent all the projects that
would enhance and protect the
idol protect the health and
safety of New Mexico residents.
Also.
There's a significant difference
in the needs of each.
Senate legislative district.
However this sources are
allocated
evenly to each of.
The shows legislature's.
H. every legislator
Does not have the same need my
district is a good example.
I don't you have a high school
in my district of.
The the my district is simply is
maybe it doesn't even have a
hello at all it is is some
apartments.
this single residential.
The neighborhoods.
And
a few strip malls.
So and far as the roads and it
major infrastructures taken care
of the rules most are take care
bye the city and water and sewer
is handled by the of a cookie
Bernalillo county water
authority so consequently most
of vote of almost every dollar
goes I was outside my district
But some especially in the rural
areas they have a big water and
wrote capital needs so it makes
no sense for each of the
legislature to get the US same
amount of money.
So.
The
Interestingly enough I think
you'll find that there is no.
There's no negative comments.
Then the
F. I. R..
Was the last time that you so
the fire didn't have any
negative comments
Okay.
Now this.
This.
I didn't see that what that.
Well.
Okay.
Do you want to introduce your
expert witness.
But that is a two to three
comments.
So one of the the then as you
want to the aspects of this a
bill is I think you'll like is
it's controlled by the
legislature not to executive
branch in most states.
They do have a sense because
system similar to this but the
The members are appointed by the
the governor and is controlled
by the executive branch
This is not the recommendations
that the committee comes up with
are not mandatory so it would
have to be approved of pride
other recommendations that to be
approved by the legislature.
And
The there were some comments
that the higher the department
didn't like this.
No surprise there we could carve
them out would have to include
them the the water trust board.
seem to like the that system
So in that conclusion Mister
chair this
This project this program.
This is a.
Different aspects of allocated
projects will bring order out of
chaos and make the process more
professional and able to state
to receive more bang for the
Buck so like to
Introduce
My two expert witnesses.
I.
At the table and Kelly because
well that's because the remarks
of you think I talked to one.
Just that we stand for questions
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator addicts followed
by Senator.
To see most of that's right I am
you would have thought I forgot
after being there for my day so
I'm gonna go to members of the
audience is there anybody here
in favor of this bill.
States that do we have anyone
online now Mr chair okay is
there anyone in opposition of
the bill.
Thing then here what about
online New Mexico and I'm not.
that go to questions and I'm
gonna start off with Senators
defendants well I Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for presenting this in
your expert witnesses
perhaps they will have some
comment about my questions this
committee I I I agree the
probably
we need some.
Organized assistance in doing
this
representing six counties.
I have lots of small.
Communities the state kias land
grants unincorporated areas
counties it's universities two
year colleges etcetera etcetera.
So my concern is.
That every entity has many
needs.
And do you see Mr chair Mr chair
Senator this committee
identifying the priority needs
of each community.
Well.
I it's a good question
certainly thank if you could
make an argument did you your
you just you could receive more
money.
Okay because there if Senator if
might if I had a community that
had.
I top priorities.
And they included basic needs
like water wastewater roads.
it is you're saying that it is
possible that this committee
might identify all of those top.
All those I priorities is top.
Thanks for the state to get to
consider is looking at a
statewide priority it may not be
considered top priority.
To address you would like to
have that there's never enough
money to do all the projects Mr
chair Senator okay let me move
to the next one
Mr chair Senator with this
committee.
Make recommendations about.
Recalling money that had been
appropriated.
that's a good question actually
Senator minerals that are the
only two Democrats to vote
against the re authorization the
last year.
We have a a health approaches
and spent.
Because you know the money's
been sitting there it's it's
it's crazy.
The money sitting there that
could have been school got three
billion dollars it could have
been spent by now if we had a
different system.
So.
It's
Yes it will that I think there's
one of those one of the of the
duties.
Possibilities that I mentioned
that they would.
Reallocating and.
Re authorizing.
And we are prioritizing projects
and and.
idle for too long.
So Mr chair I am generally
supportive of this initiative
but I am concerned that we not
just set up another.
Group that.
Get together without any
authority your teeth and I'll
stop there thank you very much
thank you senator Senator
Stewart.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sierra for thinking about this
and bringing the bill forward.
I have multiple issues with that
and and let me explain.
So
Probably about twice a week all
summer and fall I get a call
that we don't have a quorum at
interim committee well I point
some random legislator to be a
voting member patiently I have
to point someone to share.
We have twenty three interim
committees I would be supportive
of this is that also suggested
what committees to and for
combine it cetera we have too
many interim committees there's
not enough Senators and we just
can't you know we can't abuse
ourselves which is what it
sounds like we're doing
occasionally by saying you know
you gotta go to interim
committee we can't get a quorum
that's a bigger issue.
the on this bill but it's one
that I'm gonna have to deal with
and then trying to do with I
don't I don't want an answer
yet.
But the other issue is we
already have a group of people
that basically try to do what
you're proposing and they're the
subcommittee of the LFC we have
over forty staff members in L.
F. C. they take this on
themselves that's how we get our
geo phone package with them
doing an analysis of higher ed
issues and other issues it's how
we get our state Y. eight
capital comes off the top of all
our capital it's this
subcommittee through LFC now
last year the then chair
Representative Patty Lundstrom
asked them to look at the
capital outlay process our
analysis on the.
Probably a number of else's
pages it's on the one to third
page kind of reminds us of how
this process works already yeah
because it works very well no
and of course your your issues I
agree with of one thing that
people don't realize is that for
the schools they're on a
reimbursable basis so we say we
have all that money but most of
it is already encumbered even
when it sitting there for a
number of years because it takes
awhile to build these projects
spend the money and then get
reimbursed for it no we don't do
that with every project but we
do it with the schools anything
going to PED.
So it it's not true that we just
have billion some billion
sitting around not being used it
a lot of it is income for
so hi highlight the idea behind
the bill I I don't know how to.
Merry this with what we're
already doing with the LFC you
see that they've been tasked
with let's try to help the city
since counties where we give all
this money to be part of the
process that's what I think we
need we need someone else to
interface between what we're
doing and where we're sending
that money when it goes to
cities and counties a lot of
that for NGOs that have the
fiscal agent that the city's and
county's creek to so it's a
complicated process I got into
the legislature in nineteen
ninety four for the first five
or six years I thought less
capital than anyone else because
they saw the northeast behind my
address and thought I was in the
you know wealthy northeastern
part of Albuquerque my district
is the highest poverty highest
crime highest unemployment
highest double jobs by people
not registered to vote so I
focus on this.
Alright the lady housing
etcetera in my district and I'm
grateful that we now have a more
equitable system because it was
not at all I did a couple
hundred thousand the speaker of
the house would get a million
how did that happen.
So I am nervous about the idea
that we're going on do all of
that not so.
That's a lot.
You know that's that's where I
am with this I'm not ready to
support it now because of those
issues.
Thank you for those comments
and other live.
And then nobody would get an
allocation would be prioritized
on a statewide basis with which
is why most states do it and we
don't.
I and I I don't envision the
schools be included in this
because they already have a
separate system right they have
thank committee.
The schools the interim
committee I think it just got a
long name I was.
Council that was under for one
two years but it was dominated
by
People have a lot more knowledge
about what was said school
superintendents schools
superintendent plant but that is
that the money.
Included in the three and a half
billion dollars.
The unspent Mr Chairman yes
I put as much money as I can
of the schools in my district
there all high poverty schools
that comes out of my capital
outlay and yes we have the
public school about like council
that's for buildings and systems
and we have a process where we
rank the schools that we do with
the schools that are have the
most need from the beginning
with and separate system but
it's part of our capital outlay
process one hundred in the a
request for a.
The building to get you know
making those projects for water
fountains of fences and lighting
whenever I got a request for.
Capital up to build the
building.
Well Mr chairman that's because
they don't come to us for
building they come for us for
water fountains fencing to lay
grounds lighting security
library improvements at I yes hi
do a computer center of because
we don't give enough money to
anyone in this state we're
trying to change that but we've
been under funding for decades
so the bill you just voted on we
all did on the floor
on the Google outlay changes
that showed that eighty million.
That is what we called
legislative offsets right now
all over the state keeping
people from coming to ask for
money to build buildings and six
systems because their
legislators have given them a
little bit of money and we've
kept it as a well we're gonna
reduce your mouth you get
because if your legislative
offsets we've done that but it's
been a problem so.
This this is deeper.
These are deeper issues than
what what you've laid out.
Well in response to a question
about people not showing up as
the only fifteen members you
have five professional people.
And I.
Tell legislators so.
The and one of these interim
committees have forty fifty
members so obviously that.
I think people would obviously
be more apt to show up to
something like this this is
really.
More significant and important.
So I I don't see that as of.
Problem give.
And the.
So.
Do you want to entertain you of.
Propose an amendment to make
this better Mr chairman I I I I
haven't been able to read it
that thoroughly and then that so
this is the first time I've seen
so I'll look at that all think
about that thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you a lot of state seven
ten twenty year plan we're going
to spend ex number of dollars
here one X. number now is your
so they allocate and then we
time they they already know
ahead of time what projects are
going to do and so they're fully
funded we don't do that.
Mr Chairman that's in part
because of our laws about as a
settling future legislatures
with things that we decide today
so you know that that's a good
idea you know I I believe that
the LFC subcommittee should be
doing all these things that
you're suggesting in the bill
and they're doing a lot but
remember when we get the capital
outlay we've already taken out a
huge chunk for statewide capital
that goes to agencies that goes
to well you can see it this year
more because the governor is
trying to work with us so we've
all got these huge lists of high
dollar amounts that she wants to
coordinate with us so it's not
just what we see here this is a
bigger process that works
through LFC so I I'm done Mr
chairman.
Thank you all I can say is.
All every city work for recoup
from small towns to cities are
half a million we always had a
ten twenty year plan.
Knowing exactly how much money
we're going to spend that we we
would budget that I'm out.
In the meantime the projects are
prioritized I can't say why we
can't do that here.
Thank you senator Senator to the
people.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
you can really do.
That is really issues finally
this last night is with a couple
of hours with you might have
listed I did decide whether
charter schools.
City streets project should get
the individual is including the
that this is okay.
That they all need somebody but
the the the the group deciding
which is important for the use
of that the other hand I don't
have it all funded if you're
familiar with that anymore look
at that.
It seems to be the phone that
that.
Yes our lives so what.
Okay a request for comment.
Is the capital of to two million
we need a call report.
That is I I'm not sure it is
really by the level of something
that is more important that
State Street project but that is
the city street projects the
city legislature.
This is shitty but these are but
they are having a million
dollars to produce something in
this the the staff of the city
projects throughout the.
So that everybody districts of
ABF uses of money but it's not
gonna be able to do that okay so
that's this.
This problem is that I don't
think the problem could be
solved with the other interim
committee and is it is.
I doubt you're going to be able
to get I professionals the of
course of time on this.
This gonna take the view of the
job
real reiteration I mean it's
hard to get legislators of their
we get a preview.
And and the remuneration and
engineers and architects and.
The.
Centers is school officials.
It it just it it is a workable
the way I see you're you're
you're but it is a one that we
need to do so absolutely I'm not
saying this is.
I have a certain rules to change
that saying this is the best
idea since sliced bread.
But the but we.
Because I Sierra.
as we haven't seen that one
every year center.
It always feels some way of
corralling all the uses of the
more rational than your nearly
do.
To me there's here's the
suggestion that is that is that
we ought to have some provide
but it wouldn't be an ongoing
the to be somebody to draw up
guidelines for us to use in
trying to decide whether the
fire or.
But it also failed part of of
the twenty.
The US yes right the the the
whatever by the rebels out of
all the the the people at all
the beauties but.
The problem is us I know this
issue to spend four point one
two seven zero one million
dollars this year by the but I
haven't had time to do.
What legislators that until we.
The project.
The new detention center because
this is a description.
Read more than two other widely
she said which one is we are
those the use in the future I
have a.
We are asked to somebody else
but if you would tell so how are
we supposed to be making the
decisions of the.
That we're we're not we're not.
So that's really the what you're
doing a well I think the
solution is to reduce the money
we have and then you give us a.
The source you're describing
meeting one year.
And give us guidelines we would
have
that's one of the ways that you
see on that I thank you senator
are there any other questions or
comments from the committee.
I think that I just have one
comment and I think that both
senators pirtle and Baca would
agree with me that rural New
Mexicans these capital outlay
the three of us better
understand which projects within
rural New Mexico what we need to
work and how we need to work
with county governments and city
governments to get projects in
rural New Mexico town and that's
a whole different beast than
Albuquerque when we start
looking at projects that affect
our communities and in some
cases like echo a county wide
ripple like mine which is one of
the poorest counties.
Depends on capital outlay to get
projects done now I have a hard
time with the committee telling
it my County which projects the
thing where the highest priority
for them.
Practically every project within
my County is high up on the
scale for us that needs to get
done when we start looking at a
detention center hi mutual Water
domestic programs in rural New
Mexico and even when we start
looking at aging sheriff's
vehicle that I need to replace
because of the amount of time it
takes the miles that showed us
how to spend transporting
inmates within Rio Arriba County
I like the idea of the bill I
just don't think rural New
Mexico would be able to truly
get breaks the bill Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr chair.
Here but you know you just this
sparked my my passion I guess
with this in that a Mister
chairman Senator the this it is
just not workable in rural New
Mexico something like this what
what happens is and what I would
think what happens is that these
commissions like anything else
here becomes something but to a
degree and starts targeting
large voter blocs and that's
where the dollars will go
leaving rural New Mexico out in
the cold I know that the
projects that we Fund I I mean I
I know of people here that fund
projects that aren't even in
their district Mr chair.
And and conversely aware of
where I come from those
municipalities and counties
depend on capital the I mean the
the have their presentations and
they count on it and not not for
things like you know as was
mentioned earlier memorials and
things like that thanks for
water treatment sewers
water lines sidewalks basic
necessities basic infrastructure
I I really fear that something
like this would would leave
those those cities that like I
represent those municipalities
those counties out of the cold I
think your your heart's in the
right place and and there is
waste that can cause a but I
just don't think that this is
probably the way to do it I see
the same Senator Hotmail
essentially our own
geographically he's in the
mountains and and we're in the
plains but we have a lot of the
same issues where we come from
thank you Mr chair to laugh
thank you Senator Pirtle.
And thank you can respond Mr
chair and and thank you senator
you know I I think it's it's
been said this is an Albuquerque
problem looking for a statewide
solution in other words I'll
just go ahead and throw that out
there but you know I think we
can look at our highway system
and see I think this would
basically result the same thing
where Rio Rancho or Albuquerque
ends up with an overpass because
people are being inconvenienced
on their way to work and then we
had a highway in my neck of the
woods for people were dying
regularly trying to get to work
and the priority was the over
pass at that time and so I think
coming from a rural area we'll
see more neglect if it's gone to
a system like this like our
highways are are are funded and
so that's where my concern comes
from is that we're all the
people are that's where the
money will go in out in the
rural parts where people are
dying on the highways those
those highways will be ignored
and so I.
Being from.
Mr chair thank you thank you
senator what's the will of the
committee if there's no further
comment from the time the
program of the Senator responded
anything Mr chairman we just
doing what I.
Senator by consent brown thank
you in the room and and I
stated.
That.
I
I don't have a needs billion and
any kept the capital needs of my
area and all my money goes
outside because the city takes
care the rules and Albuquerque
Bernalillo county take through
the water and sewer so I I
recognize that the rural areas
have bigger capital the capital
outlay needs so.
I think it's conceivable under
my plan is to more money could
be directed to the rural areas
if it's.
If you have a truly a neutral
and unbiased Committee that's
made up of representatives from
all over the state and and
professional architects
engineers and construction
people prioritizing on a
statewide basis I think it's
because see we can go to get
more money.
As.
I guess I don't have it all my
money goes outside.
And I really I mean it has is
to this is to.
To fund the some of these Mickey
Mouse projects at the school
APS presents for water fountains
and fencing and lighting no
they're bonding powers let let
them the same with the city I do
some of the city but they yeah
they give you a hundred million
dollars with a.
Projects of the year is all
prioritization right are we so
this is Mexico so different from
other states.
The.
We what we're the only state
that does it does has is.
Type of allocation are we really
so different rather stay so we
we got to continue with this how
are you you bring up some valid
develop points but I think we
have to give some serious
consideration to making
So so
Changes to the system is so
crazy that this week I've gotten
two letters from people saying
oh I heard that the city that
states give out money.
And there's a very make a
request the state that are here
they give no money at all you
giving me a specific amount of a
specific of the project that is
so crazy the system has become.
And
Earlier in my records Senator
of.
Ortiz Parramatta eloquent to.
A little presentation how crazy
the system is.
so we need to do something.
are we really so different other
states that we have to follow a
system that's truly unique so
I'm cert I'm I'm not saying this
is the perfect solution of
certainly amenable to
Doing something so thank you
thank you thank you Mr.
Mr chair just quickly thank you
for your responses like I said
Senator I think you're part is
completely in the right place of
and and I certainly do apologize
if I spoke over you or anything
like that not giving you an
opportunity response think that
of course requires a you should
be able responsible thank you.
What will the committee.
The table was our second.
Although second so if I could
have a roll call vote.
Senator yes Senator yeah yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino look this.
well.
Senator.
Yeah.
Yeah we're.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino wanted to.
Are there.
Are they have a.
Yeah hello we don't have to the
ability
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Yes.
That.
The problem is the.
The looking for you for a.
I thank you dollars a center
thirty years.
Revise for thirty years he's
been working to.
Thank you senator and without
the.
Bill has been thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Senator what the Senate bill
three line one the water
transport members and
appointments Senator about this
good morning.
Welcome back thank you to see
that the Mr chairman Senate bill
three ninety one proposes to.
Reorganize a little bit the
water trust board.
Every year the water transport
among its other responsibilities
responsible for identifying and
appropriating about a hundred
and eighty million dollars for
water projects around the state
we we passed that bill every
year.
that is established elsewhere
statute and.
But I've been trying to do with
this bill for some time is to
get the water trust board to
look a little bit less like an
exit another branch of the
executive department so the
current composition water
transport we look at the
composition of that the look at
the existing members who were on
there now.
We have the sixteen members
there but when you look at the
state engineer the secretary of
finance and so on down the list
of existing members really is of
of right to the executive
department water trust board and
what happens when they're
approving these projects through
these projects.
From my perspective they're
gonna naturally have a bit
towards Santa Fe when you have
all these numbers the director
of the municipal we the
association counties secretary
of energy secretary marmot
cetera the goal here is to
increase the public membership
from five to six and that may
seem like an the small change
but again we've got a fifteen
member board to give that to six
and the the membership of that I
think it's a little more
balanced and more chance for the
the water transported not have
occurred the complete dominance
of you really will from from the
executive branch and the
executive representation of the
other the other changes in terms
of the membership our
kind of fine tuning in the will
so for example if you look on
page three line six right now we
have a representative on the
water trust board for to
represent the Navajo Nation.
slowed by the president of the
organization but there's no
requirement that the
Representative Representative a
nation be a new New Mexico so
we're trying to build more
specific here that you have it
Representative for the Navajo
Nation but actually New Mexicans
so there's a small a change
there the we've added in
subparagraph F. above that of
another member from outside the
executive branch outside of the
secretaries four of the water
sanitation district
representation so we've got
those on there too.
All of this goes back to again
what I see as a principal
purpose the water truck for
wishes to review these projects
that are submitted by small
communities around the state
every year and approved for
funding and financing and we
yeah we're doing this every year
it's it's an important task of
the water transport if the
principal task.
This year it's a little less
critical because this year for
the first time we actually are
able to fund just about
everybody who's asking for a
project but in years past and
very different years past we
would able to not able to fund
many of the applications from.
Smaller Canadian cities and
counties further water projects
and so when you have.
Not enough money in more demand
than who sits on the sport
becomes pretty important because
they decide to the priorities of
the funding so that's the goal
here Mister chairman that's the
purpose of the bill thank you
senator.
Is there anybody in the
committee room in support of the
bill.
Anyone on the line yes Mr chair
we have one.
That anybody in the committee
room at opposition to the bill.
Anyone of my.
What does the one percent
support of the bill was that
part of your working life he was
not paid thank you for all that
go to questions from the
committee.
Really.
No this on the Senator Pirtle
bill.
Senator but.
Of Senator McKenna.
Certificate thank you.
I know this is not a governor's
builders known.
Indication of the.
Is there any indication to
actually sign a decrease in
earth or but you know I I
crossed that bridge yet etcetera
so I I hope so and I I we've
done this you see I've got a co
sponsor here senator Wirth you
know this is a challenging when
I've had it for several years
and trying to to re balance
these boards on the this is not
a big change in taken from
sixteen to fifteen members and
taking the executive authority
down just a little bit but but
here is a good question will it
will governor ever willingly
seed some other authority a
little bit I hope so because
water should be about about that
we we I I tried this bill before
it's been some time but I I did
try to do the Martinez
administration as well to for
exactly the same reasons.
Thank you Mr chairman of the I
think this is that hopefully
she'll sign that.
Followed by Senator Stewart.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator serve on this
I want page three chairman and
senator and that is I like the
legislation with that line six
one Representative the Navajo
Nation who lives in New Mexico
and I'm wondering chairman and
senator if you would consider
adding a representative from the
pueblo.
Nominated.
Approved by the all Pueblo
council governors.
that's a different.
at different and important voice
to have on such a board.
Yes I I agree and I.
Don't want to look at the other
categories who are part of water
transport I don't see them
there.
Note that always creates an
issue too because then will the
representation of the pueblos
would import on this the
likewise you know the in my part
of the state you've been.
Suggest Willie this represented
the colonias right and
so I I wouldn't I wouldn't tell
you that's that's unfavorable at
all I just I don't know that we
also reach a point where.
Services how many people do you
put on the board only in the
interest could have
Representative I don't I don't
know the history.
Behind the current composition
that has a representative of the
Navajo Nation but I'm sure you
can understand what we would
want to change that
representation to a New Mexico
specific.
Representation but I guess maybe
perhaps the other one is the
paragraph nine above the look
that one public member appointed
by the Indian Affairs
commission.
So the presumably that might.
Yes that that representation
sure that they've got that that
insurance on their.
We always run into that that
challenge to you know you don't
we don't have disproportionate
representation
Senator has a comment on this
point.
So Mister chairman Senator
sirventes that that's also the a
question that I have.
Looked online I don't think we
have an Indian affairs
commission I know that's current
language but and we have an
Indian Affairs Department we
have an Indian Affairs Committee
I don't know where that came
from so I think nine could be
amended to save tribal meant.
Pointed I Indian Affairs
Department order secretary or
something I I I don't think that
works for us.
Even the current language.
Right.
Yeah maybe maybe it's in the
book but.
The the the the the the good
that big improvements to the
bill which of the.
What is.
Richard page one fifty four.
And here in.
If I may Mister fixes advisory
to the Indian Affairs
Department.
And it is found in section nine
dash twenty one dash fourteen
NMSA seventy eight.
I wonder Mr chairman if this is
even act right now this
commission is even act I don't
see anybody here.
Senator Lopez on that flight.
Mr chair.
For the Indian Affairs
Department came into being the
Indian Affairs commission is
what used to be the intermediary
because it's very similar to
Senator office we have a.
So
I I do believe that if the
commission is still in
existence.
But this is what we need for
increased Department.
The.
This is where we are.
So Mister chairman I want I mean
I think Senator McKenna still
has.
I suggest that's where you
amended to.
At a tribal member and and I
suggest you change the
commission prove what we're
doing using currently.
I don't want to amend here but
that's what I suggest you do
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator McKenna for writing
something sure yes thank thank
you senator.
Thank you chairman and and
senator what are what are your
thoughts on that
Your perhaps changing that
language on lines four and five
on page three.
one.
Well tribal member appointed by
the Indian Affairs Department.
With that work.
Move on with the pueblo tribal
member appointed by the Indian
Affairs Department so so with
that being the that makes the
raise it would be from mission
okay.
Great.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator.
The center to the people I need
to okay of the the only problem
this is the precludes any of
that.
For.
Well in certain sort of Senator
chair members one of the really
one of those mornings are doing
really is if you look on page
two.
Page.
you know when we look at the
public members we've designated
the representation for five of
the six.
I just really six of the six.
Really when I I'm coming down
that was a little bit more so.
Seven eight let's see can be
just a second here.
The million.
Yes area I think maybe rights of
that maybe right when you when
you.
Look at who those
representatives may be I mean I
I guess I could always the
argument I would make on the
flip side of that of course is
that you can always have a
member of the Apache tribes from
one of the other categories of
state for calling them part of
the environmental community
For
I guess that's probably the only
category they probably fit
under.
But I I would I would just say
that that the state precludes
them but it certainly wasn't
expressly.
Put them in a position of power
point and for the others I think
the the other thing that I
neglected to say of course is
that the the public member
appointees that's your point
Senator Ortiz Pinos these would
be appointed by Legislative
Council Service gives the
legislature an opportunity to
have some balance on the board
as opposed to everything being
the term by the executive
branch.
Thank you for that.
That but that okay so I'd like
to.
Amendment on page three.
lines four and five of one.
Pueblo tribal members appointed
by the Indian Affairs Department
and so will be scratching
Commission.
And public and public.
Thank you.
That is about this is that.
Okay the friendly amendment.
Any opposition of the number of
federal just quickly thank you
Mr chair and I understand of the
desire here but we are excluding
The Mescalero Apache tribe which
I've Representative for.
Since I was elected over ten
years ago and I I really think
the language as it's written
currently it's most inclusive of
of everyone when you look at the
membership of the Indian Affairs
commission it's consisting of
three Pueblo three Navajo to
Apache one urban and one non
Indian Indian members.
shall be appointed from a list
of names submitted from all of
the organizations that are
apartment so I think by doing
this we're simply saying that
the Mescalero Apaches the
hickory Apaches
and for sales I guess at this
point would not be able to
participate or have somebody on
or even really have any say
whatsoever as to who
would fill subsection nine so I
I would urge the the
Committee to reject the
amendment just because I think
as it's written now the the
pueblo council is is heavily
involved in will have a say in
who that member is and then
we're essentially removing the
Apaches from having
any say whatsoever thank you Mr
chair thank you so there is
there any other opposition on
the amendment.
Three.
The.
Senator Pirtle center to the
people that are Baca County
thank you okay.
That amendment passes.
Further debate on the bill as
amended.
That part of.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator why are we removing the
director of the department of
game and fish.
The the department here ifish
Senator you know we're trying to
go we're trying to figure out
where we can change the
membership of the numbers are a
little bit again the overall
goal here is to skew this a
little bit a lot away from the
executive department so we we
look for.
People frankly to be very candid
with you we look for people on
the board now that we could
eliminate from the executive
branch the department of game
and fish does not receive to my
recollection ever so it's use of
these of these confirm what I'm
saying the Burma Division never
applies for receive any money
from the water project fund so
all of the other branches of the
of the executive branch are
pretty active in that in that
process of these projects and
that is I have that companion
bill which is Senate bill three
fourteen and that is a bit in
this committee but that's the
annual bill that we that we run
every year to to fund water
projects and and I think that's
the reason for that Senators
that that's unlikely and
probably ever never has been.
The purchase but in the process.
And Mr chair Senator I see were
we strike on page two line
twenty
the way it's been done in the
past as we had a surface water
and then a groundwater user and
essentially
we're going to.
An irrigation Conservancy
district so we're combining the
two into one position and then
online twenty two adding the
language the agricultural
community and then so Mister
chair and senator I would like
to know what would it take to
qualify as a member of our rural
community.
It's a good question Senator an
agenda of the goal here is to
make sure that we have somebody
representing a pretty
significant user Water in the
state and again that's going to
be a appointment made by the
Legislative Council to decide
who's the appropriate
Representative the agricultural
community you and I
Showing growers but nonetheless
right now the existing language
is an irrigation Conservancy
district and I would tell you
they also have a pretty narrow
perspective on what what funding
should be utilizing what issues
for us I thought it would be
more of a more expensive to just
call it that cultural committee
and not have it so limited to
irrigation or Conservancy
district.
Mr chair Senator by concerns can
always be with that one that
somebody was six chickens and
twelve.
Some some some have a
representative the agricultural
industry but I would feel better
knowing that it's coming from
the ledge council as opposed to
from the governor because that's
something that we could end up
with
coming from the governor this
the pay back for helping on a
campaign or whatever state Rep
which on the water trust board I
do have a little bit with that
just because it is so broad
and and only having one voice
even though.
Most people should know that
active cultures number one user
of water in the state of New
Mexico so they should have a
large the presence that in in
this board but that's all Mr
chair Senator that I have thank
you thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair just a
question Mr chair Senator.
Since we're changing this now
for to the lead counsel and I
know that there wasn't any
specificity on qualifications
for those for being appointed.
is it was there any
consideration about
qualifications experience that
lets Council would use as they
go through some of the the
appointments that would be made.
But maybe if there's anything of
a conflict of interest you know
it is just curiosity if what
your conversation
administrators.
Thank you Senator the that
question kind of goes back to
with the point center Pirtle was
making you know do we have and
representative that community is
it somebody was six chickens
I the key here is that that
appointment would be made by
Legislative Council and so but
we got our colleagues on page
council with make sure that that
representation is a good
representation of the Act
community to your point center
of we do not have an in many of
these appointments right now
realize existing water transport
has five public members
appointed by the governor
Representative Katie's there
there isn't a specificity on
qualifications so I think that
be a pretty significant
expansion of trying to define
what those may be when I worked
in the past I think you're the
legislation back in the day to
required qualifications for the
PRC I gotta tell you remember
and I remember very well that
was that was a nightmare trying
to decide what would be
reasonable qualifications of yes
the boy to try and come up with
what would be the qualifications
for a representative of the
environmental community I hate
to think of what those
qualifications would be but I
think it's important that we
that we specify there's a
representative from the vitamin
Committee on this board and pent
up there are like two days as I
I gotta trust that leads that
are Legislative Council with.
Do a good job of public areas
appointments but right now there
there are no such qualifications
on the governor the governor
makes those appointments herself
without without those
qualifications.
And I remember that Mr chair
very well with regards to your
statements
but this is just a question to
ask Mister chair and also for
representation from different
areas of the state.
granted the governor had
whatever the governor does but
if pledge council is taking us
on should we ask ourselves to
make sure there's representation
not just from the middle Rio
Grande corridor but other parts
of the state you know each of
the quadrants making sure that
there's a Representative feature
that we've done that before this
committee Mr chair we have
specified so to make sure
there's a representative from
rural
welcome you to you know larger
communities fit just a
consideration on that because I
think if
The way it was done and higher I
think Mr chair how you're trying
to make some good changes just
what can we do to make sure that
future Legislative Council
members will make sure that
there are representation from
all parts of our state just a
question Mr chair thank you
sure respond really if you hit
the heart of the goal here
Senator because if you look at
the existing composition of
water transport starting on page
one with a pair of a one you
know the the membership right
now is the state engineer the
secretary of finance
administration the secretary of
environment secretary of energy
of the director of the
department of agriculture
executive director municipally
association counties those are
all going to be Santa Fe based
then we should just be pretty
straight about the new cabinet
secretaries are going to be in
that that you're what you're
talking about probably not going
to be none of those versions are
probably gonna be from rural New
Mexico so some my expectation to
go behind this bill is to do
exactly suggesting which is one
Legislative Council
appointments.
Believe that let's council's
going to be thinking about
geographic diversity.
Mr chair maybe we could add
language that would actually ask
that counsel to make sure that
there's a representative from
you know again the different
quadrants of the state of New
Mexico
Just again I don't have specific
language at this point Mr chair
but.
Maybe.
Chair judiciary needs wisdom
knowing all it all these differ
amendments we have a suggestion.
Senator.
Mr Miller I think it's a good
suggestions and I'm always
favoring it because you'll have
to hear it from me too often
times those of us in the
southern part of state always
feel like important for pretty
forgotten I think the solution
would be a good solution to be
on page two line seventeen.
After reaching Mexico
Legislative Council and after
witnesses and who answer the
words our our geographically
diverse who are geographically.
Rivers and.
So that that the server of fifty
fifty only fifty would read six
public members appointed by the
Mexico Legislative Council and
who are geographically diverse
and representative and then go
on that was there had that would
be I think it's a good
suggestion something I would
favor.
I like it it just helps to give
guidance we're not going to be
here somebody else will be here
for ten years from now Senator
about this about one more times
we can capture it correctly this
Mr chairman so what you'd be
doing this on page two nine
seventeen afterward who.
You've been through the wars are
geographically diverse and.
It just for those who are
viewing online Alaska Committee
secretary to repeat that so
everyone can hear Mr Rebecca
just we could just a little bit
what I probably do is I would
probably online seventeen.
On that same page take up the
first and the existing and.
So you don't have so many and
clauses there.
And so it really Mexico
Legislative Council who are
geographically diverse and.
Representative I'm looking over
at my colleague centers to which
is not a or have so she likes
and that we always makes me
happy so.
So if you and.
Inserting afterwards who concern
the words are geographically
diverse and perfect and then
I'll just ask the committee
secretary Pena for everybody so.
That is okay to one seventeen
right now the word and and
inserting.
After four inserting after
Legislative Council who are
geographically diverse and
representative.
That's it thank you for that it
is to have one of the committee
members who's moving.
Okay moved by Senator Lopez any
opposition.
Think back in the bill as twice
amended.
Thank Senator.
Senator thank you thank you
Senator Stewart I'm of the past.
L. three ninety one is amended.
They get real help these get a
second a second.
Senator Paypen.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes center for.
Yeah.
Senator Hotmail yes Senator.
Yes.
Are you gonna do pass Senator
thank Nico is very much thank
you have a good deal.
What are we hearing from
senators Hickey and R. T. the
penal Senate bill two sixty
three of Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee.
Yes.
I think there is an amendment
being passed out Senator.
Mr chair is really just a movie
pass right away.
I don't.
Thank.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee of Senate bill two
sixty three.
Is one that Senator Hickey and
are bringing forward I think
he's kind of that the Education
Committee this morning
The based on our experience over
the last several years with the
interim health and Human
Services Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee and
interim committee that typically
meets.
Twenty one to twenty four days
full day meetings I mean these
are not ten AM to two PM meeting
Caesar.
Technically eight thirty A. M.
to six PM sometimes.
At five PM meetings and the the
the breadth of responsibility
for that committee is is so
extensive that we frequently
finish up after having done all
those hearings.
Identifying eight or ten issues
that we never got to that we had
planned to and just just
couldn't squeeze on to the
agenda so the thought is if we
had state they permanent staff
and basically we're talking
about two full time positions in
the Legislative Council Service
who would work with the
committee a year round basis
identifying and preparing for
our schedules that we might be
able to a range of of a better
and maybe even squeeze in a
couple more hearing dates we
would also be able to hire.
Consultants who could prepare
studies or or or or reports for
us on aspect the difference
between what this committee does
it with the LFC does I think
it's worth going into just for a
second and that is LFC does
great reports on identified
topics two or three a year the
touch on issues that we were
going for example we've had
great reports on the behavioral
health the Citrix systems system
in the state from LFC staff
they've done it in effect audits
of CYFD and and where there of a
foster care program has faced
some shortcomings and select but
what what our staff would be
able to do would be pro actively
instead of going back in in
examining would have been done
taking a look at what would it
take for example to create.
A system in which there were
partial day hospital programs
for people dealing with
substance abuse treatment what
would it take to get proactive
to get ahead of the game not
just reporting of what's being
done now but what would it take
to really makes a difference and
that's kind of what Senator
Hickey and I are are hoping that
this a bit of the committee with
its expanded staff capabilities
would do and the amendment is
one.
Did I say that the other side
Representative that I will send
it right now.
No no this year they're bringing
the the the committee members
right down to the committee
setting and and so it.
The kind of by pass the sponsor
of the amendment but this
amendment is on page.
I.
Eight ten through eleven.
Okay.
Eight ten through eleven we
would just delete
The.
And every.
The other state agency in.
That every political
subdivisions so within reach so
the inter agency behavioral
health purchasing collaborative
and every political subdivisions
of the state shall upon request.
Thank you for that so just just
to just to click it's
economically that the.
And just to repeat that for
those of you who are online
online watching the assume it's
on page five of the bill line
ten will be striking out every
other state agency and which
that means the amended version
of the bill was read health
purchasing collaborative and
political subdivisions of the
state shelf.
I would move the.
Any opposition on the amendment.
The level of the go to are you
ready to comment on the bill as
amended.
I think we're ready for for for
the committee or the public to
come in the thank you all of the
members of the committee is
there anybody in the committee
room in favor of this bill.
Anyone of them we did have one
individual who would like to
make a comment this is part of
the organizers impeach if that
makes do the math all.
And I believe that I have now
from the third and.
But I couldn't understand and
advocate administrative both
servers are part of the world I
support read rigor of the
current regular admission if you
do the math all over I don't
know if that is funded so we
didn't save a request coming the
guidelines of the committee and
I'm advocating for COVID an hour
before so if you could just take
note that we have one in support
online anybody in the committee
room opposition of this bill.
What about any opposition
online.
And you know okay none of the
questions of the committee
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator how much of the state's
budget relates to health and and
spending ahead of noting Mr
chairman and Senator Pirtle I'm
I'm not aware of an exact figure
but keep in mind that Medicaid
by itself is bigger than the
than the rest of the state
budget it's about a nine billion
dollar well I should say because
I'm but it right now is about a
nine billion dollar item then
you have.
CYFD and the department of
health which has the most
employees of any department
state government I would say
that if you factor in medicated
probably is well over.
Seventy percent of the budget
even education would do are for
comparison to the Medicaid
budget Mr chair Senator I
appreciate that that's one of
the reasons I I kind of
surprised we didn't have we have
had something like this before
just
with the the scope in the the
size of the amount of.
Amount of money in the shared
portents of of health care
but I will say I really wish we
had something like this during
the COVID that the the
legislature could of had
something in place
to at least be involved in some
of the discussions with the with
the year round committee
dedicated to health we could
have at least had some type of a
voice or a state or
group of individuals that could
reporting back to us as opposed
to being left in the dust.
Mr chair Senators I I don't like
to grow government but I think
as a legislature sometimes we
don't even respect ourselves and
and this is a way to
put something in place we're
we're we're involved year round
and can make better decisions
during during the session as we
do with education bills with
Ellie S. C. and legislative
finance committee having their
year round staff as well so I I
think I am going to support this
for those reasons Mr chair
Senator thank you.
Other Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
and Tom and for bringing this
forward this is.
It is so much needed based even
for what Senator Pirtle
mentioned there over the years
it just seems like every the
information that we need as a
legislature
it's just continuing to grow Sen
coverages some staff we have
department of health and Human
Services Department you can
bring many of the department's
Center this committee because we
we don't even talk about adult
protective services which is
under this I mean it's it's just
a whole host of information and
we don't have time Mr chair.
we could probably sit there.
Two weeks out of a month early
so just trying to get
information from the departments
of from community and then you
know just for us as a
legislators to have conversation
you just don't have time to have
staff that is dedicated to help
us I mean you know like I've
seen you Mr chair and co chair
just kind of what we did this
year was phenomenal in trying to
organize.
presentations that having a
discussion amongst us chair just
committee members was was really
wonderful.
Because the way there are system
is structured you don't have a
chance for dialogue during the
interim it's it's information
you questions and then we go and
I think we need more time
because this is a huge chunk of
our budget in in addition to
education but we have the LTSE.
So for me Mister chair I just
think this is the right we need
to go so.
If I could I'd like to move the
pass well first of this pandemic
cannot.
thank you chair thank you
senator Ortiz Y. Pino are for me
I have been able to attend
interim meetings with that I
really.
Regret that because of my day
job responsibilities but for me
and her practice others watching
us on the cam could you share
with us what missed
opportunities your committee and
the state as a whole has had
because of this lack of support
and then also.
I see that the appropriation is
for one year.
and then money shut whatever
money is left reverts to the
general fund so how do we move
forward for FY twenty five thank
you chairman thank you senator.
The.
Mr chairman and and Senator
McKenna thank you yep what we
did this year was in our first
meeting we decided.
We can't cover we don't have
enough time to cover everything
so what are the three things
we're going to focus on into
three we chose this year.
We're behavioral health.
Pharmaceutical costs.
And and availability for us to
costs and availability and and
then just primary care and its
availability.
Then we spent one month on each
of those.
One of one one one set of
meetings in the one in in July
was on behavioral health in
Albuquerque the wanted August
was on pharmaceuticals that was
in Taos the one in in Gallup in
September was on primary care no
we cover other things as well
but we made that the basic phone
and so I would say at least two
full days was on each of those
topics in those locations that
only left us October November
and December one meeting in the
right started December to cover
all the rest of things like CYFD
aging long term services of the
early childhood care and
whatever it's called education
department the
the the location we have we ever
got to vocational rehab this
year we had a great hearing on
it last year we never got to
addition
the the issue that I'm gonna be
talking about a little while
brain injury.
We're frustrated that we hadn't
got covered brain injury issues
the traumatic brain injury the
subject subject was not covered
this year and and and and
they've been asking for help
dealing with that so that there
are any number of issues and one
of the other co sponsors Senator
Stefanics just came and she
might be able to remember some
of the other things we didn't
get to but we we have them on a
list that we hope this next year
we might be able to make them
priorities we would focus on
initially one other thing we
didn't get to was the whole
issue of what goes on in
corrections in our correctional
facilities that deals with
health care and mental health
care in the correctional
facilities and and and that's
just a subject that.
By itself could take up the
whole three day session at one
of our hearings we did have a
joint hearing this year with was
it up.
Point two corrections I think it
was course corrections issue we
sometimes do that will have a
joint hearing with Education
steady Committee Representative
school based health centers or
some aspect of of schoolbased of
adolescent health.
But we we didn't do much of that
this year because we just had
our power play was so full.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator and then my second
question about the fiscal year I
think the idea is that this
would then become recurring that
the Legislative Council Service
will make this a recurring piece
of the budget if we pass it this
year right thank you chairman
thank you Serra that's quite a
list
and I can see how we really do
need staff to monitor and help
support the committee
one other topic that that I hope
we would cover and we never got
to you know we under
Ellis came years ago we created
the children's trust but.
And then Senator know of when
she was in the legislature at in
the positive youth development
piece of that we've we have not
had a hearing back on that
topic.
In the last three or four years
that we keep getting you know I
keep getting shoved to the side
that is I think of a potentially
very valuable thing that we we
ought to have a hearing on this
bill.
Senator Stewart followed by
Senator that.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So I want to point out a couple
of things first of all Page
three line twenty four I think
you mean assistance D. A. N. C.
E. not assistance a and T. S..
That you know I I I focused on
that paragraph because.
This is you're asking for the
office stays the Legislative
Council to appoint the director
and associate director.
Supplies equipment we don't have
enough office space supplies
equipment now at Legislative
Council we are in a crisis with
that staffing and the the space
in Legislative Council so this
this is going to add a lot to
that issue
we just to Brinkley it needed
more room for Legislative
Council and there's a fairly
significant area outside of
Legislative Council that somehow
if we lost to the house
basically just kind of moved it.
People are laughing in the
audience but that's exactly what
happened so I don't I don't see
the Legislative Council as being
able to say all year here you go
here's your staff here's to two
directors even though they've
lost five staffers in the last
sixteen months at one of the
reasons why it's been difficult
to get bills is that they have
brand new people it takes
several years as if you've heard
Raul Burciaga and Senator Montes
talk about this is a very
particular skills so so we're
kind of already in trouble with
that we did set a minute from
the finish so in your
appropriation I suggest this not
revert to the general fund
usually when we give chunks of
money to Legislative Council to
do things like this.
They don't reverted to the
general fund they keep that
because it's again this is not
going to be enough money to do
what you're asking so I suggest
you take it out that it does not
revert to the general fund I
think it's a good idea of.
Yes we did meet with the real
about this the Mr chairman and
Senator Stewart and and he he's
the one who came up with the
suggestion of three hundred
fifty thousand but it it may be
just as he was conscious of how
many other demands are there in
the bin to squeeze the sin is
going to be difficult I I think
it was assistance that is you
clerical and secretarial help
that that might be needed so I I
don't think that we have a staff
person calls an assistant in
Legislative Council it's
assistance they need help with
that would cover all of that V.
we can tell you we don't have to
people now to help do this.
Know that you know we would have
to hire new people we're that's
of hiring new people are pro.
And no place to put them so so
you so we would have to think
way outside the box to try to
find a place you for that there
there's no room in Legislative
Council now so they would have
to go somewhere else so that's
the difficulty with just saying
okay do it Legislative Council
Mr chairman and and and senator
I mean they're perfectly welcome
to use my office complex I mean
I'm here thirty days next year
all the rest of the time they're
perfectly welcome to use that
office I mean would they be able
to do that to operate out of the
we have a whole floor of.
Legislative offices that go
basically empty you're more.
Yes Mr chairman I I I I don't
know about that.
I just don't know about health
a.
I would feel or what we have
arrangements to move down and
use all our offices were not
here I don't know about that
certainly something we could ask
for I'm just telling you you
know what I know now that I
didn't know if you for because
being on Legislative Council
it's it's not like we've got
space and people to spare we do
not so this will be challenging
that's all I'm saying
Representative I'm not point I
would admit I would move the in
the amendments that that Senator
Stewart of suggested that is on
page five.
Online twenty four.
deleting everything after the
period.
Twenty three twenty three
deleting everything after the
period.
The the modification or the
amendment would be striking from
line twenty four on page five
for at least any unexpected and
unintended balances remaining at
the end of fiscal year twenty
four so revert to the general
fund but striking manageability
Representative yes and then and
then we might as well be include
the state the other piece that
she recommended I page three
line twenty four.
The delete assistance and
substitute or or insert
assistance.
The spelling issue yeah.
So on page three line twenty
four the word assistance would
be changed to the system.
The.
AMC.
Senator Baca focused on the
amendment
What changing is it is that I'm
just curious is that what was
intended or you're talking about
people are you talking about
help Mr chair and senator if if
you're talking about help them I
have I mean assistance might be
the.
Person might be a better word
but if you're talking about I
mean if you're talking about
people if you're talking about
help obviously been addicted I
don't pretend to think the
pretend Mr chairman and and
senator budget input to makes a
good point and that is that you
know you're not going to
probably get anybody designated
as a staff person for this
committee in addition to those
two but what you might be able
to get to somebody who's willing
to run the Xerox machine and
answer the phone so when the
calls come which would be not
enough.
Probably did to designate
somebody as staff for that
committee the just the general
support staff within the so this
I think it does make sense to do
it that way.
Okay thank you Mr.
That the Senate did you move to
have a those two amendments that
would move I would move.
Those two the amendment okay
Senator Lopez seconded it at the
any objection on those benefits
thing that we're back on the
bill as amended and so I have.
No one else left of center left
the center Mr chair just
Maybe as a possibility if we
remember during the COVID the
governor's office was using your
sweet you during that period of
time so I think there's a
precedent right that lets
Council had worked with the
executive to utilize that sweep
or whatever else it was being
done maybe that would be maybe a
an intermediary staff as let's
Council for those of you on the
committee are trying to figure
out.
We need space but maybe that's a
good place to start if this bill
passes and gets signed.
we can still use your sweet says
executive has already done it
before.
Hello just a reminder that we
need to think there is room in
the building not during the
session but they're all the rest
of the year there is so the
group of we'll just have to make
it work thank you Senator
Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for you.
Or
this is an effort that has been
Recommended in introduced for
many years and in fact many when
I was serving with J. Paul
Taylor we actually had a similar
bill but I think things have
become so complicated.
With Medicaid with pharmacy with
moving ahead if we do something
with the health care sorority or
not I mean just the Senator Mr
chair suggested there were many
topics that we couldn't even
addressed during the interim and
I would hardly ask my colleagues
to consider this thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman for the
second time
so so I think the only LFC has
subpoena power I just your I
don't know for the.
South that I saw that too and I
I was surprised that we.
I don't think there's any need
for it if the LFC has it if we
ever need to subpoena.
We could at less than to do it
but I don't know if we need to
have special subpoena power
activity also has rules rules
committee as.
Page forty six of.
Who has to be about.
Rules rules committee that's so
good that's because we confirm
so I don't know if we need to
add another committee with
subpoena power I would not have
any objection to taking that a
I'd like to admit it take health
section for its entirety and
renowned for oil.
Well yeah and we were unrelated
administrative costs.
I haven't read fairly we just
take out the subpoena power yeah
this is the eight.
That's good.
So page for removing section for
and that.
We're doing that and then I
withdraw that.
On page four line twenty to
leave fell have the power to
subpoena.
All right I.
Because it's all about smoking.
And then on on page four.
line fifteen that lights
sixteen.
Speaking of our what we just.
Just take full section I don't
think there's anything left in
there I was reading that over.
Administering those we would
administer through anything so
let's just deliver delete that
whole section that the simpler
thing okay.
This chairman recently in
section four on page four and
the number okay so there's been
a motion on deleting section
four of the bill and
remembering.
And the second that is there any
opposition with that amendment.
That amendment has been adopted
that's removing section for for
the bills and remembering.
We'll go back to the bill as
amended for further debate.
Thing that puts the.
You Mr.
Thank we do have a lot of motion
for the past Center static
estimates as amended if I can
have a roll call please.
And and and I'm sorry Mr chair
to to jump and I I wonder if it
would make sense we've made
quite a few changes on this I
wonder if it would just be
cleaner to roll this out as a
sub.
Just for the benefit of of
forever saying that next.
Where to go next.
But it's.
Sure.
that makes any difference it is.
That's where if I may on that
point I really think.
For the ten years I've been here
this is it still pretty clean
with the amendments are that
wasn't too substantive that we
can roll it out as is in my
opinion and I agree Mr chairman
okay that's fine withdraw that
suggestion thank you we'll go
back to roll call vote.
On the bill as amended Senator
Baca.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator had a meal yes
Senator do K..
Yes.
You have a do pass Senators
thank you so much thank you Mr
chairman you wanted to use the.
The lady next to the health care
costs driving up next on our
agenda Senate bill two ninety
health care cost drivers
analysis back to use seven or to
the people Mr chairman of this
bill would appropriate money to
the the Legislative Council
Service to contract for a study
of.
What's what are the factors that
are driving our health care
costs ever upward
So that we can get.
This is part of the the of an
overall effort at the trying to
understand what we need to do if
we're going to have a better
functioning health care system
last year we appropriate money
to the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
do some studies of he that
Office of course I don't know
that I don't know who the new
office the superintendents going
to be but the the previous
superintendent indicated that
they would be glad to do it but
it was a it was considerable
imposition on them and they have
a lot of other things to do so
we talked with the Mr Burciaga
and of we we decided that it
would be better to send the
money to the council service and
have a little issue the contract
to do a study of the that the
that the both are interim
committee the health and Human
Services Committee and the
legislative finance committee
could make use of of the results
in our recommendations for
legislation.
That.
Thank New.
Coming line item for we.
There.
Senator.
So the appropriation bills track
okay.
That are dealing with these
issues so the workings of the
legislature tools this is
impacting the workings of
interim committee that selects
here thank you comes here and
then it often goes to the next
committee where might be also
appropriate this is just going
to finance but
but previous like that Senator
by this is now coming to
conservation his bill you are
here.
So that that's what it comes to
roll in because
Senator because it's going to
Legislative Council.
Thank you for that house.
Thank you so much and so Senator
to the people you have Dr Jim
peach list those are ex you want
to work these online yes he had
offered to be the expertise to
make the drive up so is Dr peace
on what we kind of a act.
Have you.
The.
Okay your expert is therefore
would like say a few words
great.
DrPH go ahead.
The securities.
Dr PJ there.
This year okay.
It's a drive there we do have
some order by part of a few
people who want to say a few
words.
It's fine yeah we're gonna start
off of those who are in support
Dr Rick Madden followed by Dale
Tinker.
The state is that.
I.
Yeah.
Have
you have a minute limit this to
one minute since we're running
out of time before we head out
to the floor.
We have.
Thank you of care and members of
the committee Senator T. C.
panel I'm a family physician
practice nearly forty years and
the land a recently retired but
I still have my heart of health
care.
And I represent the New Mexico
Academy of Family positions in
support of this bill there's
certainly things that I've seen
over my years of practice and
not just here but across the
United States I served on
national academy of family
physicians board of directors
for three years.
And our costs continue to
increase both locally and
nationally in an uncontrolled
fashion and may certainly affect
every single person in New state
of New Mexico as well as
physicians and their patients I
think we can do better with what
we do with our money we don't
know how we spend it and we know
where there are some big
challenges on many arenas within
health care so we like to
support this bill because we
need more information to be able
to make recommendations thank
you Mr chair thank you so much
dealtaker.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Dale Tinker
Representative New Mexico
pharmacists Association I do
stand in support of this as
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino mentioned
in the interim committee there
was a discussion about the cost
of pharmaceuticals there are a
lot of bills in this session
about pharmaceuticals and so as
as a representative for
pharmacists I can tell you that
having worked on this for more
than thirty years thirty five
years
we still haven't come to
solution because we all know
that pharmaceuticals is a cost
driver but we don't know why
that is we don't know which
components are driving the
system we know that those of us
who are seniors
compose a higher costs than than
the average we drive the costs
up as we get older so what we
need to evaluate that decide
what is appropriate response to
that and I think this bill will
help thank you Mr chairman thank
you so much for that we're next
one to go to Steve those that
are.
Mr chairman committee Steve you
said on a lobbyist for the New
Mexico Academy of Family
positions and for all the
reasons doctor Matt and
mentioned the academy which
represents over nine hundred
physicians in the state they
stand in support and thank the
sponsor for bringing.
For that we also have for online
in support of going to give them
if you don't mind and I'm gonna
start off with merry.
I have after
very attentive.
A muted thank you I'm Mary
Feldblum of executive director
Health Security for New Mexicans
Campaign my PhD I was a former
academic my PhD is in sociology
strong background in economics
and I've been looking at cost
drivers for over thirty years
this is fantastic the
legislature was finally
beginning to get information
about rising health care costs
drivers as we don't
address these all the reforms
we're trying to do for access
we'll just end up costing more
and more and more and the
national statistics are really
drastic talking about cost
shifting on to the state's
employers and more out of pocket
costs for patients and their
families so I hope support thank
you thank you so much for that
and now go to I cannot pack.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm a contact speaking
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico we strongly
support this bill based on a
position that health care needs
to be affordable for all New
Mexicans we need to understand
what's driving the huge
increases in health care costs
so we can get them under
control.
We would need to pass this bill
thank you thank you let's go to
June the mess out.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Judy Messel
with Lutheran advocacy ministry
in New Mexico and speaking also
on behalf of the New Mexico
conference of churches.
As we strongly support SB two
ninety we see this as a an
important step toward
controlling costs and especially
in that the more people in our
in our population thank you
thank you so much and the final
one is Paul Gibson.
Thank you chairman
Billsponsored committee members
thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of SB two
ninety my name is Paul Gibson co
founder retake Our Democracy
statewide I don't want C. for
nonprofit with over fifty forty
five hundred numbers.
Health care costs in health care
coverage faster soaring with
higher premiums and copays
causing many New Mexicans to go
under insured and unprotected
from health crisis there are
well known drivers of healthcare
cost increases that threaten to
make record prices far worse
Mexico doesn't take proactive
steps if the train more
barreling toward you we can use
want to see the password would
be crashed are increasing
healthcare costs is that right
and very smart health policy
experts throughout the US and
around the world wrestling those
challengers why would we want to
not going to learn from them and
avoid a trade as the two ninety
will simply allow the state to
analyze its options for
containing costs so that
legislators can take important
steps to avoid a trade I was
struck by common street
the special Senator Ortiz you
know as you can thank you for
your comments Paul.
Is there anybody in the
opposition with.
The committee room.
A lot of the.
Thank you madam on the.
Thank you will then go to the
committee.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman Senator if you've
got that same less on this bill
don't think it matters because
it's not like this bill is going
to go in statute gifted
appropriation bill but but I
think just if you're giving
money to Legislative Council for
almost anything you could not
put that on on.
Because we we we just can't do
that we don't.
But that.
I don't think we need to amended
because it's just an
appropriation bills but I
suggest that you do that going
forward that you don't have that
sentence on their okay thank you
thank you Mr chairman Senator I
love the past ocean freight do
pass seconded but never roll
call.
Senator about that yes.
Senator Lopez yeah.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Ortiz yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
meal yes Senator Duhigg.
Yes.
You have a do have side effects.
And in the absence of time
Senator memorial thirty will not
be here today will be rolling
that over to the end of the
week.
