Uh, they have sensitive
information in them and so we
don't want, we want to respect
the, the privacy of our
conferees. So please leave your
packets here. Don't take
pictures of stuff and share it
with people, um, and they will
be shredded after the hearing.
Uh, but otherwise, we will go
ahead and turn the gavel over to
our vice chair and we'll.
started.
Good morning. Thank you,
everybody. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chairwoman for handing over the
gavel. And so we're gonna start
off today with a reappointment
of Christina Ali with a small
business Investment Corporation,
Leaderworth is your Senate
sponsor, so Senator Worth, good
morning. I'm gonna hand it over
to you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everyone. Uh, I am very
honored this morning to present
uh Christina Ali for
reappointment, uh, to the small
business investment corporation.
Uh, this was an original
appointment December 15, 2023 by
the governor pursuant to uh NMSA
5829-5, and then a reappointment
on March 15, 2024, so Miss
Allie's in a position.
where she's been serving in this
serving for over a year, and I
think can really give the
committee a good sense of what's
happening at the small business
Investment Corporation. Uh, in
terms of her background, she has
over 25 years providing wealth
management services from here in
Santa Fe, uh, in 2014, she and
two others founded Santa Fe
Advisors, uh, where she is now
responsible for client
relationship management,
compliance, operations, and
finance, uh, prior
to that, um, she worked at first
Santa Fe Advisors, uh, from 2008
until she switched over in 2014
as she was the managing director
there. And before coming back to
New Mexico, she spent 10 years
with the US Trust company in New
York.
Um, small business investment
corporation is an interesting
entity and it's good to one of
the nice things about the rules
committee is everyone gets a
chance to learn more about these
different functions and state
governments created in 2001, uh,
by Senator Don Kidd.
Uh, and basically it's a
nonprofit corporation, it
receives 2% of the severance tax
permanent fund, um, and as of
June 30th of last year had 157
million in total assets,
basically the New Mexico small
business Investment Corporation
makes loans for new and growing
small businesses. Uh, so again,
and.
I'm sure Miss Allie can talk
about uh what the SBIC has done,
um, I think again, this is a, a
terrific appointment and I very
much appreciate, as with all of
these positions, uh, these are
volunteer physicians and very
much appreciate her being
willing to step up and serve.
And with that, Mr. Chair, if I
could, I would yield to Miss
Allie for a few opening
comments. Thank you, Senator,
and good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, thank you
for, uh, this opportunity.
So as a small business owner in
Santa Fe and a native New
Mexican, I'm, uh, it's a
pleasure to actually have a
business in this country in
this.
County and state, um, many of my
clients are also a small
business owners, and of course,
economic growth to me in New
Mexico is very important across
the entire state, so it's an
honor, it would be an honor to
continue to serve in this role.
Thank you so much. And we have 2
people who are here to speak on
your behalf. If I can ask Joshua
Smith and Russell Cummings to
come up to the table, and
although I called out your name,
if you can restate your name for
the record.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Russell Cummins.
I am the executive director and
investment advisor for the small
Business Investment Corporation.
And uh uh Miss Allie has served
on our board for over a year
now, and uh she has proven
herself to be very capable and
reliable, and um, you know, as,
as Senator Wirth mentioned, she
uh, she started a small business
in New Mexico a little over 10
years ago, she continues to own
and operate that a successful
small business here in Santa Fe,
and, uh, many of her, uh, the
individuals that she provides
financial advice to are
themselves small business
owners. That small business.
background and experience is
very helpful to, to our, to have
on our board of directors.
She's also a certified financial
planner with, you know, related
to the advice she gives to to
individuals and her investment
background and knowledge is also
very valuable to our board
related to things such as
investment yield and risk and
liquidity and portfolio
diversification, so she has been
a tremendous addition to our
board, and I strongly recommend
you vote yes to confirm.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is
Joshua Smith. I'm the chair of
the NMMSBIC. Um, I've known
Christina for almost 20 years
back in our old days at First
National Bank Santa Fe. Um I had
a joke that if I ever won the
lottery, I call my wife and then
I'd call Christina to help me
invest that so just from a
personal side, we very much
value her input on the board and
um a diverse.
Um, perspective and opinion is
what, you know, we really try
and have so, um, I strongly
support Sally. Thank you.
Thank you for your comments, Mr.
Chairman. By a show of hands, is
there anybody else here in
support of the country?
Let the record show that there's
3 others.
By a show of hands, is there
anybody here in opposition of
the country.
No, I'm going to head to the
committee for questions or
comments. Senator Buck.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, well,
good morning and congratulations
again, um, well done. I was
looking through your resume.
You, you taught high school?
Is that, is that correct?
Wait a minute.
I have the wrong one here?
It's Christina Alley, right?
I'm sorry, I'm looking at your
resume. OK, high school 90, OK,
I'm sorry, my fault. I thought
you taught high school,
um, she went to high school, OK.
And, and you did, you did too,
uh, Mr.
Chair, I think I did OK.
I'm sorry, I thought it, that
was a job that you taught in
high school. I, I misread that.
How, how long have you been on
the board now?
I, I, Mr. Chair, I've been on
the board a little over a year.
A little over a year.
year and a month.
And looking at um is of the
SBIC.
Hm
Well,
Uh, Mr. Chair, the mission of
the SPAC is to foster small
business growth and to fill a
gap between traditional
traditional lending institutions
such as banks, the, uh, we found
there was when this was created,
there was a gap between the SBA
and what is available. So, by
using these funds and partnering
with CDFI organizations, we are
able to reach a, a, a
Subset of
and owners and provide funding
in that regard. Previously it
was an equity approach, but that
was shifted about 10 years ago.
So, um, in your, uh, time on the
board, have you seen uh the
board.
Um, advocate for some of these
small businesses that are
struggling for an additional
loan to kind of keep them afloat
because what, what I see in my
district in Rio Rancho, um, not
so much in Northwest
Albuquerque, but we have just
gone through a, a huge property
tax increase on the commercial
property and it's affected small
businesses, um, I mean,
immensely, and we're looking at
some of these businesses. I can
tell you, um, right on, right on
Southern in Rio Rancho, uh
We have these, you know, strip
malls, some of them are very old
and, and, uh, some of these
small business owners are
telling me the rent's going to
be doubling, they're having a
hard time, uh, meeting with, you
know, inflationary costs,
potentially family medical
leave. Uh, so how, in, in your
opinion, um, especially with
your wealth management
experience. How do you, how do
you meet those challenges if
you're a small business owner,
uh, you know, with 567 employees
trying to, trying to pay double
the rent and, and some other
regulations potentially coming.
down.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
uh, so we, we don't work
directly and we're not making
the loans directly to those
organizations, um, but the CDFI
organizations, they are
partnering, and I must say that
Russell Cummins, our executive
director, does an excellent job
understanding about each of the
CDFI organizations and how
they're working directly and
also understanding the risks
and, and right sizing the risks.
So for my
Wealth management standpoint,
part of it is right sizing the
risks and managing,
understanding what your, um,
What's an acceptable level of
risk, and sometimes you're
willing to take a little bit
more and sometimes you're taking
a little bit less, so those
types of
Small business owners are
getting that kind of also
financial advice through the
CDFI, and that's a big part of
it.
And obviously with the increase
in business expenses, um, due
to, um,
Exponentially assessed value,
it's gonna come down to the
small business owner come down
on on the consumer, um, some of
these businesses aren't going to
survive.
And I, and I just want you to
know in your capacity where
you're at, as well as your
private capacity helping
clients, which I greatly
appreciate. Uh, I would just ask
that you, you keep that in mind,
um, for these people that are
struggling out there,
especially, um, in, in the
Albuquerque Metro District, um,
because I, I hear it all the
time. I did as a county
commissioner and, and I hear it
now in my current position, so,
um, lastly, I just want to say
congratulations to you and um I,
I
I want to get your husband's
name right here. Um, uh,
Timothy?
OK, is Timothy here?
Uh, no, he's coming later. He's
coming later. All right, well,
my best to you and Timothy and
uh you have my full support, and
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Senator Doig.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Miss Sally,
for being here. Um, what, what
is the role of, of federal funds
and, and what you all do.
Do, do you receive federal
funds? Is that part of the, the
loans that go out or is it all
state funded?
Um
Mr. Chair and the committee
members, my understanding is
it's all state funded.
OK. And because of what I'm,
what I was really wondering is,
is with the, with the new
administration with the the
freezes that are happening with
federal funds, if that's going
to impact the work that you all
are doing. So do you think it,
it will not, I, is that correct?
I am Mr. Chair and committee
members, I
Don't know exactly, um, and I
would need to defer to Russ
Cummins on that.
Just,
uh, I would just note that with
an unstable federal
environments, the demand for
something like this, my guess
would only go up.
So, again, I don't think, I
think what you're hearing
doesn't get direct money, but I
think as.
More business just as as Senator
Block said.
Again, when there's uncertainty
and potential federal funds that
come through all kinds of
different streams.
If they're not there, then
again, a program like this
becomes more important than
ever.
Yes, absolutely. Um, and Mr.
Chair, Miss Sally, uh,
or what?
This is kind of a, a broad
question, but are there trends
that you are seeing with our
small businesses here in New
Mexico, that we should be aware
of and take into consideration
in our policymaking.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair and
committee members.
So the need is endless.
And a lot of it is financial
education as well. So back to
what Senator Block was bringing
up part of it, business owners
are not finance experts, they
may be experts about whatever
type of business they're
running, they also need to
understand the financial piece.
And I think that's what I have
observed in my year of serving
on this is is how instrumental
the CDFI organizations are in
terms of providing a lot of that
support and and financial
counseling.
Um, needless to say, inflation
is real, the cost of doing
business is going up.
Um, so I think those are
definitely the challenges that
that we're seeing and, and our
ability to continue to expand
those that fill that slot.
Between a traditional SBA loan
or through a traditional bank
loan, um,
When uh I was working at First
National Bank of Santa Fe
running their trust and wealth
management group. I was there
during, uh, 08 and '09 and 2010,
and certainly saw how some of
the banking regulations changed
that and squeezed a lot of small
business owners who had been
It just didn't fit in the right
box.
And so again, this organization
is able to fill that space,
which I think is instrumental,
especially where
We are the land of enchantment,
and we don't necessarily fit in
the box.
What is it, uh, what, whatever
is true elsewhere is not true.
New Mexico
and Mr. Chair, Miss Allen, uh,
you, you might have said this
already. What, what are the
What are the interest rates like
on on these loans that you all
are making.
Uh
Mr. Chair and Madam Chair and
committee members, it varies by
the CDFI and how they are set.
Thank you. Well, thank you for
your, uh, willingness to do this
public service. Uh, I'm glad
that we have someone of your
caliber on this. I wanna say
commission, but it's
corporation. Uh, thank you.
Senator Townsend.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congratulations.
Um, one question, do you
Is your organization tracks the
diversity of those that they
help across the state and, and
how do you manage from
northeast, southwest, you know.
How, how does that occur, and
does it?
Um, Madame Chair, Mr. Chair,
members, absolutely, um, we do
track that and that's actually
in the little cheat sheet that
was included in your packet on
the back page of that.
I, um, at, uh
A chart explaining the diversity
of loans across the state, of
course, we have some
concentration of population, uh,
Vernalillo County being the
largest, um, but what I find,
um, inspiring is that, you know,
in more accounting where we have
4000
inhabitants. We have a pretty
good exposure to supporting the
the small business there, so.
We do track that.
And I appreciate you bringing
that up. I thought that was very
informative and, and
Yes, that it's not just an
Albuquerque thing or a Burnley
County, it helps the state as a
whole, and I appreciate that.
Thank you very much and
congratulations.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gayos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Congratulations. Uh, you
actually had me in your resume.
It shows that you do horseback
riding and speak Spanish. Uh, so
I appreciate that cause our
next uh gentleman coming up from
the banking area uh in their
organization, they have someone
that's fluent in Spanish, and
that's very needed in New Mexico
just come of the issues that we
have here in our state. I did
want to know, and I don't know
when Senator Block was asking
you in your, um,
And what you guys do, do you
have a cap?
On the mounts of the loans just
didn't know that you think so,
um,
She brought up the
Um, change in leadership now,
and I know in the last 4 years
we've had huge amounts of
inflation in the last 4 years,
and I've wondered if in, in your
cap, if you've had to manage
your cap to go up due to
inflation because costs have
gone up. I do, um, a lot of
construction in the construction
costs, you look at for
education, uh, when we started
building among school boarden
units. We're looking at $300
square foot. Now it's $1000
square foot, so, um, for
small businesses, I would think
they'd have to go through the
same type of increases. I just
wondered if that reflected in
your caps of your loans. I just
wondering on that.
Uh, so, uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and committee members,
yes, so there's a variety of
size of loans, um, and it
depends upon the CDFI that's
issuing the loans and what their
focus is.
So our loan sizes vary from as
small as an average loan size of
$333,000.
Um
And again it it depends upon the
organization and what they're
focusing on lending on, and then
we do have much larger loans, so
loans supporting charter schools
and so those go all the way up
to 5 million.
But those are, they're only 2.
The majority are much smaller
and they tend to be in that kind
of micro lending space.
Mr. Chairman,
uh, Miss Elliot, appreciate
that, uh, and I like the
diversity there on the, on the
amounts and the needs,
especially the charter schools.
I like that piece. Uh, my last
question was that on
Uh, your
Fastenbury pointed after being
on there a year, but do you see?
We're glad you're looking to be
reappointed, but do you see
anything that's gonna change?
Um, going forward in your
position, is there any major
things coming up in, in how you
guys do business.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
committee members, I think to
some of the questions posed so
far, I think the increase is
going to go up.
Um, again, given some of the,
the growth of the fund has grown
or the organization has grown
tremendously.
And our executive director
Russell Cummins has put together
a long term projection and how
that potentially will grow over
time, and I think that
reinvestment is going to
tremendously support and
diversify.
The um funds of the state.
Because that need is going to
grow.
So I think those are the things
that we might be seeing coming
in the next, um, 2 to 3 to 5
years.
Well, thank you for that, and
I'm just going to say you must
be the Dave Ramsey of New Mexico
and thank you for.
Are you
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, I, I'm sorry, I
apologize, I forgot to ask you
one question, um, which is dear
and dear to my heart in Sandwell
County, um, especially my
previous role. What, what type
of um relationships do you have
with our tribal communities uh
around the state, um, I, I know
that we've had some issues.
From a county standpoint working
with
Uh, some of the tribal partners
on economic development, and you
mentioned that's a big piece of
what you do and and I greatly
appreciate that. But what, what
role or um
What type of relationships, uh,
have you built or are you in the
process of building with our
travel partners and what
What um limits some of those
relationships or economic
development um.
Initiatives. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
committee members, uh, so that
is an evolving relationship, um,
again, some of through the sea,
I I keep bringing this up, but
the CDFIs.
I've created those relationships
and so there are some loans that
are exist in that place and we
are doing and Russell Cummins
again, our executive director is
doing a, the front end due
diligence on partnering with
additional um organizations to
provide funding for housing and
tribal. So it's an emergency.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
yeah, I, I'd be, I'd really like
to talk to him about that
because, um,
You know, the Zia and he pueblos
are.
Um, they've had some, well,
they, they got some huge
economic issues there as well as
some of the other uh tribes and
pueblos in in my county, so.
I, I would really ask that you
guys focus, focus on that, um.
That's, that's just a huge issue
for me as well as obviously
controlling regulations and
costs of small businesses, so if
you could just come talk to me
whenever it is good for your
schedule, I greatly appreciate
it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Bradley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
welcome. Have you ever served as
the governor appointee by this
governor or those before on any
other boards or commissions.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madame Chair, no,
I am not.
And um have you, so do you serve
or have you served in the past
on any for-profit boards?
And, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam
Chair and committee members, I
have not. And have you ever been
a registered lobbyist?
Uh
Mr. Chair, Madame Chair and
committee members, I have not.
Thank you. Thank you and
welcome.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Stewart.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
move that we approve this most
excellent con move her to the
floor of the Senate for a full
vote.
Very good. We have a motion and
seeing that we'll take a roll
call.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 9 yes, 1 excuse,
con congratulations. We'll be
seeing you later on today on the
Senate floor. Um,
Yes. Thank you.
I'm gonna move on to the next
country on the agenda, which is
Joshua Grisham.
And if I can ask Senator Scott
to come up?
Senator Scott, welcome to your
first time in the Rules
Committee. Happy to have you
here this morning.
So I'm gonna turn it over to you
to go ahead and introduce the
country.
And Mr. Sander, if you can just
turn on your mic.
Members of the committee.
I bring before you this morning
for reappointment.
To the small business investment
corporation.
Of Mr. Josh Gresham.
He has
A bachelor's degree in business
administration.
From New Mexico State
University.
A master's degree in business
administration.
From Texas Tech.
University
he makes his living as a banker
in our small community of Hobbs.
He's been.
Very active over the years in
various community.
Uh, volunteer organizations
including
The hospital board, economic
development corporation.
The JCs in the Chamber of
commerce.
He, uh
You spank her.
He deals with small businesses
and loans associated with these.
Daily
And with that
I'll leave it to Mr. Grassam to
answer any questions you might
have. Thank you, Senator. So if
you'd like to take a few moments
to
tell the committee about
yourself. Feel free.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh,
thank you for having me today.
Um, this is an honor, um, this
is, uh, I saw this opportunity,
um, and, uh, being from a rural
area, having to make the
five-hour drive, only one that
has to make a longer drive is a
center centerator Gallegos, um,
I thought it was an opportunity
to show rural support for rural
small business across the state.
Um
It's just a great opportunity to
be in front of you guys today.
Thank you so much. We do have 3
people who signed up and
organized support of your
confirmation. I'm gonna ask that
they come up to the table, and
although I read your name, if
you can state your name again
for the record. I have Chris
Moya, Missy Courrier, and Joshua
Smith.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Chris
Moy. I'm the president of the
Independent Community Bankers
Association. I've known Mr.
Grasham for about 10 years when
we attended Western school. uh
Western State School of Banking
together, we've known each other
a long time. Josh also serves
on, uh, the board of the
Independent Community Bankers
Association as well. Um, I'm
here in support of, of Mr.
Gresham, um, as a community
banker. He understands the
opportunities and the risks that
small businesses face around the
state and, uh, just as his
His guidance and his counsel
helps lead our association is
gangs and council will help uh
lead the SBIC for it as well.
transport.
Thank you, Mr. Moya.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, very
grateful, um, and Mr. Chair, I'm
sorry. Um, very glad to be here
with all of you today. My name
is Missy Currier, uh, Josh
Grassam was my boss when I was
at the Economic Development
Corporation of Lee County, and
during that time, Josh was
wonderful to work with from the
perspective of we went through
COVID, and as you might guess,
um, the whole world changed, and
with that in mind, it was Josh
and his bank that led the effort
to work on federal issues and
state issues to ensure that we
could get.
out the door to ensure that
folks knew how to fill out the
right paperwork to keep their
business going. Uh, the best
thing about Josh and the way his
mind works is diversification is
key for southeastern New Mexico
and all of the state as well as
ensuring that we're able to
retain the business that we
currently have within the state
of New Mexico. He's been a great
leader for us, uh, both from the
business perspective in
southeastern New Mexico, as well
as for the nonprofits. And I
know he'll create that same
level of work throughout the
rest of the state.
Stand in strong support and very
grateful to speak for him today.
Thank you for your comments, Ms.
Currier.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
again, is the, uh, chairman of
the NMSBIC, um, at a at a
banker, I, uh.
Very much valued Josh's input on
some very fairly complex and
difficult decisions we make and
in addition, you know, our
mission is to utilize public
funds as a fiduciary and use
those funds across New Mexico
and having somebody from rural
New Mexico, uh, brings a great
perspective to our board, so I
fully support. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Smith, and if I
can get a show of hands on the
committee for those of you who
would like to either ask
questions or comment, OK. Send
her block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Mr. Gresham, uh,
congratulations, by the way, um.
A little sketchy on your sponsor
sitting next to you, but um,
We'll, we'll have to get through
that together here.
So
The one thing I really like
about you is.
You're, you're a young guy.
And it's really great to have
some, some young people, um, a
little diversity in the age
here, and I appreciate you being
from
The rural area in southeast New
Mexico, um, as well, and I, I
wanna say congrats uh to you on
this appointment and, uh, and
your lovely wife, uh Jennifer as
well. Is she here with you or
not?
She's not 5 hours, it's just,
she couldn't make the drive.
She's actually meeting with the
German consulate today. Oh, that
sounds nice. OK, good.
Um
What, what do you, what, what do
you wanna do? I mean, you,
you've obviously a a smart guy,
you've researched this, uh,
position. What, what do you see
your role as doing in and
changing New Mexico for the
better through the SBIC.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, commissioner or senator, uh,
Small business is the way of
growth to become big business.
How this organization works is
it, it does micro lending, um,
and those loans grow to in
community bank lending, um, and
community bank and and and
those, those uh small businesses
create jobs in our, our rural
communities and in our big
cities, so this is where it
starts right here on the ground
floor. If you don't have
capital, um, there's lots of
other things that you can't do
to get loans through the SBIC
that we can, we can make a loan
to you, um, that the traditional
bank couldn't, couldn't.
done.
So in your uh capacity in in the
banking industry through uh I
think it's Wells Fargo, correct?
Is that who you worked for?
Meadow Mr Chair in the past is
currently the County State bank.
OK. What, what challenges do you
see that's different for the
urban areas of Santa Fe.
Uh, Albuquerque Rio Rancho, Las
Cruces compared to the rural
areas.
Of to can carry grants.
Tooro, Silver City.
What are the challenges you see
those small businesses have
versus the challenges of the uh
urban suburban areas.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I
think, um, that they're all
equally um challenged, um,
especially with uh just
different legislation that's
happening, it just makes it
harder, uh, just additional tax
on the small business, um.
There are programs that the
state offers that are great
programs you were asking
earlier, um.
About programs that could help
your, uh, constituents. There's
a program that's offered through
the banking system. It's called
CAP, and it's through the
economic development uh through
the state economic development
um deal, that's something that
you guys do, that's a great
program for our community and um
it just gives the banks, um, a
little bit more, uh, it gives
the banks collateral to do some
uh a little bit more risky
things, um, to help rehab or do
that kind of work. Have you, uh,
thank you for that. Have you
reached out to your potential
board members on the SPSC?
All righty. Just to talk to him,
get to know them, ask them what
some of their issues are.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, yes,
we've worked very well over the
last, uh, just a little over a
year, um, we have a great
diverse board and uh there's
lots of different people that
bring different values to the
board. We have a really good
board. All right, well, I want
to say congratulations, um, I'll
definitely support your
Nomination no matter who
sponsors you.
Um
I think that's all I got right
now, but uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, uh, thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator Senator
Gayos.
Thank you, Ms. Jen. Thank you,
Josh, for doing this. And I just
wanted to let the
Um, legislators understand um
Who you are and what you do for
our community, uh, being that
it's a locally owned com uh bank
that it's, there's times that we
can't get to loans in our own
means in the larger groups. So
I've seen how you've done that
in Lee County. Does that sort of
transfer over the state level
when you're, you look at
earlier, we had testimony of
$3000 to 5 million. cause that
same type mentality of being New
Mexican.
Focusing on New Mexico needs.
Does that transfer across from
what we've seen you do in Lee
County.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Senator,
uh, yes, sir. um.
I, I think everybody, every
business, um, if you're an
entrepreneur, um, and you have,
you put in the hard work, I
think, um, there should be an
organization where you could
start a business, um, so, uh,
what happens in Lee County
happens in the rest of the
state, yes sir.
Thank you for this turn.
Scratch my, and I've seen you
grow up and uh I know you're a
power couple, your wife does
grow incredible job too. I just
wanted to congratulate you
because I think you're a great
example of what
County strives for is to do
what's right by the state and
participate in the best we can,
so put that on you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. I'm gonna go
to Senator Duhi, followed by
Senator Townsend.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, um, Mr. Grassam.
Um, I'm curious.
It looks you.
So you work at Lee County State
Bank now, uh,
What's the, is there any overlap
between what you do with SBIC
and, and what you're doing at
the bank now.
Um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, the,
the overlap is, um, that those
small businesses that grow up
can actually get um
Better, better rates, uh,
they're able to um come to the
State Bank or any other bank in
the state and get, get those
loans once they're, once they're
established. So that's
kind of overlap.
Um
If I, if I may, you, you ask the
other uh person what kind of
risks, um, that, uh, I see in
the in the state of New Mexico,
and I think it's the insurance
risk.
Insurance cost is going up
across
policies are being canceled,
which makes it very risky loans,
so that's, that's the big risk
that I see in New Mexico.
And Senator Mr. Casson, thank
you. Uh, I've, it seems like
insurance risks, that, that is,
I think what we are seeing as
well is that across the board,
insurance is going up, uh, in
all areas. Um,
And, and I guess what I was
really wondering with, with my
first question was, are there
folks who
Is there a system where if
someone goes to a traditional
bank, and they don't qualify
there.
Is there, are they getting
referred to you all.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, yes,
uh, just for example, West is a
great organization for women
owned businesses. Um, we, we,
uh, we work with West. They have
a, an office in Hobbs, um, so we
refer, uh, those women, uh,
entrepreneurs over to West and,
um, we keep the banking account
and the West makes alone and
it's it's a very good.
Great. Thank you.
Um, again, thank you for, for
your willingness to, to serve
for your public service. Um,
that's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you. Senator
Towson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
here.
Uh, Josh, congratulations. Um.
I, I think you spoke just
exactly to what my question was
is in your experience, what do
you see the biggest challenge.
new businesses today, these
businesses that you have the
opportunity to help.
What is the biggest challenge
and, and what do you see that we
could do as a legislature to
help them.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um.
I, I think regulation, I think
um we have lots of regulation
for small business, makes it
really difficult for those small
businesses to operate, I think,
um.
I set a pretty high, like 100 or
something and and set rules
above that and below that, um,
for employees, but, uh, a small
business, it's, it's, it's tough
to operate, um, compared to our,
our neighbors around us.
So, madam chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
do you?
Do you believe there's
opportunity to help level the
playing field to make our
businesses more competitive in
New Mexico compared to their to
our peers and adjoining states.
Uh, sure, Mr. Chair, um,
Senator, yeah, I, I, I think
there is, um, I think if there
was a group. OK.
Do.
Well, I appreciate it and again,
congratulations, uh.
I think you spoke to one of the
big risks that I see happening
across New Mexico right now is
the insurance and, and it's uh
I I think some of the disasters
in the Mexico are being
exploited today, and I think we
as a legislative body will have
to address that sooner, better
than later, but again,
congratulations and I'm happy to
support you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, I
move that we approve of Joshua
Rasham for a reappointment to
the SBIC from this committee to
be voted on by the full Senate.
Thank you so much. We have a
motion and before I go for a
roll call vote, I want to thank
you for being a voice for rural
New Mexicans. I, in my Senate
district, I represent a majority
of rural constituents, and I
want to thank you for being a
voice for everyone who's in our
rural areas. So with that, I
want to go for a roll call vote,
if you can.
Get the vote for me.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal? Yes.
Senator Doig.
With the vote count of 9 yes and
1 excused, you'll move forward
to the Senate chamber for a full
confirmation. Congratulations.
Senator Scott just to so you
know, you will have a little
script on the floor of all the
technical stuff that you need to
say when, when you will present
him on the floor.
Thank you very
much. You're welcome, madam.
And headed to the last item on
our agenda is a good friend of
ours. Welcome back, Senator Greg
Knewart to the committee. And so
Senator Stewart will be
Uh, the senator speaking on your
behalf as an appointee to the
public regulations Commission.
Good morning. Good to see you
again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
want to start by saying, you
know, Greg Nebert needs no
introduction for any of us,
however, we're going to still do
that.
Uh,
so his resume is so long and so
detailed, he has written so many
books and articles he has won so
many awards. I'm just gonna
focus on a few items.
Uh, so, uh.
Mr. Nibert earned his
jurisdoctorate cum laude from
Pepperdine University.
He is a lobo graduated from UNM
uh in 1980, economics and
political science at a minor in
biology, really like that wide
range of uh interest that he
has, um.
He attended Clovis High School.
He's a Roswell native.
Uh, New Mexican, uh, Clovis High
School, where he won all the
honors was in student council,
was the boy state delegate, so
we're we've got a little alpha
dog here with the kind of work
he's done his entire life, um.
What I really like about his
resume is that he lists his 8
years in the state house and his
one year in the state senate as
public service, as community
service, which is exactly what
it is, uh, so I do want him to
talk about what it means to be a
landman.
Uh, I'm ignorant about this. I
think it has to do with oil and
gas, uh, he's known for his uh
law on oil and gas, um,
And he had prior to uh.
Being in the PRC, he was a
partner at Hinkel Shaer
specializing in real property
energy administrative law, and
he's been recognized for his
work in Ireland and gas, so we
all know them, we love them, uh,
I'm met, uh, a representative
Neibert first when we served
together on a committee where we
wrote our anti-harassment
policy.
We have 8 from the house, 8 from
the Senate, uh, equal number of
Rs and D's and uh Gate Kernan
and I served from the Senate,
so, uh, he just thoughtful,
reasonable, intelligent, easy to
get along with. I was really
looking forward to having him
serve and he abandoned us, not
by his own desires.
So, uh, welcome Greg Kneipert.
I'm sure we'll have lots of
questions and fun with his
confirmation.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
committee members, it is indeed
a pleasure to appear in front of
you, uh, it's a little different
on this side of the table and
that side of the table is
suspect.
Um
I want to thank uh.
The present prote for agreeing
to sponsor me. It it's, it's an
honor to be here. It's an honor
to be considered.
Or
An important position, uh, and a
position that frankly, a couple
years ago.
Uh, you know, I was
Joining with the majority of
Of the legislators in, in really
questioning uh.
What to do with that agency.
And
When it was mentioned to me that
I ought to pursue.
Uh, joining this agency was a
bit befuddled.
Uh, to say the least.
They asked me to.
Investigate
The agency.
Because they said it's changed.
And I did
My due diligence. I, I, I, I did
what lay men do, they do their
due diligence to determine
whether it's a good deal or a
bad deal, um.
And
Looked at some of the problems
that have
persisted with the agency over
the years, things that we
brought up.
On the Senate floor and the
House floor.
Couple of years, well, 3 years
ago.
Um
And
Everyone I talked to.
told me that
It's working.
What we did as a legislative
body.
At an morning commission and the
people that were selected to
fill those roles.
We're professional.
They brought
Education and experience to the
commission.
And that it was something that
uh
intrigue me.
Uh, they are making it or we are
making it.
A truly professional
organization.
That, uh
Delves into issues and
hopefully.
does the best job that we can to
find that meeting between.
Affordable energy on the one
hand and on the other.
Continue to attract capital to
our state.
Uh, by rewarding those who take
the risk.
That's a fine line.
But that's the job that uh this
body.
Has charged that agency with.
That's our statutory obligation.
And so, after doing uh a lot of
investigation talking to a
number of people.
Uh, I threw my hat into the mick
was fortunate to make my way
through the process, which is
quite arduous.
And uh
30 days ago received uh
Come up to Santa Fe and, and to
take my role as a commissioner
subject. I'm pleased to have
been on the job for 29 days.
And uh I can tell you it's a
bigger job than what I even I,
I'm learning.
The time to to get up to speed
with look forward to the task. I
look forward to the challenges.
And
Frankly, we as a state have got
opportunity for our children and
grandchildren.
are dependent on the sea.
So, I thank you for the
opportunity and thank you,
Senator, before I go to
questions, we do have one person
who signed up in support, and no
one who signed up in opposition,
if I can ask Missy Courier to
come up and once again, state
your name for the record, even
though I just did so.
Welcome back to the table.
I'll take your
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Missy Currier, and as you've
already heard in a lot of what
was just said about Mr. Neibert,
I think there's two things that
stand out his diligence and his
kindness, kindness is diligence
is immense if and when he asked
you a question, you better bring
your A game, um, and he's very
Intent on finding the right
balance and ensuring that he can
continue to move to Mexico
forward. That's very admirable,
of course, from the business
sense and will bring so much to
the PRC, but more importantly,
his kindness, no matter who you
are, no matter where you come
from, no matter what questions
you have and bring to the table,
he will listen, he will comment,
and he truly means it when he
says, how can I help you? He
will bring immense value to the
PRC for all of New Mexico, and
we very much look forward to
working with him and with any
capacity, and congratulations.
Fingers crossed. Thank you, Ms.
Currier. Py a show of hands, is
there anybody else in attendance
in support of the country.
6, and by a show of hands,
anyone in opposition of the
country.
No, I have Senator Stephanics
who's on the list to speak. If
you can raise your hand if those
of you who want to speak,
perfect. Thank you, Senator
Sophanics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Stewart, Madam Pram,
and, uh, Senator Neibert for
being here.
Uh, and Madam Chair, of course,
um.
A couple of questions and thank
you, uh, Mr. Nibert for stopping
by my office to chat for a few
minutes and I'm pleased about
your appointment.
Uh, could you talk about what
you think should be the
relationship between the PRC and
the legislature.
Madam Chair, and Senator.
I think that that's a
Traditionally been a missed.
One of the statutory roles of
the commission.
is to communicate with the
legislative branch and the
executive.
As to
The public policy that you all
create.
And how
That public policy is being
implemented.
Its successes and its failures.
And we need to have that
dialogue with uh this body.
As well as with the uh
executive.
On how to move forward with
respect to issues that that we
see on a practical level.
So I think there needs to be
more governor.
Uh, when she was interviewing me
that she, she thought that.
That was maybe a role that in
place and I hope that the
commission will take advantage
of that.
I have, I'm sorry, we would like
to have ideas of
What we need to do for the PRC
to give you the authority to
carry out.
Some of the statutes that we
pass.
And in that vein, uh, what role
do you believe the PRC has with
the ETA.
The energy transition Act.
Madam Chair, and Senator
Stephanics, uh, the energy
transition Act, the obligation
of the public regulation
commission to enforce and
implement that law.
And so
Our role is to
Uh
See what the public policy is
as, as reflected in the law and
to enforce it.
To its full extent
To
Uh, implement the provisions
that you've given us some
discretion to to uh implement.
Uh, and to
report back
on
that will impact the state in
the future.
We need to be up, we need to
look at, uh, tweaking something
here and there to make sure that
All
served that they have the
affordable reliable energy that
they're dependent upon, and
frankly, the affordable reliable
energy that our state, I, I
think our role is as the three
commissioners is to
Implement and enforce the laws
that you, whether it's.
Thank you. And uh Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, Mr. Neibert, um,
I have encouraged the PRC to ask
for the budget that they need in
order to carry out all of their
duties.
And we have some um
Uh, solar projects that are
going large solar projects that
are going up in different parts
of our state and uh
Representative McQueen and I are
uh doing a bill on solar siding.
Where we would pass the
authority to the PRC. He develop
some standards.
And the issue is, and I
investigated this with your
staff earlier. The issue is that
we don't really have a
definition for utility size.
Versus industrial versus large
versus residential versus
community, etc. and so, uh, some
of them are down in Sandoval
County along Highway 14, some of
them are along my part of
Highway 14, and I'm sure it's
gonna be in other parts of the
state as well.
And so this is an example.
Where when the bill is
introduced or drafted, we would
like to have your input.
As to what
You all believe you and the
chief of staff, what you all
believe would be the role, and
what would be the appropriate
role of the PRC.
But Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chair,
I believe this is a very
qualified candidate. Thank you
very much.
Thank you so much, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you.
Mr.
Oh
I've known, um.
Of and have worked with.
Representative slash.
Senator Ibert for a number of
years.
Um
Other than, um,
But you have talked about today.
I, um
And, and I think there's was
spot on. Um.
As, as well as protein was in
your opening remarks.
The ability of the PRC.
To become integrated.
With legislature.
is paramount in my mind, if we
want.
Clean, affordable, reliable
energy.
We kind of started out um with a
mandate.
And we're now trying as, as the
ETA and we're trying to make
sure that it works for everybody
involved, and I think um I think
that is where a critical
juncture of making some real
decisions if either modification
or acceptance of, of
Energy, um, under those
circumstances.
I am um
I do believe that uh.
Your unique um historical.
Um, insight to the legislative
process.
Taking that to the PRC,
uh, sets the bar.
For us and the PRC to work
together going forward, and I am
very hopeful.
That, uh, you're successful in
making that bridge for all of us
to, to work together.
It, um, it's, um,
I think it's the biggest thing
on our, on our plate. Uh, we
have lots of, we got lots of
balls in the air, but that's
one, if you don't have real
solid.
Energy, affordable and
dependable. No businesses.
No home is is happy.
So I, um, I'm happy to fully
support.
Um, your, your confirmation and
your nomination.
And I do believe that it will
benefit all of us. So thank you
very much. I didn't have a
question. Well, I got a bunch of
questions for you, but I decided
I'd be nice to you today, but I
might not be that way on the
floor in a little bit, so be
prepared, sir. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator Senator
Gaos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
Senator slash
PRC commissioner neighbor, uh, I
wanted to start by asking you,
so earlier you talked about the
overwhelmedness of the new
position.
And just wondering cause uh you
know my history, I worked with
the gas company in Mexico for 30
years now. I'm a contractor and
so we damage.
lines, but uh I'm just wondering
on the PRC side, you have formal
training or is it more staff
giving direction, how are you
gonna acquire
The knowledge that you need to
carry this out.
Well, right now, uh.
I have been given stacks of
materials to read everything,
uh, so.
That today, that's been uh my.
My introduction is uh trying to
read not only statutes, but also
read how the office works, how
it's organized, and, and a lot
of those. I've also found that
unfortunately, uh,
The legislature has required me
to take 32 hours of ethics
courses, which so
I've spent
5 days now.
5 of the 29 days that I last,
uh.
Making sure that I get the
ethics portion and apparently
that was.
A former senator who's now mayor
of Albuquerque, Senator Keller,
are getting mad at the PRC and,
and upping the ethics
requirement, by the way, for you
lawyers, the
Ethics training.
That you receive from the state
bar does not count toward those
32 hours, so, so we're trying to
get those changed, uh, or at
least I made some notes to get
that changed, but anyway, um, so
right now it's been mostly
reading and meeting with, with
staff.
Particularly uh Miss Cory.
And trying to understand the
process, um.
The other commissioners have
encouraged me to a Western.
Conference for new
commissioners that they say is
excellent another meeting in.
In Washington DC for commission
in that as well. So there, there
is a lot of training that
Give me a lot of information.
But what I'm, what I'm seeing
is, uh, and, and part of what I
think my role is.
The commission, in my opinion,
needed a lawyer asking questions
right now why are we doing this?
Why are we doing that? I'm
probably driving Mr. Cameron
crazy and, and Miss Curry crazy
because uh of my, my questions,
but I, I just want to understand
why, why we're doing certain
things. Why is Mr. Cameron on
this side of the table when he's
my lawyer, that ought to be
helping me on that side of the
table.
Um
Simple questions like that, I
think, I think those questions
that we'll, we'll work through
those. So it's not only my
getting up to speed, but some of
the questions I'm asking is
probably causing the agency
itself to, to, to think about
some things and I think that's
probably healthy and good, and
we'll work through those things,
but right now, it's reading an
awful lot and uh trying to get
uh just observe.
The process much uh like the,
the new senators are doing right
now, uh, uh, drinking out of a
fire hose, frankly, uh, it's,
it's a lot of information very
quick and uh.
You try to absorb it the best.
Well, thank you for that, Mr.
Chair and chair.
And prote center slash uh I just
uh wanted to go back and uh
mention her or broad diligence
and uh we talked in the corner
over there earlier about, uh, me
bringing out the good and bad.
But the good and bad actually
work together as you were, I
think we've talked about before
when we served in the house
together.
Uh, there's a bill, and I think
the
Um, speaker.
Of the time did not like the
amount of time you took on
reading through the word and,
and there's a bill that he took
and.
Split it.
Over the word and so for the PRC
I'm gonna tell you uh reading
may not be a really good thing
for him, because he'll find
mistakes, but I, I think it's
helpful for us to understand
that you can get down into the
weeds.
And you can understand because
you're a legal background.
I'm on school board, I'm a
contractor, but I don't
understand the word and is three
letters that I brush over.
But I don't get into the weeds
while you do so I just wanted to
bring that up. That's my good
and bad. I'll probably use that
on the floor, but I just also
wanted to give me as far as
rules to understand the
relationship we had in uh May of
18, uh, we went to China to
represent New Mexico on some
contract negotiations and even
in China,
He could do
As good as well as the good and
bad he does in New Mexico.
In China, to be able to get them
to understand and there again, I
was in the learning phase, uh,
the importance of Rosal
airfield, the airport there.
Because Chinese ermine.
Like simulators, people that fly
if speak English also.
I did not ever realize that we
could bring them to New Mexico
and trained them to fly cause
My thought is
The Chinese stay over there, but
in, in insight, he's able to
bring stuff like that into the
light, so, uh,
I'm very grateful that you're
looking at.
This opportunity.
I look forward to working with
you and I hope that the good and
bad, even though it's on the
same topic, we'll reveal that
you at least bring out the truth
of the matter, so.
With that audio, thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Chair, um, first of all,
I don't know what to call you
based on your resume, um, slash,
I think, but I want to say, um,
congrats to you and your family,
and I want to thank you for your
many years of service here in
New Mexico.
And I think, um,
What really impresses me besides
your resume going back to the
Ford administration.
Um, what really impresses me is
your sponsor today, and we have
a bipartisanship sponsor with
our Senate prote, Senator
Stewart, so thank you for
sponsoring uh slash.
And uh that that right there
means a lot uh to me because we
need more of this in the
roundhouse, absolutely, so I
greatly appreciate you doing
that, Senator Stewart.
Um, I wanna just kind of echo
and say thank you to Senator
Stefaniks, uh, for your
questions on, on the roles and
relationships, and I think
that's critical, um, with the
PRC and the legislature. So, um,
that
That really hit home to me.
Um, but one of the things that
Senator Stephonics touched on,
um, but the question, I don't
think the question came out is,
as a PRC commissioner, do you
have any restrictions on
testifying any type of OCI
testifying on behalf or against
any of the bills in the
roundhouse as appears to be
commissioner, or you have to be
firewalled off from that.
Um
and Senator, I'm not aware of
any restrictions you're 32 hours
of ethics training that didn't
come up,
you know,
we would have to speak as a
commission.
OK, OK. So that's the question
you have to speak as a whole as
a commission, not individually.
I would think so. I mean,
you're, you're wanting
information from the commission.
Not from, from me and need to
have.
So, I would need some direction
from the other commissioners
to come up here.
I would need
Uh, I would think I would need
direction from them as to what
the position of the PRC OK.
Do you, does the commission plan
on doing that with any bills in
front of the House or the Senate
right now that you know of.
I think
I think we
do have bills that are in front
of uh front of the house and
spec that we will be up here,
uh, advocating for those
positions and uh I just want to
make sure I understand, so the
position.
Uh, is that
The, the PRC commissioners, the
three of them, they don't speak
individually, they speak as a
whole.
on legislation, whether they're
going to be for or against it,
do I have that right?
You're talking to a guy that has
29 days under his belt, but I
would.
I would analyze it
from the commission, you want
the commissions decisions, the
commission's perspective.
Not
OK, that's fair. We, we may, we
may have,
you know, some different views
on things, but you want the
position that the agency has,
which is only, uh, going to be
arrived at if the commissioners,
you know, charge somebody to
point of view
I don't know
because I would hope that the
three of us would have a
discussion, have a position and
that that's the position that
would be.
brought forward
To this body to, to the other
chamber as well as to the
governor's office.
Perfect. Thank you, sir. What's
the, uh, and I, I don't know the
other two commissioners, I mean,
I assume you do in your 29 days
there now, but uh I, I know your
experience looking at it. What's
the um makeup of the other two
with their experience.
Um
The chairman is
Patrick O'Connell and he is an
engineer by by training.
Comes to the commission with uh
I think great depth of
experience he worked for public
service company of New Mexico.
Western Resource advocates or
something, so he, he comes to
the commission with that
background and experience and I
can tell you.
all, all the, uh, both, uh.
So we have a lawyer, an
engineer, and what's the third
one
Commissioner Aguilera came to
back to New Mexico from Berk, he
was a commissioner at uh
commission and I came back here
so he had more of a policy
background, uh, I don't know
what his degrees are in, but,
uh, I think he's more from a
policy perspective and certainly
having that first.
Expertise to to our state
agents, again, both, uh, both, I
think.
What people
told me about.
These are professional.
People who want the
PC to be a professional
organization.
They don't want to have it uh
eroded by er commissioners and
and action, they're doing the
best we can.
I want to be a part of.
All right, so my last question,
and yeah, um, he, he does talk a
lot.
Yeah.
Um,
so lastly, has the
Mr. Nyberg has the PRC, um, are
they looking at um any nuclear
initiatives in the state in
regards to not stores, but
nuclear power that you know of.
Uh, I have not, uh, seen
anything or heard of anything
regarding nuclear and
My
Explanation looking to you all
to
provide my own personal
Opinion, well, well, I
Don't have any problems with
nuclear.
I, my view is that.
That's a hard sell and, and so,
uh, you know, I, I'm an all of
the above kind of person, uh,
myself.
But, uh, nuclear, I think is
something that you all are going
to have to deal with.
If we want to get to
zero emissions,
uh, you know, the courses that I
took as a legislator.
Uh,
legislative Energy Horizons
Institute.
The conclusion among some very
smart people nation do we
meet the, the critical energy
needs of their conclusion is we
have to embrace nuclear.
That's not my conclusion, that's
their conclusion. And so we as a
state, we want to.
uh
Demand
Energy demand is uh.
The
We're going to bring
we're swell to uh
Santa Fe
State Highway Department had to
make uh
Uh
additional wider turns, uh, at
the Corona cutoff because of the
quantity of.
Wind turbine blades and the
towers.
so that the big trucks can go
through and, and right now if
you go to Roswell during the
day, you're gonna have to stop
traffic control there.
So that these trucks can make
it.
On the Corona where they're
building an enormous.
the
Being built and uh we're going
to be able to harness.
A lot of wind power, but uh we
also know that occasionally.
It doesn't blow or corona we may
need to supplement. Well, I
definitely appreciate, um, sir,
your words, uh, your vast
experience, you know your way
around the roundhouse, you also
have that local government
experience as a county
commissioner.
Uh, which I think is extremely
helpful, uh, from my own
personal background, and I
definitely want to say thank you
for stopping by my office as
well to talk to me, um, you
know, one of the things you said
that stands out to me is.
You're in a above, you know.
All of the above type of guy
when it comes to uh energy here
in New Mexico, and I, I believe
that as well, um.
In a free market economy, we
definitely need that, so, um,
you get great experience. I got
your old office, you didn't dust
it when you left. I'm not gonna
hold that against you, but, um,
I appreciate you, um, your
service to the state, your
service here in Santa Fe in your
county, and um you get my full
support, sir, so thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Duhey. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Madam Protem,
Senator.
Um, I think it is a great loss
to the legislature that you are
not here anymore. And I too was
very much hoping to have you,
uh, with us in Judiciary and,
and really enjoyed you here on
rules, on policy matters. I
think you and I rarely agree,
uh, but you have always been
incredibly thoughtful, um,
Really
Done deep thinking and critical
thinking about issues that even
if I don't agree with the
position you're taking, uh, you
taking those positions and those
discussions, I think made
Policy better, um, and made me
think about things, uh, more
deeply, um, so I'm really sad
to, to not have you here, but I
am, I am glad that we get to
have you at the table here in
front of us today. Um,
I have heard concerns about
conflicts of interest. Uh, so I
would like, if you can respond
to those for us. I don't think
you have a conflict of interest,
but I'd like the public to hear
your response to those concerns.
Well, obviously, uh,
30 days ago I was a member of
the Hinkle Law.
And
I was
harder in that firm had been a
partner in the firm for.
Uh, 30.
35 associate attorney for 5
years, 4 years prior to that,
uh, so I have a
A long connection with, with the
Hinkel law firm for New Mexico
standard, it's a larger firm, we
have multiple offices, so the
Santa Fe office represent
several.
Parties that may appear before
the
I can, I can go in to long
history if you if you'd like,
but uh.
Uh, the Roswell office, uh.
Where I worked and spent uh all
of those 41 years.
Uh
My knowledge, nobody in Roswell
in the last half century has has
appeared.
Before the public regulation
commission or frankly, most,
most agencies that work is
handled out of.
Out of Santa Fe, uh.
So the, the, the issue.
could arise at uh you know, one
of my former partners, uh.
One of the former attorneys in
the law firm would have
mentioned.
And so the, the issue for a
lawyer.
would be
Uh, is that something that would
cause me not to be able to.
Independently evaluate.
The testimony independently
evaluate the information coming
in.
Would I be unduly persuaded by
Uh, the statement simply because
of a relationship with that
lawyer.
And uh
You know, the
The
Uh
Fact of the matter is, I think
I'd have to look at each case.
Individually and separately and
make that assessment is this?
I is this going to be something
that would cause
Not be able to.
Render an unbiased biased
conclusion based upon all the
evidence that's submitted.
And uh
A lot of that, I think for for
lawyers is going to deal with
the relationship that the lawyer
has.
Um
With that
Party. So
Uh, in looking at it, uh, well,
that.
If I'm sitting as a
commissioner.
And a lawyer from the Hinkle law
firm is, is in front of us.
I'd have to look at not just.
They're from the Hinkle law
firm, but I'd have to really
look at.
What is my relationship with
that person.
And is that relationship?
Going to uh cause extra in input
or insight that I wouldn't give
another lawyer, um, the, the
lawyer that I know of that
primarily does work is a lawyer
that I really don't have a
relationship with a personal
relationship with uh.
And so the, the question was
asked, you know, well.
Hardy or representing one of the
parties in this case.
He being a Hinkle law firm.
Attorney
would be the, the
We're all end all of that
decision of the conflict and
that my relationship with Dana
Hardy is, is uh very limited at
best.
Frankly, the lawyers that are in
this room right now. I, I, I
know.
The lawyers in this room better
than I know, uh,
so that, that's the analysis
that I would, it would, it would
have to be done whether it's a
Hinkel law firm lawyer or
Somebody else, uh, you know, you
have to look at all those
things, uh, do, do I have a
relationship with a party, not
just their counsel, but do I
have a relationship with that
party that would uh render me
unable, you know, as judges, I,
I think you, you have to, you
have to go through that
exercise.
Each and every, I'm prepared to
do that, you know, the, the
relationships that I have with
the lawyers in our Roswell
office.
For the most part, if, if they
appear to have to recuse myself
because I have
A deep, long seated relationship
with, with those individuals
some of my partners in the
Roswell office. I, I think I
would not be able to view, uh,
their, I would be giving them
some credit for personal
interactions with them over so I
think as, as judges have to do.
Other people have to look at
what is that real relationship
and what is that doing to my
mental
is that
Relation, I, I can.
Tell you that I'm prepared to to
do that analysis, if uh if those
things come up and
And I'll have to make uh make
judgments on a case by case.
And, and senator, Senator
Neibert, um, senators senators,
um.
Uh
That's why I have no concerns
whatsoever about a conflict of
interest with you. I have one,
every interaction I've ever had
with you leaves me only with the
impression that you have your
ethics are of the highest
caliber, uh, and 2.
Yes, you are doing, you would be
doing exactly the kind of
analysis that we would ask of
anyone in any adjudicatory
position in this state to do.
Um, so I just wanted to to.
Make clear that that I.
I do not have those concerns
and, and I want to give you an
opportunity to address them.
Um,
With Senator Block, you were
saying, you know, if, if the
legislature is asking us for our
opinion on something, we would
present that as a commission.
That absolutely makes sense. I'm
going to ask you about a couple
of personal, uh, opinions, um.
And so one of them we're on
Friday, I believe we're gonna
hear uh SB 109 in here, which is
a bill that
That to me it looks like it is
really just cleanups of uh of
PRC language other than in
saying, you know, for
rulemaking, you just follow the
State Rules Act. That seems to
be the most substantive thing.
And I, I don't know if you're
even familiar with the bill, but
if so, am I missing something
there? Is there, is there more
to this bill that I'm seeing?
Well, if I can look to my right,
is that OK. Yeah, I, I, I think
it is, is a cleanup bill and I
believe that the bill is also
trying to
Provide some
Clarity
As to the roles of the
commissioners.
And the role of the chief of
staff.
And
Uh
The PRC is a
Unique body.
There's people, there's people
in the office that I can't.
Um,
I can say hi.
When it comes to the work.
with people in the building
because.
Those people represent the
public interest before us.
And so it's a conflict of
interest for us to discuss.
Of cases pending for us because
they are advocating for them.
Um
And so I'm learning uh in fact,
one of the questions I asked
just to try to uh
I think it's clarify.
it's kind of like
you.
Um
I a while back, I, I worked on a
location approval.
Ah, a solar generating project
that And
One of the issues that I I
learned about in doing that work
was so you have the solar
generate generation,
then you also have the, the
battery storage.
Um, and our statutes, say you
need that location approval for
the, the generating, but not for
the battery storage. And when I
went to the, the hearing on, uh,
at the PRC on that.
This application that I had
worked on.
One of the chemist shows I can't
remember which one said, you
know, we should really look at
this because
If
If the environmental
considerations are important for
the generating uh portion of it,
then why aren't they important
for the battery storage part of
it as well. Um, and so I was
just curious what and I that
that would take a, I think a a
statutory change, uh, what I'm
curious if you have an opinion
on that.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
