Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee and I'll just
start by saying I'm feeling a
little rough we'll see how this
goes but you just have my phone
here Mr chairman I don't have a
computer and I don't have the
bill in front of me so I
apologize in advance.
I have to Senate bill twenty
seven two presents and it is the
role in fixed infrastructure
crisis response act this is yes
An idea that I am hoping to get
some additional information from
the committee to really make the
city a solid piece of
legislation it's a work in
progress so I'm not I'm not
necessarily hoping to get it
through today so much as begin
the discussions so the my intent
with this piece of legislation
was to create a fund for rural
and tribal and frontier.
Communities when there's a
crisis
instead of having to wait until
the legislature is in session to
get any quieter State support we
and respond to these crises
throughout the year and we know
that this last year we had a lot
of fires a lot of flooding
across New Mexico a lot of rural
communities for hit particularly
hard in rural communities we
know that we don't have the
capacity to necessarily go after
funds that were eligible for we
don't have matching dollars
often to be eligible for for
federal funds that require that
match so this would go a long
way in providing additional
support for rural communities
and with that Mr chair I'm happy
to answer questions and have a
discussion about the bill thank
you senator so the start of the
audience is there anyone here in
support of Senate bill twenty
seven.
Anyone opposed.
It affects everybody on.
F. Medicare's a couple people
before okay.
The computers.
Of.
Road is.
You can see.
Yeah so any other comments
don't.
Of the thank you share a I don't
know if the sponsors here us
in here can hear you
you.
Isn't it.
Senator grace concern but also
in the FY all our.
Talks about the
As a result created this
standalone Fund.
So we may lose out on federal
dollars for similar purposes.
