L. S. resident.
Senator Griggs here.
Senator Hamlin.
Center our meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Center my Estes.
Senator Neville.
Senator oh now.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Center city a lot this year
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart your senator Tom
in.
Senator Wirth your Senator
to be given this morning by
senior pastor Greg Schneeberger
Christ's church of Santa Fe
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be let
Senator Bobby Gonzalez the
salute to the flag to be led by
Senator Woods.
Let's pray together.
called to serve in this place
made in your image and in doubt
with knowledge and
righteousness.
to a place of confession about
all my own needs and thinking
about everybody in this room in
their their life their families
their loved ones.
All the things that are going on
Right or that you would give
them wisdom you would give them
discernment.
And we're the would you would
give them rest are you would
remind remind each of us that
But this.
And as you said to give your
life as a ransom.
For many it income the lorded
over eight income to the
come from great families and
didn't look cleaned up or didn't
have you know generational
heritage lands but had basically
been forgotten.
be a place where justice and
love rain.
So I pray for your truth and
your love in your goodness to
for us in a place from which we
might not finish but begin the
work that you have given these
your servants to do today the
lord is my shepherd I shall not
righteousness for his name's
sake.
Even though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death I
will fear no evil for you are
with me your rod and staff they
comfort me.
goodness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life and I
shall dwell in the house of the
lord for ever may that be true
here today we pray in the name
of the father the son and the
correctness and the we're gonna
see on on does that deals in the
state of the on the left on a
hostess help articles.
Good Monday morning everyone
will go to senator Peter Wirth
for the first order of business
thank you madam president good
morning to you and good morning
to the members
the and a unanimous consent to
go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection we are
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you madam
president thank you senior
prayers and again I very much
appreciate the.
Reference to our lives outside
of this place that don't stop
because we're here and it kind
here but we're certainly
thinking about them
as well and getting to the other
side of this
Madam president I yield first to
Senator Padilla and then just a
Seeing no objection will allow
change cameras in the chamber
today thank you madam president
unanimous consent to excuse
president today is culture day
at the legislature sponsored by
the department of cultural
affairs and I understand senator
everything on the agenda for the
members today on third reading
we're going to do items one
through nine in that order and
is here today's culture day and
I think that's sponsored by
department of cultural affairs I
think I've got you making some
remarks on that so let me yield
I see senator Byrd there first
and then we'll figure out where
of you being here today because
it is cultural affairs day and
of course I hope everyone knows
that the
New Mexico museum of space
high beautiful gold windows that
reflect the sunset each and
every day and it is absolutely
beautiful place we invite each
history I would like to
introduce you to android R. two
D. two.
This young droid is part of the
sci fi in sci fi fact exhibit
fact but also how the real world
of science and technology then
it redirects what is created in
science fiction these two realms
the time between Salem and
fantasy and science fiction in
reality is truly connected and
so if you would like to get a
even alcohol once we get it back
to the hall.
Live long and prosper.
Sounds like a lot to say this
morning.
Right.
I would like to see madam
president that this body and and
support and right now we're very
excited because of the museum
has a lot of connections with
the Smithsonian with NASA and
nature that will all of a lot of
them going this year and in the
years to come and it is going to
be a wonderful museum once again
we hope everybody will come to
well who is right here making
sure that R. two D. two is
taking care of thank you madam
president remember cultural
affairs day today and also the
New Mexico museum of space
Senator Padilla thank you very
much madam president I had a
question if Senator Burt would
yield.
Do you you'll Senator Burt.
Yes I would be more than happy
I don't know if you was there or
not I could not tell you for
sure I'd I don't think so he's
not much of a party your he's
more of a doer thank you madam
preservationists moving around
I really address that so thank
you for the question now thank
you very much madam president I
just really want to thank
senator Byrd for continuing on
our pattern to bring in new
technology
team first security robots here
about a while back couple weeks
ago and I think this is terrific
that in a bipartisan fashion
madam president we are helping a
I grow in New Mexico thank you
senator Byrd.
to thank Senator Gonzales for
entrusting me to carry three of
his bills and is absent so
Senator I'm happy you're back
and hope you're feeling well
thank you madam president.
Senator Gonzales will come back
thank you madam president no to
all the members and
Of those a very warm.
and the just a word of caution
student to everyone of this
thing is very real you know and
second time of just sharing with
the members of how real this
thing is one of the one night I
couldn't even drink water.
And that's how I ended up in the
of us to protect ourselves and
to protect everyone around us
and yes patient as we can with
people but let him know that you
Senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president
just I'll say a couple things
about culture day given the
our economy here in northern New
Mexico in really throughout the
state I think senator Byrd
focused on the museum in his
area we've got just an
extraordinary museum system in
our state and I think it's one
the return on investment here is
huge and again we have a museum
system that I think is the envy
and thank the department of
cultural affairs for their
advocacy and continued work
along those lines
I think what we will do madam
I do see Senator Woods madam
president.
Senator what's.
Who do you know we had a very
And I just want to say madam
president that if.
What a.
Great thing.
To have Senator Gonzalez back.
all of a sudden we get to come
back in and experienced so many
good things that few people give
madam president district where.
A little bit of a spiritual
enlightenment from the Bible.
And it says.
cunning and craft is cracked
phone us up to speed for.
Plotting but speak the truth in
it is our job.
To to try to determine the
pathway of the state of New
Mexico.
Ideas in our head at least be
able to discuss them and bring
them forward.
Madam president thank you so
much.
Seeing no objection the Senator
Brandt will be able to debate a
also want to welcome Senator
Gonzales back
again as someone that was down
for the week with COVID the same
time he had it I certainly
have to take very very seriously
even after I vaccinations for me
the third time I've had it and
it definitely.
Took a shot at me and it
to do one through nine what
we'll do first is just there's
some messages up there unanimous
that we go about our business
messages from present.
wants one any staff wants one
closely here on my desk for
sorting by pick one up thanks
members of thank you senator
Morris right now all will go
Members are also doing PCR tests
and and I appreciate the center
Moores I I do know sometimes on
the rapid test you won't test
again the test results sometimes
may show negative when in fact
you've actually got it and just
confirming that so then
president Ms because that we got
our business messages from the
for House joint resolution eight
and request the concurrence of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa and Marty's
McCutchen chief clerk messages
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty nine as amended
by the house.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five fifty as amended by
the house.
Bill five thirty three and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk.
The messages from the house will
be entered into the channel
business senator Wirth thank you
madam president so I was just
told the PCR tests are with the
EMTs were just upstairs on the
second floor of the north side
into third reading items one
through nine we will if we do
get committee reports are when
we get committee reports will
take a break and come back and
one Senate bill sixteen create
health care authority department
seeing no objection were on
third reading of legislation
Senator Stefanics thank you
madam president I ask unanimous
amendment or substitution
Senator Stefanics to explain the
bill thank you madam president
this is a bill for the executive
consolidate the purchasing and
negotiating power to lower
healthcare costs by providing a
single unified Department to
director with nine divisions the
cabinet secretary would be
appointed by the governor and
approved by the Senate.
The Senate bill sixteen remove
of forty include the commission
on the status of women the group
budget committee and the New
Mexico health policy commission.
Related to the desired goal of
Services Department which is
state employees The New Mexico
public school insurance
authority and the retiree health
care sorority Senate bill
sixteen includes a temporary
order is anticipated to further
delineate the organizational
structure the power and duties
of the health care a sortie
Department and to move divisions
twenty twenty three a final
reorganization report to the
legislature is due January one
twenty twenty four transition
plans include the department of
executive branch branch has the
power to establish new
departments and re organize
other governors have created
under executive powers the aging
Apartment the intent of Senate
bill sixteen is to save money
and health care costs health
insurance and to provide greater
access to health care madam
president I stand for debate
Thank you Mr president and have
not heard this bill so I do have
a question if the sponsor will
yield.
Well you you madam president I
schools in Nicosia.
Those two in particular concern
me a little bit because
currently that independence
their insurance coverage and
those of us that live on the
borders of the state whether
you're on the eastern side the
western side of the southern
northern part of the border many
Thanks premiums for are employed
and employees with the our
districts pay more for insurance
is due to that cost and so can
concerns that I have with regard
to to cost savings and because
cost savings is generally done
by the limiting access perhaps
out of state physicians and
able to protect those employees
for school districts around the
state that access care outside
of New Mexico.
the state on on and on the east
side of the state to our
retirees at cetera but this plan
of this bill madam president is
be voting madam president and
senator on any of further
requirements for the department
they are to present their
reorganization and I think that
duly noted are your concerns and
the concerns for all the people
on the borders of our state.
Thank you Mr president madam
all of these things to fall
under without really knowing the
details in the authority that
perhaps we take it away from
both APS as well as the.
to access I I I just wish I had
more sure it's because it
appears to me that that this is
going to be a more universal
health care outcome down the
road maybe not in this bill but
are going to be carried forward
after the shell is formed and
then down the road when we
actually are giving that
authority to the department that
the main goal is cost savings
unduly so thank you very much.
Thank you senator other debate
on Senate bill sixteen.
back and when we contract with
the providers we do make sure we
get the lowest cost and we also
provide for all persons and the
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the rules been called and all
those present vote in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
Saying no well.
Right Senators we are on Senate
bills being.
Senators we're voting on Senate
bill sixteen two years suits if
you wish to vote no please raise
Moores voting no Senator Burt
voting no.
Senator thank us voting no.
Senator share voting no.
voting no senator Sanchez voting
no Senator Diamond voting no
Senator Schmedes voting no
Senator creeks voting no.
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative fourteen in the
negative Senate bill sixteen has
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions were placing Senate bill
Senator Shendo to explain the
bills thank you madam president
Senate bill four seventy four
this is a brought to me by
the most Carroll school
of tax payments were distributed
to school districts by counties
or municipalities issue
industrial revenue bond for
renewable projects.
twenty twenty one.
We change the law.
The requested by counties
required that bill payments be
divided equally between all
twenty twenty one law did not
create and and and equitable
solution in fact they created
more in equity and so what this
bill does is
district and then also
Allows for
Okay.
It's a three pronged approach
fifty percent of the district of
proportion of geographic
footprint of each school
district and in ten percent
based on the proportion student
Roman of the school district so
Seeing none Senator Shendo to
close I move that sent the.
Bill for seventy four with the
show of hands Senators tier
states those wishing to vote no
please raise your hands on
Senate bill four seventy four.
Senate bill four seventy four as
amended with the emergency
clause has duly passed the
Senate Senator Shendo thank you
madam president and members of
the body.
actions placing Senate bill
three three four on final
passage has been taken and it is
now open for debate amendment
and substitution Senator Diamond
to explain the bill thank you
largest wildfire in New Mexico
history and although the U. S.
Forest Service didn't claim
ownership for that fire
responsibility it is because of
because of you just for service
didn't claim responsibility we
have received no federal funds
and no outside assistance and so
assistance to we'll rebuild
bridges and dams and a state
kias and and ditches we are here
today this bill before you
from flood water conservation
districts from our local clogs
and from our counties and so all
of these projects are shovel
ready and much needed in our in
our communities that have
impacts as a result of the fire
Senator Hemphill
right.
Thank you madam president and I
just wanted to express my
gratitude for this opportunity
to work together with my
flooding and also wanted to
compliment Senator Diamond on
her impeccable fashion sense
today she's looking particularly
bipartisan.
Seeing none Senator Diamond and
create him tell to close.
Thank you madam chair I am move
that Senate bill three three
four do now pass and I ask
bill three thirty four to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
By a vote of forty in the
we receive from Grant County and
also would like to express our
gratitude to the lieutenant
governor who was instrumental
this summer and helping us get
the emergency resources that we
need thank you madam chair madam
president thank you.
and ask Miss consent that Senate
election for placing Senate bill
three four ninety four as
amended on final passage is now
subject debate amendment
substitution.
opportunity we're seeing these
large increases in in
universities in some areas not
in all sectors of the two years
schools were less than six
percent increase over the same
what we're saying in this bill
is if you come with the tuition
increase you're gonna have to
justify it to the higher ed
secretary and if it's
forty to reduce their I. Angie
and that percentage is the
increase so that way we know
that kids are treated fairly on
tuition rate increases there's a
extended library hours the
secretary can then say those are
justifiable expenses we agree
with them but if they're not
just a file those expenses than
Thank you madam president
Is the higher education
department request this with the
sponsor yeah please madam chair
Madam president and center in
conjunction with the higher ed
secretary and talking about
tuition increases I think there
alignment with us I don't think
with them it's how do we how do
we make sure that everything
just a file expense in higher ed
is there.
their doors open for students if
they are under funded and don't
have a mechanism of raising
tuition and afterwards.
You madam president center we
did a bill a day or two ago
hundred twenty four million in
R. P. S. piece R. P. S. P.'s
were designed after three year
rollout to roll into I. Angie
but now they become a
working and we know that there's
cost inflation we know that
operating costly gliding gas
basic costs are going to be a
very easy explanation increased
Women that work for me and my
officer going to nursing school
their books just their books
alone the tuition was free but
just their books alone more
we're twelve hundred dollars for
the semester in the nursing
justification for the cost of
their printing costs is it is a
cost but we need to know what
the real costs are to the
students and this is a way for
us to look at universities and
cost of books go up I think
those are independent aren't
they.
Some presence in I I don't know
books are independent but if
it's a cost it's not a tuition
increase but it's an
Madam president I don't think
books would be covered under any
of this how much is tuition gone
up over the last five years that
our universities.
colleges from twenty nineteen
to
Currently there's about a six
percent increase I don't have
that she from the cell number
and try to remember the numbers
increase fees hopefully my
offices listening because I have
that paper my file and I don't
have it now but it varies by
inflation gone up over that same
time from two thousand nineteen
to two thousand twenty two I
think you indicated that things
gone up six percent how much is
inflation gone up.
universities I wish I had that
paper and I hope they're
listening and CPI has gone up
about I I'd have to look at
eleven percent some universities
percent it seems like
universities have a much larger
increase that they need to cover
than what they're getting funded
what this seems to do is to
allowed to do that I think it's
a bad idea takes away the board
of regents who are responsible
for any tuition these types of
increases but have a
their budget is viewed indicated
madam president Senator that
there's a bill to study this
anticipated cost of tuition fees
are and calculate instruction
purposes for the fiscal coming
fiscal years they give them here
in advance to look at their
costs where they think need to
percent or they come in with an
eight percent increase in sales
we need eight percent because we
didn't do this.
In the other comment at six
percent was was two year schools
because I'm guidelines justify
it to the secretary of HUD.
And make sure that the fees are
and and tuition increases or in
Madam president Senator over the
last three years or so have the
university's been fully funded
with their requests to the
finance committee.
ways for each university that we
don't know there's a sheet I
have in my office where over ten
year period in certain
really knows so are we signing
them correctly is the real
answer we need to pass the study
the second thing is when we
fully fund opportunity and we're
four year institutions they did
about eleven point three percent
increase overall that was above
CPI.
From twenty twenty two period
increase over three year period
on the four year institutions
well some of the two year
institutions only were it to two
point two percent
a total of about twelve point
four percent up in a twenty in a
two year period increase on
higher ed universities.
then to put in something that if
after the budgets are set if the
university feels and that would
be their board of regents that
makes the determination that a
tuition and fees is not in the
best interest of higher
education which is in the
business of economic development
through research through job
that's being done certainly
needs to be done so that we know
ahead of time I did vote against
this particular building
committee for the reasons that
I've been stating I think it's
fully understanding how much
that funding is how much it
should be and not trying to put
in a penalty of universities
feel that they need to raise
there requests have gone under
funded and they've had to figure
out a way to make up for those
monies this essentially is
taking away that mechanism from
those universities and I would
amendment Senator Schmedes to
move the amendment.
The then president elect New
sent foreman number one is
Senate bill four ninety four as
a minute.
Senator Schmedes to explain them
on.
The message then present just a
just a type of their it says the
manuals.
That's grammatically correct
Allah I think it's a good
amendment.
So I think I heard that a
friendly amendment from the
I'm sorry Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
we're on an amendment.
Madam madam chairman and madam
there a committee sober
something.
It in mind the L. just read
exactly what mine says on page
two lane one eight.
it's not a typographical error
it's a it's a graphical error
thank you.
At the amendment is page two
line eight even though you can
barely tell that it's an eight.
The members only to move sent
important number one isn't bill
for ninety four as amended and
a ask for voice for.
Those opposed nay the eyes have
it.
The bill is adopted the
amendment is adopted back on
debated the bill.
I did not see this neither the
the committees I'm on review
this particular piece of
legislation but it it did seem
to me that just the other day we
Committee authority to to deal
with higher education issues and
then
I notice in the comments of
the interim this is this is
rushing into action with a
solution to a problem that may
or may not exist.
education study committee to
take a look at higher education
issues seems to me that this is
a much more complex bill issue
P. programs are the SP of under
research project and special
research and special projects
programs.
As if that was somehow an
that did we as legislators as
representatives of the community
ask them to do we want their
expertise used in something
a request from us to do and so I
think we're mixing apples and
oranges by trying to conflate
the the.
Those special research and
community projects somehow and
this is a much more complex
issue than to simply say if
you're gonna raise tuition
you've got to come back to us
and we're going to deduct that
from what we've already given
you I think that's a heavy
inflation and the fact that
research universities have
expenses the branch colleges
don't have they are trying to to
to do a lot more things than the
state either they've asked the
Legislature to us them to
undertake for the they're
responding to a national
account not just a very crude
attempted saying well they've
increased by Sliq percent and
the branch colleges only by this
percent that that's a
committee with to the study and
then to come back with some
recommendations this a little
better thought out than this
thank you.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I see no objections sergeant of
arms to escort the secretary
into the chamber.
you madam president to the other
states around us have any kind
of mechanism like this to to
stop
Universities from raising
them justify your increases to
us so if you read the bill on
page two you're looking notice
that they have they have to show
their costs and sure what their
tuition increases are to the
Angie but to go back to a few
sentences later by the good
center for Albuquerque is that
R. P. espys were designed for a
three year program to roll into
I. Angie what's safe never done
G. in those universities to
increase their I. Angie so that
those programs are still there
and sustainable not relying on
our P. S. P.'s
utilities up ten percent student
transportation ten percent
student health care ten percent
and then overall you roll that
number in the state these are
mechanism like this that is at
the very end of the process
after there have been hearings
of within the university's
Senator manuals madam president
no we don't know about any other
mechanisms but if you look in
Arizona there's one set of board
board regions control those
three universities so I imagine
they they talk about what rate
increases are what increases are
throughout the state they
Arizona does not offer a lottery
opportunity in the last year
when we did that the higher ed
institutions increased their
costs by eleven percent in one
the big question that we're
trying to answer today.
Thank thank you madam president
what is our average state
tuition and the universities
Madam president according to
expert witness our state is
about eight thousand a year for
a four year institution about
Thank you madam president so
what is the problem if forced to
mission is lower than the states
surrounding us.
what is the problem that we're
to resolve and not solve is if
an institution has a justifiable
increase.
And it's utilities gas whatever
of books went up maybe the cost
of new computers went up maybe
they need to replace a computer
system and that we didn't find
them or they don't have the
funds to do that those are
institution says they want to
buy an airplane or they want to
they want to do something that's
totally.
Out of out of on this that they
those kids that want opportunity
that are poor and just want to
welding certificate that just
want to try to get associates
are we keeping our costs and
control so that we don't block
them out with universities
Present at I mean it's a
reaction to what every time we
see when we increase lottery or
lease first our lottery saw
tuition increase.
using the university at the same
cost of pop the costs should
decrease but that's not what
we're seen.
Madam president of.
This is the first time I see the
universities but I find this
bill of.
Addressing a non problem at this
point if we have a study that
says that the universities are
be some action taken
it and and that is our
responsibility to review it it's
also the regents
responsibilities to review those
one of the the one of the things
that the sponsor mentioned was
the R. S. of what our our PSP's
those programs he said that they
Indian Law Center has been for
me for many many years that is a
completely different problem
from this particular
problem that we're trying to
address I've been busy texting
various people to see the if
they.
heavy hand to deal with the a
problem that isn't even in the
tuition it's it's the the
problem of the.
with that Madam present I just
have to state I I stand in
opposition to the bill although
I think the sponsor for
highlighting the issues.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Ingle.
president will he does.
Present Senator my analysis.
Our analysts to.
Four of the higher education
institutes like university New
Mexico seventeen nine northern
New Mexico is forty six point
referring to a different she's
not at the F. I. R. I do believe
we have that I know that over a
ten year period we went and
looked in LOC and see what the
there you may know what eastern
supplemental funding was because
we're not funding I NG correctly
was over and told me this number
is about thirteen percent in
balance even more by doing that
to certain universities and so
when they come back and say I'm
short I'm short the whole time
and then we look back at the at
the time line you say these
Representative center are still
don't see much of an answer
there I I'm just curious I'm not
being critical of your answer
but some more surely I've got a
free we've got to figure there
experience in doing this and I
was just curious
If you'd like to I can do a
little more work owner maybe
your expert can come up with
something here but of her
we were on this.
Senator then yes Mr president I
I do have a sheet and handed to
me and I can get a copy is a
good center but from two
was a tuition increase of two
thousand ninety seven and fees
of one million two hundred
seventy two.
Any further debate on Senate
bill four ninety four.
Senator Schmedes the settlement
present just a quick comment you
and the education sector the
higher ed secretary they're
dominated by government third
party payment.
This is why the prices are going
instead of this we need to be
doing we we telling our higher
ed people are higher ed
institutions you have to take
some responsibility in the
success of the students after
you're gonna consider shackling
that person to debt.
Well what happens after the
leader institution is just up or
down we got the tuition we got
boost you to a full time job
section to help you pay off that
debt.
That should be part of the
accrediting process it should
also be part of the state of New
the game for adding success to
those patients are getting away
from so much as third party
payment and then just kind of
forgetting about the graduates
I'm not saying that the the the
schools are forgetting about the
graduates but I'm saying tied
can do to actually start
addressing the root cause of the
the increase in intuition in in
our state and and also I I think
transparency and what the the
our ally is going to be for the
for these investments and even
even having tiered system for
tuition not just not just
charging per hour but actually
on and be able to provide for
themselves and pay off their
debt but to be very careful it
may sound kind to give someone
alone to go to college degree
Thank you any other debate.
Senate bill four ninety four.
Senator share.
Thank you madam president I know
that.
To yield senator Munoz careful.
Madam president I think all
yield with it limiting to the
the good Senator to the top ten
responses.
discussion was wrapped around
our P. S. P.'s and how those
were supposed to be temporary
until it rolled into the I.
Angie but there.
is one percent of I. Angie so
free to roll those into I NG the
universities would had almost a
thirty percent increase in I. N.
increase in I. N. G. and to the
good Senators point you know we
are funding school higher ed
institutions based on
tuition wouldn't have to go up
because we would have world this
money into them in the eye in G.
already.
And
take out of the weird category
does that sound right Mr madam
president Senator Madam presence
Senator that I wish there
there's no word category in the
Eastern shore because of the
number of I think need and so
same with western and they come
and say we want one more we want
more and then we find them in a
higher rate different and I NG
if you have to have a tuition
increase in their justifiable
the secretary will allow those
but if you're just gonna have a
tuition increase just haven't
officially have a section eleven
of weird stuff we do have our PS
piece which all the people in
the world don't know what we're
talking about there in fact half
people in maybe three course
people in rural don't know what
necessarily bad but why aren't
they part of just the funding
for the school I mean none of my
don't think are bad
so one of the things is in here
dollars a month you it I mean
here to to you NM but if you
took that and put it in the eye
in G. we don't need all of
these.
madam president and senator do
you have any idea how many of
these.
Of our PS piece that exist out
there and what's the smallest
one that you know of missed
present.
fourteen thousand dollars but we
don't know what the R. F. R. P.
SP does the next us most one I
think was about thirty thousand
R. P. S. P.'s was role that
inner I. Angie so there I. Angie
goes up and it's not leaving out
there hanging and if we want to
do something new and innovative
sense and how do you handle a
hundred institution.
So so madam president I.
You know as as we heard this in
finance that made a lot of sense
instead of these.
dollars
But if we just took this money
of at least a significant
portion of this money and put it
in the I. Angie now the
In the I. N. G. you get to spend
it how you want you got it.
But don't raise tuition at least
not right away because we have
lottery scholarship keep up to
now we've got the opportunity
scholarship.
And.
What we don't want to do is just
raised tuition raise tuition
putting money in the
universities.
With the cabbie out says okay
don't go crazy please.
We want you to take care of the
Don't raise tuition without
without the.
Operating body at least having a
look at it.
cut the universities are good or
harm the universities or higher
ed this is just trying to make
it so that it makes financial
sense to the appropriators.
And then we can go through these
But if it does and it's been
doing it for three years put it
in the eye in G..
Just cleans up the the.
The financial accounting of all
they're not prohibited from
doing anything else.
But we've got all these are
PSP's and other specials out
there that are really muddy and
up the situation so that we as
that's not what this is about
this is about cleaning up all of
these and just it is an example
this first page that no one can
read.
page of I don't know.
Type six font of all the R. P.
S. P.'s so why not roll into the
I. Angie or at least those who
Thank you Sir further debate on
Senate bill four ninety four.
Seeing no debate.
Senator Munoz to close.
the student increase in there
was about three thousand
students to share overall and so
as they got the divisional
students the cost should be
lower because they're serving
number one thing here is when we
did lottery a few years ago I
think a lot of the increased
over time a hundred and thirty
eight hundred twenty three
knowing that they going into an
institution knowing that what
their tuition is going to be and
that we can have some control
over what their costs are going
to be
more kids leave home their
tuition costs go their books for
fees costs go up that they don't
plan for their something they
want to do just let us look at
it let us justify it to the
present I amount I do now that
Senate bill two for ninety four
as amended by do now pass and
pass this consenus and that the
record show the rules being
called and all those present
bill four ninety four just by
cemented to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Ingle voting no Senator
voting no Senator Diamond voting
no Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting
no Senator McKenna voting no
Pirtle voting no Senator Hamblen
voting no Senator Wirth voting
no Senator Stefanics.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Well as of twenty three in the
Senator manuals it was a close
one man present.
Thank you.
Let's move on.
one twice amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
Senator Hamblen to explain the
for metropolitan redevelopment
basically this will enable local
jurisdictions to collect up to
seventy five percent of the
incremental city county and
state property in gross revenue
that money is used for economic
development in their areas this
bill gives those communities
autonomy over whether their
monies are directed and how it
can directly help them and
areas that are in need this is
an opportunity madam president
for areas that have M. R. A.'s
and also encouragement for
communities that don't to gather
community input create a plan
centres we're improvement is
needed and rural communities
that do not have an MRA but are
in desperate need of economic
development in at this point
madam president I would like to
could you take their
conversations outside.
Senator Kernan thank you madam
president I certainly am in
favor of this bill and
them to do an expansion of what
they're already doing but more
importantly one small community
that are represented number of
years ago had a very small
grocery store that basically
believe in any event it will
help those communities that have
that area in their community
that they need to redevelop that
would have helped that
fifty one.
When did you just for someone
else yes madam president my
other co sponsors Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt sorry sometimes
hard to see you sitting down.
know even for newer city like
Rio Rancho was probably our new
city in the state and yet even
in our city we have several
it's about sixty years old for
some of our classes and some of
those areas and honestly most of
the areas that need to be or
redevelop to ride along I twenty
get them back into serviceable
space
so this is a a bill that I think
will help all of our communities
with redeveloping those areas
that need to be brought back up
us co sponsor together and here
we have another bipartisan bill
so thank you.
Thank you other debate on Senate
bill two fifty one Senator Wirth
midtown campus and again this is
an important bill just to give
one additional option to our
city council to consider as that
area gets redeveloped so again
Seeing none Senator Hamblen to
close thank you madam president
body in my co sponsor Senator
Kernan and Senator Brandt the
passage of Senate bill two fifty
one as amended provides access
location in Albuquerque to
redevelop and revitalize to
bring new and existing
businesses as well as the
opportunities for rural
communities to begin planning
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senators we're voting on Senate
bill two fifty one is twice
amended to your seats if you
Senate.
Senator Hamblen thank you madam
president thank you my co
sponsors I appreciate this being
a bipartisan effort truly our
communities will be benefiting
unanimous is that we go about
our business committee reports.
Seeing no objection we are on
that order of business committee
reports three or treat.
consideration and report same
with recommendation that a do
pass and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually.
The reader saying no objection
the reader to read all the
committee reports.
passed as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
The house bill twenty six as
amended do pass and that's
House bill forty eight to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill seventy five as
substitute for house bill ninety
feet ninety I do pass.
House bill one of six do pass
and that's referred to the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose may I just have a
committee report is adopted.
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senators
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman.
upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports Senate bill five
seventeen do not pass but that
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill five
health and public affairs
committee.
Senate memorial thirty eight do
pass in this referred to the
conservation committee.
Senate memorial forty four do
referred to the Education
Committee.
House bill two seventy four as
amended do pass.
health and public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator do it then
present move committee reports.
were acted upon individually.
Senator Wirth were done with
committee reports thank you
Third reading of legislation
Senator Hickey.
Thank you madam chair.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
amendment or substitution
Senator Hickey to explain the
bill.
First madam chair I have a
amendment that's being passed
out it corrects a grammatical
move them and I move I move the
amendment I move Senate floor
amendment number one number two
to Senate bill two seventy three
a reader to read Senate floor
Madam chair this being an
insurance bill it has four
sections doing with two group
twenty the word to was left out
after compare both so it's
compare bowl to and
line twenty and again repeats
Twenty eight seed line twenty
one and section thirty eight C.
line twenty four the ads were to
after compare but madam chair
and I move that the amendment be
amendment Senator Hickey to
close.
Thank you for a the amendment
and that it do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the role as the voice vote and
and do it by voice vote thank
seventy three as amended
although some favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed nay the amendment
is adopted back on the bills
that was initially sponsored by
senator Domenici in two thousand
and eight and it has been added
into one bill and I also want to
mention that Senator Hemphill is
my co sponsor on this bill.
The basically what it does is it
seek help and currently most
health plans have eight hundred
numbers or some sort of
permission to go through this
allows them to go directly to
difficult stringent and prior
authorization for other areas
and mental health treatment then
what is used for medical
and process to assure that our
health behavioral health
providers are paid at similar to
our surrounding states and
the OSI to work for a year with
the health plans very
collaboratively to put together
all of the medical necessity
which is based on behavioral
health associations together put
it put together and then it does
provide for the O. S. side have
staff to help them write the
bill and to enforce it and that
percent bill two seventy three.
Senator share.
Madam president I would yield to
anybody that wants to debate.
Yes okay Senator Woods.
Thank you.
Woods eight we had quite a bit
of discussion in and Senate
finance about this bill and and
so the question is our last
And we talk about the adequate
provider networks and I showed
you my concerns about well very
rural communities and and you
shall we do when in the bill it
says.
That they will find a.
Hey
now we've got very limited
people in an area so it's going
to be non profitable for someone
Madam chair and senator would
thank you for that excellent
question there certainly are
very remote areas but as
Telemeds progresses and as
federal law moves to make it
again it's getting those
providers adequately
compensated for doing that
provide those services so that's
how we would try to get the
network adequacy and I think in
in many areas particularly with
rates many of them may actually
settle into some of those areas.
Senator Woods are thank you
madam chair.
Telemedicine network madam chair
Senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you madam chair and
and the dispensing are riding to
pharmacies I believe that they
they have that ability the
clinical social workers do not
be brought in if the individual
was not licensed to prescribe
medicine.
I'm assuming that that with out
this law telemedicine wouldn't
be available in these areas for
that could you give me a little
more.
madam president.
Madam president and Center would
screw great question
telemedicine is is doable it's
incentivizing the plans to say
services could we make them
available as patients call in to
the health plan to find out
where they can get the care so
it isn't that this bill enables
Thank you for that in in madam
president if if I could ask one
more.
Is there any concerns of from
madam president and senator
thank thank you madam chair and
senator woods
the
developing a kind of a central
Center of truth of networking
for all clinicians that's coming
through something being done in
and in doing so you'll be able
to meet adequacy now in terms of
the cost what's very interesting
when I presented a bill a couple
health to the substance use and
and and mental health conditions
are stabilized the co morbid
chronic conditions Senator Woods
down and actually they will
actually save money in the
health plans and this is been
demonstrated in California was
to the actual customer that's
buying the plan and how those
cost you you're going to expand
the service by requiring this to
that those costs will actually
go down if we.
Incorporate a a total.
Medical.
providers out there now know
your company telemedicine but we
don't have the providers the
first step providers the the
very first one that that we can
people in the clinics and we've
got PTA's.
We've got a little bit of.
Of the very first person you go
And so I worry about that whole
process and madam chair you
you've figured out but now I
know very little about mental
right now and I'm going to be
quiet thank you madam chair.
Thank you for your great
questions Senator Woods other
debate.
disagreement over this but just.
My my quick take is you know
we've seen several bills
that they're gonna say we are
gonna make you save money
I'm Comiso we do it right there
are profit driven.
corporation a lot of these
groups are publicly traded they
have a responsibility to their
shareholders and they have
professional people they've
don't buy that argument and I I
realize I'm I'm kind of tongue
in cheek putting words in the
mouth of of the other side of
the argument but I I don't I
just don't buy that argument I I
save money when we're the ones
that really know how we're gonna
make you save money so I I I
humbly you know what I
respectfully reject that
staff and nursing bill of course
we want better staffing for
nurses but can we just mandate
if we just say you have to have
this many nursing hospital the
hospital already want that they
an adequate network I realize
there are some consumer
protection things into us I yes
you have to have yet that
legitimate product right I I get
that but as at the end of the
listed at ad nauseam in this
state you know the the biggest
problem once again as are
oppressive gross receipts
taxation system that we have on
services which exports large
of why we have inadequate
networks.
it's not because we need bills
like this to just mandate
adequate networks is because we
have other factors that are
destroying the adequacy of those
Thank you madam president
weather sponsor yield.
Yes I do you to Senator Ivy Soto
heels thank you very much madam
down below there's a
confidentiality provision that's
as an insurer shall protect
confidentiality of an insured
receiving mental health or
substance abuse a substance use
to short term plans subject to
short term health plan and
accepted benefit act I
understand the rest of it not
applying why would the
confidentiality provisions not
what line in which page
certainly page eight.
Lines twelve through fourteen.
And seventeen through twenty.
madam president and some Recchi
beginning first of all lines
twelve through fourteen of the
confidentiality provisions.
And then the exceptions.
thank you Sir
I call that the aflac because
clause
I would to need to get an expert
to explain exactly what it is
but it's something that protects
for other types of insurance
And madam president center
Hickey are the confidentiality
provisions that would apply to
those aflac and F. like type
plans.
I would have to check with the
I said I do understand all the
other provisions the
confidentiality provisions I
want to make sure that they're
covered otherwise and if not for
us to.
And colleagues I support this
bill tremendously.
We treat mental health
differently.
They would treat other.
And did not go to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee.
But every other health the yield
This consent that he be allowed
to debate sitting down.
Due to a physical malady he can
Health issues are different.
Health issues.
Someone.
Who suffers from mental health
problems it doesn't.
Someone who does it obscures who
they are.
I know this.
Because I've suffered from
through.
But the effects are real.
Yes the Israel.
Is a real.
Exceedingly difficult to do.
To certain parameters that have
happened.
Impacted by mental health
issues.
A lot of time with.
Over the last ten months.
I would be standing here today.
The issue in this bill.
With the prior authorization is
significant.
Privatization.
Going to treat me for this.
I needed to tell him the entire
story.
IDA tell that person the entire
story.
Before I finally was able to
talk to someone.
There's always a concern as you
keep telling the story that is
going to end up in more more
records.
It's going to be out there in
more more places.
Issues the confidentiality
issues.
The prior authorization.
Able to get the help that they
need.
So that they no longer are
obscured in terms of who they
To debate the bill.
Thank you madam president and
that will respond to yield.
Of the of the bill we talk about
the utilization review of mental
health substance use disorder
services and we say that the
Presentation is that is it
reasonable to expect that
a monthly process I mean should
you for that question having
spent probably half of my
professional life in various
leadership roles and health
plans yes monthly is necessary
because things keep changing the
Thank you madam president thank
you senator and and is at
checked on by the department of
insurance has a monitor.
other states it is our
department of insurance is
slowly building up to the kind
of staffing that it needs to do
these compliance reviews this
and the administration building
tax from our show I I didn't get
to to hear the you know the
testimony usual about you know
maintain they maintain network
adequacy in a.
When I when I look at that now
and then I look at the fact that
the bill.
and it managed Senate judiciary
especially Judiciary when you
look at all the new material in
the bill.
president sponsor you intend for
to do I think.
I think that's unfortunate
because I I think there's a lot
in here the definition Lee might
should have gone to begin with
because of what the bill is what
the bill was trying to do and
how much new materials contained
Is there any further debate.
Seeing none Senator Hickey to
close on this Senate tax
Senate bill two seventy three
committee substitute as amended
do now pass.
Senators tier seats we are
Senator Brandt.
Senator Woods voting no Senator
Schmedes he's voting no Senator
creeks voting no senator Sanchez
transportation committee
substitute percent bill two
seventy three is twice then it
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Hickey thank you madam
just a unanimous consent that
center that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill four thirty as amended on
final passage it has been taken
work with the Senator Diamond
earlier today this is a bill is
simply is asking for funds to
help the good folks overdose
overdose of downs and linking
County to recover from the
fire then I can't tell you
anymore than that you Rohingya
have burned over two hundred.
structures including homes.
systems in the grow those would
also downs area it also includes
a significant damage and for
bridges will have to be replaced
thousand six FEMA still has not
completed their commitment to
linking County to finish that
project up yeah and that's what
we're asking for madam chair is
additional comments Senator
Stefanics I thank you madam
president thank you senator Byrd
for initiating this with the
local communities representing
to every community that had
fires and the people who in
Lincoln County have gone through
fires over and over again and as
senator Byrd has referenced here
still being worked on so I think
the senator for bringing this
forward madam president and I
hope the body will stand behind
the communities.
thank you madam president to I
move now that to Senate bill
four thirty as amended do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
amended to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
affirmative serum the negatives
Senate bill four thirty just
amended has duly passed the
Senate.
Senator Burt thank you madam
president thank you members of
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty five Senator Ortiz the
penal.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
for putting it on its final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
Of to be considered by the body
if the reader would rated.
Reader to right Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate health and public affairs
explain the amendment thank you
madam president
Senate floor amendment number
one is a was developed after the
department of corrections
be the very difficult for them
to to implement in the timeline
originally proposed and so we've
we've given her an extra six
months.
treatment in prisons item two
that gives her an extra year
before it would have to be
completed and all the
institutions would be
incorporated.
with that I'll stand for did
debater questions this debate on
the amendment.
substitute for Senate bill four
twenty I do now pass and ask for
a voice vote.
Senator so we are on Senate
floor amendment number one to
Propose nay the eyes have it the
amendment has been adopted back
on the bill Senator TCP noted
explained the bill thank you
madam president and what we're
in prison or in jail and they
are addicted that they would
have access to the most up to
date treatment methodologies
approved by the FDA.
untreated and them then
resorting to the same
down downward spiral the got
them landed in prison in the
for for opioids opiates and for
alcohol that whatever is
available we should be available
in our jails and prisons
we're starting with the prisons
assisted treatment in jail for
the few weeks or months before
they go to prison if it's not
available in present because
then they would they would lose
the benefit.
If we also now have through the
would have access to the print
same treatment today began while
incarcerated.
And and we're asking the Human
Services department to draw up
the regulations that would make
Is there debate.
Senator Woods followed by
Senator critics than church
Senator metes.
Senator would skew on us deal
first.
So to do that I didn't hear it.
Is this a new I just the sponsor
I I again this is the concern of
got a read in in the analysis
here that the state will pick up
the cost for this program is is
and we've since clarified with
Mr this the the the analyst for
finance that there is in House
the county detention centers and
the same is in the county
dissension centers madam
president and center.
Madam president Senator Woods no
what what was pointed out to me
was that the opioid settlement
that the Attorney General
entered into which we were
hoping to tap has already been
be put toward this but the
amount each county gets is is is
pretty differs pretty widely and
so of that they used to formula
I'm not sure what there was a
treatment in their jail using
those funds we that's why we
didn't make it mandatory because
some counties simply won't get
enough from that Madam to be
that can continue that's what we
didn't make it mandatory for the
counties for this first year.
We giving them time if they can
find funding either through the
because we're not financing it
through the house bill two.
Senator what's your okay
understanding madam president
and senator that we are not
Okay well that that alleviates
the concern because my next
question was going to be what do
the counties think of this but I
guess I could just that anyway
that's a great question and
It I was very pleasantly
surprised in the conversation I
had with the Roosevelt County
manager and their jail the
program
very very some county to county
some are already doing it using
other resources Bernalillo
county's M. D. C. for example
does that but not every county
when their when their sentences
up for their trial the is held
in there they're released
at the then go back into the
community without any resource
counties will be willing to
start this.
The one other issue though is
they're reluctant to started if
the people released to go to
prison they're in jail they're
found guilty they're sent to
Some of them by two by the end
of calendar twenty twenty five
all of them by the end of fiscal
year twenty twenty six all
prisons will have to have
department because they have not
had medication assisted
treatment available and it's
it's alleged in that lawsuit
that that's a violation of the
it's upon the set upon the
request it's upon the
determination by the health care
provider that they needed.
So there was.
I want to thank you very much
Thank you madam president I
believe the Senator Woods got
most of the questions that I had
but I just want to.
region and and etcetera but this
is not mandated to the counties
Senator and that is is one of
the questions it Senator Woods
having to implement this within
there's no appropriation to
assist them with I'm not sure
that that that's going to work
bottom of page one it says the
Human Services department will
administer the fund which has no
money right now and that they
will then come up with
want to do this voluntarily the
health and Human Services
department will help them with
that
this yet we've what we're hoping
is that they will voluntarily
begin it if they think it's to
their advantage and that in once
the corrections department is up
and operating then it makes a
help those counties to want to
engage in is that correct madam
madam president Senator Griggs
already going to the counties.
For all their opioid programs
it's at their discretion so some
of them already have programs in
money force them to spend it on
this so we're not doing that
this year if they want to they
can use those that that funding
source to do so for example Rio
that's not recurring money
incidently that was that's a
that's a one time pay out by the
pharmaceutical in the drug store
chains.
But that five million in Rio
individual County and we don't
mandate in this bill.
Thank you madam president and
and think center.
Thank you very much ma'am
presents under you know it's
interesting brought the The
lawsuits I was gonna ask about
that
I I have a a little bit of a
concern that
You know there's a lawsuit on
having access to care with
people who aren't in jail people
have means.
And I think we're gonna have the
because we run out of medication
ran out of providers and then
they say Hey you have an
established program here yet I
will I was last in line so it is
something else to.
To consider but I do have a
what are they doing now what is
the kind of the status quo for
people with addictions.
Madam president Senators
committees do you mean the ones
that has a program as Roosevelt
County does or is Bernalillo
county does in there maybe some
others that I'm not aware of.
Then they have access to
people released from prison
after two or three years where
there was no medication assisted
treatment are coming out and
testing positive for use so
there is a a I wouldn't say
black market illegal contraband
kind of drugs it encourages of
guards encourages anybody coming
in and out of the the facility
set of severely restrict that
access to drugs.
Madam presents etcetera I'm I'm.
even keep.
Illegal illicit drugs out of our
prisons.
you know this is not an area I'm
quite bizarre to me.
Madam presence Senator.
I you know the eighty just
raises a question really not
continue to mass medicate
people.
You know if we know
theoretically if we get rid of
these illicit drugs as as you
say are are present in the in
You have an inmate who gets
released.
Cold Turkey there off of their
off of all other opiates.
they are on a potentially
lifelong.
Eradication.
and and I I understand I
understand complex complex issue
A plus or minus illegal drugs
which we got we we gotta do a
better job on that.
But working very system where
where the inmate is released a
And their drug free.
And then we compare that to
another person if we have all
these medically assisted
assistant for a we're calling in
mathematically assistant
know you you are you're still
addicted.
Controlled eviction right under
under them and management of
health care provider but you
still have a physiologic
And you compare those two
situations once again I realize
it's more complicated you
compare those to sedition
situations in which one would
would you rather be.
I I gotta tell you a I a
preference on I'm gonna go with
option number one.
Completely free now is relapse
how how did you make it.
How did you make it here how do
you make it with the job and and
you're here you're not in jail
anymore how did you how did you
get out how did you know and and
they all they all some of the
ever ever go back to to my you
know the crowd I was running
with so I understand that a
relapse is possible
I I I get that okay.
high high percentage of us are
on on prescription medication
and a lot of it is for chronic
disease that is preventable.
On a disease that is
preventable.
little bit different I would
vote for it.
If we're in a structure this
differently we're gonna find
maybe a different type of the
legislation not not just this
bill but many many other bills
that that deal with opioid
abuse.
as an option I feel like we are
or acquiescing in our in our
society a little bit too much to
this
that model they love the model
where the patient is to go on
lifelong treatment and where the
goal is to never get off right
Senator it off let's not talk
activities are structured and
then this is the same thing
let's not talk about getting
off.
Free and clear.
Let's talk about putting them on
for the rest of their life.
just saying where are the where
are the incentives where the
financial incentives that we're
placing into our our health care
system that are serving these
loving caring to offer people a
true fleet free and clear
treatment plan and I just I I
would say you know what I think
the response would be in this
bill well there's nothing to
prevent that in this bill well
yeah that that's true.
And so that's becoming the the
home run the success once again
is lifelong treatment not a not
a free and clear life free of of
where our health care system is
going with opioid addiction
there are the things I think we
should be doing and I think we
should be offering more inmates
of free and clear option.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you madam president and
with the sponsor deals madam
president Senator Kernan of the
good deal
states requiring the
establishment and operation of
medicated assisted treatment
programs and county correctional
facilities and I'm just
Well madam president and
senator.
You're probably right I had I in
And.
Madam president Senator would
you be willing out of I don't
have a member prepared that I I
have a concern about that as we
change our Human Services
Department over to health
authority with rulemaking
authority over this I I am
that I wonder if we could maybe
address that or maybe someone
could.
Adequate.
Yes if you'd like to drafted
avid considered friendly okay
debate the bill for a minute
we'll get that done thank you.
So any other debate on have any
other debate on the bills
the opportunity to debate as
that amendment is quickly being
drafted at.
I would yield to senator Ortiz
C. Pino thank you resin resident
of supporting the establishment
and operation just changing
requiring to supporting because
that would that would convey the
meeting better than just
eliminating that totally.
sorry Sir madam president
senator Morris.
Madam president would you like
to hold in place or do want me
to act like I know what I'm
talking about.
I have a couple more comments
sorry are you were you gonna
still time to I I don't think we
need that okay Senator Kernan
yes thank you.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president Eunice incentives you
Senator when you know simply
returns the chamber.
Seeing no objection we will do
that.
I think we should be clear about
this it's called medication
assisted treatment it's not
trying to do is not considering
the provision of methadone or
whole the whole the whole
package it's the counseling if
you attendance at of groups it's
the it's the effort it that that
that making a life changer
medical standard of care for
dealing with opioid addiction
right now so I know Senators
committee believes that the that
we should just go cold Turkey
and all these folks that's
you offer the method on to
reduce the craving.
To reduce the need for it the
the the the physiological demand
for it but then you find other
another Senator as soon as
Senator Kernan is finished and
give her back the floor Senator
Hotmail thank you madam
president and I want to stand
and thank the sponsor for this
Rio Arriba county in northern
New Mexico the number of
grandparents raising
grandchildren because their
parents are addicted and in most
cases behind bars this bill will
next generation who's currently
being raised by their
grandparents no when we think
about addiction we can't think
of New Mexicans as throwaways we
that percent of the court so I
want to thank the senator for
bringing this bill forward this
bill will do a lot for those of
us in Rio Arriba county thank
you madam president.
facilities and certainly the
correctional department has
tried to do everything possible
and in my facility and in Lake
County until they have now
going into the facility that
they're that's one way that
they're getting the drugs inside
and so if there's a lot of
criticism I get complaints from
people who have individual
facilities going forward because
it's incredible how creative
people are in getting those
strokes in the facilities it's
of that so just want to mention
that in I know that there are a
lot of different ways we can
help these individuals with
their drug issues certainly as
program in in my community so
they're ways that we can address
that but they have to have a
willingness and they want to be
free of those can't mandate this
Madam president etcetera I just
went ahead and just struck the
the part about the counties and
we can maybe as it goes forward
if you wanted to you know at
that one little piece back in
Collaborator whatever your word
less out I don't recall that
senator let let let's wait to
talk on the amendment until we
have that and should has it been
It's on its way okay we'll come
back to Senator Kernan as soon
as we have it Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
who are in prisons now are going
to get out and we don't want
them to get out worse than they
came in and so it's really
important to have treatment
programs and to offer a variety
that we all want to see and so I
am very happy that the sponsor
who is the chair of the of the
interim committee of the
Legislative Health and Human
really commend this bill and I
think it's going to be good for
the state especially at getting
that root causes of many of our
problems thank you thank you
madam president.
did not say go till culture and
everyone.
I said that should be an option
and it should be considered the
highest.
Level of success so how this
works is pharmaceutical
lifelong prescription therapy
that's what people are being
taught in our medical schools
all across the country and and
this is a quote unquote success
it's the idea of someone with a
should what we should have in
these treatment programs is that
free and clear option is
considered the gold standard and
should still be considered but
it's not being considered
that's that's my position on
this my position is not let
everyone go cold Turkey that
that's not the position thank
you members of.
you having been a county
commissioner for eight years and
what it costs to run a large
scale we had about six hundred
and I still do.
If you can keep them out for
way of hi I think the current
cost exceeds a hundred dollars a
day in any jail in the state and
we have a we don't have thirty
three jails around the state we
and if you have these inmates if
they can be out and and
functioning in some form fashion
I don't care what the drug costs
it it's a it's a better deal and
county jail and or the city or
the state prison whatever the
case may be but just just a
thought Mr president I thought
to since we're having to kill a
few minutes I throw that out
having experienced what it costs
So we're waiting on the
amendment get copied and
delivered it should be here
media at Lee.
Senator Neville I I just I will
this.
You know I'm met madam president
to and and senator
The
for a full year of and and it's
not for every inmate in Cibola
that that that it's for I think
they have a of a cohort of fifty
that are going through that it's
thousand dollars for each person
to participate in it.
That is including staff and so
forth images addresses that I do
that's the grant they received
no I don't madam president since
senator Neville like I just
don't have an idea I have an
expert witness here but I'm not
sure if if he's still here
you.
Senator Kernan on the amendment
to move the amendment yes thank
you madam president I move that
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino didn't we
amended this bill to begin with
yes many a long time ago second
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty five as amended amendment
sponsored by Senator Kernan
Senator Kernan to explain the
amendment thank you madam
sponsored.
I think he had some wording that
was a little bit different and
maybe could put that back on in
the house and I certainly would
agree to that I'm not trying to
keep this out of our fists
a little bit ahead of time so
let's just kind of take them out
for now hopefully really was
encouraged that this was part of
it but since there's no funding
I would really hope that we
could remove this for now
amendment seeing none Senator
Kernan to close thank you madam
president incentive for member
number two to Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
Senate health public affairs
committee substitute percent a
bill for twenty five as amended
although some favor signify by
saying aye.
concerns and certainly support
this bill in its current form
thank you thank you senator
seeing no further debate senator
to supino to close.
clearer bill so I would move
that the Senate finance
committee substitute for the
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five as twice
negative by show of hands
Senators tier C. we're voting on
Senate finance committees such
two percent health and public
affairs committee sub two
percent before twenty five is
Senator Woods this voting no
Senator Schmedes he's just
floating no.
negative Senate finance
committee sept two percent
health and public first me sub
two percent bill for twenty five
as twice amended has duly passed
the Senate senator Ortiz Pena
for Senate bill two one five
thank you madam president ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that all action for
placing some Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
present this bill creates ****
is a crime in New Mexico where
are one of the only two states
that do not the outlaw this
activity leaving just West
Virginia behind us so that's
the good John lady from Santa Fe
County Senator McKenna thank you
madam president and Senator
Moores
yep Senator Moores and I were
Of this crime against animals
thank you madam president and
Senator Moores all right on the
bill.
pass in the records show that
everyone voted in the
affirmative except those voting
negative by show of hands.
Senator chair seats we're voting
on the Senate Judiciary
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
fifteen has duly passed the
Senate Senator Moores.
Thank you madam president thank
consent we go that our business
introduction of legislation
seeing no objection or on that
order business introduction of
legislation the reader will read
Senate Joint Memorial fifteen
Department of Atlantic county of
real property located at
eighteen thirty five highway
three fourteen southwest in Los
Lunas how the Senate joint
resolution fifteen.
House Bill three fourteen
introduced by Representative is
Romero and Martinez Andrea
Romero and have yet Martinez and
House Bill three fourteen
hundred twice by title is
ordered referred to the Senate
health of public affairs
resolution proposing to amend
article four of the constitution
of New Mexico by allowing for
provision of legislative
salaries and creating a citizens
commission on legislative
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house joint
resolution.
Eight.
It is so ordered referred to the
House Judiciary Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty nine and act
relating to courts eliminating
court fees providing additional
mainly amending jail for non
nonpayment of fines or costs
repealing sections thirty one
dash twelve dash six through
thirty one dash twelve dash
fourteen dash eleven and sixty
six dash eight dash one sixteen
point three NMSA eight nineteen
seventy eight building laws
eighteen fifty eight eighteen
three eighty seven section one
clause two thousand to twenty
fifteen chapter ten section
three laws nineteen eighty three
substitute for house bill one
thirty nine.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty nine have a read twice by
title is ordered referred to
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five thirty three and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
and finance committee substitute
for House Bill five thirty
three.
House Appropriations finance
finance committee substitute for
House Bill five thirty three.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
of finance and administration by
the General Appropration Act of
twenty twenty thirty four felony
warrant enforcement house
appropriations and finance
Senate Judiciary House
Appropriations finance committee
substitute for House Bill five
fifty.
administration in relation to
the program compact and
requesting the state engineer
and the Interstate Stream
Commission to exercise their
authorities and to closely
coordinate their efforts to
The moral sixty five.
His order printed and referred
to the rules committee sent
memorial sixty five.
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection more
announcements and miscellaneous
business center work thank you
madam president so that is it
Senator Pinto pronouncement.
Thank you madam chair members of
the legislature Sen Indian rural
health and public affairs
committee will meet at three
o'clock in room three eleven
we've got built by Senator
Pirtle Senator Brandt
and then we have a house bill
two house bills three seventy
and two oh seven.
And with that sits at three
o'clock in rural
with Senate bill five twenty
Senator Stewart then we will go
on to house bill's one ninety
four
house bill one eighty four
McQueen.
Thank you madam president thank
you Senator so front this.
Thank you madam president the
some business take care of so
we'll make sure but is there we
have House Bill for a to start
with Martinez in Chasey on
voting rights protections and
Senate bill five thirteen so C.
in Senate Judiciary.
Senator o'neill thank you madam
chair of members your Indian
rural and cultural affairs
everybody knew that we're not
meeting yes very important
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you madam chairman I
members before the chairman of
judiciary runs out here because
you know them and ask them what
do yield.
Senator fund yes to yield the
How then president center
sometime this morning I don't
remember the exact time.
Madam presence Senator I just I
just wanna let you know we're
getting all these are so that I
was getting a lot of text
of legislation so our mind if
you wanted to roll that over
till March eighteenth I'll be
fine with me I just wanna let
you know that there is a lot of
pushback that we're getting that
but on such a big critical piece
of information our bill that's
just not a lot of notice was
given out there Mr madam
president Senator.
becomes a matter of trying to
get those scheduled into what we
already planned for Monday so I
take full responsibility for the
work hard to get the agendas out
but as you point out Senator
things are happening pretty fast
role of cultural fares will not
be meeting tomorrow.
I hope you have a pocket full of
cough drops.
Right any other announcements
It's thank you madam chair this
is not about not meeting
tomorrow so okay the game while
I went to the gym today to scope
it out well you know we got the
light a candle for Mr Seaver
weapon Josh and were Senators
Joshua Sanchez is knee gets
better by Thursday we had Center
pope out there today so just
just now even though we're still
so rest of just need everybody
to show up that's the main thing
I want everybody to show up on
time and we will take care of
business because we got mow my
seven o'clock is tip off at the
Indian school you know that
beautiful gem but be sure you
get there you know before to
warm up you know and then we got
Thursday March ninth thank you.
All right thank you so much.
Any other announcements
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
