The appointment of Allen Sanchez
to the state investment counsel
If I can have center Campos
please come up and Mr is not
just if you can join him, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you for joining
us as well.
Thank you very much. Madam.
Chair, Mr Chair. It's great to
go out and be before the Senate
Rules Committee to present the
qualifications and credentials
if you will of Allen Sanchez.
For your consideration as he
moves forward, uh, as hopefully
a member of the state investment
counsel.
Uh, Mr Sanchez and I go back
several decades and we've built
a very strong relationship.
In serving the needs of
Children.
And I bring this up because over
the years regardless of
What the issues have been here
at the state capital.
Allen continues to rigorously if
you will fight for
The well being of families and
the well being of Children. And
throughout all of that,
One of the things that he has
done. That definitely qualifies
him for this position.
Is to serve if you will, as the
manager of a private trust of
$110 million
Again dedicated to the health
and the well being of New
Mexico's Children.
I could go on with so many of
his qualifications, but I'm
going to defer in a moment to,
uh, our speaker of the house who
submitted this particular
nomination for consideration.
And that speaks extremely well
of the people that not only
support the commitment that Mr
Sanchez makes and has made
But what we're going to be doing
in the future with a resource is
through the state investment
counsel and how those dollars
then continued to be applied if
you will, to better in our
family, So if I may, Mr Chair,
what I'd like to do is to defer
this time to the speaker of the
house, too.
Talk a little bit about his
nomination and why he is
submitting the name for our
consideration here in the state
Senate of Mr Allen Sanchez.
Good morning, Mr Speaker. Good
morning, Mr Mr Vice Chair, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you for
allowing me some time to be up
here.
Um, Mr Sanchez, as Senator
Campos has expressed that
somebody with deep expertise in
the area of investment as the
manager of of the largest or one
of the largest trust funds in
the state of New Mexico, um as
head of CHS Saint Joseph's
Children, But beyond that, I
think what's really exciting for
me about this nomination is the
fact that
As we build up our trust funds,
which now who, over around $50
billion more or less.
Ah, it is important to have that
diversity of expertise and
experience on the council. Um,
that includes, uh, your graphic,
Uh, professional and personal
experience, and Mr Sanchez comes
to the table, not just as the
manager of one of the largest
trust funds in the state. But
prior to that is a very
successful dairy farmer.
Developer. I mean, I I feel like
he's a little bit like Forrest
Gump in that he has done most
things, uh, that, um you know
that that that we can think of
here in the state of New Mexico
A lot of us know him from his
advocacy work here in the
capital, But there's a whole
wide experience that is probably
in front of you and your
packets.
That Allen brings to the table
and brings to the state
investment counsel. Lastly, I
think as somebody who comes from
rural New Mexico, um I think
it's important to keep that
perspective. Um, you know,
obviously I'm from Albuquerque
and and I'm very proud of that.
And when I was thinking of my
appointment to this position, it
weighed on me right that.
Having somebody from
Albuquerque, right? My hometown.
But you know, rural New Mexico
really needs to continue to be
uplifted in this building. Um
and I think that this nomination
also alliance with that value
giving rural New Mexico is
strong boys on on this
investment counsel, So with
that, I'll kick it back to to
Senator Campos. Um, I apologize.
Madam Chair Mr Kerry will have
to step out to do a meeting here
in a little bit, but I
appreciate the opportunity to be
able to address you.
Thank you, Mr Sanchez. Don't run
away like Forrest Gump. Thank
you very much. Madam. Chair, Mr
Chair as we move forward, Uh, if
I may, I would like to go ahead
and turn this over at this time
to Mr Allen Sanchez to make a
few remarks, but I want to go
back to one thing the speaker
has indicated, And that is with
a $50 billion that we do hold in
reserve.
The use of resources over the
next decade is going to be in
coming upon each and every one
of us to ensure that we take
care of our families that we
take care of our state and most
importantly, as we move forward,
that we leave resources there in
perpetuity, so that our state
continues to flourish. And with
that, Mr Chair if I may
Different this time to Mr Allen
Sanchez to make a few brief
remarks.
Mr Vice Chair, Madam chair
members of the committee. I'm
very grateful to be invited and
considered to be a trustee for
the state of New Mexico. Most of
you have known me is the voice
of the bishops and I was
surprised how sometimes you
won't know me because I hadn't
been here to represent myself or
to promote myself.
So this is a different
opportunities speaking in front
of the Legislature, usually I'm
comin pretty nervous with you
now, but I want to share with
you, Uh, who I am. And in short,
I'm here today with my daughter,
Emma, who's with me and my wife,
Carolina could not be here
today. She had to serve in the
emergency room at U. N. M today.
And my son, Francisco who's at
the University of San Francisco,
and I've appreciated their
support and all these years in
the work that I've been able to
do but bringing this to to you
and why Why would I be in front
of you? It's kind of like the
same question when I was invited
to lead Catholic health
initiatives Saint Joseph's
Children after the sale of Saint
Joseph's Hospital in
Albuquerque, they were therefore
systems at the time.
And it was a decision to divest
of the hospital and take that
equity and then move into the
area of community health. How
can we create healthier
communities and I was invited to
take on that responsibility as
president at that time when I
came in to trust was $51 million
in 2008 and had to start from
scratch. We still had the same
Ah, goal of creating healthy
communities but doing this
outside of a hospital to think
outside the box, and I think
that's been one of my biggest
talents is to think out of the
box is an entrepreneur. So I was
hired ah by the sisters and
their board at the time because
of my experience in social work
and knowing the state
My background, annoying the
state from top to bottom.
I had served as director of
Renew which my responsibility
was to recruit and train for
4000 facilitators across the
state of New Mexico for renewed
for small face sharing groups
and that also entailed of
recruiting 41,000 people to
participate in that
But the other part was the
entrepreneur piece. Uh, I've
done a number of things I grew
up in Mexico on the Tamil
language as a cowboy.
And enjoyed starting things
since I was a child for a Jeff F
a raising rabbits, she cattle,
dairy cattle, and then, um,
moving into. After that, I
opened a treatment center for
alcohol and drug addiction.
And then spun that off with a
partner that took that over.
I, uh, start was co founder for
the Ballet Folklorico the novel
Mexico.
And promoting our culture.
I began a dairy farm from
scratch, Understanding the
importance of environment.
water. Talk about water issues,
Water rights protection of the
environment, opening up the
first bottling plant in 30 years
that had been opened in New
Mexico for processing milk,
being creative and doing six
flavors of milk, cappuccino and
The Nana and Strawberry and
chocolate and, uh, having to
create a distribution for that
to 40 stores from Socorro to
Espanola, then sold that moved
into real estate, developing
property selling property
dairies to expand the number of
subdivisions and Valenciennes
County.
AH worked for Renew
international, the western
United States and spreading that
into those states from all that
from here to Alaska.
And then when I got to ST Joe's
They handed me that
responsibility. The reins of $51
million and I took that to today
to $110 million.
And implemented through our
board and the board's decision
to have a distribution of 5.5%.
So we have a trust that has only
one source of revenue, and that
is the market and it has to be
able to grow but also served the
people in those years since 2008
to today we have spent on the
people of New Mexico $70 million
And the trust grew to $10
million.
Saint Joseph Children take 00
state money. We We were like
they say we're a country before
country was cool We were doing
home visiting before it became a
priority of the state of New
Mexico. We now operate the
largest home visiting program in
the state when the largest in
the nation and into showcase
that we have an international
study tour, people come from all
over the United States and other
countries to learn about.
About the home visiting, so I'm
humbled to be here in front of
you to offer my talent as an
entrepreneur, Something like
starting things up looking
outside of the box and knowing
we got to preserve this fund the
same way that at the end of the
month I'd call her CFO and I'd
say I want to know those
numbers. How much did we gain
that we lose? How's the market?
Following that daily knowing
that we spend, uh, three year
rolling average of that 5.5% and
you're going to support that
that investments got to be
strong and following that yet,
so a balance What do we spend on
today?
And how do we go to the future?
Because we can't just send money
to the future. We gotta send a
educated population and with the
opportunity of the strength of
the $51 billion that strength
and I think of that number that
$51 billion in the in the trust.
There's another number as great
as that number.
And that's the 2 million people
that live in the state. And I
bring that balance to this, Uh,
council if it's your favorite,
and so I come to answer any
questions for you to gain your
trust. Because one thing I've
learned is what being a
fiduciary agent means what does
a trustee means? And you see me
coming here for the bishops? I'm
very, very difficult issues.
Sometimes not necessarily my
issue, but I know it fiduciary
obligation means and I love the
state of New Mexico and I have
cried for the Children of New
Mexico and they're in my heart.
And I offer that to you for your
consideration and trusting me as
a trustee on your behalf.
And on behalf of all the people
of the state of New Mexico, So
thank you for the opportunity to
share with you. Thank you. Mr.
It's not just how we do have
people who signed up in support
of your confirmation. I'm gonna
take the first five that I'm
going to read out from an email
and I'm going to have our
chairwoman time, Dr Veronica
Garcia.
You'll have a minute and a half
each.
Thank you. Chair do hig members
of this committee? Um, for the
last three years, I've served on
the Executive Committee of Ch I
ST Joseph's Children as its
treasure. I've been on the board
for five years.
And as he said, I want to
validate working with the CFO.
And with Mr Sanchez. Um he says
he's taken the reins. Um, they
have done amazing job of growing
that fund and, um
And developing programs to
increase the health of our our
community. He took the funds
from 51 million to 110 million
and then implemented an annual
policy which we have had strong
fidelity to because of his
leadership about that. 5.5
rolling average, which allowed
the organization to invest 70
million and home visiting
programs.
And we are now in the process of
replicating those programs
across the state, providing that
service for free to others who
want to begin those programs.
Saint Joseph's Children, um, I
believe is making a big
difference in this state because
of the leadership of Mr Sanchez,
And it is without reservation
that I believe he will honor his
fiduciary responsibility and
serve with fidelity and
independence to meet all the
duties entrusted to him. Thank
you. Thank you, John Clark.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
John Clark. I'm the state
investment officer for the SEC.
And as I'm sure all of you are
aware Mr Sanchez has
successfully advocated over the
years for a wide range of
important issues related to
poverty, Early childhood
education healthcare. These are
all important issues related to
the funding provided by the S I
C
For the upcoming fiscal year s I
C funds will contribute about $2
billion towards the states.
Approximately $10 billion
budget.
Over time as oil and gas
revenues gradually declined and
supply less of the funding
towards the state's budget. The
funds provided by US I see will
become the dominant source of
funding for schools and other
critical programs throughout the
state. So we look forward to
welcoming Mr Sanchez to the
state investment counsel and
look forward to working with
them on these important issues.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Stephen spits.
If you can come up to the
Um, you may recognize my voice.
Done a radio shade just from
having done the show known
people. I think Alan would be
not only, uh,
An excellent choice, but he'd be
excellent because I think the
evidence before he's pretty. He
was a small businessman, but the
best kind of an entrepreneur. He
understands profits and losses,
Creating value understands micro
economics he's been involved.
Common Spirit Health, one of the
largest healthcare company, one
of the largest sectors in the
United States, So we understands
that
He runs his home visiting
program that's been very
successful in program. Why?
Because, uh,
I'm sorry. 30 seconds, okay?
Sanctity of two protocols
exceptional and you all know
this. He loves his state.
Whether you agree with this
obviously, advocacy or not, he
believes in it. He wants. What's
good for you, but the biggest
thing is what Alan said at the
end.
It is. Passion is really
childhood. That's tight as you
just heard to the success of the
permanent fund.
No one could want it more. Thank
you. Thank you so much Build
Orden.
Morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee Bill Jordan with
the Mexico Voices for Children.
Um, I've known Alan for I guess
about 20 years and over these
years we partnered on so many
issues that impact the lives of
Children and families and
communities.
Allen is somebody who's willing
to listen and engage when there
might be disagreement.
That doesn't mean that he's not
tenacious.
He's passionate and energetic,
visionary and deeply committed.
How did a guy who trained in
Rome
In the very best seminaries of
the Catholic Church End up
milking cows for a living.
How does a guy who walks
comfortably with Popes?
Walk and stand so solidly with
the poor and those who have been
left behind.
But the real question is how in
the hell did he end up here?
Will forgive me for saying that.
God only knows how it happened,
But I have a clue.
It's because he's a man of
integrity and what you see is
what you get is passion and his
compassion or real. His skill
and his smarts are second to
none and his personal ethics are
unquestionable.
I and the whole team voices for
Children or proud and honored to
support this nomination. And if
I may since I am, uh, not on the
list for Kelly, I want to just
say I've worked with Kelly over
20 years ago. And you can't time
Maria Estella Dario.
Good morning. All. Um my name is
Maria Stella that Rios
I'm a former business person of
for over 40 years of the
research and development. Um,
in, uh, the defense contracting
business.
When I retired, I became a
member of the board of
directors. Ch I ST Joseph.
I was driven.
To do that.
By a sense.
That I was going to join an
organization that had
The true meaning of New Mexico
in mind.
With
With Allen Sanchez at the helm.
I cannot tell you what it meant
to New Mexico.
What he had the ability to use
the resources.
Not only
Not only Saint Joseph
But also
He saw the, uh the resources of
the state and not just money,
but he saw it in his people.
It's Children. It's families.
I wholeheartedly endorse.
Allen Sanchez for this very,
very important mission. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Sanchez. We
have a hard stop at 1030. There
were two others. I'm just going
to read their names into the
record. They won't be
commenting, but just a coward,
Ray Centeno in response, And so
did Martin Romero. And with
that, is there a show of hands
of anybody else Who's in favor
of this confirmation if you can
raise it?
Oh,
Practically the whole room, Mr
Sanchez, anyone online?
Okay. Anybody in opposition of
this country?
Saying none. What about online?
None. And with that I would go
with questions or comments from
the committee. I'm gonna start
with Senator Morris. Thank you,
Manager. Thank you.
These microphones suck. I'm
gonna continue to say it for the
next 10 days. Mr. I hope House
does best speaker
Um
Hello.
Is that work, madam? Sure. Um,
And I appreciate you saying you
want to be full disclosure
because I do have a lot of
concerns about this. Madam
Chair, Senator Speaker. You're
paid lobbyists as you indicated
in your opening remarks. I like
you, too. Disclosed who? Not
only your clients, but the
issues that you have worked with
while up here as a paid
lobbyist. Yes, Thank you.
Uh, I usually refer to myself as
an advocate. I've worked for the
conference of Catholic bishops
as their voice I do receive from
them a stipend, uh, which is not
extensive this year.
For serving here at the
Legislature and to the interim
committees and phone in and
fielding phone calls. Year
round. It's a 7 $11,000, so it's
not what I make my living on.
It's a ministry of the church
called to that for the bishops.
I have advocated on minimum wage
and advocated repeal the death
penalty against food tax.
Ah, on a number of issues for
early childhood I've advocated
on the constitutional amendment
for, uh, early childhood.
Um, these are all issues that
were decided upon by the New
Mexico Conference of Catholic
Bishops in their discernment of
looking at the the Gospel I have
advocated on pro life issues
brought forward a consistent
ethic of life, which means we we
are pro life that also has the
sense of
Life after birth. That means
many of the safety net issues
and then because I, uh I'm the
President Saint Joseph anytime.
Anybody in New Mexico speaks on
behalf of our organization or
other person they must register
as a lobbyist, but a small
portion of my job is Saint
Joseph. Responsibility is also
to come in and represent Saint
Joseph's Children.
Uh uh. Saint Joseph Children
takes zero money from the state
and the programs that it
operates. And I think to the
best liability, remembered the
issues that we have advocated
for Madam Chair Center. You You
said you're President. ST Joe's
not just the chai. Um do you
have any state contracts with
them?
With Chae Ehe. I Yes, Very
important Catholic health
initiatives used to be its own
corporation. It's now a division
so Catholic health initiatives
is a Catholic healthcare
provider and dignity. Health was
a Catholic healthcare provider,
The two of them three years ago
merged.
And became common spirit health.
Uh, I was. I was hired and
employed by
Catholic health initiatives. I
am not an employee of Saint
Joseph's Children.
Saint Joseph Children, has a
corporate member of the court.
The corporate member is now
common Spirit health, and so I
served on a number of committees
for common spirit. Health Common
Spirit. Health is the largest
healthcare provider in the
United States nonprofit
healthcare provider. That is my
employer, Uh, they operate in 23
states.
With 145 hospitals with 155,000
employees in in each state when
their operations they hire the
president of the corporation. So
I operate the Corporation of
Catholic Health.
C H i. ST Joseph's Children, uh,
the organization common Spirit
Health. Um, there's a
performance cultural assessment
each year and New Mexico has
ranked the highest our employees
out of 100 and 55,000 employees
in the United States and so my
source of income by living is
not from the bishops. That's
aside ministry. Very small.
Piece of what I do. Uh, I am an
employee of common spirit help.
Madam chair sank. Thank you,
Alan for that. Now, let's talk
about Obviously the big issue
here is abortion. Um, you've
gotten paid to lobby against
abortion rights in New Mexico.
One of the issues we actually
agree on.
Um, However, I think that should
be concerning to a lot now try
and other Catholic health
organizations do not allow
abortions or fight, Uh, women's
health issues around them if it
investment counsel we invest in
Medicaid. We invest in health
care. We invest in hospitals
were invested drugs. We invest
in all sorts of different things
to provide a revenue source for
that money.
You have a conflict there.
Very big conflict there.
So I'd like you to walk us
through that conflict.
Okay. Same thing issue that
comes with the hospitals.
You don't abandon people. And so
if there is a person, uh, coming
to our hospitals, uh, we they
will assess in the same way I've
done with ST Joseph's Children,
Uh, you have sense what the
emergency is. What's the need
Like for us to Saint Joseph
would be referring and so we
would refer people to counseling
We would not refer somebody.
Uh to an abortion, but we would
refer them to counseling in the
same way that Planned Parenthood
refers clients to US people have
gone in for late term abortion,
and then their their evaluation
of told a person. Uh, maybe you
need to have a conversation with
ST Joseph's Children for support
through prenatal and rearing of
the child and so in the
investment
Uh, I would be one of eight
people would have an opinion on
on that investment counsel. I
don't think I would be able to
dominate that. Uh, but that is a
position of the of the church.
But I am not the church and I
know that sometimes people have
confused me with the message
from the bishops here, the that
I'm the church in the voice of
the church.
Uh, I do have to address my own
personal conscience whenever I
make a decision, and I think
that's the state has invested in
very important health issues.
Ah, I feel very in line with
Pope Francis. If you follow the
teachings and what he has
bringing the church into our
modern day of taking the gospel
and looking at the social issues
through the lenses of the gospel
And so I won't deny I will look
at the investments of this state
through the lenses of the
gospel, uh, alongside the piers
on that gossip of that of the
state investment counsel. They
all bring their traditions. They
all bring their
Culture, and with that I can't
be judgmental of their
decisions.
Madam chair.
I mean, for instance, um, the
pope is against morning after
pill. So, as are the bishops
that is an investment that we
invest in pharmaceuticals. Um,
and again, I think this is the
inherent conflict of lobbyists
being in positions of
policymakers and speaker I have
right. I have spoken very
vehemently about a number of
lobbyists this year. I'm
disappointed that lobbyists are
being appointed to these kinds.
In this year.
And when you receive money and
compensation to influence us and
you, Mr Speaker to be put in a
position of policy making it
creates an inherent conflict of
interest have encouraged the
governor not to do it encouraged
our leadership not to do it
encouraging you not to do it
because it creates an inherent
conflict of interest when
someone receives compensation.
To influence government
officials that he put into a
position of policymaker. It
doesn't pass the smell test.
So what? I hear you saying,
Alan, if you
And investment decisions.
Conflicted and do not believe
what your employer is saying.
You are willing to go against
your employer.
Yeah, our employers very clear,
very clear that we are
individuals. If I were to come
out and be in conflict with a
policy that the employer takes
on in New Mexico, and this has
been, uh I've taken heat for it.
This is what you have to
understand. People have said
Ellen. Why haven't you put the
same efforts into some of the
direct abortion issues as you
have into early childhood?
Because Saint Joseph even though
it's a Catholic organization, it
has prioritized to journey with
families who have chosen to have
the child.
And putting that money into, uh,
home, visiting and helping those
families journey in that, and so
I I would not see ST Joseph
Coming here. The other pieces,
you know, Conflict of interest
also means what you disclose the
problem with conflict of
interest is when you don't
disclose you have a conflict and
you may have to disclose that
and not vote on an issue.
That's the ethical and proper
thing to do. That's when most
people you've seen get in
trouble in politics is when they
have a conflict of interest, and
they don't disclose that and
they vote in favor of what that
what their conflict is, but I
feel I'm an ethical person and
I'd be willing and I would hope
Senator Morris
Um, vice chair and chair,
Senator. I would hope that you
would call me out if you saw a
conflict and that's what this
hearing is for. Let's let's
address the conflicts and that
they're all out there on the
table.
Because when you get in trouble
is when you don't disclose the
conflict, and so you've
disclosed that you feel strongly
about that. And that would be, I
think an important piece where
I'm willing to sit and hear
people I need to hear you. And
if I'm on this as a trustee for
the state of New Mexico, and you
raise a conflict with me, Uh
then that may be a call.
Two for me, too.
Not vote on an issue or for the
the council itself to discuss
that concept.
And I agree with you on the
conflict of interest. Every
single one of us has a conflict
of interest that the voters, um
I know about we disclose about
we talked about. It's the nature
of a citizen legislature.
The bigger conflict to me is
that you are paid to influence
policy.
And this is for all the other
lobbyists. We've had this
session. I voted against all of
them.
They are paid, which by
definition means that they are
sway able
It's not necessarily their
personal opinions. It's what
they're paid to do.
And they're paid to influence
policy. And then when you take
that person who was paid to
influence policy and make them a
policy member
And not
Disconnect that willingness to
receive money. I feel more
comfortable, Madam chairs
senators, Reverend Speaker if
you would not be a lobbyist, is
that something you would
consider
Well, I would. I would have to
not work for common spirit
Health because your your laws
and for the what's required by
the secretary of state if
anybody walks in this building,
this is the law of the state,
and you speak on behalf of of
organization. Other than
yourself, you must register as a
lobbyist. Even if you're a
business person If you speak out
on behalf of someone else's I've
understood her.
About the secretary of state
issue, but for the bishops, I am
I am moving toward and they've
known this for a while, uh, to
at some point turn that back
over to, uh, a advocate that
we've been doing some succession
planning with
Now I can't. I'm not going to
commit to do that or not,
because I feel speak and have a
ministry in my church. I
wouldn't want us to to redo and
re argue it was happened with,
You know, President Kennedy for
being a Catholic but in your
point of being paid, um
Um, I could move to the bishops
to a position of volunteer that
made you feel much better, uh,
for the bishops and not take
that stipend for the first few
years when I did this for them.
I did that for the three diocese
would rent my own room up here
to be here, Pay my own gas, and
that's a ministry of the church.
I would hope every citizen would
feel that commitment that they
could have for their faith or
their tradition or their
spirituality do things like
that.
I just want to make clear with
some of you just said, Are you
accusing me of being against
you? Because you're Catholic.
You just brought up Sure that
was cleared and then? Yeah. Then
let me fix your, uh
Vice chair, Madam Chair, Senator
that make sure that if I'm
understanding you, Yeah, I feel
relieved. If you're saying it's
not about Catholic, I think my
family would have something to
say if I was against Catholics
and the very strong Catholic
background in my family. I think
that was interesting Comment
there. Thank you, senator.
Because that relieves me. That's
what thank you. Um
And I think that's just that we
really concerned. I want to talk
about your experience. As a
manager. You said you've been
managing this fund since the
2008.
You've been the manager making
decisions. Well, I I I see
oversee the fund. Sign off,
Madam Chair, Senator. Let me
explain to you, Mr. Chair, Mr
Vice Chair, Madam chair.
Uh, Senator, what This means is
I'm responsible for the
investment of the fund. What's
recommended by agent also
overseeing and I sign on any of
as any changes in the in that
investment with common spirit,
and, uh, I sign and responsible
from the CFO prepares.
Any withdrawal on our 5.5%
because that's drawn monthly.
So it sounds like more you're
more than a secretarial role.
Where you just
Maintaining Are you making
investment decisions for that
fund?
I have an input on that with
common spirit. It's very similar
to the state Investment Council
where you have somebody that
brings forward uh, the
recommendations and they explain
them to decide on that. They're
not a rubber stamp, but they see
those they may send them back
and say, rewrite those or
rediscover or explore that.
And and so make sure you're
making investment decisions on
this fund.
The reason I'm asking is because
it says the statute says, you
have to have 10 years.
You have to be in investments
for 10 years to be eligible for
this commission, So I want to
know if you're qualified for
that. Have you been making
investment decisions for this
fun, or have you just been
supervising, for instance? My
wife makes our investment
decisions. I don't
I would. Um, I would consider
that my oversight and the
board's oversight. Uh, is a
decision is a decision making
position. Um, along with the
expertise, you have made
investment decisions in 2008 and
then investment decisions can be
a numerous numerous things. I
mean,
There's made personally in my
own LLC. Uh,
Decisions investments with real
estate. Uh subdivisions making
those decisions and purchase
mortgaging moving equity in
those
Um And so when you said you went
from 51 million in 2008 210
million, yes, that's a growth
rate of 2.57. According to my M
B, a withdrawal of 5.5%. I'm
glad you're saying that because
if you just put it into the Dow,
it should have been about $30
million more.
But that's because we have a
5.5 rolling average.
Which has spent $70 million on
the people of New Mexico if we
if we were drawn nothing, it
will grow anything, bro. But
there has to be a balance of
what do you withdraw and the
balance for us is a commitment
to the state of New Mexico.
Uh, you know, it's it's it's
it's safely invested is 5050
decision on its investment and
the risk
Uh, but if if you were to take
that 70 million that was spent
on the Children to Mexico than
that fund would be over 180
million plus.
In cured.
Investment that would have
returned on the 70 million, But
we believe that the social
investment in the Children is
going to be have a greater
return to the state of New
Mexico. So in a sense, we've
been subsidizing the state of
New Mexico with our trust fund
and things that now that I'm so
happy that the state has taken
the lead in early childhood
services, Mr Senator
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ma'am. Senator, Speaker Um
and Alan, um
Yeah, I'll be good to know.
Um, encourage the governor not
to do it and the state
I support you on the abortion
issue, But there's other
confidence that you're going to
be able to put those or
something best fiduciary
responsibility. I hear what
you're saying. Your arguments
about early childhood
investments and all that stuff,
but the investment counselors,
and there's other ways we can
spend that money. You're gonna
make political decisions and
council in a direction that
conflicts with a lot of beliefs
about
Who are adamant use and
investments, and I say I have
the same agreement on my side,
So I feel better if you weren't
a lobbyist. Um
I don't know if I would get to
yes on that. But I encourage all
those making appointments to
really consider this And this
isn't something I just said
about you.
Senator Compost knows what I'm
talking about. I've made one
vote in my 12 years that I
regretted because I knew before
I voted.
It was the wrong boat, and I
promised myself I would never do
that. And I've made votes made
votes where I said, Oh, my gosh,
I can't believe I did that. But
I think never. I never made a
vote again that I knew was wrong
Before the only person in this
chamber I've had that
conversation with it. Um and I'm
proud of that almost made a
mistake at beginning of session
by voting for a lobbyist known I
wish you luck.
On this ship the time. Thank
you.
Thank you, senator or cheesy
Pinot.
Thank you, Mr Vice Chairman,
Madam Chairman and senator and
speaker and Allen. Thank you.
Uh, I'm sitting here trying to
trying to
See if I agree with Senator
Morris about lobbyists or not,
And and I don't. I don't
necessarily think that just
because you've been employed.
As a lobbyist.
Now, if you continue to be a
lobbyist, that that's a little
different, But if you've been if
that's I mean, I don't think
lobbyists is a bad thing.
Some of my best friends are love
you.
Yeah, that
Ah, but I am curious your
background in theology. And and
so how
How do you see that?
And I know what you said about
seeing investments through the
lens of the Gospel.
But let's face it. You will be
one of how many members are
there on the state investment
counsel.
Eight members. I understand
members.
And I assume that at least some
of the other members won't be
looking at investments.
Through the lens of the Gospel.
How will you? How will you deal
with that situation where you're
making decisions?
But there are another seven
members who may see things
differently on a given decision.
I, um, Mr Vice Chair, Madam
Chair and Senator. I think every
person approaches all your
decisions with a conscience to
form conscience through your
life and your life experiences.
Mine just happens to be very
public because of the position I
shared doing this for the
bishops, but we all approach it
with some bias, and the real
challenge is to look at the
common good. How do you achieve
the common good doesn't mean you
compromise your values.
But it means you seek the coming
good and what's asked of you,
the other pieces you have to
remember. This isn't this isn't
our my money I was looking at
the State Investment Council and
its values. It has core values
there.
Uh, there's there's one value
that rubbed me wrong, and it's
the value of pride and I would
propose that we're going to
change that to stewardship. Uh
and then pride and ownership.
Once we look at that as an
ownership, you're moving it from
a stewardship, which means
you're always conscious of what
is does the juristic society we
live in need from me today.
And that's basically what both
Francis calls and I I quote this
because it's a movement. If
you're going to address my my
Catholic background is as being
a
A person that studied theology
and earned numerous degrees. Is
that for me? The call is this
who are the vulnerable?
And what do they need from me?
And that will be my main lens.
In a nutshell to address this.
Um and Mr Chairman, and and Mr
Sanchez.
The portfolio of investments
that
That the investment council
deals with this is has been
widened over the years. It goes
far beyond.
Stocks and bonds.
Um, How did does that compare
with the portfolio that you were
part of or have are still part
of that Catholic health
initiatives very, very similar,
very similar.
Do you have you have a diverse
portfolio? Diverse portfolio?
It's 5050. So there's there's
There's some risk. There is some
risk, but it's strong enough to
twist here. Bear markets.
And one of the things that we
made him chairman, Mr Vice
Chairman, one of the things that
we, uh encourage our investment
counsel to do is to try to use
some of their the investments in
in local startups, Local, uh,
promoting local businesses,
Minority enterprise. Things like
that. Is that also part of your
Experience with the
ST Joseph's Children's
Investment portfolio, Mr Vice
Chair, Madam Chair and Senator,
Uh yes, because in this
portfolio because we united with
all the other portfolios for the
23 states together to get some
power, um
You sometimes invest in
something so that there is a
vote there, So you have a vote
on. So that's that's similar but
like with ST Joseph in my work
Uh, I believe if if we're going
to take any risks, we've been
very safe and we should be safe
with the $50 billion. We have to
be very prudent. But if we're
going to take some risks, those
risks need to be for the
businesses of New Mexico. I
mean, I've seen him struggling
when when you know when I bought
a piece of property to find the
value in it and realize its rich
and gravel and develop that, and
now it's the tablet, gravel pit
and Berlin.
From that basic down, not just
real estate, but down to earth.
These are the things that people
of New Mexico these are the
businesses and why should we not
be investing in homes that are
1600 square feet or 1800 square
feet? If we're going to take
risk, let's take it on our
people in New Mexico and
businesses here.
Well, um, Mr Vice Chairman, I
tend to agree with Senator Moore
is about one thing, and that is
if you are going to be on the
investment counsel. You probably
should not continue as a paid
lobbyist. I think that does
create some some problems. I
don't think your background is a
lobbyist should disqualify you.
From the state being able to
benefit from your experience and
your expertise.
Uh, so I would I would. I would
feel comfortable voting for you.
I certainly you know, have
enjoyed watching you work on the
issues that you feel so strongly
about, even though we've
disagreed on several of them,
But I still respect the views
and the way you go about it, Uh,
And so I feel very comfortable
with your ethics with your
expertise and with your
experience, and I would feel
comfortable supporting you.
Thank you, Mr Vice Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Chairwoman
do hig.
Thank you.
And
Hmm. Senator Mr Allen.
I guess I I am concerned about
the song.
I am concerned about some of the
answers you gave attempt to
Senator Morris. Um and right now
I'm a no on on your
confirmation, and I'm hoping
that changes over the course of
this. This conversation.
Ah, I'm very concerned that you
said you're going to be looking
at investments through
essentially a religious lens
through the lens of the Gospel.
Um
That deeply concerns me. Can you
talk more about that is, uh,
Madam chair. Uh, what That means
for me is the last statement
that I made about asking the
question Who are the vulnerable
and what do they need from?
Not not the lens of the gospel
in the sense of a catechism.
Or a doctrine or profession of
faith.
But in an important ethics that
I grew up with in in, uh,
serving others.
And putting others before me.
That's what that means for me,
is that, uh, if I come to help
somebody, it's not to promote me
and, uh
Many of the senators here
probably could testify in the
years that they've seen me come
and have a fiduciary obligation
to be an agent.
For the bishops. But that's not
not who necessarily, I always
am.
Or promoting myself.
And so
This position. We very, very
important that it's not about me
promoting myself.
Or promoting my religion, You
know that would that would be
completely wrong.
What? For me? What would be
important is that I'm coming to
this as a person who is gonna
first hold myself accountable.
You know, for decisions I make
for the benefit of the people.
So I don't want to. Uh uh.
In the sense they I take any
pride in being on the board. I
want to take humility to be on
this because that has to always
call me to be asking. Senator.
Madam Chair. What is it that you
need from me?
On this. And and Senator, Mr
Allen. So you talked, You said
kind of a lens of caring for the
vulnerable.
What about folks with pregnancy
is that they want to terminate?
Are those the vulnerable in your
eyes? Who would also be part of
that lens when you're making
investment decisions vulnerable
is a very, very important big
word. And this is where, uh, we
see that there are exceptions.
There are times are needs people
have and so
Uh, I have not. I would not
stand in the way of a person
that made a decision for that.
But that that
Taking that to this investment
counsel would be more taken to a
level of pharmaceuticals that we
may be invested in. Uh, it'll be
very hard to even find a
pharmaceutical that's not spread
out through the different needs
of the people and reproductive
health.
What about specifically, uh,
Pharmaceutical that would would
terminate a pregnancy.
Is that would you?
Would you not?
Would you?
Object to state investments in
those pharmaceuticals based on
your religious views. So on the
size of that changes that is
proportionality what we call an
ethics proportionality. And if
that company provides
proportionality of more good
than bad then then you would
have to be able to somehow
justify that because of the
proportionality.
So so I would say, I would say,
uh, we wouldn't put all the eggs
in one basket that I would I
would turn away from a
pharmaceutical that did produce
a day after pill. Uh
If that was in their full
portfolio.
But it was so that's
proportionality. That's how I
would just that.
All right, So let's say
hypothetically.
75% of their portfolio is
something like the morning after
Peel. There's many reasons of
women they choose to have to
take. That could be different
therapies. So then you would be
closing down the options of all
the therapies that are that are
involved in that.
So it would be you would you
would not be able to make one
blanket statement C and I would
not
Make a blanket decision to to
vote against that.
Senator Mr Allen.
I I I believe deeply in the
separation of church and state.
And so what? I'm really
troubled, hoping to hear from
you is a clear and unequivocal
answer that you are not going to
make state investment decisions
based on your religious views.
Can you unequivocally say I am
not going to make state
investment decisions?
I think I can say yes to the
same extent that every senator
that comes here and makes a, uh,
swear of oath to the
Constitution of the state, and,
uh, it would be wrong for me to
make any of those decisions
based on religion. It would have
to be based on the argument and
the common good that in the
Issue and the discernment in
front of us as a council.
So that's a yes Yes. Okay. Can
you say unequivocally that you
will not continue to act as a
paid lobbyist or advocate? Uh,
in any capacity while you are on
this board.
Ah, I will save some money if I
if I were not to advocate for
the bishops, um
I'm not. I'm not prepared today
to say that I wouldn't do this
for the bishops as I would
transfer it.
To a person that's been in a
succession planning. So this,
uh, appointment begins march.
1st. Is that correct? Remember,
it would probably take a few
months to make that kind of
transition. But I believe that
the good that can take place for
our people in the state of New
Mexico.
At this time, I would prioritize
being able to have that
influence. Uh, on that
investment so that we can go
with a strong
Future fund and a strong uh,
social investment in the
And and Senator Mr Allen.
I want to make sure that I'm
getting that I'm understanding
clear.
Oh, your appointment begins upon
confirmation. Okay, so you are
you are on that.
You are on the your start today.
Um
So is it A yes or no? That you
will commit to not
Uh, continuing as a paid
lobbyist or to pay that or an
advocate. Uh, if you are on this
commission
For the Bishops Council. Yeah,
Madam Chick.
Madam Chair. Senators of
Committee. Uh
For the conference of Bishops. I
could move from the position of
paid lobbyist.
And I can commit to that.
And and that's where the Council
of bishops, I'm asking
Globally. Will you not act as a
paid lobbyist or at or paid
advocate?
If you are you are on the S. I
C. I need a yes or no. So you're
talking about Saint Joseph's
Children and the work that it it
does. I'm talking about anyone
who you are acting to see this
is a good, very important
question. Um
The organ and well, let me make
sure I'm not committing the
organization, the organization
ST Joseph, I would have to move
that person to the full
representation of the
organization organization. ST
Joseph Children would still be
advocate and lobby.
But I would be happy to move to
the position. Uh, anything that
falls under
The requirements for for
registering as a lobbyist.
So if it's if it's issues that
aren't under lock paid
lobbyists, I will have to keep
those responsibilities. But I
could surrender the
responsibilities as paid
lobbyist.
So that's a yes okay, So yes.
Globally, you will not serve as
a paid lobbyist or paid advocate
while you are serving on the S I
C
Yes, Yes, yes, The word whatever
that falls in so Christmas,
we're talking in broad areas
There is, uh, whatever is
required by the secretary of
state that makes you a lobbyist
and to register as a lobbyist. I
will surrender that. Okay,
Because I I see and Senator Mr
Allen. I see on your
questionnaire, you say?
Yes, your your lobbyists or
legislative agent when they
asked that, Madam chair? Yes.
When they asked that I have
right now, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator Baca. Thank you, Mr
Chair, and thank you for
submitting your credentials, Mr
Sanchez for this position. I
know it's challenging to come
forward for some places of
honor, but they're also places
that are question and exactly
Um so I wanted to talk a little
bit. I think I was gonna cover
much of what obvious and in this
position, but my colleagues
leave that alone. But what I
will say is that, um as this sex
session has progressed, um I'm
compelled by some of my senators
here on my position with
Lobbyists in regards to these
positions. I've slowly become
more to the side of presuming
that that should not be a
practice. Um, we've had a couple
of passed through confirmation
so far, and I can't tell you
that I haven't had some regret
with those votes that I've made
on those. So, um, I'll start
with that there.
The second thing I want to get
into is your education and
background. You explained a bit
about your
Position in regards to the trust
that you manage. Um and I wanted
to know if you had any other,
um, experience, um regarding
finance.
Equities securities. Things of
that nature. If you've ever
managed assets of those types of
nature before other than the
trust, yes with real estate and
mortgages, and I see and and and
thank you, Mr Chair, Madam chair
right now, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Sanchez,
and I appreciate that. I've done
a lot of real estate, work
myself and and work with
mortgage and real estate
contracts. Um, In my practice,
it's a focus area for me.
Um I have also traded equities
securities forwards and and
other instruments. Um, options,
things like that. And I can tell
you the differences are vast in
those two areas. Um, there
there.
To be honest with you of little
relation to each other,
especially when you're talking
about micro investment, which
is, uh, of the example you gave
of a gravel pit. Um
Versus you know, multi billion
dollar fund moving in and out of
several in several sectors.
Those are completely different
items might my next question I
would ask you is, um And I read
your your, um, educational bio.
But do you
You know what I did not see was
any degrees in economics,
banking or finance? Um do you
have any, if not degrees in
those types of financial fields?
Do you have any certificates or
things of that nature that you
can offer us to to make me feel
more comfortable with you?
managing and having input to a
fund this size?
Ah matter. Um, Mr Vice
President, Vice chair, Madam
Chair, Senator. Yes, on the
first degree that you see from
the College of Santa Fe that is
it is a is a type of business
degree looking at operations.
Perishes, Um Institutes of
organizations. So that hasn't
been then my my life experience,
particularly with
15 years with ST Joseph
Children.
Some of the investments, Mr
Chair and Mr Sanchez have to do
with very complex derivatives
and and equities that in sectors
that have newly emerging in some
cases, um, that look at things
like, uh, market performances,
and I think it's a very
technical field.
Um, I get unless you've been
exposed to it. I think it's it's
I I would like in some of the
experience you have, and I and I
don't mean to be little. It's
because I lack in experiences
that you've had, and we all have
our own strong and weakness,
strength and weaknesses in
certain areas. And so I want to
say that I don't begrudge that.
But
But those types of instruments
are, um the technical expertise
required to make knowledgeable
decisions in those areas is is a
something that I think you would
gain more from having if you
worked within a hedge fund or
within a trading operation of
some sort. If you've
If you've been on a floor if
you've managed, uh, teams of
traders have been a traitor
yourself. Those are those are
kinds of things more more akin
to this type of position, or
even if you have a degree in
economics and have a more macro
level of expertise in economic
transactions involving equities,
derivatives options, those sorts
of things
So so I I feel that although
related yes, this is a trust. It
did seem very administrator real
to me What your position within
That was, um And I think that,
um there's a little bit of
lacking there against that would
make me comfortable. Um, I don't
I don't question your motives.
I don't question your integrity
in any way. But I do have some,
uh
Hesitation, I guess with, uh
with the nuts and bolts of the
resume, if you will, and so I'll
leave it at that. Well, thank
you again. I want to thank the
sponsor for coming to speak to
me beforehand and offer to offer
answer any questions that I
might have. Um, I do appreciate
that senator Compost and that's
all I have.
Mr Chair. Thank you, Senator
Stefanick.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator. And thank you, Mr
Sanchez.
Um, I came in a few minutes
late, and so I whole
conversation about religion has
kind of thrown me.
This is an appointment to the
investment counsel.
Um
I I believe that, um
What your coming up for
appointment.
Has to do with ensuring that the
state of New Mexico
Has funds that continue to grow.
For the well being of the state.
Could you make a general comment
about what contributions you
will make to that position?
Without religion in the company.
Yes.
Ah!
Mr Chair and Madam Chair,
Senator. My experience in
understanding when you approach
a trust.
You don't start. You don't start
with the dollars. You start with
the people that you're the
trustee for.
And so I start with the people
in Mexico. What their need is,
their need is for this trust to
grow, but also what's the
investment that we make today?
So in the growth of the
investment, we need to be very
prudent that that it is secure
that it's invested in a way
there's diversified that's going
to grow, but also how that
investment can grow.
In thinking outside the box in
New Mexico companies.
And there's opportunities. I
think that we're missing and
this is what I want to bring to
this, Uh
Oversight to the state
investment counsel is how are we
not thinking outside the box?
uh, to propel New Mexico forward
in attracting businesses and
growing the mom and pop
businesses in our state, so they
have
Funding financing, and those two
things is how I would approach
is thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you Any
other questions or comments?
Senator Personal.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Compost. Thank you. Um,
I like Senator Stephanus did
come in a little bit late, but I
was able to listen to the
committee hearing on the way in.
Um I do have a little bit of an
issue just from the many years
of being on this committee and
Um, a little bit of your work
here and and what we've done and
it does give me concern with
you, Um, doing the job that
we're gonna put you on is such a
powerful
Group is the state investment
counsel.
So I do have my reservations
there much like the secretary of
C Y f D. That doesn't mean I'm
hoping you fail or make bad
investments or anything like
that. Of course, I don't want
that to happen.
Um, but I also don't want to get
in a situation where you know
decisions are made and and and
it's because maybe
Political thought, as opposed to
what is best for all new
Mexicans.
And that includes Chavez. Can,
um, I think many of the times
they're they're left out of the
conversation, even though that's
where a lot of the
The money comes from that we're
investing.
And so hopefully um, you know, I
challenge you to if you get
through
To help me that voice for for
this group of people because
they don't feel heard they don't
appreciate it.
Um, whether it's perceived or
real, You know who's who's to
decide that so hopefully we can,
um
Get that changed. Work together.
Find a way to ensure that we're
investing in businesses and that
in that cork you madam Chair or
Mr Chair. Thank you.
Senator do hit for the second
time.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh,
Mr Allen, Tell me a little bit
about your
Mr Sanchez. I'm sorry. I'm
sorry. And I did that a couple
of times, didn't I? I apologize.
Um
Uh uh.
Tell me a little bit about your
involvement, and when there were
efforts to pass the early
childhood constitutional
amendment, tell me a little bit
about your involvement and your
positions on that.
So I was a member of the
investors. Madam Chair. I was a
member of the, uh, investing
kids. Now, um
Coalition.
We started out 10 years 10 years
process to pass this. I was one
of the leaders, uh, and one of
the strategists in doing this
When we approach this, we is
before we hit 50th. We're at 48
and we were hitting heading
towards 50th and Children's well
being.
We saw the trend and where we
were going. There was no, um,
appetite for attacks at that
time political will to raise the
money for that. We saw the
growth of the fund and I made my
ex made myself an expert on the
land grant permanent funds
studying that inside out. We
hired economic economists
renowned economist schooled in
economics, Uh, Swiss School of
economics.
We put a portfolio put studies
together. We did research. We
pulled the public pulled it 79%.
So we knew that the will of the
people were there if you're
going to try a constitutional
amendment, you need to have the
people behind you. We knew that
the need was there, and we saw
that the fund could support the
distribution. That was very
important part. How do you go?
In the future with a healthy,
strong fund. And what is the
appropriate? Uh, number to pull
from that We see that the fund
is still robust and growing, but
there is the concern that that
it it grows by two sources of
revenue, and we had to
understand what those two
sources of revenue gas and oil
and and and its investment.
And could that hold the withdrew
the money being withdrawn and we
came to the conclusion. Yes, And
there's also the equation that's
not placed in that. When you see
the value is the value of the
oil still in the ground in the
that that's never no one ever
takes into account that value
that's still there. So we had to
do research on that. We had to
bring forward to the this body.
Um and we were able to convince
the House of Representatives
numerous times and ultimately
convinced this body that the
constitutional amendment was, uh
Uh, strong, prudent decision and
I congratulate the senators for
placing that on the ballot and
then with investing kids now
helped lead the the vote, and it
did pass by 70.3 very strong
margin between both Democrats,
Republicans and independents.
The will of the people ended up
speaking on that very clearly so
I was very proud and happy to be
part of that. It took 10 years
to do that, and that's one of
the things make me feel good
about, even though it took a
long time is that
Uh, the State Investment Council
is about investment, but it is
prohibited to have a position on
who the beneficiaries are.
So I'm changing roles in that is
now to protect those
beneficiaries. We did add early
childhood is a beneficiary, and
I'm very proud of that work and
proud of the work that this body
did.
Thank you.
Senator or TCP? No, thank you.
Mr Vice Chairman just a quick
comment on that issue.
It was an investment banker
trained investment.
With the great background of
financial caution, who
Usually fought you on that.
Uh,
Because he argued that if we did
it
The fund would go back result.
It was only when, when, when,
when, when he was no longer an
opposition that we were able to
get it through this committee
and onto the floor of the
Senate.
And he was proven absolutely
wrong. We've invested
In Children, and the fund has
grown.
Despite all of his predictions,
So just because you're trained
in investments doesn't
necessarily mean you can tell
the future And it doesn't
necessarily mean your judgment
is going to be proven correct in
the long run, So I thank you for
being willing to take that on
all those many years fight the
fight, and eventually you
persuade. Thank you for that,
Senator Morse.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Thank you for a
second time that you just made.
I think something just came up
and I was going to talk about it
earlier about your advocacy work
in the political work. You did,
Um, which is fine. Every single
one of us has taken our arrows
and our sling. We do.
But for years you were
responsible for billboards upon
on the freeway, negative mail
pieces attacking members of the
Legislature and in the Senate
social media ads, it got very
negative and again part of the
game. You haven't senator or T
semen. But believe it or not,
not everyone likes me. And they
called me names. Um
Hurts my feelings.
Um, but, yeah, you You had a
very active role in a very
negative political campaign for
many years, attacking many
members of the Legislature's
some aren't here. Some are still
here. Now you're gonna you're
gonna be, um
In in a in a government position
yourself.
How, and I think we're able to
put that aside sometimes because
it's the nature of this
business, But there there are
some hard feelings towards you,
Um for your advocates what you
did, accusing members of the
Legislature not caring about
Children.
Because you had a different
opinion about a constitutional
amendment. You were responsible
for putting up billboards
against both previous members of
the S I, C and members of the
Legislature saying
How do you you going to then
work with those same people?
Both of the s I C e and in the
legend of Children just because
you have a policy difference,
and you really did drag a lot of
people. Mr. Vice Chair, Madam
chair and Senator, uh, you you
shared with us. I want to
understand when I understand
your question.
Uh, because
It was a coalition of numerous
groups and numerous individuals
and and I can't take credit for
what other coalition members did
Some of those ideas were good.
Some of them weren't uh, been
since that time accused and, uh,
given credit for so many things,
matter of fact, they some people
start to think I was the
Chupacabra that I'm responsible
for.
So many things. You mentioned
the line of
Ah!
About Children. Two senators, I
never purchased any billboards.
I get credit for that, and, uh
I didn't purchase billboards
that were negative. You know, I
did not do that to make the
record clear, though that was
not contracted to me or to ST
Joseph's Children. Ah,
The billboards that I think
you're referring to was not
My doing, And I know that
sometimes the other coalition
members, uh they wanted the
credit for it, and Saint Joe's
would get the credit and it was
an art was in our project, So
our project is how he's been
about bringing the system
sticks and that is a negative.
Is negative, and people will
say, Well, you know, it was sad
about that. You know that we all
are sad about that. That should
make everybody sad.
The statistics, but we just
brought the statistics of the
Children forward.
And anything we did in the media
in the sense of purchase media.
Uh, we did not have an ask in
it and that was taken to the
secretary of secretary of State
who made it very clear that they
weren't political ads. They were
educational ads and those
educational ads. Um
Just brought forward.
The statistics of our Children,
and in that the people had the
choice to do what they wanted
to, Senator. Thank you, Mr
Gerald Machiavelli, Machiavelli
said If someone thinks you have
the power accepted, um and so
that that was perception out
there and but so how I'll leave
it at that. We've got a bunch of
others. Totally. Dennison chair.
Thank you. Thank you See no
other questions. What's the will
of the committee?
Motion for a do pass if I can
have a roll call vote.
Senator Baca. Senator Baca about
snow. Senator Lopez. Yes,
Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Moore's Senator Morris
Votes No. Senator Nibert.
Senator Nyberg votes, no senator
or cheesy Pinot.
Yes, Senator or TCP. No votes.
Yes, Senator. Pirtle, Senator
Pirtle votes No, Senator Stefan
IX. Dinner or fun. Stefan X
votes? Yes, Senator Stewart?
Yes, Senator Stewart Rhodes.
Yes, Senator Harm you Army of
votes. Yes, Senator Doig.
Yes, and explain my vote.
Senator do his votes. Yes.
Senator, do it.
And Mr Sanchez.
I
I guess I I am
I'm voting yes, and unsure of
that vote, and I
Really?
I heard the commitments I think
that you made here today to, uh
That
You're not going to make in
state investments. Ah, and not
going to continue as a paid
lobbyist or paid advocate. What
while you're on there. Um, and
so I'm going to be watching too.
To make sure that is the case.
Uh, but thank you for your
willingness to serve.
Mr Sanchez, with seven in favor
of this confirmation will be
seeing you in front of the full
Senate later this morning.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair. Thank you very
much. Thank you very much
committed
in the next move on to the next
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Kelly O'Donnell
to the state investment counsel.
Gonna call up Senator Stewart.
Good morning, Mr John.
Good morning, Senator.
Good morning, Mr Chairman, Madam
Chair members of the committee.
I am have the great honor today
of presenting for the state
investment counsel Kelly
O'Donnell. Kelly O Donnell has
both an undergraduate master's
degree and a PhD
In economics from the University
of New Mexico. She got those
degrees from 1995 through 2001.
Since then, she's worked in
state government in New Mexico.
In several different categories.
She was a senior fiscal
economist for the New Mexico
Department of Tax and Rev.
She was a tax policy director,
Also for Tax and Revenue
Department. She was deputy
Cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico Economic Development
Partners.
Department. She's been the
superintendent of R L and D. She
has her own company. O'Donnell
economy, economics and strategy.
Currently, she is the chief
research and policy officer of
home Lies. Uh, I can tell lots
of funny stories about Kelly.
She's just
So smart when it comes to the
economies of things. She's got a
great sense of humor. She's been
a friend for a long time I
introduced Kelly Oh, Donald
Thank you.
It's a great honor. Mr Chairman,
to be considered for the state
Investment Council. Um as and I
want to thank Senator Stewart
for for giving me this great
opportunity.
Um, as as Senator Stewart
mentioned I am an economist by
training. I've been working in
New Mexico public policy for
over 25 years with a emphasis
throughout my career on public
finance. Um, I am also I have
never raised any sheep but I
have raised three Children here
in New Mexico. They all went to
public school here in New
Mexico. They all went to U. N.
M.
Two of them have launched and or
another states. The last one is
still home here at U and M. I
got my PhD in economics while
raising those three Children and
serving as a senior fiscal
economist attacks.
From there. As a senator Stewart
mentioned I served as director
of tax policy Deputy Secretary
for economic development
Regulation and superintendent of
regulation and licensing and
then moved on to you and M where
I was a research scholar in
public administration and
economics for seven years. Um, I
also have my own company,
O'Donnell economics and strategy
through which I have consulted
for
Numerous local local governments
here in New Mexico state
government agencies. Many many
nonprofits have very wide
experience in public finance, as
it applies to many different
areas of New Mexico. Public
policy. Um let's see, I
currently service chief research
and policy officer at home wise
here in Santa Fe.
Um, let's see, Don't so a little
bit more about me and what I
actually think about things
foundational to everything I do,
starting at tax many, many years
ago at voices for Children many
years ago and throughout private
consulting and in my public
service, I believe that is
strong economy is built from the
bottom up.
And it's built on the foundation
of well funded, well
administered.
Um, cohesive systems of public
education, healthcare and public
safety.
Uh, fundamental to being able to
adequately fund these things and
build our economy in such a way
that Children growing up here
now have a real chance of
success in the New Mexico
economy and don't just leave the
state.
Um we is is the State Investment
Council and the funds it manages
New Mexico's economy is changing
rapidly. It's funny, I you know,
Like I said, I've been here 35
years, and for many, many years,
it really didn't seem like it
was changing at all. Um, but in
fact, it's changing quite
rapidly now and as this as the
new director of the state
investment counsel mentioned
Those invested funds are going
to become more important than
ever as we move through the
energy transition and as there
are fewer royalty revenues for,
for instance, the permanent
funds, um so it's absolutely
critical that those funds be
managed in a in a in a prudent,
fiscally responsible manner
because they were intended.
By Congress to last in
perpetuity and to fund public
education in particular, but
also the other 20 beneficiaries
of Land Grant Permanent fund and
everybody who benefits from the
Severance tax Permanent fund and
all of the other funds that the
s. I see managers. All of those
funds need to be responsibly
managed for the benefit of the
beneficiaries and the current
and future residents of New
Mexico.
I also want to mention that I
worked a lot in economic
development throughout my career
in a variety of different
capacities, and I know that part
of the mandate is your part.
Part of the work of the SEC is
is to find investments in New
Mexico to invest in New Mexico's
growth and that process of
vetting vetting investments
determining which will be long
term beneficial for New Mexico.
You know, waiting through all of
the propaganda that tends to, um
surround economic development
efforts in New Mexico, waiting
through that to see the truth
and see what is really in the
best interests of new Mexicans
and the beneficiaries of the
various trust funds is going to
be a huge effort and one that's
going to require a lot of
expertise, and I think a lot of
fiscal discipline
And with that, I will, um
I'll conclude Thank you again
for considering me. It's great.
Thank you so much. We do have
one person who signed up and
organized support. Mr John
Clark.
Good morning again, Mr Chair and
members of the committee again.
My name is John Clark and I'm
the state investment officer for
the S. I C. I have had the
pleasure of working with Dr
O'Donnell in the past throughout
a couple of her roles, but
primarily in her roles at the
Economic Development Department.
It was always a pleasure working
with her, but also her work,
both in analysis and insights
have always been very well
regarded, well respected.
Given that given her strong
background in economics, look
forward to welcoming her and
working with her on these
important issues. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. We have no one who
signed up and organized
opposition. But is there anyone
in the room who wishes to raise
their hand in support of the
contrary?
Saying three
I'll give you a minute.
Um
As I have
Okay?
How didn't always have this high
tech stuff? The Um as Miss
O'Donnell is going to replace me
on the state investment counsel,
Uh, there are some things I
think it needs to be said about
her role as a center appointee
to the state investment counsel
and I have to know that she has
to be willing to
Answer Any questions that ask is
asking of her by a state
senator, because it's very
important that this role that's
going in there as a as a
senator as representing you and
your body. Your body has to know
what's going on in the state
investment counsel.
Uh, it hasn't always been a
better roses in there, but it's
things are going along very well
right now. But she has to be
able. No one should be able to
Quiet or stop her from asking a
question that you asked as a
state senator. Because
This.
This is a check and a balance in
this system member from the
house and the member from the
Senate or the people that have
to relate to you.
What's going on on the policy in
this state, and it's It's very,
very important that that role be
carried through. I'm sure Miss
O'Donnell can be will be do a
great job, but, uh, it's a it's
a lot of changes a lot of
opportunities there, too.
To vote for social issues rather
than
Making as much money and look
what you can looking out for the
kids and finding jobs for our
people in our own state.
That's all. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the committee room and
opposition of the appointment?
Anyone online signal now good
questions or comments from the
committee.
Senator Nipper.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um Mr Chair
and
And so, Donald. Um
I didn't say anything with the
last. I would like to talk a
little bit about your investment
experience. I see the economic
vesting.
Are not the same. And so I'd
like to know what your
background in
Investing in making investment
decisions. Okay, turn it on and
don't touch it. Okay? Got it.
Um, thank you for that. Mr Chair
and Senator Nyberg time than I
have been, as I mentioned before
working in public finance, um,
with an eye towards fiscal
fiscal responsible fiscal
management of public funds for a
really long time.
Do I have direct experience in
investments? You know of the
size that the s I C is managing.
No, I do not.
I am.
I am very, very interested and
and in learning more, but I have
not been the person who is
responsible for making large
investment decisions. I have
advised many individuals, but I
have never been
Well, Mr Chair, Missile, Donald,
even but if you've advised
people as to investment
decisions, what
What would that advice look
like? What? What, be doggoned
them invest in certain stocks
Certain categories of investment
vehicles. What does that look
like?
My the work that I have done as
an economist, has largely been
around looking at the impact of
investments of public funds and
trying to determine the degree
to which those investments of
public funds generate returns
that are sufficient to that are
sufficient to justify their
investment in one way or
another.
So my my work on advising in
around investment has generally
been around helping, um
businesses and institutions
determine whether what they're
proposing to do with public
funds is a responsible
investment and if it will
generate
When you say generates, Um,
returns. Are you meaning making
money or you talking about?
More more Fick types of returns
such as stable employment
opportunities for for our
students. Whatever. Yeah, Mr
Chair, Senator neighbor. The
answer to that is both. I'll
tell you that.
From my perspective, and and I
am I'm a I'm, a classically
trained economist, uh, but from
my perspective
Uh, I There are investments of
public funds that aren't going
to generate a financial return.
That's that's why you have a
public sector. Right. You have
public goods, but by and large,
most investments, particularly
when they're in private industry
or in yeah, in part of an
industry need to generate an
actual economic return. So why
look at both, and certainly I am
quite capable of quantifying.
The the non pecuniary to use a
fancy term that the non
financial returns on an
investment, But I'm also quite
capable of and have on many
occasions. Uh
Looked at the actual finance
long term financial returns to
investment.
So, so it's It's a blend of
both, but I am
What I'm trying to emphasize. I
think in this answer is that
Financial responsibility and and
care and prudence in investing
or making financial decisions is
absolutely critical to me, and I
am not inclined to consider a
social return on investment to
be equivalent to a financial
return on investment. I think
they're both important, but I
think the financial return on
investment, particularly in this
role
Is the the more important return
and should always take
precedence.
Well, Mr Chair and Miss
O'Donnell. I think with respect
to
The very nature of
The find the funds. The goal is
to maximize the return to the
citizens of New Mexico, and
that's uh, that's counted in in
dollars and not other.
Other types of, uh
Measures that one might say
Well, that was prudent. It's
really how much money did you
make for us this past year and
and so in that regard?
Hmm.
The requirement, as was pointed
out in the last discussion.
Making investment decisions and
I'd really like to focus in on
making investment decisions for
the return in dollars. Uh, have
you had that experience for 10
or more years?
I have had over 25 years of
experience in state public
finance and and and in
responsibly managing public
funds. I believe the statute
includes finance in that list of
qualifications.
10 years and
With respect to the role that
you see yourself.
Being part of the state
investment counsel.
Do you think that that role in
public finance will assist you
in? Uh, maybe making transit?
Making investment decisions that
are primarily focused in the
private sector. I think Mr
Chairman, Senator
I think a
Commitment.
To a little bit.
My first job instead. And and I
apologize. I'm gonna digress
just a little bit. My first job
in state government was at TRD
tax and rev writing F I R s and
that although that seems sort of
trivial, it was actually
foundational to how I think
about things because what I
learned for better or for worse
at the taxation of Revenue
Department many, many years ago.
Was that it is critically
important to protect the state's
funds. That taxpayer dollars
checking taxpayer dollars is
part of being a public servant,
and I always in my career in
public in the public sector. I
always took that very seriously.
I don't think there is there
There is no object. You know you
can have other
Priorities and you can pursue
other agendas. But if you're
managing public funds, that's
what you're doing, and your
managing them to to achieve the
greatest return on investment
for the people of New Mexico,
who put that money in there in
the first place, and that, from
my perspective is sacrosanct.
There. There's
That's the number one agenda and
everything else is secondary. I
think that you can bring, um
Ah, a spirit of fiscal
discipline and prudence to
making financial decisions and
you can do that in the public
sector or the private sector.
Um, so I, although I don't have
direct experience managing large
funds that are invested
privately, I do have a great
deal of experience managing
public funds in different
contexts. And I also have, I
think
The right mindset in that I know
how the money is. I know how the
money was generated. I know how
the money is spent. Um, I
believe that I know what New
Mexico
Needs for a stable and adequate
government, and the first thing
it needs is the confidence of
the people in how the funds are
administered.
And so for me having
Operate, operating from a
position of
Humility.
Um
Willingness and ability to learn
very, very fast. Um, and a long
history of being very consistent
in my belief.
That
Responsible Fiscal management is
our first and foremost primary
role. We can't. Um, I think I I
think I'm qualified to do this
role and I think I will become
more qualified in a very short
period of time because I am
extremely committed to learning
and I'm also very clear in my
priorities and in my commitment
to
Putting the financial well being
of the state first.
Well, let's uh
Mr Chair and Miss O'Donnell. Uh,
It's certainly, uh
A challenge with all the world
events that go on trying to find
The
Opportunities that present
themselves and trying to
See
Maybe into a crystal ball.
That's not necessarily clear.
As to where the not only the
economy but frankly, where a
particular company is heading
were a particular class of
Investment opportunities whether
they be bonds or real estate or
the stock market generally, uh
and it
It seems to me that are
Requirements to place people on
that council with with
significant experience was well
thought out. And because it's
not something that just anybody
can do, frankly, and it's not
something that many people do.
Uh, and there's even less that
do it well.
Yeah, and we're in a fortunate
position to have one of the
largest sovereign funds in the
world.
At your fingertips, if you will,
If you're appointed to fill this
position, So, uh, it's a
tremendous responsibility. It's
not only requires, uh,
On the job training, but we're
supposed to come to it with with
Some ability to discern those
matters so
You know, I I hope that your
background and
In public finance. Uh, may
Wind itself as a benefit as you
get over over to that side.
But I do think that there's um
not very many people in the
state that really
Are qualified to do this type of
work and to make those types of
investment decisions and it's a
it's a difficult
Task, and I'm sure the eight
commissioners get around and
talk about, uh, where this stuff
is headed, and hopefully there
those discussions
Result in and
Continued growth of that fund
because it's pointed out
previously.
Um oil and gas revenues while
they are great.
The last few years and hopefully
they'll continue to next year.
Maybe the year after.
We do know.
That those funding sources will
be tempered.
Over time and possibly in the in
the near future of the
Money is going in.
To some of those accounts will
be dramatically different than
they are today, so that's going
to put greater challenges on
this, Uh
Investment counsel to maximize
allow us to have the ability to
spend those monies for the
various projects that you are
familiar with on the government
side.
But but I see this on the on the
private side have had
In my career, Uh, several
positions where we were
responsible for investing large
sums of money and making those
decisions And it's not an easy
Easy task. Wayne Risk reward
scenarios, Wayne, uh
The
Types of
Investments that you want to
make for a period of time and
Taking on those risk, and
sometimes you get it right and
sometimes you get it
tremendously wrong, and, uh,
trying to learn from from those
Bad decisions and overcome
those is part of the learning
process.
I hope you're not only a quick
study, but I hope that you're
coming too.
With some some eye toward
Investments and
The way. Uh most of those
investments are going to be in
the private sector, which I
think is vastly different than
the public sector. Thank you,
Senator Doig.
Senator O'Donnell, Um
I have no concerns that you
aren't coming to this position
with. I think exactly the kind
of experience that we want folks
off.
Yeah. The, uh
The statute, says 10 years of
experience in investment
management risk management,
corporate government,
investment, accounting or
finance. I think your experience
probably covers
At least a couple of those for
many, many, many years.
Um, so I
Clearly.
I, uh
I think it was clear in the last
year. Uh, the last country I I
have no problems about saying so
if I have any concerns how
someone on this position or or
or any other, Um and I
I'm thrilled that you are
willing to do it and I think
you're going to be an excellent
Thank you, Senator Morris. The
experience since you regularly.
Um I just want to get the second
next line was about contracts.
You disclose that? Um, And have
you done anything in the last
two years Because the statute
specifically says you can't have
done any, um
Members shall not have had any.
It's got to be, UM and Senator
It'll be close on the two years
I have. You know, I've done a
I've done data analysis for ped.
They have one that when they
calculate their risk, you know,
they do, uh,
When when they set up the
funding formula. They have some
problems with some of the data
and they contract with me to do.
some data analysis for them. It
has nothing to do with public
policy. It is, but if
technically it that contract may
have disclosing it. I think it's
just read the sense to you
members shall not have any
contracts to do business with
the council.
The investment office, state
treasurer, the Educational
Retirement Board, the Public
Employees Finance Authority, or
the State Board of Finance
per person's appointment.
So I don't say PD in there. But
would you agree not to do any
while you're on s a distraction,
State agencies while you're over
there.
Yes.
That would that would be that?
Yes. Absolutely. Thank you for
that. Thank you See no further
questions or comments. We had a
motion from senator stuff panics
or a path I can have a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca. Senator Baca
votes. Yes, Senator Lopez? Yes,
Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Yes, Yes, Senator McKenna votes.
Yes, Senator Moore's Senator
Morris was yes, Senator. Nibert,
Senator. Nine both. Yes, Senator
or G Pinot? Yes, Senator or TCP.
No votes. Yes, Senator. Pirtle,
Senator. Puerto votes. Yes,
Senator. Stefan IX, Senator
Stefan IX votes? Yes, Senator
Stewart? Yes, Senator Stewart
votes? Yes, Senator. Harmony.
Oh, yes, Mia was yes, Senator.
Do Hig Senator do
Votes. Yes.
With 11 in favor of the
confirmation. We'll see you
later this morning on the Senate
floor. Thank you. Thank you so
much.
Another committee will stay
going until 11 a.m.. We're going
to move on to the next agenda
item, which is the appointment.
Of Josette Monette.
To the as the secretary of the
Department of Indian Affairs.
Good morning, Senator Shindo.
Senator.
Members of the Rules committee.
I'm truly honored here this
morning to
Present to you miss those that
Damon, a
That's the, uh
There's an IV for her Senate
confirmation for the Indian
Affairs Department.
For the last 11 months. I've had
the opportunity to work with her
in her role as deputy Cabinet
secretary and general counsel.
And she's done an extraordinary
job with the department.
As you can see from her
impressive resume.
She started a schoolteacher Mimi
Stewart, think you appreciate
that?
Uh and I went on to work in her
own tribal community at Turtle
Mountain Community School there
in North Dakota.
After several years of teaching,
I think she probably got the law
bug and decided that pursue her
law degree at the University of
New Mexico, where she came to
attend your American any summer
law program.
Prior to her, uh, her school in
their graduated in 2015.
And it's pretty much called New
Mexico home after she graduated
from law school. That's
extraordinary work with some of
our
Nonprofit organizations.
Served as co general counsel or
deputy counsel for some of the
tribes in New Mexico.
And work with one of the guests,
a prestigious law firms here in
New Mexico that work with
Ah, that we use in our fight to
get our lands back.
And so, uh,
I told you young woman.
One of the things I wanted to
You know, I was just
reminiscing. Uh,
In 20 years when I sat in front
of her the rules committee when
I was confirmed as Cabinet
secretary back in 2004.
And I really had to remind
myself
But as Cabinet secretary, I know
we talked about tribal
Reports of tribes in the state
of New Mexico or sovereigns.
But as a Cabinet secretary, I
had to understand that that work
went beyond just two tribes
because of the state of New
Mexico is also home to over 300
federally recognized tribes,
people that have called New
Mexico home.
So I'm very, very proud to to
say that after 20 years
You know when
This money gets confirmed she
will be the first Cabinet
secretary.
To be not from the state of New
Mexico, but I know that she
would do an extraordinary job
and I know her people and her
tribe back in North Dakota.
To remind Ben would be proud of
her so
That I'm gonna turn it over to
her for her comments.
Sorry, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee Bourgeois anytime she
I'm Josette Monette. I am here
with two of my Children. Today I
have three Children, Lupe and
Jude. They're sitting off to the
side and many members of the I d
staffer here with me as well
today. Um, As Senator Shindo
mentioned I am Turtle Mountain
Band of Chippewa Indians, where
I was born and raised lived most
of my life on my reservation
came to New Mexico in 2012 to
attend, Um, School of law.
Um and I haven't left since my
entire legal career has been
spent here in New Mexico. Um, my
Children attended Albuquerque
Public schools. I have two girls
that my older girls that are
attending U N. M right now and
my son is in his senior year of
high school at a P s.
Um, I grew up surrounded by
family and my community and my
reservation. I was raised by a
strong single mother who I
believe is listening on zoom
today from North Dakota at
Coleman. My reservation, um
I, um I am a single mother
raised my three Children here. I
grew up with, like I said in a
strong family, um many of those
things that you see and hear
about about reservation life.
Unfortunately, I'm able to check
many of those boxes as well. I
think I've had a pretty good
life. But, um
Like I said, growing up in a
single parent household and the
product of a survivor of
domestic violence. I have seen
addictions affect my family and
my friends. Um
But the resiliency of Indian
people and the real Sicilian Sea
of my community and myself is
what has kept me going
constantly.
Um, so I had wanted to become an
attorney for years of my life.
Never believed that I would be
able to make it. It took me a
long time to get there. Um, I
wasn't sure that I was smart
enough. I wasn't sure that I was
going to have the ability to do
it. Um, but, um
But it was always something that
was important to me. In high
school. We had to take tribal
government in order to graduate
from high school on my school on
the reservation. My grandpa
served on our tribal council
when I was younger. My uncle is
a former chairman of my tribe
have other family members who
have been part of tribal
politics. And when they talk
about families have talking
about politics at holidays In my
family, it was always talking
about tribal politics, and that
is what I grew up with
surrounded by talking about
tribal politics and what's going
on in federal Indian law?
I do have a couple of, um, an
auntie and uncle that are both
attorneys. Um, but I really had
no idea what an attorney really
meant. Or when attorney really
did. But when I was in middle
school, I saw a lot of my
friends being sent off to
detention centers are going off
to certain places, and I kept
wondering why nobody was there
to help them. And so I kind of
thought well.
I think I'd like to become an
attorney to see if I can help.
Um
But as I grew my my, my mind
shifted. I thought maybe when I
came to last school, I actually
thought maybe I would become a
lobbyist. Or maybe I would go
into policy. Um, but I was in
the Southwest Indian lock Limit
clinic and in the clinic, we
represented indigent clients in
public courts, and I decided
there that that was really where
my heart was for law.
Um, I took my first job as an
attorney here in New Mexico at
the New Mexico Legal Aid Native
American program where I
represented into indigent
clients in public courts. I have
represented clients and many
Pueblo courts in New Mexico, um,
on a variety of issues on you
know, we're basically general
law practitioners. Um, we're
able to do criminal
representation, criminal defense
work as well because there's a
carve out
In Indian country, You're not
guaranteed the right to an
attorney and so on. Legal
services has a car about to
allow legal service providers to
be able to provide that criminal
representation in tribal courts.
Um, so I was able to do that.
From there. I was able to move
over to the Pueblo of this
letter and worked as associate
general counsel for a little bit
and then moved over to Barnhouse
Keegan, Solomon and West and
Private Indian law firm in town.
Um, that, um tribes and
businesses throughout Indian
country and then went back to
New Mexico Legal Aid Native
American program to serve as the
director where I was just before
coming over to I A D.
Um
So just to go back to my history
a little bit about coming to New
Mexico when I was in fourth
grade. My mom worked for Indian
health services, and we had come
here for training. My mom came
here was supposed to be a one
year training. I think, um, but
we didn't stay the whole time.
But we came here. I went to
Montana Vista Elementary School
when I was in fourth grade.
For part of the year and in my
mind, New Mexico was like the
place to be. I had strived my
entire life to get back to New
Mexico. I loved Albuquerque. I
love New Mexico. I thought I
would come here for undergrad.
Um, I ended up having three
Children before I graduated with
my undergraduate degrees. And
so, um, I wasn't sure that I was
going to make it out of North
Dakota.
Um, I was a single mom at the
age of 25 with three kids. Um, I
came down to New Mexico when I
came in 2012. My kids were 10 8
and six and I moved down here
without any family. Not really
any friends. I knew a couple of
people that I had attended pls I
with that we're going to be at
the law school. Um, but I took a
jump because I knew that if I
wanted to be a new Mexico it was
my chance to make it.
And try. So, um, we came and
we've been here like I said it.
it is our home. My kids have
lived here. My kids tell me
repeatedly they're not leaving.
Um, this is where they want to
be. And so this is our home. Um
So I started with I d in March
of 2023 as the general counsel,
Um
And was able to kind of, you
know, learn the lay of the land.
It was my first time in state
government in any state
government, So it was a huge
learning process for me. I spent
the first few months reading
through all our policies, all
the statutes trying to
understand I had to learn about
capital outlay and tiff to learn
about the state Tribal
collaboration Act.
I had to learn about what our
founding statutes are and how
we're organized. I spent a while
doing that. Um And then in July,
uh I was able to move into the
deputy secretary role, so I
served as deputy secretary and
general counsel together for a
while and then, um, was
appointed into this position.
You know, and in December of
2023, so it's just been about
maybe six weeks, six or seven
weeks that I've been in this
role right now, Um
It's been great. It's been a
wonderful learning experience. I
have met tons of people. It's an
honor to be able to serve the
state of New Mexico and to serve
the tribes, Nations and
publishers in New Mexico as well
as all Indian people in New
Mexico. I think New Mexico is a
unique state. It really is the
apex of what's happening in
Indian country. People are
looking to what's going on in
new markets are in Indian
country in New Mexico to
determine where
We're Indian country should go
in the future, and I think
that's important and I think
it's an amazing experience to be
part of. I cannot think the
state and all the nation's
public and tribal leaders enough
to allow me to be in this
position. Um, I have some goals
looking at I'd moving into the
future my first week that I got
appointed to this position. I
kind of came up with some
thoughts about how I wanted.
Idea or some goals for 2024 and
I sat down with the staff and I
said, Okay, here's my Here's my
goals for 2024. Let's see how we
can get those accomplished. Uh,
you know, and we're looking at
next year. We'll look at whether
or not we need any more. I, um
FTE, whether or not we need to
expand any of our initiatives,
But really right now, my biggest
school is really to stabilize
and build and continue to
strengthen.
Idea and continue the work. That
might thank you.
Thank you. We do have several
who who wrote in an organized
support, and I'm gonna do a
minute and a half each because
in the essence of time, and I'm
going to start off with Governor
Janelle Writebol, who's joining
us via Zoom. Good morning,
Governor.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
We can hear you.
Okay, so I'm not sure how to
turn on my camera or if I can,
but, um
Good morning, everyone. I am
Governor General Rabaul on
behalf of the rebel pocket. I'm
here today to support Josette
Monnett for her confirmation as
Cabinet secretary for the
Department of Indian Affairs.
I am confident in her leadership
to lead the Indian Affairs
Department and we're committed
Lee for four and with the tribes
As general counsel. She has the
knowledge of the departments in
the workings. She has worked
well with my tribe staff, and
I'm sure this is the same with
the Indian Affairs Department as
well.
Miss Manette has proved so far
as deputy Cabinet secretary. Her
commitment and work ethics to be
successful.
I asked Respective rules
committee members and our
colleagues in the Senate to
follow suit and vote yes to
confirm Secretary Monette. Thank
you. Thank you, Governor, Myron
Armijo
Well, he's looking for him. I'll
call up Governor Craig from the
Pueblo of Greece.
Good morning senators. Members
of the committee. My name is
Craig One cello. I'm governor
for Vickery's Pablo and I'm here
today to support
Josette Butcher. Her name's
Josette Monnett, Cabinet
secretary Indian affairs.
I had a speech read now, but
having known her and it's only
get a minute, so having known
her and having worked with or I
can tell that she has a clear
understanding of the drivers,
communities and native
communities within New Mexico,
Having worked with her, observed
her, she's quick. She's quick
learner. She supports my tribe.
She's good to she's not not Only
good to pick Cherries but all
the public lows.
And I look forward to working
with her, and I hope that you
would support her today. Thank
you.
Governor. Armijo isn't online
right now. And governor
Makhzoumi of the Pueblo Vista
Let the hat an emergency on the
problem and can't make it. You
signed up in support. So next
I'll go to Vice President
Rochelle Montoya of the Navajo
Nation.
Good morning.
Um I do have a statement from
President Nygren from the Navajo
Nation. Um, chair Katie do his
vice chair Leo Romeo, honorable
members of the Senate Rules
Committee. I write to express
the Navajo nation's full support
of Josette Monae's appointment
as the secretary of New Mexico
Indian Affairs Department. The
Navajo Nation believes that
secretary designee
Monet possesses the exact
exceptional skills and
professionalism necessary to
lead the department and to
respect represent the Navajo
nation and all the nations,
tribes and troubles of New
Mexico. I respectfully request
the honorable senators of the
Senate Rules Committee to
support Secretary designate
Monet and to share your support
with your senator, your Senate
colleagues.
And this is for myself. I am
vice president of the Navajo
Nation. I'm the first female to
hold this office. The reason I'm
pointing that out is because
across the Indian country are
native women are always looking
for positiveness and to have
Miss Monet sit in this position
is going to be an extremely well
thought out.
Um, position for her. She has
just expressed her different
views and her different
experiences she tackles
Experiences and
The jobs that she does.
With her whole heart. That's
what we look for as native
women, and I fully support Miss
Monet and I do ask and humbly
ask that you vote. Yes to
confirm her today. Thank you,
Doctor.
Thank you. And I do see the
honorable Laura Montoya joining
us today. Madame Treasurer. You
here to speak on behalf of this
country?
If you are coming up
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I won't
take up much time. I'm Laura
Montoya. I'm have the honor of
being your state treasurer and
traveling around our state. Our
native communities are very
important and many have stated
their support. And I also do
support her. Thank you.
Thank you. And just for the
record, we also have Secretary
Stephanie Rodriguez Department
of Higher Education Secretary
Jason Bowie, Department of
Public Safety Secretary Ricky
Serna, Department of
Transportation. Deputy Secretary
General Frederick Department of
Indian Affairs. And with that on
a show of hands, is there
anybody else in the room in
favor of the country if you can
raise your hands?
The whole room.
I can give you two minutes if
you'd like to.
Good morning, Honorable
Committee members Chairwoman,
Vice chair. I am here
representing Santa Ana Pablo and
Governor Myron our meal. I just
received a text he was unable to
get the proper link. He had
technical difficulties on his
end, but the pueblo Santa Ana
is, uh well, my my name is J.
Garcia. I'm a tribal council
member former lieutenant
governor and representing Santa
Ana Pablo.
Governor Meo asked me to convey
to the committee that the public
Oh, Santa Ana is in full support
of Miss my name getting
confirmed for this position, and
we are proud and honored to
support and endorse or as our
next cabinet secretary of Indian
affairs.
We look forward to working with
her to advanced native issues,
concerns and successes for all
tribes, bubbles and nations so
again on behalf of Governor
Armijo and Santa and the Public
Travel Council, we endorse this
money for this confirmation
hearing. Thank you for that.
Anyone in the committee room in
opposition of the confirmation
Anyone in online.
Saying none any questions or
comments from the committee.
Senator Morris. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you really
appreciate our conversation. Um
one concern, comment we had
about you knowing about New
Mexico history and travel issues
and things I have been more than
11. And I think the support from
all the tribes. I was worried
when Santa Ana got up to oppose
you, but, um,
that was opposition by the way,
Governor anyways. Um, so I'm
really proud of you for doing
this and reading disclosures and
some of the challenges you get
to know you.
Just quickly on disclosures. Um,
you said that you had or are a
member of the UK government
gambling board. Are you
currently that there or have you
have you given that up?
No, I have not done it since I
moved over to the state. I was
on the gaming commission and no,
no Moscow. Okay, and the law
firm or any other compensation
You're currently receiving any
conflicts there that you need to
disclose. No, there are no
complex. The only other thing I
do is I work as and, um, the at
U. N. M School of law.
As a moot court.
Um, professor for the need of a
national Native American Law
Student Association conflicts.
Thank you with that.
One other comment. Senator Lopez
Thank thank you, Mr Chair.
And Senator. Remember your
confirmation senator, too.
Um
You know from that first
presentation and time that we
had here in front of Senate
rules a few years back.
The importance of the Indian
Affairs Department is critical
for the stadium in Mexico.
And I know others who have sat
in that seat before to have, um,
I think continued to move the
role of what the department does
and has within state government.
Um, I just wanted to ask and
part of this is
When we talk about
collaboration, right? Um
What is your plan? When you
Are representing and moving in
between our our tribal
communities. But what is the
plan that you have to make sure
that
The state honors the
collaboration.
I was talking, Madam Chair, Mr
Terry, members of the committee
I was visiting with Senator
Shindo just before we came in
here. And, um, one of the things
that I think that I've said, and
and before I became general
counsel. Also, one thing that I
said, is, um
Hmm. My life is is Indian
country and serving Indian
country. And so, um, whenever
decisions come up, and things
need to be decided, are things
need to be looked at one of the
things that always guides me is,
uh how, Um how is it going to
impact Indian country and what
are those impacts going to be
the Indian country?
And that I won't do something
that I think overall will impact
in Indian country and adverse
way. I think my role within I A,
D. Um, As I've stated, I think
New Mexico is very unique. There
are not a lot of states that are
giving capital two tribes. That
is not something you see very
often.
And you don't see states doing
collaboration with tribes. You
don't see a lot of states taking
consideration of tribal
leadership into consideration
when decision makings. I think
my role at I d, um if I'm able
to continue as the Cabinet
secretary is to ensure that I
can continue that lease,
enrolling, facilitate
communication between the state
and tribal leadership, as well
as Indian country and all native
people with in New Mexico.
So my goal is to ensure that I'm
able to keep those lines of
communications open from both
sides ensure that for sure,
Tribal leadership knows that
they can contact us. They can
contact. Our office has an
amazing staff. They do amazing
job. I really depend on my staff
to be the experts in the areas
where they're hired. Um, but my
goal is to make sure that I
That I keep that door open and
that I consider what it is. And
that, um, that ultimately I know
that I'm here really for Indian
country and that that's my goal
is to make sure that we have
that. But again, I think New
Mexico is such a unique state,
And that's why it's like so
important to be here and so
exciting to be here because we
do so much for Indian people in
New Mexico.
You and I appreciate that, Madam
chair and and over the years
I've seen, um
The Legislature and the state
government being much more
supportive.
Of all of our tribes here within
the state.
And I know there's a lot of
initiatives moving forward now.
but in the past two around
Indian education
And how we continue to foster
support, making sure that
Um, tribal education is front
and center.
Um so I would I would hope Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair Senator
Secretary to be, um, that you
know those initiatives continue
to move forward. But do you know
that you do have friends in the
Legislature other than Senator
Shindo?
But there are others of us who
do support and want to make sure
that we
Continue to foster. Um
The cultural values the cultures
of the different tribes and make
especially with bilingual
education.
Um, we've had a chance to go to
him is Pueblo.
And see what beautiful work has
been done within their education
system and others around the
state. But how do we continue to
move that forward?
And I hope that you would
continue to be at the forefront
of that as a liaison with the
Legislature to to make sure that
we keep our commitment.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator McKenna.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Vice chair and Senator
Shindo, Miss Manette. I was
really impressed when you and I
spoke on the floor Sundays ago.
Um, really proud of your
willingness to step forward.
And lead the Indian Affairs
Department. Since our speaking
on the floor, I have had the
opportunity to converse with
your predecessor, and he had
only glowing remarks about how
much you have learned already
when you were his deputy.
So I've already I'm really
impressed with the team
language you use this morning on
how to reach the goals for I a D
and all of the pebbles and
nations that I d serves, And I'm
really thankful that your your
nation is willing to share you
here in New Mexico. Um, this is
your second home. Thank you very
much. Madam Chair, vice chair
and Senator.
Thank you no further questions
or comments the will of the
committee.
Moving Do pass by Senator
Stewart if I can have a roll
call vote.
Senator Baca is excused.
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Lopez votes. Yes, Senator
McKenna.
Yes, Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Morris. Senator Morris
votes? Yes, Senator. Never
Senator. Neighbor votes. Yes,
Senator or G Z Pinot? Yes,
Senator. Easy Pinot votes. Yes,
Senator Pirtle is excused,
Senator Stefan IX, Senator
Stefanik votes? Yes, Senator
Stewart? Yes, Senator Stewart
votes? Yes, Senator. Harmony.
Oh, yes, Senator. Hermia votes.
Yes, Senator. Do hig.
Senator Do have votes? Yes. Nine
in favor. You have a do
passable. See you later on the
Senate floor for the full
confirmation.
Thank you. Members of the
committee.
We're not gonna move on to the
next item on the agenda, which
is
That's a city that Dolores
Lucero appointment to the space
of authority, and I believe that
Senator Griggs will be leading
this confirmation.
Good morning, Senator Griggs.
Good morning, Mr Mr Rice here
and members of the committee.
I'm I'm here to sponsor Delores
Lucero for position on the
Spaceport Authority board.
I've known Delores for for many
years when she was on the City
Council
In large cruises. I was on the
city commission in Alamogordo,
and we had off opportunities to
interact. You can read her her
resume. She's a longtime
resident of Las Cruces been
involved in numerous civic
activities and would be a great
asset to the board of their or
taboo to the Spaceport
authority.
So it's that will stand for
questions and, uh
She where we go. Thank you. Mr
Lucero. Would you like to make
some up some people some
comments? Yes, Mr Chair and
senators. Thank you for having
me here today. And for this
appointment, I am my lifelong
Residents of Dona Ana County
served as mayor Pro TEM for the
city of Las Cruces and been an
advocate for the spaceport from
the day one with Governor
Richardson, who later appointed
me to this base tax.
District.
Different from the spaceport
authority.
As when I was elected, and so,
um, my son attended Huntsville,
Alabama in the sixth grade to go
to the spaceport there last
week. I was at the spaceport
lunch and this space, Uh,
injection was successful, and
there were four astronauts from
outside of the
New Mexico area that we're up in
space. But most importantly, my
role I feel in the future of the
spaceport authority is to move
the spaceport away from
Thinking that it's all about
Going into space, but more into
the education of aerospace. That
day. Two weeks ago, there were
100 and 50 students from Sierra
County and Dona Ana County that
attended it was, it's amazing to
see how that's grown.
New Mexico State University now
has an aerospace degree.
That I wish my son could have
participated in.
But in any case, I'm a big
advocate of it since day one,
and, uh, I stand here for
questions. Thank you know we do
have one person who signed up
and organized support Janet Co
stuff You'd like to step up. You
have two minutes.
Mr Chair.
My name is Janet Acosta. I've
known Delores for 20 years, and
she has dedicated, hardworking
public servant. She's been a
proponent of space since
inception, and I can assure you
that she will be an asset to the
sports Spaceport board. I asked
you to vote Yes. On her
confirmation today. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anybody in
the committee room in favor of
this confirmation?
Thing to any in opposition.
Anyone online?
Thing man will next go to
comments and questions from the
committee.
Saying none. What's the will of
the committee hidden later? Let
him go without any questions.
Um, obviously, spaceport has
been a little bit controversial.
Mr Chair. I'm sorry, um, and
hasn't really lived up to the
expectations for the last 15
years. What do we actually get
that investment back?
Thank you, Mr Senator and Mr
Chair. I'm glad that you're
asking that question because I
have been forming the same one
over the last five years and
meaning the new spaceport
director last summer in a
conversation in that
Like I said, I was a proponent
when this tax was being passed
in this in the county with over
65% in a favor, and so I want to
see this in through. I think
that, um
The
Marketing of that spaceport is
not what the public understands
it is not about Virgin Galactic.
It started that way with
Governor Richardson. It has
grown into much more than that.
The activities that take place
out there in the 100 employees
that are employed every single
day at six digit more salaries
is an indication that this has a
lot of growth potential. It's
just that we haven't
Explain to the voters how it
takes place.
It has the longest runway in
this country.
Um, an example. Jay Leno was out
there.
To run his cars.
But he pays the price for that
Everyone that uses that place
you pays a price for it. And
Toyota also did commercials out
there. There is a lot of
activity. I have that dynamic.
Ability to
the fire lights turn on emotion
for a do pass if I can get a
roll call vote.
Senator Baca and there any
objection to this confirmation,
saying that you have a do pass.
We'll see you later on the
Senate floor.
Teresa. If you can come on up,
and we have Senator Moore's
we're having our sergeant of
arms check to see if this is a
test or if we need to evacuate.
Thank you, Mr Chair. This is our
last one of the day for, uh,
Finance Authority Teresa and
constant tedious. No, I
butchered that. My apologies,
But you guys are probably
impressed with no her from her
world CFO at you and M.
Um, she's also before she came
here as CFO. She was at Santa
You see San Francisco. She was
also before that, For the last
35 years, she's been at leader,
Leader of budgeting various
universities, And before that
she was vice chair at Berkeley.
Um, and she got her MBA at
Berkeley. Also be a U. C. Davis
and most importantly,
She is a native of Bethesda,
Maryland, where the smartest
people in the country come from
Senator or TCP, no, just
dignified gentleman General
Ladies from Bethesda just really
a wealth of knowledge of the DC
Madam chair with that I'll let
her explain a little bit more.
Mr Chair and members of the
committee. I'm very honored to
be here today in the interest of
time in our safety Alma very
quickly.
I am very honored to be able to
use my experience in finance to
help the New Mexico Finance
Authority. I'm eager also to
work on behalf of the entire
state of New Mexico. Um I'm
eager to collaborate with a
fellow committee members. I have
a passion in my heart for the
state of New Mexico. I'm
interested in anything that can
do to is a catalyst for positive
change for the state.
And I appreciate your time and
consideration of me in this role
as I want to work for the
continued success of our beloved
New Mexico. Thank you. Thank you
with that, and you know the
teacher in me as a little
nervous about these lights, so
I'm not gonna take any comment.
If you're okay with that and ask
for immediately.
Mr. Here. We're going to just
point out that I have Brown here
to support me, but I'm sure he's
fine. There's two people here.
I'm not gonna take any comment
because I'm getting nervous of
these lights that I want to get
us out. So there's a motion for
do pass by Senator Moore's. Is
there any objection to this?
Saying none. We'll see you
later. I'm gonna go ahead and
oh, and then stopped.
So we did have the motion for
the do pass and no one in
opposition. We will be seeing
you later this morning in the
Senate chamber for the full
confirmation.
Thank you.
Senate Roses in recess.
