Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator bye yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator my SS.
Senator McKenna your senator
Morris.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Center share your Senator
Shendo.
Center souls.
Etcetera Stepanek's.
Senator Wirth here Senator
Woods.
You do not have a quorum madam
president.
senators to the chamber.
You now have a quorum miss madam
president.
former San L. to fund so pueblo
governor and traditional leader.
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance the lead
In the.
Come on no way way here then he
what to do with manatee noted we
need we at Senate O. L. D. B. to
among all impaired Sumpter are
compared Tompkins among all.
We K. nominee he will be on show
also doing the Courtney no no
recording of the toy.
Mr Coker he will be on show and
then you know the point me
he'll.
that have gone before us however
you that I've been chosen to
work here.
Your representative and every
one of our people here in in our
state of New Mexico.
To give you the strength.
On a daily basis to help our
people.
Mr here's our common we have
gone through hard times and
everything.
together as one group.
And more blood since goes to
each and everyone of you and
everyone that's here present
today thank you.
and the wood on the ceiling on
this that deals in the Cibola
County about the it was the
second part of the Las.
Good morning everyone we'll go
to senator Peter Wirth for our
first order of business.
Thank you madam president good
order business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president thank
you governor Toyotas for being
here we very much appreciate
wisdom and knowledge are
appreciated and we are honored
to have you here with us so
thank you.
Ladies and gentleman Senate we
president I believe you have
sponsored some gift bags on
desks courtesy of the New Mexico
Asian families and the Asian
is just re opened and we're glad
to have them re opened and also
code a restaurant in Albuquerque
restaurant I don't know but as
soon as those come over I've
asked them to set them up in the
for having bills drafted is next
Monday February thirteenth so
please keep that in mind today
is D. a de Locle to it a day
which is P. B. and J. day from
the president's table and place
that on today's calendar.
If there's no objection sent a
Ortiz Y. Pino at that memorial
will be read and then after
we're done with the memorial
will introduce their gas.
Both on the floor and in the
gallery Senator Padilla also has
that we're gonna wait to see
that that should be lots of fun
and also very important that's
good stuff that's happening here
in New Mexico I know some other
members have guessed introduced
from six to seven dinner from
seven to nine by invitation only
thank you madam president that's
it's up front and I would yield
to Senator Padilla.
No objection it is so ordered.
Other announcements Senator
Brandt men present I would like
to excuse Sir Moores answer
Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam present
apologies units consent to allow
cameras in the chamber and in
the Senate gallery we have
families tied together on the
seeing no other announcements
Senator Wirth for our next order
of business thank you madam
president I think what we'll do
is go to the memorial Senator
on the order of Business third
reading of legislation Senator
Padilla thank you madam
president I move that the Senate
memorial two be put on its final
moral read by the reader madam
presidents all us to do that
the reader show right.
Senate memorial two a memorial
recognizing P. B. and J. family
services was founded in nineteen
seventy two in Albuquerque
southwest valley in response to
a scarcity of services and
supports for children at risk
and their families and whereas
community and whereas the
services provided by people B.
B. and J. are rooted in the
experience of the first children
and families survive P. B. and
are including in prisons and
jails and responding to the
needs of children and families
that have emerged in a changing
society and whereas B. B. NJ has
ability to care for their
children and whereas PPE NJ's
main site in Albuquerque
southwest valley is eighty years
old and is deteriorating
safe suitable site and we're
just B. B. and J. is the is you
a unique and its commitment to
offer ongoing cutting edge
and families serving in many
instances generations.
To reunite and restore
environments what's where
agencies now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state in New Mexico that
recognition be extended to P. B.
NJ family services for its
three be proclaimed P. B. and J.
day in the Senate be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to P. B.
NJ family services signed and
clerk New Mexico state Senate.
Senator Padilla thank you very
much madam president that we
fifty of a little bit ago with
very little bit ago and I will
tell you that I was one of the
first participants in this
program way back in the day in
the south valley in in the
you see lots of babies running
around at the roundhouse today
madam president it always lifts
all of our spirits when that
happens and they're on the
rostrum here they're up and
we'll talk about them here in a
little bit but I have to tell
the legislature over the past
fifty years and and the
legislature's been generous to
help them that way I do have a
number of things that that we
could talk about that in greater
detail but one that I will
them exactly some of the tips
techniques etcetera and how to
keep that family together stay
engaged primarily fathers that
are coming out of out of jails
key individuals madam president
that is help this program for
many many years I like to call
in one of my mic my best buddies
here he every time they come to
him he has worked very hard I'm
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
madam president and yes I I
would like to speak in support
of this memorial honoring peanut
calculations would have been
nine years old when she founded
it was a quite a quite an
accomplishment.
One of the things I wanted to
say about peanut butter and
jelly PPV and J..
They have not dealt in
philosophy they have built in
actual proof the work on the
ground that they do shows that
Build relationships with those
families that the key to any of
this to motivating families to
relationships it's now multi
generational that people work
there that they that they send
their kids for help there when
they need help and that they're
department today is a result of
the work the P. B. and J. did
and the way they were able to
help convince Ellis can years
ago to push for the creation of
terrible stories that hit the
press about how kids are
mistreated we deal we we we
cannot resort to removing
lot of work and it's it really
is a tribute to what they've
done so I hope the members will
join me in in thanking them for
the work they do and supporting
Thank you madam president
I worked with and you've got
your back when I was at the
clinical law program at the
collaborated again with a new
director but also on on issues
facing our families.
and that's not and that's with
policy.
The other thing that they've
done is tremendous services for
families and the success stories
of this agency are think are
again thank the work of Peavey
NJ and and ask everyone to join
in honoring them thank you madam
chair madam president thank you
about P. B. NJ but I will tell
you madam president that that
simply scratches the surface I'm
sure there's a lot of elbow
grease time energy overnight
meetings this and that that
called what is your favorite
thing about P. B. and J. let me
just quote two of them if you
wouldn't mind madam president
summary on one of them is
sleeping and dreaming about an
ocean another one is playing
going down the slide in up the
slide all that madam president
so I called some of those out
because think of the imagination
that these kiddos are getting as
a result of having this
experience in their life so
members in the lieutenant
governor be shown as voting in
the affirmative.
Seeing no objection Senate
memorial to has passed with
yes yes correct Sir for the.
Thank you madam president and if
we go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
and I'll introduce some guests.
I am going to acknowledge all of
our guests from P. B. NJ today I
know we have some in the gallery
we have some here on the floor I
do want to recognize some
families are in attendance
Manuel undergoing Florida Molina
heard earlier
We have a brand the signs signs
late what these Abedi cardio
Haley on that at the Ernestina
what if the serum and there is a
Marcio to stand she is the
founder of P. B. NJ family
services and has done work a
yeoman's work in our community
for many many years if we can
welcome them.
So Senator Wirth where
announcements miscellaneous what
else shall we do today.
Thank you madam president
the house the reader to read.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
The journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Senator Peter Wirth.
Madam president your Education
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one twenty
has had it under consider
consideration and reports the
same with recommendation that it
Senator souls from the committee
report from the Education
Committee.
Thank you madam chair I madam
And let the record reflect that
they were voted on individually.
No objection the reader to read
all the committee reports Senate
Senate bill to to do pass as
amended and that's referred to
the finance committee.
passed as amended and thence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
senator William P. souls
chairman Senator souls I move
adoption the committee report.
Those opposed nay the eyes have
it the committee report is
adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
consideration consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do passed as amended
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chairman.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports Senate bill fifty three
do pass as amended.
Senate bill three eighteen do
pass and thence referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it committee
report is adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
are acted upon individually the
same has been duly rules and
engrossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
We are adoption of the state
verbal Committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed nay.
Reader to read
no.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
Senator Padilla thank you very
much madam president I want to
draw the body's attention the
chamber's attention to a special
guest today here in New Mexico
have a company called team first
here in New Mexico team first is
a cutting edge technology
company based right here in
Albuquerque there founded in two
thousand seven they began as an
taking it solution to the next
level by bringing high paying
jobs to New Mexico in the
security industry and they are
going to be providing these
these devices and this is Mr New
up at the end of the day that
they're providing these
facilities are these devices on
campuses they can work inside of
buildings they can work outside
committee that I chair science
technology telecommunications in
the interim and we did invite
them to Farmington and they
brought him up there and he had
a really good time on the campus
of San Juan community college
to provide securities on their
campuses but we do appreciate
Madam present you taking the
time to come by and see in this
morning and.
He's donning his New Mexico's
here right there and he's got
chief operating officer Patrick
Kalondo
the lead robotics manager Dylan
Rodriguez is in the chamber as
well we also have their investor
relations professional Steven a
introduce their channel partner
manager who's a childhood friend
of mine we grew up together and
and let just down the road from
each other and I'm very close to
their family and they're very
close to mine his name is Andy
Sanchez anyone to waive their
And madam president when I was
in Farmington we did a demo I'm
sorry when we came back to their
office in Albuquerque I really
want to make sure the thing
works and wouldn't run over me
so I went out to the parking lot
first robot thank you for
allowing us to do this Mr leader
and madam president so just to
speak.
He does.
Can we hear him speak not sure
and and he can also stop and
immediately notified law
enforcement professionals that
are already programmed into know
whether there's the danger in
the facility where he might be.
madam president to take it is
going to exit here in a little
bit and get back to work
somewhere in Albuquerque hello
can I just say one thing then
present so they already have
work that they're gonna be doing
Okay.
looks pretty miscellaneous gonna
thank you madam president I'd
like to introduce today my
intern from New Mexico highlands
university leadership program
More instant Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you madam president I too
would like to introduce my
against native women she's from
Ysleta Pueblo a set of Santa Fe
Indian school graduate and she
plans to major or yes majoring
in social work and she plans to
Any other announcements.
Seeing none of us Senator
Gonzalez.
For your prayers for my wife
Charlene that will be going
through a very intensive surgery
tomorrow.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president will
run announcements have just been
told the lunch has arrived in
the land someone make sure
everyone gets a chance to go
we will dissolve ourselves into
a committee of the whole and I
think just stand in place get
lunch we can do it right here on
the floor and wait for the house
see no objections were on that
order business introduction of
legislation the reader to read.
Senate bill three sixty three
resisting lawful arrest Senate
bill three sixty three.
Senate bill three sixty three
and then read twice by title
sort of printed and referred to
the Senate health public affairs
governmental conduct their find
that prohibitions against
references to a legislators
legislative capacity or against
use of provided stationery do
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three sixty four Senate
bill three sixty four and read
twice by title is her printed
and referred to the rules
marketing and promotional
program Senate bill three sixty
five Senate bill three sixty
five have been read twice by
title Sir print and referred to
the Senate Education Committee
regents of the university of New
Mexico for the New Mexico
bioscience Authority to staff
and operate a bioscience
business accelerator Senate bill
six Senate bill three sixty
seven introduced by Senator pope
and act relating to school
attendance improving reporting
requirements for student
For minimum awards Senate bill
three sixty seven Senate bill
three sixty seven have been read
three sixty eight introduced by
Senator pope and act relating to
law enforcement providing
exceptions in certain situations
to the requirement that law
enforcement use body worn
committee thanks to Judiciary
Senate bill three sixty eight.
Senate bill three sixty nine
dues by Senator pope an act
relating to workers compensation
amending the New Mexico
by employment as a firefighter
Senate bill three sixty nine.
Senate bill three sixty nine
have been read twice by title
Sir printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
data collection requiring
certain executive departments
and public bodies to collect
demographic data pertaining to
sexual orientation and gender
Judiciary Senate bill three
seventy.
House bill forty three
introduced by Elizabeth Liz
Thomson representative
Representative Elizabeth Liz Liz
public schools and public
private postsecondary
educational institutions to
adopt policies and procedures
addressing affirmative consent
and prevention of sexual assault
standard for sexual activity
house bill forty three.
House bill forty three.
House bill forty three.
House bill forty eight
introduced by Representative
Matthews and act relating to
nursing providing for an
read twice by title is ordered
referred to Senate health of
public affairs committee thanks
to Judiciary house bill forty
eight.
for employees of the office of
the Attorney General expanding
the scope of the district
attorney personnel and
compensation act to include
employees of the office of the
committee thanks to finance
Senate bill three seventy one.
Senate bill three seventy two
introduced by Senator share an
acquire facilities and charge a
fee or advance payment for storm
water service Senate bill three
seventy two Senate bill three
seventy two have been read twice
Senate memorial thirty three
introduced by senators Stefanics
Stewart Wirth how to meal
Hamblen Brandt but the souls
memorial thirty three.
Senate memorial thirty three min
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not referred to
Senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous seeing no
objection were on announcements
lunch we are going to have a
joint session honoring Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian day
we'll just stand in place go get
some lunch and will wait here
until the house comes over and
then we'll head over for
committee chairs will be in
tomorrow at eleven o'clock and
bills tomorrow and get warmed up
for that so eleven o'clock we'll
be back in tomorrow and now the
time for committee chairs to
make their announcements.
meet as scheduled at one thirty
if we are still in the committee
of the whole we will meet
fifteen minutes after that ends
in room three twenty one.
commissioners and we will also
be hearing bill three the bill
that was just introduced the
bill from senator Wirth and
you to check the Senate rules
procedures on the what's
happening page and sign up ahead
of time.
Thank you for that reminder any
other announcements from any
afternoon and we have twelve
bills on our agenda as a result
and see any of our committee
members here but as as a result
we are going to have a dinner
madam president all right hope
everyone heard that right any
other announcements
seeing none Senator Wirth I
thank you madam president for we
Madam president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
one seventeen.
Has had it under consideration
thence referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
German.
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
acted upon individually.
As amended and thence referred
to the finance committee.
Senate bill one thirty eight to
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one sixty eight do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill one seventy one do
not pass but that Senate this
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill one seventy four do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
favorable committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those pose nee the eyes have it
committee report is adopted and
announcements and miscellaneous
we're on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president so we are going to put
ourselves into a committee of
purpose of attending a joint
session honoring Asian American
Pacific Islander day and native
American native Hawaiian day and
asked that the members stand in
