Seven people
in a little under three hours
very which means we have about
half an hour for each conferee
so if folks can keep their
overall introductions to to
under ten minutes that would be
wonderful I just so that we have
time and actually right now I
don't think we're gonna have a
ton of questions from the
committee so those of you going
first if you like to go a little
longer I think it is that's fine
to do so the and the other with
that I'm going to get it over to
the vice chair who chairs are
permissions thank you madam
chairwoman good morning to
everybody we're gonna start with
the first item agenda which is
hearing the reappointment of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources department we have
with this cabinet secretary Sir
Propst and her Senate sponsor
senator Wirth good morning
senator Wirth welcome back thank
you Mr chairman madam chair and.
I will say that for me it's very
nice to be back in the building
and I'm super happy this morning
to be able to present secretary
cultural Probst for
reappointment as cabinet
secretary
our.
Kind of careers money at the
legislature in her serving in
state government pretty closely
aligned and I first got to know
her during the Richardson
administration when she was the
energy and environmental policy
advisor and then deputy cabinet
secretary and then she worked.
in a variety of different
salting and for Interwest Energy
and then of course has been
cabinet secretary of New Mexico
energy minerals since January
twenty nineteen I have.
Found her to be incredibly
knowledgeable about the issues
that she faces in that.
Challenging job and just think
that this is been a tremendous
appointment by the governor and
I think we should all feel very
lucky that the secretary is
willing to sit here for round
number two another hopefully
full four year term but I could
not be more
honor to present her for
reconfirmation and I will keep
it.
Short even though we don't have
a quorum.
I just think I'd like to hear
from secretary let her just say
a few words thank you madam
chair.
Thank you senator thank you
madam madam chair Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is their cultural profits it's
been my my honor to be the the
cabinet secretary of EMNRD for
the last four years and I'm
really humbled to be reappointed
interview before you again for
reappointment I want to thank
senator Wirth for sponsoring me
again and and having that faced
in the first time that I appear
before you it was a very very
deeply personal moments my
family were all here and my
husband Wayne is here today my
parents are watching but you
know I told you a lot about my
personal background this time
you have an opportunity to
evaluate how actually do on the
job you have four years of track
record and I want to talk about
some of the things that we've
accomplished as a few things
about where we're headed and
then see what what questions you
have for me but you this is an
incredible department that I
have the opportunity to lead of
an incredible team and I'm
really proud of the team that I
built we have worked with you on
passing monumental legislation
for the state of New Mexico
energy transition act the grid
modernization roadmap act we
have a governor Lujan Grisham
has established a climate change
task force that I coach here and
we are well on our way towards
you meeting Paris agreement
targets for the state of New
Mexico and that his has afforded
us the opportunity to to go
together to the international
stage and showcase what New
Mexico is leading on climate and
energy both that last year it at
cop twenty seven and before that
in Glasco cop twenty six we have
an incredible forest action plan
that we've established with
tribal input with the U. S.
Forest Service that guides our
ten year plan for for forest
health and prioritizing
watersheds across the state we
have issued mining soil health
guidelines worked on that with
with many stakeholders
at the oil conservation division
perhaps as come the the longest
way in the last four years in
terms of modernization we have
promulgated after two years of
public process.
Really robust methane natural
gas waste rules we've instituted
a spill role you've worked on or
penalties we've worked with the
industry on reducing seismicity
in the southeast part of the
state and we're tracking fresh
water use of produced water.
Many of these things you know
took a long time to negotiate
with various stakeholders in the
industry but really proud that
we have that collaborative
relationship and that important
industry and overall a year of
prior prioritize transparency
and accountability are sovereign
government to government
relationships between the
department and and our tribes in
Pablo's and and looking ahead
you double doubling down on that
as well as the environmental
justice work that we need to do
around climate and energy around
the state there two more things
I want to mention that are
really long term things that I'm
proud that we've accomplished in
the last four years there things
that started when I was working
for governor Richards and one is
that a few years ago we open the
doors to Pecos canyon state park
and we also completed the
remediation of the pride while
cavern under the city of
Carlsbad again with the support
of the legislature that was pro
first preventing at at huge huge
public hazard and really proud
that we were able to remediate
that site and bring stability
back to one of the busiest
intersections in the state and
and part of our state that's
incredibly important so looking
ahead you we have hundreds of
millions of dollars flowing to
the department for under the
federal stimulus programs
everything from oil and gas well
plugging to abandon my
infirmities.
Station that's going to be a
huge opportunity in a huge
challenge over the next four
plus years and I'm I'm looking
forward to to doing that and
then we also will continue on
with all of our economic
diversification work and claim
that work and just responsible
oversight of industry in New
Mexico thank you so much for the
opportunity to be here I know
you have a lot of people to
speak with this morning if I
want to keep it sort of
furniture questions thank you
chair thank you so much for that
I'm not going to go to members
or people who are joining us in
the committee room if you can
raise your hand if you're in
favor of this country.
And for those of you who would
like to speak but if you want to
I'll do I the first five to come
up to the front and then if we
have time of need more if you
can come up to the
The desk in the front state your
first and last name for the
record.
Thank you.
And we're only I'm only gonna do
I so the first five in line will
be the five that would all be
hearing from this morning.
Good morning.
Good morning madam chair Mr.
Mexico good morning can you hear
me OK good morning Mr chair
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Laura
Sanchez I am the executive
director of government and
public affairs at PNM and I have
I'm here in support we're PNM is
in support of the secretaries
confirmation I have known
personally the secretary now for
gosh almost twenty years and as
Senator Wirth that discussions
had many different roles in our
state very active in a lot of
public policy work and I've had
the pleasure of working with her
on a number of issues both well
All I we were both in the
nonprofit sector and then during
her time in government and I
find her to be extremely
professional the most most
integrity and she rented
apartment the same way and so we
definitely stand in support
thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair members of the committee
and.
More and without with energy
efficiency project and I've been
working with the secretary for
almost twenty years as well and
I'm just here to please urge you
to reconfirm this woman she is
an amazing asset for the state
of New Mexico and I wanted to
give you for reasons that I
think she's really really great
at this job one is that she's
brilliant she does the best job
of analyzing data and moving
projects forward in finding
creative solutions to every
problem that we face and we
really need that in this
position second issues
resourceful I don't think
anybody's gonna be surprised to
hear me say that I think energy
minerals is underfunded and
understaffed and yet somehow the
secretary make sure that the
projects continue to go and that
solutions are continually found
and that is really important for
the New Mexico state in New
Mexico she's a very professional
I have been to her with good
ideas and not so good ideas and
she's always very very print
professional and kind and she's
you know brought me together
with the opposition and made us
work together to find ways
forward and that's what New
Mexico needs well lastly I think
the most important is that she's
caring she can.
She always looks forward to what
is this project this policy this
program going to do to benefit
our state and that's what we
need so I just again I urge you
to confirm her appointment she
is what we need in this position
in New Mexico thank you for your
comments.
That Mike that you all are
on par our mixer on up here but
that one isn't so I guess if you
just speak up and towards those
other mice there there on the
desk so we make sure everyone
online community yeah because
yeah.
Thanks okay good morning madam
chair Mr chair my name is
William because we're gonna and
I am the director of
transmission development for
Invenergy of renewable energy
and transmission line developer
who is developing a four hundred
mile long transmission line in
the state of New Mexico I'm a
short term and then I've only
known staff for about ten years
or at only work for there for
ten years when I was working
with the New Mexico State Land
Office in twenty thirteen to
twenty fifteen and to the
executive director of Interwest
where we partner together to
help make New Mexico state trust
land a destination for renewable
energy projects in the state my
experience in that office taught
me that one this is a tireless
leader always a lot of energy a
lot of vision but also the
importance of having leaders in
position who agree with the the
state of New Mexico the people
of New Mexico because the right
leader I work for a Pyle will
help create change will help
institute a lot of great
programs and then the wrong
leader will stand in the way of
progress and change and
renewable energy projects so
when I saw that Sir was
appointed back in twenty
nineteen I was excited from a
far from Colorado and when I got
the chance to return here six
months ago I was very excited
because I thought that we would
be able to work together and
it's proven to be true in the
last six months I've met with
their and her staff several
times and we're working on a
creating a project that will
change the state that will
change the Energy opportunities
of the state and that is
something that
the reemployment of of Serra
will help continue this
innovation that our state needs
to have for energy transition
for the environment and for the
health of New Mexicans and so I
urge you to vote for her
re appointment and I thank you
for your time thank you for your
comments.
Thank you madam chair members
I'm consulting on the political
policy director of conservation
voters New Mexico people have
talked about how professional
and prepared secretaries and
just about every venue which
means that generally speaking
when we're acting I don't get
the opportunity to show the
gratitude that we feel not just
for the last four years which
she ran you through legislative
achievement that vicious
visionary and crafty rulemakings
the reform well conservation
division just so badly needed
all that fantastic but I think
it's worth also noting the
career of service that she has
put together just to this point
I think virtually every climate
achievement in the state almost
I can't wrap up some of the
rooms correctly for wrong.
She has played a pivotal role in
which is amazing so the
gratitude that we feel for the
for the career service really
strongly urge you the
reappointment of the secretary I
think the word asset was used
before it is not always easy to
attract people who are going to
hit the ground running and a
half so the sort of capability
and dexterity with the state
government that the secretary
does it's a rare asset we hope
that you reply to the thank you
thank you for your comments.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
Patrick for the I'm here on
behalf of the EOG resources we
are the largest oil and gas
producer New Mexico I always and
as number five number five a
five there's not much more I can
say but what I would want to
highlight just for the sake of
you know
As as it's been an
exemplification secretary Kopel
props true value to the state as
her diverse and unique
experience across a wide variety
of facets within the energy
sector that is not something
that you see generally speaking
in the M. and R. D. secretary
but it is something that is very
very much appreciated as she can
look at comprehensive broad
policy impacts across all of New
Mexico not just for her own
department so on that basis we
strongly support the the
reinstatement of of Secretary
cultural props thank you for
thank you for your comments is
there anyone on still a listed
to to on zoom so you can just do
two at random who are joining us
via the web.
His name.
T. J. Trujillo good morning.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
We can hear you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is TJ trio and
steak I get one of those rare
opportunities to testify on
behalf of myself
I apologize for not being able
to join you in person but I was
one of the unlucky individuals
they got the wrong house COVID
and I'm still in the process of
recovering.
However I do not want to miss
this opportunity to testify in
support of the reappointment of
Sarah Cottrell Propst.
I don't Sir of for about two
decades as I work with various
capacities including our time as
public as a public servant the
state government and our time
working and private industry.
I simply don't have enough time
in this important to fully
explain what a wonderful person
you have a free appointment.
The short.
Sure Sir is one of the most
talented passionate brilliant
individuals that I've had the
privilege to work with over most
of my professional career.
The state of New Mexico is a
better place because it serves
past service and reappointment
will only serve only better
serve the future of our state I
think Sir for her time and I
think you for your time.
Thank you so much not here for
one more.
Representative good morning.
Good morning at thank you chair
in Deborah Condit had registered
lobbyists for Interwest Energy
Alliance and I stand in strong
support of
secretary Propst confirmation
this morning I I was I consider
myself one of the lucky ones I
got as they're hired me on
several years ago to work with
her at Interwest and and I you
know sometimes when you work
with people there are those who
bring me up to a higher place in
your work life in your
professionalism and Sir was one
of those people and she you know
thank god we have right here
from New Mexico pushy a
challenge me even in my own work
life to be a better person and
more professional and everything
that I do and I'm so lucky to to
work alongside her and New
Mexico we are in here in New
Mexico we're so lucky to have
someone like her she has done a
fantastic job and spear headed.
That the EPA another and other
rules another bills that have
come a long way and you're just
so lucky to have her New Mexico
and I hope that we reconfirm her
and get four more years with her
care hello thank you for your
time and that.
And have a good day thank you
for your comments is there
anybody in the committee room
who's in opposition of the
reappointment.
Thing that anyone because of.
No yes room so with that I would
go to questions and comments
from committee.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning Serra corsair by love
issue you're just a workforce
now we just has to do everything
you do it all up I do want to
ask you though
everywhere I go I hear from
young people who are just not
happy with us because we're not
doing enough about climate
change
then the bot demise of our
climate bill that we were
working on together doesn't help
that so can you just talk a
little bit about you know your
vision and what what you see the
government's role going forward
in addressing climate change in
particular.
Chairman Senator Stewart thank
you for that that huge question
it's it's right it's it's a it's
a huge it's a huge challenge
there too two things I want to
say one is that I'm incredibly
hard work that we're doing
already as an administration
across all of the departments
through the climate change task
force whether talking about the
department of health looking at
the health impacts of climate
change or you know our our
department along with secretary
kitties Department working on on
methane rules those things a lot
of those strategies have either
been completed or well underway
clean car rules we've done a lot
of that I think we do what we
are.
What's missing is the the
permanence of a law like we were
working on together we haven't
quite gotten there yet the
session I think it's possible I
think it's doable it may not all
be done in one bill that is the
one bill for all time we have to
start start somewhere I will
point out some other other
pieces of legislation that
contribute to climate because
it's not just climate mitigation
reducing emissions it's
important we are living with
climate change now we need to be
resilient we have the worst fire
season we've ever had that our
our department was involved in
fighting those fires and so
Senate bill nine that senator
Wirth is sponsoring is a build
up for the first time find
recurring funding for
conservation efforts around the
state and in the case of EMNRD's
forestry division making our
forests more resilient to
climate change through
activities like cleaning it is
incredibly important to how we
how we survive in our
communities survive and what the
having having less fires means
less health impacts from the the
smoke so you we we I have have
passed legislation already which
BTA is a climate bill it reduces
greenhouse gas emissions in the
electric sectors that we have we
have done that you now that we
have these incredible nation
leading methane rules that were
worked on with the industry and
in the case of EMNRD's methane
rule you know no one challenged
that ruling court it stands it's
being lived with by the industry
we're implementing it we have
some Kinks to work out that's
going to take some time and some
effort but you know we're on
track there those were the two
top sources of emissions for the
state that brings us to
transportation and you have been
a leader on that sector as well
with your clean fuel standard
work that's going to be
important and I think you are
our work on on transportation as
a servant one of the next big
ticket items so whatever that
looks like I I hope that people
don't hang think that climate
success in New Mexico is
dependent on any one bill even
though it may seem like that at
the time climate change affects
the whole economy and we have to
have.
A whole bunch of strategies you
know bottom up top down to
tackle it and so I I'm not
putting all my eggs in one
basket and I don't think the
advocates said either and I look
forward to working with them on
it thank you Mr chairman and
chair if it's that kind of an
answer which is why you're
perfect for this job that you
see things that you work on them
that you don't give up thank you
put coalitions together so I
just appreciate your leadership
ship so much so thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and good
morning good morning committee
members good morning this props
and it's really thank you
Senator Wirth for sponsoring her
again and I I too want to echo
what we've heard on speakers how
impressed I've been working with
you in both official in New
Mexico passed the unofficial
capacities
I don't know if you remember but
we had that
climate change virtual meeting
with the now secretary deb
Haaland and I.
I was so impressed because I was
fumbling my way trying to do a
web in our and you were so
patient with us and my staff
because we were under COVID
conditions and I just don't
remember your presentation and
and this year helping me work
through the the our matters for
a free roaming horses
which I'm really pleased that
bill seems to be succeeding so
far so want to thank you for
your compassion your
professionalism and your
integrity and I'll be really
glad to give you my support this
morning thank you thank you
senator Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Wirth for sponsoring
the nominee this morning for
reconfirmation yep thank thank
you in your comments you you
mentioned the secretary Probst
the the Brian well is that
finishing of the the the filling
and and the resolution of that
issue in Carlsbad has that been
completed chair and senator yet
yes the remediation portion has
been completed it's stable we're
now in a two year monitoring
phase we have seismicity
monitoring devices at the site
to make sure that nothing is
that you know nothing is going
wrong underground so I'm I'm
pleased to report that that
seems to be on track.
Right that's very good I've
thoroughly enjoyed Mr chairman a
conversation I had with the
secretary Propst about the of.
The whole situation with the
department of health and have
really.
Have a great night how much
great progress has been made
under your administration and I
was particularly delighted that
you're on board with the idea of
geothermal development in the
state which I think can be the
the final ten to fifteen percent
of our renewable energy
production of electricity so
eager to stand in support of
confirmation thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
Senator Moores thank you for
your chair thank you senator
thank you of secretary and just
want to reiterate our
conversations no we don't always
agree on policy sometimes but
I've always found you to be
incredibly pleasurable to work
with even if the answer is no
and I just want to encourage you
to to continue to do that you've
always been open to our side of
the aisle and willing to talk to
us and talk to mystery and I
said sometimes answers no that's
fine on I just want to encourage
you to continue to do that and
are you you've been a total
professional persons I've known
you many years so I just want to
thank you and regulations and
everything you need from us
please feel free to call us to
thank you secretary thank you
senator Madam chairwoman.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to say it is so neat to sit here
and hear from conservation
voters and then from an oil
producer
whole area it really is a
testament to two year your
coalition building and and your
creative problem solving and
and like I counselor few
apartments and you guys are
underfunded and understaffed and
still doing remarkable work
and so I just want to thank you
for your service and I
enthusiastically support your
reconfirmation.
Thank you madam chair the I
think no one else I would like
to just make it just a couple of
COVID it was nice to hear that
you're brilliant resourceful
caring and tireless leader and
it was nice to sit and chat with
you and to learn more about you
and who you are as a person and
so I think we're very lucky to
have you and my question is
going to be what we're the two
toppings you you bring or that
you're proud of it and you
address that right you're proud
that you worked on the Pecos
canyon state park and you were
to ensure that hazard were
minimized and Carlsbad I'm
thankful that you address those
I'm also very thankful and your
leadership in bringing tribal
members to the table my district
has to pueblos and he could be a
nation that's important that are
native brothers and sisters have
a seat at the table and I'm
thankful for that now with that
Secretary Stewart.
Secretary.
I've what little by thanking at
the thought of divorce a
senators to.
I move approval of Serra props
Rippon permission may get their
approval with the second from
Senator Stefanics if I can have
a roll call vote please.
The fifty Senator Baca Senator
Ingle Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle
Senate's the phonics test
Senator Stewart yes center how
to meal yes Senator Duhigg yes.
Eight two zero congratulations
will be thank you today on the
Senate floor.
Thank you.
Senator what the next going to
call up at the department of
I've been tourism department
cabinet secretary job for for
for reappointment good morning.
Thank.
Thank you Mr president and
members
I'm very lucky this morning to
be able to do a second order
confirmation of someone who has
been doing a fantastic job R.
for states secretary Jan
Schreier get the pronunciation
Rights
So currently secretary Schreier
is.
Obviously leading the department
and continuing the New Mexico
true efforts in our state which
has been terrific for the state
of New she has done something
that is so important and that
over the years as a senator from
Santa Fe were tourism is one of
our huge economic development
drivers you know we just haven't
prioritized it when it comes to
funding and getting dollars into
that department and so I have
been very encouraged to see
through her leadership we
finally started doing what we
need to do which is investing in
tourism and realizing what a key
component tourism is for over
economic for overall economic
development and so she served in
this capacity
As secretary prior to that she
was up president CEO The New
Mexico hospitality association
from twenty fourteen to twenty
eighteen and then held some
positions that the tourism
department
in the in the in fact before the
working for the hospitality
association so again I just
think this is a tremendous
reappointment we are very lucky
to have someone like this who is
willing to again step up around
two and so I'm honored to
present secretary stronger this
morning for confirmation.
Thank you the morning morning
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to present to
you today it has been just an
honor to serve in this role for
the past four years and growing
the economy and providing job
opportunities and wealth
bringing in new wealth into our
state is something I'm very
passionate about because I want
everyone in the state to thrive
and I'm just a humble to be
reappointed as the cabinet
secretary of tourism and I I do
want to say I'm just beyond
grateful for the tourism
department's team
the industry the other agents
cabinet secretaries who
partnered and collaborated with
us because we're seeing tourism
grow at a just a wonderful right
over the last ten years we've
seen a thirty percent increase
in tourism economic impact it
now represents five point two
percent of the state's GDP which
is just for perspective third of
oil and gas so we talk about
wanting to diverse of fire
Kanemi this is been an industry
that has just continue to
perform for New Mexicans and a
lot of that is because the
partnership with the Legislature
of continuing to invest in this
particular industry
One of the things that I'm very
proud of is while the pandemic
was incredibly difficult for the
secretary being closed for a
very long time our recovery
actually outpaced the national
average
and it still is outpacing the
national average with growth and
that's really because of the
foundation that we had with the
New Mexico true brand because of
the additional investment to
that this body agreed to
appropriate to the tourism
department so we could compete
against our neighboring states
and really take advantage of
that pent up demand
this year I am I'm just so
honored that I get to stay
continue to steward The New
Mexico magazine who is
celebrating its hundredth
anniversary I just think it the
people that came before me to
steward that Brandt issue with
the New Mexico magazine a
hundred years for print
publication is just outstanding
is the oldest publication that
is state owned in the nation
also this year we are
celebrating New Mexico truce ten
year which is a nationally
recognized brands from brand USA
to U. S. travel association they
point to New Mexico and say this
is how you do it right as the
gold standard of what other
states should aspire to and then
finally one of things we
announced just recently is that
we are launching a tourism
exchange and this is been a
strategy that was implemented in
Australia to really focus on
supporting tribal and rural
communities taking full
advantage of the tourism economy
and so we are the first in the
US to launch it here and so
we're working with partners
across the state to make sure
that they can take advantage of
this opportunity
with all those accomplishments
you know working with industry
to achieve that that could
significant growth across the
state I believe that the best is
yet to come there's so much more
opportunity and I'm beyond
excited to contain.
You this momentum growing
tourism in every corner of our
state both local and tribal
communities so thank you so much
for the opportunity to present
today and I look forward to the
opportunity to continue to serve
thank you so much slide show
have those of you in the
committee room who's in favor of
the reconfirmation
reappointment.
Thank you and I'm gonna take the
top two because it's it's a
little after nine up quorum I'll
take have to to come over to the
desk to make comments.
And I'll need you to state your
first and last name for the
record please.
Hi my name is Jenny.
Okay sorry I'm short okay
I've written that my comments
because I'm not a politician I'm
not a public speaker I hate
doing this enough I didn't feel
so and support of a Jan I
wouldn't be here so I apologize.
My name is Jenny Campbell I'm
chairman of the board of the
fund on the flaws of the oldest
hotel site in the country I'm
also chairman of the state
tourism commission I've worked
with secretary Schreier for many
years first when she was CEO of
the hospitality Association and
then and she's been secretary of
our tourism board she's a uber
competent leader I've worked
with three cabinet secretary so
far and.
Jennifer has taken the
department to a totally new
level along with all of our team
as Senator Senator Wirth said
she was appointed two thousand
nineteen she spearheaded tax
legislation which brought equity
to the New Mexico lodging
industry she guided rebranding
The New Mexico true campaign
I've been tourism chair said
staff launched and that has
really put New Mexico on the map
in a way I think it has been
before she added L. A. as a
market for us which brought the
fifty six one return on that
investment I think all of you if
you could do anything and get a
fifty six to one return on
investment you would do it to
the counts come home so that was
really fabulous she has earned
record breaking spending in
visitors and twenty twenty one
of seven billion dollars that's
with a B. equating to eighty
four thousand jobs and seven
hundred eight million in state
and local tax revenue.
She is as she mentioned leading
this the W. international
tourism exchange change for the
first time ever in Prather New
Mexico is the first state to get
involved with that international
tourism exchange could really do
major things in bringing tourism
internationally to our state.
And last but not least shes was
recently appointed by our
president Joe Biden to the route
sixty six centennial Committee
and she's nominee for vice
chairman of that so she has done
an amazing job as cabinet
secretary she's passionate about
our industry and as that
constituent of hers I can tell
she's she's always thinking of
new and better ways to market
our state to tourists to bring
money to our state which results
in more jobs for our state as
well as pride of all of us being
able to live in the great state
and land of enchantment so thank
you for letting me speak on
behalf of Secretary fryer and I
could not be more supportive of
and I hope that you all vote in
favor of re appointment she's
done an amazing job for industry
thank you thank you for your
comments about take one more.
Good morning madam chair Mr
chairman members of the
committee I mental health.
Right now I'm entrusted by
secretary shire to service our
W..
All role in an appointment that
I take
I'm honored and privileged to
their to take this journey with
you either the four years before
and now the next hopefully for
next four years.
As you can imagine I have a.
Very clear deep lands into
working with secretary Schreier
on a daily basis and on on the
daily grind.
she is.
Dedicated and determined.
I think she comes to the office
with significant PO ways and
positivity and she creates an
environment in which everybody
in the team is set up for
success.
We have a tremendous talented
team that she stewards and leads
and empowers.
Including myself.
And.
Our representation and
commitment to the industry that
this agency representative.
Is her fierce advocacy is bar
none.
So I ask for your affirmation to
reconfirm her.
Hi the terms and.
Thank you thank you for your
comments I will be hearing from
people and so but I would like
you to raise your hands if
you're in support of the
country.
Okay so there's three that were
online and I'm gonna go are
there anybody in opposition of
the re appointment.
Six nine and the online.
Thank you for that with that
I'll now go to questions and
comments from the committee.
Senator fabrics.
Thank you Mr chair chair
I thank you senator Wirth for
bringing this forward and I'd
like to commend you even before
you were secretary The New
Mexico true
Campaign was very exciting and I
the department reached out to
different counties or to the all
the counties to see if they
would want to participate and of
course Santa Fe County found it
to their benefit to participate
and I think we made the right
decision
and the activities of the
department is moving forward I
I'm so glad that you are
Focusing on diverse activities
in the department thank you very
much.
Thank you for that Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you Secretary
have a question do you do
specific targeting different
markets for every area or do you
just market all of New Mexico he
said the I think mentioned LA so
the market all of it where do
you maybe state specifically
Santa Fe might have better there
were really does is going to hit
better in Dallas or even insure
wall what do you market specific
areas and in specific locations
and chair members of the
committee thank you senator
that's a at the excellent
question so our strategy is
multi layered what we have is
eight national branding campaign
to build awareness that New
Mexico is indeed in the United
States yes indeed you do not
need a passport you can drink
the water and one of the other
questions we get on really
regular basis how are your
beaches.
So we still have a lot of work
to do to raise awareness of New
Mexico and what truly is our
state about and then so for that
national campaign we are in LA
we are in San Diego we are in
Phoenix Denver
Houston Austin and Dallas we
used to be in Chicago but that
was a performing as well
according to our data so we
dropped that so and then that's
one years so those are fly
markets where we really deeply
saturate the media market and
then another layer is what we
call it a national addressable
so that's just digital but it's
really targeting the
psychographics that we know
really love New Mexico so we're
not trying to attract people
that love Mickey Mouse because
that's we offer something more
special and authentic and the
outdoor adventure in our culture
so that is the digital across
the entire United States and
that includes imagery all
throughout New Mexico in our
promotion and then our next
layer is really focused on the
communities and so we have a
cooperative marketing program
that we've been able to grow the
last few years because of
additional appropriations from
this body we're we do a two to
one match for local communities
so the community puts ten
thousand and we're going to put
twenty we put that money
together and we do a campaign
where they say this is our goal
these are target and we're able
to work with them specifically
on what they're trying to
achieve so it's really
complimentary that we're able to
align their strategies together
raising the awareness of our
state but then able to do some
customize work with communities
to make sure that we're getting
what they need as well.
Mr secretary thank you for that
I think George Strait has an
ocean front property for so.
In Arizona so you never know
but I I do appreciate that has
has the department looked into
marketing into Mexico to all
lower Mexico City or some of the
the larger cities in Mexico I'm
chair members the committee
Senator yes we have at this time
and throughout the data that
that we've collected in the
research that we've done we
decided that it's not time yet
specifically because we don't
have enough funds we have less
than one percent of the domestic
market of leisure travel in the
United States and so there's
still a lot of low hanging fruit
of what we can achieve here in
the US and there's additional
costs when you go into different
media markets each country has
different laws around
advertising and media as you can
imagine also there's different
it's a different culture to
different target markets it then
and it's a different language so
then you have to make sure that
all of your creative is just not
translating you have to do all
of that back research again so
at this time we decided that's
not Weiss and won't find astron
of and a return on investment
as staying at domestically in
the United States and Mr chair
secretary I do appreciate that
but I would asked that if you
ever want to reach out to the
Mescalero Apache tribe the the
Do a lot of their marketing into
Mexico and has been very
successful for them lots of
tourist almost all of we go
skiing and it's just time to
Spanish being spoken and it's
because they're all from Mexico
City or to all was and it's it's
great to bring in that outside
money and instead of just always
be in Texas money it's good to
kind of get it from somewhere
else but no reach out to them
because I think that would it
would be
I think we would benefit if we
could somehow tap into that
market the committee members
Senator thank you.
Thank you so much for that that
Madam chairwoman to hit.
It and
I shot you heard said that the
GDP from tourism is a third of
what oil and gas springs and
that is a remarkable statistic
And I also can't imagine you you
were appointed in two thousand
nineteen so the majority of what
you have your service has been
during the COVID in this
position I can't imagine.
How challenging that that must
have been specifically this
process so I just want to thank
you for your service and and
again highlight how essential
tourism is to our our economy
and talking about diversifying.
That that's going to be one of
the main blocks of of that
diversification sept thank you
for your service thank you thank
you madam chair and so the only
comment I have is I was really
impressed you know that we've
increased by thirty percent when
it comes to tourism and I want
to thank you cabinet secretary
for your commitment to tribal
and rural communities might
portion of the state so my
district is made up of rural New
Mexicans and tribal communities
and that's alright to just happy
to see that some of Rio Arriba
county is New Mexico true it was
so exciting to join us in this
bill that would be launched our
ideas on the lowrider museum
which will be coming soon and so
with that I'll entertain a
motion from the committee.
The different parts of the
second I have a roll call vote
please.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator Moores
center to the Pino yes Senator
Pirtle centers the phonics
Center stored yes center how to
meal Senator Duhigg yes.
Nine two zero congratulations we
will be seeing you later on the
floor for your appointment.
Seven that secretary Groginsky.
And Senator Padilla.
Good morning thank you for
joining us.
Current.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you senator
thank you very much of Madam
chairman Mr vice chair members
of the committee thank you so
much for having us today I have
to say that this is a topic
early education that has been
that the entire reason I ran for
the legislature to begin with
and when I got here we
immediately started working on a
number of initiatives and we we
did land eventually at a
historic moment for New Mexico
when we created the early
childhood education and care
department I was thrilled to
carry that legislation with many
people on this committee and
many people in this legislature
and all over New Mexico to get
that department created.
As you know at the time we were
delivering early education
across four major departments of
state we had agencies trying to
do it we have a lot of of people
working very very hard madam
chair and we created this
department and then all of a
sudden I I you know they came to
us that we need to do a
worldwide search to find the
right person to help us build
this airplane while it's being
flown at the same time and so
governor Lujan Grisham did a
phenomenal job of opening the
searches far and wide as
possible we did meet Elizabeth
Groginsky and she came into New
Mexico and I have to say that we
we're all much better off and
lucky that she made the decision
to come here of those four
departments and other agencies
we elected to put them into one
department so the challenges
that secretary Groginsky and
it's my second time caring for
confirmation I couldn't be
happier madam chair and so the
challenge of bringing those
efforts together was was
monumental not not just from a
policy standpoint but from a
funding standpoint which we're
all dealing with still today and
and trying to figure out exactly
what is the best methodology to
fund early education in New
Mexico and we receive so much
guidance from her and her
experience Washington DC
Colorado Illinois all the
different places that she has
done this she was able to bring
those experiences to New Mexico
and it's made a huge difference
since we brought the department
online and brought in a
secretary you can ski into that
role she has brought not only
that experience but also
that national and international
experience into New Mexico by
cultivating what we have here in
New Mexico we've already done
and also bringing in new
innovative creative and powerful
ways to chair of the education
in our state so while respecting
the culture the history and
everything that already been
done in cultivating that into
bringing new experiences and new
information and new guidance to
early education New Mexico has
has really done wonders for us
and so like I said ran for the.
Legislature on this very topic
you know twelve years ago and
here we are I have never felt
better about where early
education is headed in New
Mexico until now and it's
because of the individual
sitting to my left here madam
chair and so I'm gonna stop
talking because I could just go
on and on about how wonderful
this human being is and I wonder
if I want to hear from her as
well thank you madam chair.
The morning thank you madam
chair Mister chair and Senator
Padilla you're just I mean he's
a your incredible leader and can
send that died in the counselor
to me through these first four
years I want to thank the
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
I am so honored and feel
privileged to be able to service
in her first term and hopefully
her second term with
confirmation today because we
are leading the nation in early
childhood and it really is
because of leaders like
yourselves years like governor
Lujan Grisham and myself and
amazing team at the early
childhood education and care
department I have our CIO here
Sandeep Patel today and our
chief health officer Dr Janis
Gonzales I think we would offer
you should all be proud I think
of what we have built here in
New Mexico is a strong early
childhood care and education
system that looks at the well
being of families and children
beginning prenatally not just
their education but their
development their health their
support we know we have a long
way to go but we have built an
amazing team as you know what I
sat here three years ago we
don't even have a Department and
it was an exciting time my
husband here Scott Groginsky was
here with twelve of my other
family members and it was it's
exciting we thought that with
the world is our oyster we're
going to do great things and we
did great things we passed early
childhood Trust Fund we work
together with all of you and we
know that by bringing all these
programs and services together
we could be more aligned we
could think deeply about what
where these structural
inequities that we built into
our systems and build a system
that is more equitable and
cohesive and then yeah the
budget was signed and we all
went into remote and that was
and if you know.
Working with the other
secretaries as we were
transitioning but we immediately
put families at the center of
our thinking and said how can we
make sure that help is adding
doesn't stop early intervention
services don't stop for young
infants and toddlers with
developmental delays how can pre
K. continue even as we have to
go into remote childcare stood
in it right there and supported
families businesses hospital
associations were on the phone
with us saying we've got to get
doctors and nurses in and our
child care programs state open
and we supported them we have
stabilized the childcare
industry if you talk to people
in other states and some I I
don't wanna talk to because we I
have five people who are here
and they can speak even more
eloquently about what this
department has meant for New
Mexico families children and the
people who care for and educate
them.
But they many other states are
losing childcare people are
closing their businesses but we
made key policy decisions that
kept not only kept ours
stabilize we've grown it over
three thousand more slots in
childcare we've expanded pre K.
our home visiting program has
expanded and people are getting
access to quality services I
also want to read our Assistant
Secretary for native American
early education and care the
legislature so wisely put that
in our department we have built
incredible government to
government relationships with
our of twenty three tribes
bubbles in nations through the
tribal investment strategy that
you all supported in our budget
this year and expanding for next
year we have been able to enter
into inter governmental
agreements with fifteen pueblos
at the Mescalero tribes so all
based on what they're tribal
priorities are I just want to
highlight that in this time we
have also secured over eight
million dollars in private
sector funding to support the
goals of this administration and
over thirty five million in
additional federal money outside
of federal relief which was over
four hundred million and so I
just I think you can feel good
that we're we're very
transparent and work very
closely with our child care home
visiting early intervention in
pre K. providers work closely
with advocates and families and
we're building a strong team and
a strong community across the
state I have the chance to do a
spring to work twenty twenty two
I have copies of the the summary
report traveled the state and to
Senator parties point road so
much as a leader having access
and being in community with
communities about what is that I
was able to be in retail so I
was up in Clayton I was in
spring or we were in Farmington
we're grants and Gallup and
everywhere in between the Clovis
poor Tallas so much rich culture
and history here that we're
bringing into how the this
department and how we work in
partnership with the communities
we just.
Released in September our five
year strategic plan all the
copies of that for you hope to
be here to implemented and I
think it's exciting six big
goals school readiness family
community engagement government
to government relationship
ecosystem alignment you know
when we have health and family
support and education and care
we have to bring them together
with families and children at
the center and finally
organizational excellence and
actionable data we have to make
sure our legislature has we need
to make the decisions about what
is the influence that this new
department is having on school
readiness on outcomes health
outcomes educational outcomes so
I'm excited and I hope to have
your support today and again
we're doing great things and we
have a lot more to do but I'm
excited and really appreciative
of Senator media's leadership
and support and guidance thank
you madam chair thank you
cabinet secretaries of the five
that you brought today for
comment I'll allow the five to
speak with the essence of time
I'm going to do one minute each
if you don't mind and I'll have
you lined up in front of the at
desk and if you can state your
first and last name for the
record.
And the settlement co chair at
on the madam chair with time
thank you.
We don't have a Mike so if
you'll speak clearly into the
marketplace thank you so.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much my
name is amber Wallin and I'm the
executive director at New Mexico
voices for children stand in
really strong support of the
secretary you know in the many
years of watching the secretary
work and working with her have
seen just I would say maybe
first and foremost competence in
the extreme which you can't
overstate how important that is
in this position I have also
seen a real passion for early
childhood policy for excellence
within it and for communities in
the state you know as Senator
Padilla and the secretary said
the past few years have been so
challenging for kids and
families for child care in
particular and during that time
we've seen historic expansions
of child care assistance
increases in wages for our
workers increases in provider
reimbursement rates and really
just such an incredible focus on
supporting programs excellence
in pre K. home visiting all of
these things of meet our
communities and families
stronger and we really urge
here.
Reconfirmation and look forward
to the secretaries continued
leadership thank you all again
thank you for your comments.
The morning Jenny morning good
morning madam chair do heck and
members of the committee I'm so
excited to be able to stand here
today in support of six
secretary Groginsky three
affirmation she came here from
out of state not having a
background in New Mexico to
create something out of nothing
and the first thing she did
though and has continued to do
throughout her tenure she
listened she's not hard to find
she's everywhere she's at any
meeting you want to be at and
she wanted to listen and learn
and that's what she led with
coming into the state I I saw
her probably I don't know how
many sizes from eight but she's
still learning and she's still
listening and she's a very
collaborative leader
those of us in the philanthropic
sector who supported the
creation of the early childhood
education and care department it
has exceeded our expectations
especially during a troubling
time like COVID.
With the department was created
it was wisely decided that
Assistant Secretary for native
American early education and
care would also be created we
were fortunate that one of our
employees job on arch Aletta was
selected to be that first
secretary and she wanted me to
pass on thank you so much and I
type of the.
You don't you don't if you don't
mind just stating your first and
last for the record setting part
of president CEO The Little
foundation thank you for your
comments what thank you for all
the partnership with tribes that
means a lot to them to be at the
table thank you thanks.
Good morning good morning madam
chair members of the committee
and Catherine Freeman CEO of
growing up New Mexico and am
here to support the confirmation
as secretary good ganske and to
think everybody here and all of
you who helped this department
get created
you know when I reflect on time
with secretary against the
here's what I remember her first
day was December third and I
remember I was on the beach and
kabo at the end of February
talking about how we're going to
manage first responders so we
did under the leadership of the
department we managed through
COVID we stayed open we did all
of the things that we need to do
I especially in my thirty
seconds that are left here want
to talk about the public private
partnerships between going up
New Mexico and the early care
and education department it's
not always easy but everybody's
really willing to hear the
comments and do the work
together and that's where we are
we've got great fabulous top
line decisions many things
secretary begins again has led
us thank you so much for your
company now we execute.
Thanks.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and Matthew Henderson
executive director of the ledge
cation Fund I want to thank
secretary regions key for all of
her work and Senator Padilla for
his leadership in just comment
on what a huge task this is you
know there is no model for early
childhood system anywhere in the
country that is right.
All are starved of resources all
have programs that are somewhat
in conflict with each other and
secretary again ski is really
building the model system with
us all here when I say with us I
mean
Secretary HSD is hugely
accessible to our members we've
had hundreds of parents and the
educators me with her over the
last couple years a lot of times
with a lot of tears a lot of
problems and frustrations
secretary again excuse not
defensive she listens she works
with our members to incorporate
their concerns their vision into
a unified vision for change in
New Mexico and we're in full
support of her renomination
thank you for your comment.
And Representative to get your
comments good morning thank you
Mr chair miss madam chair and
committee member members thank
you for and the opportunity to
speak my name is Michelle can
Tana I work with Presbyterian
medical services and the
director of children's services
for that organization we operate
the head start and early head
start program for four counties
in New Mexico we also do pre K.
home visiting early intervention
and CSE F. P. sponsorship all of
which fall under the department
I'm here to wholeheartedly
support the reconfirmation of
the secretary she has been
extremely inclusive and
collaborative in her role as
leader
we've had extremely good
communication from the
department and with the
secretary she has she and her
team have developed a very
strong and important strategic
plan and secretary Perkins K.
definitely has the leadership
capacity to implement and I'm
very excited to see that happen
to be part of that so again I
also participate as part of the
New Mexico head start
association and I think we are
all in support of her we
confirmation thank you so much
thank you so much for comments I
will be hearing from anybody and
so but is there anybody on zoom
who's in support of the
reconfirmation.
To raise their hand on line is
there anybody in the committee
room not in support of the
reconfirmation.
State none what about items of.
Thank you and with that I'll go
with questions and comments from
the committee.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you
madam chair and vice chair and
thank you Senator Padilla
secretary Rubin ski I really
enjoyed our two conversations
that we've had the past few days
and all the what I've heard this
morning is your justice staff
who are.
Donor advocate for our most
important resource which are our
future leaders of the state the
nation and the world.
And I want to reiterate
hello I will assist you as we go
on.
Just in those those
matters that we were discussing
and
Want to.
Sure you the hat
I'm as a New Mexico voter when I
think of early childhood I think
of child care helping our
parents grandparents and
guardians taking care of that
resource up from zero to five
and I so I pledge to you on tape
to the public to our committee
here that I will help you to
ensure that we get that taken
care of so thank you thank you
madam chair and chair.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez
followed by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
congratulations madam secretary
of I know for our conversations
that we've had.
Over the last few years.
I I your experience that you
brought with you and what you
are growing you know during your
tenure here in New Mexico.
And Mr chair in the early
childhood is from birth on
and I think we're New Mexico
still has yet to work of course
is in the area of how we work
with children with disabilities.
you and I've had conversations
will have Scott also
but the earlier we're able to
diagnose right we're our
children may have some and I
always like to say deficits but
I think extra gifts the way I
look at it
it is most important because
that also helps families it
helps the whole system move
forward but I do believe Mr
chair that we still have some
shortcomings as to how we work
with of our training should I
say of those who are taking care
of our children those who are
providing that early education I
mean it's the whole gamut.
And Mr chair I know it's not
just for this particular group
is state covers even for those
who are in candor through all
the way through the system even
into higher ed as to how we
focus and work with those who
have a gift.
In
what I'm hoping
Mr chair is that we can continue
to work on building that support
but it also goes back in the you
know secretary Rodriguez I know
will be appears also it is what
we do train our those who are
the teachers that come out it
also has a whole encompassing
the fact of what we do
In Mr chair there's always so
much more to go into but I know
in my conversations with the
secretary she's committed to
this and you have many of us
here who are committed to making
sure that we can assist and help
in some fact fashion but I know
that
I always have hope of in that we
can make that needed change.
you know and and Mr chair
sometimes in some places where
I've spoken with parents just
because you speak Spanish only
that doesn't mean you have a
disability that means we to have
to acknowledge that we need to
speak a language to address and
if it's one of our children our
communities and native a native
American Community that we do
have to make sure that we're
recruiting working with those
who speak more than just one
language so that's also if many.
conversations that I've had over
the years to it's just that
support New Mexico needs to to
focus on thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
followed by Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Senator Padilla and
secretary again ski just two
quick questions for you you've
always been very forthcoming in
the interim committee meetings
providing us with lots of good
information but I want to do it
if you could update us on two
things one the the child and
adult care food program its
current status it was kind of
floundering there for obviously
during the pandemic that even
before that it was really
declining in its participation
numbers at and hopefully it's on
its way back up if you bring us
up to date on that and then on
your efforts at getting
additional home visiting models
the approved for matching funds
and and the federal
participation.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino great question our
child and adult care food
program is doing very well we
have grown Sanchez we're working
with that food initiative
through the governor's of food
initiative with the twelve
agencies would be able to get to
expand that pre school farm farm
to preschool I think it's part
of like getting more community
gardens and more fresh fruits
and vegetables New Mexico grown
and we have great leadership
really stable leadership and
that both under director sandy
Trujillo Medina but also board
Miller the.
Zero chief for child and adult
care food program so very
pleased to share that we're in
good shape there the numbers are
up yes Representative and Mr
chair Senator Ortiz Y. Pino on
home visiting we are bringing to
models a child first which is
for families experiencing
substance use issues and mental
health it's very intensive model
with a clinical clinical
expertise in case management
nine months to get the family
stabilized handed off to another
home visiting program at and
we're working very closely with
HSD and our home visiting
partners around how to grow
these Medicaid funded home
visiting programs and make them
sustainable it's not easy to
just turn on the switch and
start claiming for Medicaid but
we're also expanding you know
first born which is a New Mexico
home visiting program and
working with our statewide first
born office to make sure that we
have a diverse set of home
visiting programs available to
families right thank you thank
you very much Mr chairman thank
you senator Senator Moores.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you so much I really do I
want to echo some of the
comments already made really
appreciate you and coming in New
Mexico and jumping in right here
but a part of our conversation
before impasses always been I've
never been a fan just created a
new department for the sake of
creativity Department
politicians love doing that you
know it's a it's we're doing
something to the the as an
example we're just doing
something so potentially
improving lives of the many of
us all the article in the paper
this last week about we continue
to struggle in our now fifty two
in education and I know the new
are the pipeline going into that
even you know those are
classically Senator agency we
always that Mississippi to look
down on and find out where
passed us.
And so I want to focus my
questions and and not just by
creating new bureaucracies but
actually improving the lives of
special native American children
that have been drugs and article
talk about that too what are you
doing an apartment doing to
focus on those issues as a
pipeline to get them ready for
school because we have failed
generation after generation
after generation we used to be
able to qualify governments
Sippy we can't do that anymore I
mean we're fifty two out of
fifty so what are what are you
doing actually matches correct
brought properties great
programs great funding streams
for nonprofit groups but
actually improving the quality
of education and lives of
children that need.
Senator Moores ideals.
Member station that is a great
question because we feel that
responsibility that that the
legislature created the.
Comes for children I think the
first thing we did is we look at
how are we funding and
supporting our earliest
educators those are the ones
working in our childcare
programs in our pre K. programs
but in childcare particularly we
did the cost estimation model
and we were woefully
underfunding child care so you
can't pay staff if you don't
have the money eighty percent of
a child cares business in person
so the way that people are
making it and making ends meet
was to pay low wages and so we
said that is not good we have to
increase the wages of early
educators because it's that
eighty percent of the brain is
you know with your new little
one it's developing in those
first three years so those
educators have to be there
consistently they have to be
feeling supported and respected
so that in relationship they
have with those babies in those
toddlers is positive that's
where the quality comes in the
people who provide that care so
we need to recognize that so
we're doing that we've done that
in this administration we also
have to make sure that families
have access to home visiting
while they have childcare or
while they have pre K. and that
all those programs are screening
children consistently screening
them so if there is any delay or
potential for delay they're
getting referred to our family
infant toddler program to
getting those supports so by
bringing all those programs
together the staff for working
together thinking about how to
compliment because family
sometimes need all three of our
four four programs and sometimes
they just need to but it's being
family centered and not just
building programs but building a
system that works for family.
Thank you senator madam
chairman.
Thank you.
yeah and and I'm sorry I missed
a little bit of of your
presentation because I I've I've
really enjoyed what what I've
been hearing and what I'm
hearing is a real wholistic
approach to to insuring that
early childhood detected early
childhood well being in New
Mexico and again and and I know
that are.
I know the the pandemic was
probably hard on on every
committee secretary said in here
and I think again this is
another one of those departments
where oh my gosh and get nothing
going during the pandemic is
specific it really difficult for
what you all are doing and I
just I commend you I get through
it and and.
Doing such such really yeah I I
someone mentioned that there
really is no model for this on
the doing that ground breaking
work under the most difficult of
circumstances that I really
commend you for content thank
you for everything you've been
doing for New Mexico and make
our cats.
Thank you madam chair before I
get to a motion I just want to
also thank you as a former
educator I know how vital pre K.
is for that school readiness
foundation and for life's
foundations I want to thank you
for that I want to thank you for
your strategic plan with those
six schools I think having
division that and knowing where
you want to take the department
is vital in ensuring that their
success not only for the
department for but for our
youngest constituents are
children of New Mexico and so
with that I'll entertain a
motion motion for confirmation
by Senator Lopez and the second
by Senator Stewart if I can have
a roll call please.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle
center law office yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator Moores.
Center to the penal yes Senator
Pirtle centers the phonics test
Senator Stewart yes center how
to meal Senator Duhigg yes.
Nine two zero congratulations
will be saying you're later on
the Senate floor.
Did you.
The madam chair is is calling on
Senator Shendo to come in.
And he's here.
No.
Cabinet secretaries under the
weight you want to come.
Good morning Senator Shendo well
the rules committee we're next
we're going to the next item on
our agenda which is the
reappointment of taxation and
revenue department cabinet
secretary secretary Schardin
Clarke good morning sufficient
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee of everyone is
familiar with our our current
secretary I don't think I want
to say too much because I think
the work that she's done you
know for us as a committee and
and the status is.
Your very she's a wonderful job.
you you all I had a chance to
interact with her be with her
over the course of for a.
Her work as a cabinet secretary
and
Well I'm going to send her over
to if you want to say anything
else thank you thank you so
thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Stephanie
Schardin Clarke I've been the
cabinet secretary of the
taxation and revenue department
since January twenty nineteen
and I just first want to take a
moment to thank my family and
some very special friends that
are here in the audience today
and some that are watching
online especially my son's
Duncan clearer and Spencer back
over here
you know the a great portion of
their lives has now been spent
with me in the position that I'm
in now today and I really
appreciate the support of all
this community and family and
honestly at the end of the day
you know not every day in my job
is enjoyable but it's always
rewarding and it's most
rewarding to know that I'm
getting to set an example for my
kids in public service and
integrity and hard work and that
at the end of each day that's
that's what's important about it
to me it's real honor to fit
here though before this
committee for the second time
and it's been an incredibly
rewarding and challenging for
years at the taxation and
revenue department I'm humbled
by governor Lujan Grisham's
faith in me to to re appoint me
to this position and hopefully
allow me to continue on for
another four years.
Madam chair if I if I may just
highlight some of the major
accomplishments that have
happened at the taxation and
revenue department in the last
four years
the first thing I heard about
when I during the department
with vacancies we were at nearly
thirty percent vacant when I
started and we're at twenty one
percent now so of course we
still have further to go but
that means we've added sixty
about sixty employees to our
work for state law statewide and
that has made a huge difference
in our ability to serve the
public some of their
expectations for for customer
service the department was also
in a very difficult position
with regard to cut corporate
culture and the morale within
the department the workers had
been through a lot to say the
least and every year we do a an
annual corporate culture survey
and the results have ticked up
up up four years in a row and we
are looking to continue that
some of the things we do to make
sure that we have a good call
corporate culture it's
everything from making sure that
there's a career ladder market
value salaries
making sure that there's
training and development we
insist on civility within the
department with each other and
with our customers fair
promotion fair application of
policies things like that have
made a big difference and then
I'm turning to our customers
which is why we exist we exist
to serve the state whether they
be taxpayers are drivers we work
really hard and making sure that
our customers have the very best
experience possible which is not
always easy we often you know
the customer's not always right
we have to tell them know what
other here yes but we try very
hard to
take the time to explain to them
why the answer no is no and then
what they know to get to yes so
that they leave feeling
supported and heard and and they
like they received empathy with
the budgetary support of
governor Lujan Grisham and this
legislature we have been able to
do tremendous things within MVD
when it comes to customer
service four years ago the
average wait time in MVD offices
with over seventeen minutes.
And that spanned very high and
some of our busiest offices
sometimes customers were waiting
more than an hour and a half
currently the average wait time
across all the state offices
this four and a half minutes so
we've we've taken that down
tremendously and that's about
having a lower vacancy rate and
having an appointment model that
works very well to make sure
that we can serve the public
we've also greatly expanded our
online service offerings COVID a
silver lining perhaps is that it
allowed us to try more things to
see what would work and just as
one example in twenty twenty to
seven times more drivers renew
their driver's license online
than in twenty nineteen and
that's huge that's better for
customers and better for us.
turning to tax policy of course
we've accomplished more in the
last four years together as an
executive and the legislature
worked in many bipartisan ways
as well to improve our tax
policy
we have issued a billion dollars
in rebates that since may twenty
twenty two and can to continue
to to flood them out as as a few
more get cleared on those
rebates benefited about eight
hundred and seventy five
thousand New Mexico tax filers
with almost every family in New
Mexico from twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty one we also
implemented destination based
sourcing which broadened our
gross receipts tax and allowed
us to reduce the statewide rate
for the first time in forty
years we're incredibly proud of
that progress of the working
families tax credit and Lichter
have also been expanded an index
for inflation in the last four
years which did wonders to make
our tax system much more
progressive and for the first
time this year the vast majority
of New Mexico seniors will no
longer pay income tax on their
social security benefits which
is something that we're very
grateful to work together with
this legislature to accomplish
each sixty day session taxed Rev
works hard to bring you tax code
cleanup legislation that just
makes the system streamlined and
you know less prone to
litigation and protests and make
that work better for us as well
as our customers we're doing
that again this year.
And so including there's there's
so much more to be done very
proud of what the department has
accomplished together with the
legislature and and under this
governor's leadership the last
four years and I look forward to
the opportunity opportunity to
continue to serve thank you
thank you so much for that and I
want to go to the members of the
audience members of the
committee room how many of you
are in favor of the
reappointment.
I'll take that I'll take three
of you to speak on behalf of the
cabinet secretary and I'm gonna
do one minute each with the
three of you.
Come up to the table to consider
first and last name for the
record.
My name is Richard Ackland I am
the president and executive
director of the New Mexico tax
research institute and it's not
really in that capacity that I'm
speaking to you but my
organization which doesn't.
Really support or oppose
anything
Support the reconfirmation of
the cabinet secretary here today
tax administration is critically
important to the state that's
how we fund education and all of
the other critical services the
state provides.
It's important to businesses as
well obviously because that can
be done wrong and the secretary
here I can tell you in my
personal experience since two
thousand four I guess LFC right
here in the northwest
No one is more qualified than
than secretary Schardin Clarke
talked to continue this work you
can certainly do worse but you
can probably.
So.
I appreciate the chairman
supporting you know this we
confirmation and with that I'll
conclude my remarks thank you
thank you for your comments a
couple that might be a The New
Mexican as the quotes of the
day.
Good morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you all and
thanks to chairman Shendo just
stand in strong support of the
secretary you heard a bit of it
but the past few years have seen
incredible tax policy
implementation you all passed
over a billion dollars in tax
rebates hundreds of millions of
dollars and improved credits for
New Mexico's families and she
led the implementation of that
which was a major job then in
addition to that big you know
the really big news making
policy is the essential tax code
cleanup that she has led to the
Department technical wonky
changes that really do improve
the tax experience for families
for businesses from passion to a
lifelong dedication to the state
to real diligence and hard work
and excellence that background
the Richard touched on you know
nobody's better prepared to the
to do this job and we really
stand and strong support and
thanks again to the committee
and to the chair thank you for
your comments and rounding out
the comments from the committee
will.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee my name
is Ben Hecht I am a tax attorney
I started out my career in
nineteen eighty one at the New
Mexico taxation revenue
department I now work for an
organization the multi state tax
commission of which New Mexico's
long been a member I have seen
lots and lots of tax leaders tax
department leaders across the
country both here in New Mexico
and elsewhere and I echo the
comments of my esteemed friend
Richard Anklam that you're very
very fortunate to have secretary
Schardin Clarke leading the
department here I can't think of
anyone better to do that she's
had a very difficult job over
these last four years a leading
the tax department with its
vacancy rate as she talked about
and the need to staff that
department act adequately in
order to make sure that the
citizens of New Mexico get the
services they need so thank you
and I hope that you'll confirm
US secretary Schardin Clarke
thank you for your comments I
will be hearing from anyone
online but if you can raise your
hand yes if you're in support of
the reappointment.
We have to in favor now back to
the committee room anybody in
opposition of the reappointment
saying then what about V. as
the.
Okay very good I'll go to
questions and comments from the
committee.
That part of.
Thank you Mr chair of would be
possible get Senator Moores a
new chair.
We can work at getting better
more or more than the.
Mr chair I please be careful
that is Senate bill seat in the
morning.
I see it being broken Mr chair I
did realize how spoiled we were
in three twenty one and still
we're over here but I just add a
few comments besides that that
I've worked with the the
secretary for now four years
Everytime call very responsive
like she said a lot of times I
don't get the answer I wonder my
constituents doesn't get the
answer that we want but at least
we get an answer in a timely
matter and and a lot of times
things are taken care of quickly
I do have of one thing those.
Having now use the private
sector for the the vehicle
Registrations and things is
there anything going to try to
improve and streamline even
better the government NVD system
to where it's it's just the
customer service whenever you go
to the private sector's
everything's so fast they're
very they'll help you you know
whenever you whenever I've
experienced in the public maybe
not as
Not as friendly I guess is there
is are continually working to to
improve.
Yes madam chair and senator
pirtle thank you for that
question you know and and
anecdotally we all go to MVD and
actually experience it first
hand maybe once every few years
and it has changed a lot and
actually in the the most recent
calendar year the wait time at
state run MVD office of this was
lower than the wait time at the
private run offices and again
that's a lot thanks to our
appointment model that make sure
the customers arrive in the pace
that we can serve them we also
have appointments readily
available same day or next day
appointments and thirty two out
of thirty three of our offices
one has some vacancies that are
slowing it down
but we're always working on
staff to just make sure the
expectation is high for civility
and empathy and helpfulness
and we do have a lot of turnover
less than we used to but still
quite a bit so the training just
never stops as far as that goes
but the expectation is high to
treat are you know those that
need to comply with the law are
also customers and that sort of
a newer concept there you know
taxpayers are also customers
drivers or customers they're
just not you know somebody that
we are here to enforce something
upon and I appreciate Mr chair
and and secretary I appreciate
that you know whenever we went
through the transition with the
driver's licenses and trying to
figure out and prove residency
there was a lot of issues and
and you definitely had your
department helping with that I
had to go for
my wife's grandmother who didn't
have a birth certificate because
back when every born in Las
Vegas and didn't have a birth
certificate and had to go to the
church and get the baptismal and
I mean it was it was quite the
ordeal but you Department and
and the local the envy worked
very well and and was very
gracious and and helped with
that and so I appreciate them
doing that in and all of your
help going through that that
that was quite an ordeal for me
too I could even prove I lived
in New.
Mexico so it was quite hard with
all my stuff in my business so
appreciated the help that they
did with that so but happy to
hear I I think I'll have to go
back in and see if it's improved
I haven't been to the immediate
awhile so hopefully
get to experience it and see the
ones that you bang thank you.
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
chairman chair and thank you
senator for bring this forward
this summer when we were in the
interim Tax committee we had a
we had testimony from a
constituent who has had a major
misunderstanding run around it's
cetera from the department.
And the department was listening
and by the time we finish that
meeting and I contacted April on
yourself your office everything
was resolved so the department
was very quick to handle the
matter and I in the constituent
appreciated that very much
because she response received
quite a full refund of some
money said she was owed I do
believe that
several parts of your code madam
chair Mister chair need updating
is that part of the plans for
the session yes I'm here in
senators to finance the
department has to tax code
cleanup built their Senate bill
one forty seven and Senate bill
one forty six and Senator Shendo
is is the sponsor of both of
those and one of them I believe
is in Senate finance this
morning.
And of madam chair Mister chair
do you believe of Adam secretary
do you believe that
there's enough understanding
among the different legislators
about the changes that you want
to make in those two bills.
I'm madam chair and senator
Stefanics I think so yeah I I
had good dialogue we presented
the draft to the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee at the end of the
interim we had good dialogue in
committee thus far and
you know some of the some of the
changes are so wonky and
technical that it's it's hard to
have a serious conversation
about them but we are there for
any questions that the members
may have.
Well madam chair Mister chair
the only comment I would make is
that if you don't get to sit on
that committee or any other
committee you don't really know
what's going on so often times I
don't know what's going on in L.
E. S. C. because I don't sit on
that committee so please don't
under estimate how much
communication you need to have
with everyone thank you very
much.
Thank you madam chair do that
thank you and I want to echo
some of the the other comments
we've heard that you are just
super responsive every time I've
ever reached out about anything
it gets addressed and resolved
no within an hour often so I I I
really appreciate that
Also hearing that there's a
focus on empathy at the M. V. DN
with tax I mean that's that's
kind of amazing and I I really
appreciate that
and that you're putting your
average wait times from
seventeen minutes to four and a
half and that that adequate at
the wait time is now shorter at
our state run offices and the
private ones all high I have
been to a state run office I
can't remember.
Last time I was because I always
just go to went to the private
ones
on the assumption that that was
always going to be a faster
experience and so I'm I'm really
thrilled to hear that that that
our state is is offering such
sites such good customer service
And I also want to thank your
your son Spencer for sharing you
with us I.
I know that that when your mom
has a really big job like this
sometimes that means that the
you don't get to have around
quite as much as you would like
and so that's a sacrifice on
your part that we really
appreciate thank you also at
tech to this to the secretary
when I grow up I just want to be
as cool Spencer life has.
Madam chair just for the record
this is Duncan and.
Rating over here funds who also
has I think one of the cool
terror cuts I've ever seen so I
think it goes for about I didn't
aside and really focus on
version yes thank you to to to
both your sons for for sharing
you with us thank you so much
Senator Moores thank you thank
you.
Very pretty rad
madam chair and pirtle center
for loss of Mars it thank you so
much Secretary I just want to
echo lot of COVID comments about
it your responsiveness in
apartment Sanchez responsiveness
you're probably the most
respected my tax person ever at.
No one likes the tax man cometh
so here here you are getting
accurate so I appreciate it and
just first R. Pirtle said and
for your comments I I recently
broke the law Senator to sleep
you know I did registered my car
in time and before that I got
pulled over I realize I've done
it got on the website it was
super easy and I think those are
kind of things that the chair or
do so I encourage you to
continue that process us as us
as customers are used to now
with online shopping and I can't
remember I paid I I did rate
after fee because I was late but
I can't remember if you guys are
process so you do processing
convenience fee for of course
are you still doing that manager
secretary if you are please
stop.
Yes madam chair and senator
Morris we we do charge a
convenience fee for the online
renewal of registration but we
also discount the renewal amount
by five percent so they've
offset thank you figure was
impacted remember because that's
obviously where we all are as
consumers which the reduces the
load workload at the the chairs
talk about if it was easy to
just get on there make the
registration change pay my fee
Senator T. C. P. and I'm sure
the mail pieces coming out next
next year this week
so I appreciate that I wanna
talk about the tax rebates we do
get a lot of folks are calls and
stuff are you the guy got more
and us to this point but I'm not
word about it but there seem to
be a lot of delays a lot of
people marketing those tax
rebates and now we're having
we're talking about doing
another one this year talk to us
about what you learn from that
and how we're going to do a
better job if we do rebates this
year Senate Senator Moores and
madam chair I I believe the
latest number I heard was that
we have about fifteen thousand
rebates that are we're still in
the process of trying to get out
because either the ones that we
sent were returned in the mail
or there's an error on the tax
return that somehow preventing
it from from being processed but
fifteen thousand out of you know
about one point one million
filers we are working on that
tail and
the rebates that are proposed in
Senate bill ten this year the
main difference between that and
how that process will go if they
become law and how last year's
when is that last year in may
twenty twenty two we began
issuing rebates on tax returns
that were do maybe April
fifteenth but maybe not until
October fifteenth of twenty
twenty two so you can think of a
tax filing here as as like a a
cohort that comes in and has to
settle and close so we began
issuing rebates when we were
still processing the returns and
of course that's going to have
some more hiccups than than
usual the rebates their proposed
in Senate bill ten are also
based on last year's rebates
which are now based.
Klay settled except for those
roughly fifteen thousand or so
that I mentioned we don't have a
good address for some other
issue holding it up so that is
that's the main the thing is is
to base the rebate on a tax year
that is done the other thing
that would go better if we are
authorized to issue the rebates
that are in Senate bill ten this
year are that we've included in
the appropriation amount in
amount that'll allow us to use
the state fiscal agent bank to
print and mail them they have
over three times more daily
printing and mailing capacity
than we have in the basement of
the Lujan building so that would
triple the speed of getting out
all be mailed rebates Madam
chairman Matt Mr chair of
Senator secretary wire we stew
we still mail in check print
amount trucks what are we doing
what tronic transfers like we do
for everything else and madam
chair Senator Moores about two
thirds I believe of of the
rebates go out by direct deposit
and that's where we have current
banking account information for
the taxpayer but the remainder
which is I think about three
hundred fifty thousand checks we
don't have the banking
information or the authorization
to be able to mail it to them or
to to direct deposit so we mail
it.
Thank you Mr thank you again for
this really appreciate you and
your department and the the
progress you all made our
continue to be as responsive as
you have been the second term
Census request I do have a
confirmation hearing
keep keep up the good work thank
you.
Thank you so.
Make a comment about it thank
you for a few things listing
your initiatives that you
accomplish that are are huge
right working on your vacancy
rate have a good career pipeline
that increase includes
professional development online
every day and I'm hoping that I
can work with you I shadowed
with a and M. D. O. T. to work
with men and women working on a
cruise with the overnight snow
removal I'm hoping that you
would allow me to sign a waiver
and shadow MBTs I can show
constituents the issues that
those employees work with and
how they work on helping New
Mexicans every single day and
then the last thing is I really
want to thank you for working
with me with R. T. D. and that
tax which I thought would be a
quick fix turned out that it
would be a nightmare for
taxation and revenue but not
only did you educate me we took
the time to help me think of a
solution that would work for
Senate district I am so very
thankful for that and so with
that what's the will of the
committee.
Do passed by Senator FedEx and
seconded by Ortiz are both the
what is wrong with me today I
will talk about I'm gonna blame
it on my comment I.
Of the roll call vote please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Ingle
Senator Lopez Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores center to the
Pino yes Senator Pirtle centers
the phonics Senator Stewart yet
center how to meal yes Senator
Duhigg yes.
Two eight two zero
congratulations we'll be seeing
you later on the Senate floor
thank you.
Senator old bill and have it
secretary Alicia keys this is
for the re appointment for the
economic development department
and when you're ready Senator
Neville you tend to get.
Thank.
It.
Thank you contact.
Yeah.
That are things that time
allows you to make a comments
relief to both of them for sure
thank you thank you and and
thank you.
Mr chair and members you know
just very honored to re present
Secretary keys remember was that
four years ago sponsoring her in
front of this very same
committee
just really struck with her.
Her bio I mean she's got strong
rural New Mexico roots and at
the same time off she goes to
Los Angeles and working in that
for dean you know movie industry
and guess who brought up Netflix
to our state cages mmhm billion
dollars worth of revenue or
whatever so I can't say enough
about her curious what J. what's
them today for your middle
initial for Jennifer okay so.
Feel like she's just done a
great job and that's all I
really have to say so I'll turn
it over.
Whomever thank you senator madam
chair members of the committee
thank you I use the J. because
those people don't think that
I'm a singer so
So I just want to thank you I've
been cabinet secretary for just
over four years now and it's
been an absolute honor not only
to be able to say to New
Mexicans how can I help you
every single day which I think
is a fantastic thing to say is
just also the other G.
secretaries that have been here
today and you just realize what
a passionate fantastic group of
people they are.
And I also want to just thank
the governor for her support of
me and for taking a little bit
of a leap of faith with me I'm
so EDD's mission has been
amplified by the twenty year
study that we did on the
economic development plan to
diversify the economy and what
it said was that that we need to
focus on job rich industry and
specific attention to spreading
wealth to rural parts of the
state and underserved
communities so really how are we
doing in the past year two years
the state has added seventy
thousand jobs during this time
New Mexico's job growth has
exceeded the national average
New Mexico's unemployment rate
is now at a fourteen year low
but how are we doing
specifically it EDD we have an
incredible incredible team and
as you know we we we return
calls within minutes
it within hours if not minutes
we have an incredibly
intelligent passionate wonderful
group of people working at EDD
so really I feel like my job has
written been relatively easy.
In the past four years we've
used utilize leader to assist
sixty businesses supported more
than eight thousand five hundred
new jobs with an average wage of
sixty four thousand dollars
which is twenty percent more
than the administration before
us and that is really been our
north star is to increase wage
rates in New Mexico because when
we look at the states around us
those wage rates are
increasingly percentage wise
increasing more than in New
Mexico so very excited about
that with lead assistance we
will have seven billion dollars
in new capital investment across
New Mexico and will have five
hundred and eighty million
dollars in new payroll of the
ten year economic impact is
estimated at thirty four billion
dollars for the first time ever
Lida is assisting communities
with rural infrastructure
improvements at county owned
industrial parks we recently did
yield a McKinley and San Juan
County we've use leader to
leverage very large expansions
as the senator mentioned the
Netflix deal also entails we
were also able to recruit a two
billion dollar aluminum and
manufacturing and recycling
plants Valencia County.
I'm equally proud of the role
jobs that we've been able to
create capital bar and grill in
Sapporo green stream algae farm
near Columbus in need boys jerky
and fared.
And leader was vital to close
one of the most significant
rural investments in years and
that was with the wind turbine
energy cables corporation which
is converting a shudder to dog
food factory of in Camerino New
Mexico to hire three hundred
people.
We've also for the first on time
and done two deals with the
tribes which is never happened
before within the job training
incentive J. to if the average
wage for hires had a all time
high in the last six months with
over twenty seven dollars an
hour and this is up fifty two
percent from last year in film
we are continuing to set records
we have one point five billion
dollars in direct spending by
the film and television industry
in the last two years that's one
point five billion dollars that
would not be in New Mexico
otherwise.
We've seen fifty million dollars
in spending in the past fiscal
year outside of the Albuquerque
and Santa Fe corridor due to our
rural up left so we really feel
like we're getting films out
there into those rural areas we
have three film partnerships now
Netflix eight twenty eight which
is in Los crucis and also in B.
C. universal.
These investments are putting us
on the map movie maker magazine
recently named three cities in
the state as top locations for
those who want to film and work
in the industry.
I have a lot of division so.
You will our outdoor recreation
with something that we created
in twenty nineteen and we've
invested nearly twelve million
dollars in funding outdoor
access including outdoor
recreation trails and the
outdoor equity program.
EDD has been the sounds to word
of public money for over the
past four years we've received
eleven federal grants dollars
for strategic planning business
out finance outreach and the
latest which was seventy four
million dollars which the state
will receive over the next ten
years for venture equity funding
for small businesses and
underserved businesses as most
of you know EDD is also provides
administrative support to the
spaceport to the New Mexico
border Authority and the office
of military based planning in
the past these divisions have
reported to the chief of staff I
have taken a real interest in
these divisions because I feel
like they're super important
economic development.
Spaceport is home to six tenants
now an airspace is one of the
industry clusters that is
bringing higher paying jobs to
New Mexico from day one in the
administration we have
emphasized the importance of the
border we now have a hundred
seventy million dollar request
in to expand the port of Santa
Theresa last year you
appropriated fifty million
dollars for border highway that
area is changing
because of the geopolitical
situation in China and Russia we
are going to see and and I is
that ministration by this
administration to really on
shore and restore we're seeing a
lot of movement in that area.
Office of military base planning
we recently hired a new director
Richard Glover who is actively
engaged and not only keeping us
off of brac list but being
ambitious about how we can have
more military work here and help
our military families.
So finally I also just want to
say thank you last year we
received probation for more
regional reps we now have boots
on the ground in Gallup
Bernalillo Santa Fe Albuquerque
more a less crucis poor Tallas
in Roswell.
I think that's good for all of
New Mexico families and really I
think to travel the state to be
able to raise my family here.
To be able to talk with public
officials and residents from
demi in two requests has been
incredible.
The challenges are real.
There's going to be a lot of
opportunities but I look forward
to serving the governor and you
all for the next four years
thank you very much thank you
cabinet secretary.
Members in the committee room if
you can raise your hand if
you're in support of the three
appointment.
And I'll hear from three of you
a minute each so three can line
up come up to the desk make sure
you state your first and last
name for the record please.
Learning more about it if he
does come to speak out here
members of the committee my name
is rob black on the president
and CEO of the Mexico chamber of
commerce I'm honored to be here
on behalf of the secretaries of
re appointment she is a
passionate committed leader who
is focused on growing and
diversifying our economy both
for today and for the next
generation and we share that
commitment with her and as part
of that I'll tell a quick story
I one of your special your time
she participated in study prior
to the state study with the
chamber driving New Mexico's
futures economic competitive
analysis out of that we surveyed
seven hundred businesses the
number one issue that came out
of the that survey was the need
for regulatory reform.
I had breakfast with the
secretary we talked about those
results she agreed that was
something that she was passion
about she thought was important
to make sure that especially for
people who have a hard time
getting through the regulatory
process underserved communities
low income people she took that
to the governor that became an
executive order October twenty
one that's the type of
partnerships secretary keys
brings to the the business
community because of that we're
hearing strong support thank you
thank you so much.
The morning.
Morning Mr chair madam chair
members of the committee Laura
Sanchez on the executive
director of government public
affairs at PNM recently we have
seen on president increase in
the at our company and I'm sure
with the state in terms of
bringing bigger companies into
the state the Amazon to
Facebook's those that are
committed to more renewable
energy and carbon free policies
and with that they always look
for stable electricity of course
and they look for a welcoming
environment in terms of economic
development and the secretary
has been an amazing partner in
that venture during her tenure
she has continued to serve as a
resource and advocate for
economic development throughout
the state encouraging
collaboration and teamwork which
is how we've come to work with
are so closely economic
development is a function of
requiring the coordination and
strategic alignment of all
participating organizations and
she's worked tirelessly to
achieve that alignment
successfully driving a level of
growth in the state that we've
not seen in many years we
respectfully ask for your
support thank you for your
comment to your right up time
thank you for that and now I'm
gonna go to zoom is there
anyone.
In favor of the conflict.
That anyone in the committee
room in opposition to the
reappointment.
Thing then what about the.
Thank you and with that I'll go
with questions and comments on
start up a Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair thank senator thank you
secretary you can call me so I
don't know how I'm gonna vote on
you are muted you don't ask for
more votes will
I really appreciate you you've
always been great to work with I
appreciate I'm glad you're
working with industry because
it's a human part conversations
before justice by point
overregulation that we do here
in New Mexico and on small
business particularly it's the
best way for a lower income and
middle income families to move
themselves out of poverty to be
entrepreneurs in New Mexico does
everything it can to Stifel that
opportunity and just makes it
very of very only people can
operate here corporations or
nonprofits not it's not small
businesses so I'm glad you're
instruction addressing that
because it's some we do to
Stifel keep people on
generational poverty but can't
from entrepreneurs entrepreneurs
move out of their couple things
that I was looking through the
the thing
thank you are packaged and I
remember the from four years ago
we're talking about a couple
hours we have questions about
conflicts of interest we have
done it today because we know
everyone so well and there have
been conflicts remember we had a
conversation about your film
that you were working on for
years going out and I see it's
still here being disclose
whatever happened with that and
did you ever get that produced
madam chair members of the
committee a senator Morris no I
put my film career on hold.
But I still have the company and
I feel like I need to tell
people that I appreciate that
and remember having like I I
recall that conversation for
four years ago and I you also
remember I told you we try to
get the last chance you to film
at New Mexico military institute
a couple years ago and then
appointed a national
championship so I guess Netflix
lost that chance to be able to
fall that and Center o'neill's a
fan of that show as I am I won't
talk about space for you know
the Santo ni O. I've been here
not going on two decades
many of us been around here
always hearing about hospice
support has been the greatest
best bang it but it's always
next year and you know after
after all this time we're still
waiting so the press up to speed
on that as a huge investment we
made all think we're we've ever
gotten anything in return for
that madam chair members of the
committee senator Morris me
right so I think the decision
was made about twenty years ago
and when I came into this
position there was a lot of
information that I was not
receiving as the cabinet
secretary from the director of
the spaceport so as most of you
know we did have to go through
an investigation of the
spaceport and I feel very
confident in the director Scott
McLaughlin who is there now and
his team he's a very honest
person and basically what we're
looking at right now is virgin
galactic is our is our main
tenants and they have plans to
start launching multiple
missions I think it's by the end
of this year and
So I think that spaceport is an
asset.
I think that lower earth orbit
satellite launches are something
that are very are going to be
increasingly important to us
and New Mexico because of the
proximity of the space point to
white sands has a real
opportunity.
To become a player in that field
but when you think about that
field.
It's very limited because it's
very expensive so who is
launching their right now.
What you want me to change.
So we need to support version
galactic
because I think they're close
and obviously they've had a
successful mission already and
our horses tied to them right
now and I think that there I
think that it's going to be a
fantastic.
economic development and tourism
driver for that area.
Do I think we need need more
work there yes
you on musk is the person who's
really launching a lot of
satellites into space and he has
his deal with Kennedy so are we
going to get somebody like you
on our basis I don't know
but the governor and I are
already looking into other
options along with the spaceport
that would expand the book of
work there.
And so I can't say anything
right yet
but we are definitely looking
into how secure that facility is
and whether or not it could be
used in the future for any kind
of space commander space force
operations.
So thank you for the question
thank you Roger thank you
senator thank you secretary and
you know what I would down to
the the demo of the spent launch
is really cool but I was just
Hartnett there talk about moving
to Alaska when a the scale it up
and so that those hopefully we
can talk about about decision to
that seem like it was really
cool technology.
I'm so madam chair members of
the committee why they would
need to move it is because of
the orbit of the earth and they
would need to Alaska because it
would get the satellite and the
rocket into the right orbital so
I don't think that they're
moving to Alaska are having a
facility in Alaska means that
we've failed them here I think
that it's would be the next step
for them really and and because
the release the Mach speed would
be so incredible that they need
to actually build into a
mountain biker better explain it
to me so it's thank you for
explaining that to me
any of those business hard about
because of some and he's in
Albuquerque kid I grew up here
is parents want to UNM
moved away when he was young but
sauces are nineties but spending
so much money and Texas not
coming back to New Mexico and R.
O. B. by but I will to actually
have those conversations about
you know reporter for U. N. M.
he will be here because that's
where his parents Matt that's
were that was a student there
and that so of of of everyone
knows that about them that
they're at the very top New
Mexico you and I'm connected but
we have been able to get him
back to New Mexico so madam
chair members of the committee
Senator up he is actually
launching off of his father's
ranch in Texas so I don't think
that he's willing to move that
to New Mexico to realize there's
a problem yeah but I do feel
like the Amazon distribution
center which obviously we did
not give any Leda funds to
because that was a project that
was going to move here anyways
but I do think that you know
that's that's a stab but we
continue to talk to his people I
can't say that I have that
direct connection right now but
we continue to talk to his
people about further options.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you senator thank you
secretary dismembered just focus
on the small businesses in New
Mexico businesses that we have
we were talking about the
biggest best bang but we always
are stifling to New Mexico small
businesses so keep that in mind
as we move for because but that
you get and generational poverty
is by giving them opportunities
economic driver opportunities
not just jobs with large
corporations thank you madam
chair thank you senator the
secretary of the work thank you
senator Ortiz the food Pino
followed by Senator facts thank
you Mr chairman and senator and
then secretary keys we often
hear talk here wills New Mexico
is not doing anything to
diversify we're we're still
beholden to one industry oil and
gas that we we're not really
ready for the future it's clear
that you're making steps in that
direction that will make is
capable of surviving the end of
oil and gas in the state
whenever that occurs I just had
one quick question for you what
we it was often said in the past
that one thing that we ran into
into trying to attract companies
to the state was our workforce
and that we we didn't have the
type of work force that was
attractive to many of the
companies could you address that
are we making any gains in that
regard or what we need to do to
do that.
Madam chair members of the
committee senator Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino it's a great question
I'm gonna go back to their
diversification from oil and gas
first
I think that energy is the topic
of our time.
when we talk to companies the
first question is how and where
and how clean is the energy that
we can get from you.
And so I do feel like
diversifying that portfolio is
incredibly important and so I
work with secretary cultural
Propst and secretary Kenny
probably more than any other
secretaries in this cabinet and
that is because when a company
comes here we not only ask are
they paying good wages are they
providing benefits.
Are they going to irreparably
damage our environment if
they're here whether that be the
land the water or the air and
I'm not the expert on that but
Secretary economic secretary
cultural pirtle and I think
we've been very friendly to
business but we've also held
them accountable and so I'm very
proud of that work that we do in
terms of our work force.
In our twenty year study.
The strategy group that we
brought in said that we are not
doing a good enough job.
With educating our students for
the specific kind of work and
companies that are here and that
we need to do a better job
making sure that those students
are getting the qualifications
that they need so I have been
working directly with secretary
Rodriguez on this issue and then
we've taken one sector which is
film and you all appropriated
the forty million dollars for
the media Academy and so fifteen
schools who teach film and
television around the state
finally they have a core
curriculum in their teaching
together we will be having
announcements soon but we have
already announced the satellite
campus at the DAC see in NMAA
you and it's great that dean
Torres is here today because I
really feel like that
communication and collaboration
between industry and educational
institutions whether they be for
year or two year is.
What is going to lead to our
success.
And I also feel like we need to
really study
the stem fields because we have
an amazing opportunity to be.
A leader and advanced technology
in space and cybersecurity and I
do think that we need to to to
better support that
communication.
Thank you and Mr chairman and
and secretary keys the I think
I've.
I just hope that you will not
hesitate to bring to the
legislature any needs that you
have this is such a pivotal
department for all the rest of
state government and for the
operation of the people of the
state we we just we need to have
a strong economy which you've
done so far as great hope you
can continue it and I think we
all want to support and make it
work whether that's more money
for some of the education
programs that you identified as
being particularly crucial or
actually in in expending energy
into it I won't miss the
opportunity to kick in the pitch
for the geothermal potential of
the state I know you're you're
right on top of that as well so
thank you thank you very much
thank you senator Senator
panics.
Thank you very much Mr chair
chairman care Senator for
bringing this secretary forward
I'd like to thank you for paying
attention to our small
communities that's something
I've been talking about and a
couple of my communities I was
pleasantly surprised to learn
that rate goes and manager
Madrid have received grants and
that your department is working
with them
the issue that I'd like to bring
up of Mr Chairman chair is that
Small businesses large
businesses in order to be
successful need sound I. T.
broadband.
Connectivity and I recently
learned that our department of
transportation is charging a
very high amount of money for
right away too late lines and
I'm wondering if your department
since this is so crucial to the
operation of businesses if your
department could do some
coordination with I. T. whether
we have an officer department
and the D. O. T. to cease if
some of this can be worked out I
understand and
Representative Gail Armstrong is
the person who brought this to
me that that DOT doesn't have it
in their budget and they're
charging something like.
I'm gonna say five thousand up
foot I don't know something
astronomical and that a lot of
small communities can't really
afford to do that to get lines
to their people and I know in
the past madam chair Mister
chair that there used to be
grants and funding for this type
of thing but I would just ask
that you look into this for the
future this is something we've
been talking about for a long
time I was just saying to our
pro ten this morning that.
You know if you're at my house
you can have your picture and
the sound on it once you get one
or the other on my internet so
that's why I have to come to the
capitol the time for meeting
Ezzell but thank you very much
and if you want to respond
please thank you madam chair
Senator Stefanics I will follow
up on that I do think that
broadband is an economic
development issue I know that
there are that the governor has
formed you know of the I had a
broadband who was Kelly cycle I
will follow up with her and I
will also follow up with
secretaries are not on the DOT
part of it so thank you great
thank you very much thank you
senator Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you madam
secretary and I was the the
internet broadband is huge in my
area to you know what's the
struggle for surfing the
internet and watching Netflix at
the same time.
No but Mister chair and
secretary I do appreciate a lot
of the work that you do your one
of the few secretaries that when
we have interim committees the
show up in person.
And you come before the
committee and I just wanted to
make sure the public knew that
of of the twenty three year one
of the few that does and it's
always appreciated when you do
this last year was Las Vegas I
believe.
and always great answers updates
I like what you're doing in
rural New Mexico it's a it's a
huge passion of mine to try to
get as much economic development
outside of the Rio Grande
corridors we can and your
department's always very helpful
I do have a question Mr chair
secretary is there some type of
guide that we've that you've put
together for smaller
municipalities with all of the
funding available the processes
and and try to simplify a for
the smaller cities to to tap
into some of the funds that you
all have madam chair members of
the committee Senator Pirtle yes
it was great to see you in Vegas
and I have to disclose my
family's originally from Vegas
so I have a real I have a real
soft spot for it
and the we do we have an EDD
book a nice glossy book that we
can pass out and I'll just make
sure that on Monday morning
there brought over to this
committee so that you can that
you can have one and you all can
pass them out to your
constituents thank you Mr chair
but madam secretary that be
awesome to have that and that
way because I get calls from
friends that our state on the
dexter city council I just don't
know where to go or or what to
do and really help them out
we've we've seen a little bit of
economic development down in
Hagerman put in a little beef
jerky plant which is really huge
for the little small community
and a few years back before your
secretary we were able to do the
USA beef plant which is huge and
and so I would hope that not
just the real high paying jobs
you know in my community if we
can get thirty or forty fifty
thousand dollar jobs than a lot
of times as the second income
and it really does put families
over a level where they can have
a lot of success in their kids
can go to college and and do
that so don't forget about those
those projects even though you
know meat packing plants not as
flashy as Facebook it's very
important in my neck of the
woods but I do appreciate Mr
chair and secretary of the you
do thank you.
You madam chair to head thank
you and yes secretary when you
started you said that you thank
the governor for taking a leap
of faith with you hi I I don't
think that was much of a leap of
faith that was a pretty safe
bet.
and I I I'm very glad that she I
I here we were we were both of
the city awhile back and and and
she poached you from the city
and boy is that to all of our
budget but that she did so thank
you so much in in my in my
private job I had the
opportunity to meet with one of
your boots on the ground a
couple months ago and and was
just so impressed is he sat down
with with myself and and and one
of my clients and walked us
through the holy to process
and I and at which I was
embarrassed to say like I did
not understand.
but but after that meeting I did
it my client to and and I I'm
thank everyone who's comes in
contact with with your
department gets that same degree
I have
service and so I really
appreciate that I also
appreciate how responsive you
are and you are always there
anywhere always answering your
phone
and I I I I really appreciate
that so thank you for your
service thank you madam chair
you know I think that one thing
that we just try to be
especially during the COVID is
compassionate and a lot of
people need help
and a lot of people need hand
holding especially during that
really hard time so.
I have to say it's my staff.
They're really fantastic they're
there and it is your leadership
that that that I think they're
responding to so thank you.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to say thank you cabinet
secretary I appreciate you
diversifying and growing the
economy of New Mexico and I
really am thankful that you're
bringing tribes into the mix and
bringing them to a seat at the
table the two things that I
really like that you talked
about with Lee that is how you
are working with rural
infrastructure and creating
rural jobs Senator Pirtle myself
Senator Baca at most of our
districts are rural so that
really means a lot to me and I
want to thank you for that so
with that what's the.
Okay that
that of course seconded by
Senator Pirtle I have a roll
call vote please Senator Baca
yes Senator Ingle Senator Lopez
Senator McKenna yes Senator
more service center to the piano
Center Pirtle yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes center how to me you yes
Senator Duhigg yeah.
Lied to their congratulations
we'll be seeing you on the set
up for.
I went to Mexico.
The cabinet secretaries
Stephanie Rodriguez for the
higher education department and
senator Morris the morning
morning.
One researcher going much
members of our my committee
given Stephanie secretary
Rodriguez is one of the OAG
cabinet secretaries I think she
has been around this building
and been around us so long but
you might as well be considered
one of them
we all know over we all like her
she like many of the cabin
sectors today are very
responsive to us to answer your
call she deals with the
university's shows a tough job
hurting many many cats as we all
know and scripture order because
I think we all know her very
well and how we all work which
side are respected so then
secretary thank you good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee because my sponsor of
the new newborn as you all know
I will be keeping my mask on
because I am recovering from a
cold and I want to respect that.
I also have to note that I'm
extremely appreciative of him
for serving as my sponsor for
the second time actually thank
you Senator I am humble that
I've been able to serve New
Mexicans as the cabinet
secretary of the higher
education department for the
past two years and I look
forward to that upward momentum
that we have been building
together when it comes to
college access and enrollment
for the first time in a decade
historically the department has
served and been dedicated to the
fiduciary responsibilities of
our colleges and universities
however we have turned a new
chapter to really be dedicated
to the people we are ultimately
serve and that's our students
and graduates and because of the
historic and monumental
initiatives by governor Michelle
Lujan Lujan Grisham and you the
legislature New Mexico is
leading the nation in higher
education policies that are
student centered and will
improve individual economic
mobility find pathways to family
sustaining incomes and
strengthen overall statewide and
community wealth we as an agency
and you as a legislative body in
our partners in this room today
are clear we're emphasizing the
whole student experience by
supporting financial access
wraparound student services
through food security
initiatives mental and
behavioral health supports and
even more and I will always
stand by the notion that higher
education is a common good for
New Mexicans and our state Now
Senator members touched a little
bit of my career I've been
bugging you since day one of
this administration you know
hang in with my votes but I also
want to touch on my personal
background first things first
I'm a proud Lobo and so is my
husband sitting behind me I
originally stemmed from a line
of agricultural workers also
known as but I settles from the
imperial valley of California I
am the first and only college
graduate with a bachelors degree
and my family out of my siblings
I am the daughter of a T. so
educator at a community college
and the data daughter and wife
of Michael.
Information go up and I am the
proud yes the niece and nephew
who are being raised by my
parents their grandparents why
am I sharing this with you well
our stories are very important
and as you can see with the
little I have shared with you
about my life I can relate to
many New Mexicans here in the
state.
Now what have we accomplished
together in higher education I
know you know I blast you with
emails every single month of our
updates but I'm gonna tell you
one bipartisan passage of the
opportunity scholarship act the
country's most encompassing
tuition free college program
providing tuition free college
two thirty six thousand New
Mexicans this fall semester
alone thank you Senator
Stefanics for sponsoring that
and getting that through the
Senate with me I could have done
it without you we also have ten
thousand students who are
receiving the lottery
scholarship the nation's first
college program promise program
in the nation.
Statewide public college
enrollment has also increased by
over four percent the second
highest in the nation where
everyone else San declines in
our nation's enrollment we also
increase the number of full time
first time freshman by almost
ten percent and I am breaking
the news to you all here you
hear it first after of course
the governor's office but I will
say that we are actually
breaking another record for
enrollment this spring semester.
Three growth of the teacher loan
repayment and health
professional loan repayment
programs with the help of our
partners some of which are in
this room such as the unions in
the association's applications
have increased by four hundred
seventy seven percent and our
worries have increased by one
hundred eighty four percent the
past two years hello number four
adult education program
enrollment went from eight
thousand after the pandemic to
ten thousand one hundred fifty
seven and I we launch the first
statewide college student basic
needs survey in the country no
state has ever taken this on to
see what our students are facing
when it comes to food security
and basic needs such as housing
thank you for your help Mr vice
chair in helping us get that
started to date we have more
than one million dollars out the
door for food security
initiatives and one million
dollars out the door for
behavioral health services as
you can see I have been busy we
all have been busy however I
want to thank our higher
education leaders across the
state some of which are in this
room if you can please raise
your hand that you are here
today I know there's a ton
I also want to recognize may
amazing agency colleagues who
helped make all of this possible
some are also in this room today
and others are watching on zero
thank you W. secretary but the
State Opera he'll our directors
and also our public information
officer in the rest of the team
that makes the world go round in
higher education and adult
education in New Mexico thank
you members for your support
year round thank you for
listening to Pete thanks to a
wonderful sponsor any you'll get
back to you madam chair thank
you so much for that cabinet
secretary now before I go to the
includes in support of this
three part re apartment it's
important to note that twenty
letters of support were sent on
your behalf which weren't
printed and given to you today
members but their work twenty
letters that came from
throughout the state of New
Mexico and that doesn't include
the number of emails we also
received so with.
That with the short handed you
can show me in the committee
room who's in favor of the three
appointment looks like the
entire room.
I don't pay them.
I'm gonna bring a four of you
one minute each if you want to
come up so the first four to
come up to the desk can comment
and I'm gonna do one minute for
the first four.
Good morning madam chair Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Jamie Trujillo I'm
gonna keep my mask on to restore
coverage I am the executive
director of the New Mexico adult
education association and I am
very honored to speak in support
of the re confirmation of
secretary Rodriguez from the
beginning she has been a just a
very tireless and effective
champion for adult education
last September she attended and
adult education family literacy
we can talk a ticket kick off
event where she was presented
with an out on a champion of
adult education award and she
shared some of her personal
experiences with adult education
I just gave us a really
wonderful gift with that and she
committed her support to adult
education and has really walked
that talk ever since the last
two legislative sessions the
executive recommendation for
adult education funding has been
nine million dollars which is a
huge increase for us and this
year that included money for
instructional materials and for
for a high school equivalency
test vouchers and so that is
becoming a big reality for us
and that is in part so much
thanks to secretary Rodriguez
and so just to and I will say
that the opportunity scholarship
which she champion has been such
a wonderful opportunity for
adult education students because
they are the nontraditional
students who really need that
support and help so I I just I'm
so honored to speak thank you
for the confirmation thank you.
Good morning thank you madam
chair Sir chair members of the
committee my name is Ian then
undergraduate student body
president at the university of
New Mexico our cabinet
secretaries have a lot of
different constituents to serve
when it comes to higher
education I place value on
leaders who remember the
foundation of higher education
of students I you needed to
understand the higher ed is here
to educate students for research
conducted in large part by all
students hi regard leaders who
are above all else in support of
our students and who understand
that financial needs
considerations and success and
unique driving ambition of
students in New Mexico I'm here
on a weekends where I have a lot
of homework because secretary
Rodriguez is a leader who is
available times prepared I'm
working diligently for her
student constituents when it
comes other stakeholders like my
institution I'd like to draw
your attention to our letter of
support from my UNM president
Garnett Stokes Boller branch
campus leaders who are in the
room with me today we with the
money mental positive
opportunity scholarship and
significant enrollment increases
the basic need survey that is
valued by my students at the
agency I just want to say that
we are all confident and a
strong future for higher and
under her leadership thank you
so much you can see is awesome
she was.
Hi.
The morning.
Good morning madam chair and Mr
chair and members of the
committee my name is Robert
Martin and I president of the
institute of American Indian
arts and here in Santa Fe and
I'm also chair of the New Mexico
tribal college consortium that
represents the for colleges for
tribal colleges here in New
Mexico and so I'm speaking on
their behalf as well the
secretary Rodriguez I'm proud to
be be here in support of your
record reconfirmation she's been
so helpful to us and made a
difference she's accessible
she's responsive to our needs
she's visited our communities
and specially our colleges and
every time we reached out to her
she's made a difference for us
and and I think all the programs
that she's implemented the food
security mental health the
opportunity scholarship the dual
credit program for the tribal
colleges have all increased
student success is our
institutions in fact the
retention rates that are the
highest they've ever been for
the tribal colleges across the
board thank you as well as our
attendance thank you thank you.
Morning good morning share madam
chair Senators it's great to see
you I'm Stephen most president
New Mexico tech and I'm here
representing probably all of
higher education the cop the the
branch and the community
colleges since they're not
appear to stand so we are
standing strong support the
secretary right because she
brings the following qualities.
She's very fair she's very
diligent and she is really
concerned about the students and
I think that as you pointed out
as one of the most important
things so we are supporting care
reconfirmation we think highly
of her we work well with her and
I I know you're looking at the
clock and so with that I stand
strong support thank you thank
you for your comments online are
there any in favor for the
reappointment.
K. to online and then back to
the committee room anybody not
in favor of the re appointment
signaled what about online and
nobody on no one online will now
go to questions from the
committee will start off with
Senator panics thank you Mr
chair Madam chair Senator for
bring forward this and nominee
and thank you Secretary for your
good work.
I'd like to thank the presidents
of the colleges that are in my
district who are here president
Martin present rally maybe
others I don't know don't know
restraint right.
Probably read also to but anyway
In higher education could you
identify.
The item the category that is
not well funded that we should
be paying attention to madam
chair Mister chair.
Madam
I was gonna well that's that I'm
sorry that's not on the top of
my list here
Madam chair you know senator
thank you for that question I
was gonna say athletics because
we had a conversation.
Thirty eight but if you I really
have to dive into other things I
I would say there's a couple of
things I'm gonna ask folks to
really look into and that is
estimate on research we have
three strong research
institutions here in the state
of New Mexico and a lot of the
money that they bring in aside
from general fund is actually
eight federal dollars for the
research that they do but that
is not enough to ensure that
they are having salaries paid
but they're able to continue
these mission critical things
moving forward and can continue
to thrive here in the state of
New Mexico I think the other
thing is workforce so when we
talk about workforce we think
about our community colleges
when we think about our branch
campuses they're the ones who
are really developing folks to
graduate and hit the road
running right away into careers
and often times their well paid
careers over time we have
decreased funding for hi skills
in their workforce components
but we're working on increasing
those levels again I really
encourage you to look at
research in public service
projects of what items in there
are so seated with those two
factors when it comes to
supporting that and then the
last of course is teachers and
social workers we need loan
repayment programs and we need
to ensure that those programs
are being funded in a
sustainable model we have done
numerous and down equipment to
ensure that we're bringing
faculty and for increasing
enrollment and students but
that's one and done how are we
going to sustain that model for
years to come to ensure that
we're producing teachers are
producing social workers for
state agencies and our public
schools.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair
and other insurers ma'am sure so
the sponsored open speaking
about politics and is more than
just a football and stuff like
that you know this irks her
husband as a student athlete was
a student I put you in a moment
but it's about diversity also
it's one of things I talked
about with secretary yesterday
when I played football twenty
percent of the African American
Matt males on campus I think
it's still the case we're
student athletes so and most
meant male athletes are some
color soccer basketball area so
there's a lot more than just
playing football put in helping
on and play bass also there's a
lot more to the to start
secretary and I talked about so
Mr chair chair since the the
Senator wanted to do that
besides diversity let's consider
gender equity absolutely every
time there's a cut to athletic
programs what are the ones to go
the women's teams the small
teams the soccer which we should
have been supporting all along
in our entire state so I think
that we need to revisit how we
look at athletics overall I use
my junior money to make sure
that women's athletic total
money was completely funded for
scholarships for both our
crossover tenants in Austin
scholarships are this year
because that is a critically
important right thank you very
much Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank
you Mr chairman and and the
secretary and and senator thank
you for bringing this moment if
we can confirmation forward I
did I did want to follow up on
the social work and infants the
the job you did in getting that
money out the door as fifty
million dollars in last year's
budget all out the door and I
think it's all been spent at
this point maybe there's a
little bit left but but and
that's been incredible shot in
the arm to the social work
programs in the state so if we
want to increase the mental
health workforce at the social
workers and counselors and
psychiatric nurses for that's
going to come from.
And that's and that's exactly
what you're what you're of.
A department was able to get the
money out to to begin
implementing one less thing I've
often heard it said madam
chairman and and Mr chairman the
vice chairman the the the all of
those
R. P. S. P. the line items are
growing you know they're getting
out of control there's too many
of them is just getting that's
precisely in my mind where we
ought to be focusing more
support those are the programs
that bridge the gap between
academia and the real world does
the programs that bring the the
campus into the community and in
the community into the campus
and that's where we need to be
focusing some of our attention
not less but more so I I applaud
you for bringing that up and and
I would I would hope that the
that the Senate and the the full
legislature would would follow
through on I'm becoming more
realistic and how we fund those
are PSP programs they're not out
of control they're under funded
currently and we probably need
to figure out a better way to
sustain their ongoing of
financial solvency thank you Mr
president Mr chairman and madam
chair thank you madam chairwoman
to pick thank you have did you
say thirty six thousand but
folks are doing the options
colors this is on that yes.
That is fantastic
Yes I know and I and I love the
the wraparound services the you
are focusing on high and and
addressing issues that are going
to insure that our students have
everything they need to be
successful students
in their lives
Have a question is so and and
senator to Pino was talking
about getting those funds out to
encourage that the social work
folks going into social work is
there any mechanism that's
tracking.
Where they're going after that
so are they going into.
Are they going to CYFD or are
they going into private practice
are they leaving the state
how it is is there a way that
that that we know I don't know.
What are return on investment is
on programs like that madam
chair I will tell you that the
children's youth and families
department Under Secretary Vigil
has done a study to see where
graduates are going and if
they're being hired in the
profession I will also tell you
currently there is no mechanism
but we're working on it it's the
New Mexico longitudinal data
system also known as rise and
them we are the lead agency on
that it's a coordination and
collaborative at collaborative
effort with early childhood
Public Education Department
higher education department the
department of vocational
rehabilitation and department of
workforce solutions this system
will be launching in phase one
June twenty twenty three of this
year we've been working on it
two years the full
implementation of it will be
June twenty twenty four and will
have ten years of data already
integrated into the system so
you can start to see the upward
mobility of students is that all
the data we want to know but
it's a start to a system so you
can start to see where people
are graduating what scholarships
they received where they part of
any early childhood programs and
where the being employed now in
New Mexico so we're working on
and we hope to have that up very
soon for you all to use here in
the legislature actually that's
one to I really look forward to
seeing that thank you and thank
you for for all of your work
thank you madam chair I'd like
to just make a few comments I
want to thank you for all that
you do for New Mexicans and what
you do for higher education.
You and I clicked the two first
met because our stories are so
similar and first generation
college students worked on food
insecurity ourselves when we
were in school and which is why
help champion with you
addressing food insecurity and
at colleges throughout New
Mexico giving us your top five
list of important but I want to
share with my peers that if you
don't mind a top priority for me
is helping to keep the
opportunity scholarship and I
hope senators that you work with
me on ensuring that that
scholarship stays for those
bridge students now Bridge
students for those of you who
don't know our first semester of
college students who need that
two point five GPA during that
first semester to that qualify
for the lottery scholarship we
also need to ensure that the
lottery scholarship stays with
the opportunity scholarships
simultaneously because of not
sixteen thousand New Mexicans
can be affected if we don't do
this and if you think of stories
like cars cabinet secretary we
didn't have a family that we
could call as our safety net for
help in college these
opportunity scholarships lottery
scholarships are vital for New
Mexicans who have stories
similar to ours to break the
cycle of poverty I want to thank
you and Dr Trujillo for all that
you do and your staff and so
with that with the little the
committee to pass.
Okay senator Morris with the
second by Senator products roll
call please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Lopez center McKenna
yes center more service center
to the penal yes Senator Pirtle
yes Senator phonics.
Senator Stewart yes center how
to meal yes Senator Duhigg yes.
Ten two zero we will see you
later on the Senate floor
congratulations.
Senator Stewart if you can come
up with the reappointment of
environmental department cabinet
secretary James County.
And and I just want to tell
folks because we're supposed to
be on the floor at eleven thirty
I let our floor leader know that
we need to complete the
secretary Kathy is confirmation
and that we the the rules
committee might be a little
delayed getting down to the
floor so just don't get too
nervous if you see it getting to
eleven thirty we're going to
allow for a full the full
discussion for his confirmation
and our floor leader just as
understanding of that.
Good morning Senator Stewart the
morning.
Good morning Mr chair madam
chair members of the committee I
am honored today to bring the
reconfirmation forward for James
candy.
Just this week our secretary has
been named by Temple University
as the one of the fifty great
engineers from Temple University
secretary Kenny stands out as
one of only a handful of public
sector honorees highlighting a
career that began as an intern
in the US environmental
protection agency culminating to
his position as cabinet
secretary so secretary Kenny
holds a master of science in
environmental engineering degree
and a bachelor of science degree
in environmental engineering and
technology both from Temple
University of prior to his
appointment secretary Kenny
worked at the U. S. EPA for more
than twenty one years most
recently as senior policy
adviser for oil and gas in that
role he worked for senior agency
leadership and design gravity's
to support environmentally
responsible development of oil
and natural gas resources while
working with states tribes and
federal agencies.
When secretary Kenny began he
restored for key core values to
the department that helps
implement the mission one
science using the best available
science to inform decision
making to innovation employing
creative engineering and
technology solutions to
interesting of our mental
challenges collaboration
engaging communities and
interested stakeholders and
compliance ensuring meaningful
compliance I could talk a lot
about other things but in the
presence of time constraints I'm
gonna turn it over to them Hey
can talk a little bit about his
last four years sector can.
I thank you madam thank you part
time sort for sponsoring my
reconfirmation I appreciate not
only the members of this
committee but the members of the
legislature I giving me that
opportunity as well as the
governor giving me the
opportunity to serve for the
past four years
as I'll say the best cabinet
position in state government and
I look forward to earning your
support today and and hopefully
on the floor as well
it's been an honor to work with
New Mexicans with our tribes and
pueblos with various community
members community leaders and
the legislature and the five
hundred plus employees at the
Environment Department together
we reduced climate emissions
we've tackled the growing ozone
concentrations the air quality
issues we protected surface
waters both for scientific
purposes but more for outdoor
recreational purposes we've
cleaned up groundwater improve
drinking water and brought it to
areas of tribal nations that
haven't had it before
we're preventing occupational
fatalities there are OSHA
program we helped one hundred
and sixty hand and cannabis
businesses stand up over the
last four years and I'm proud of
the investments we made in our
economy many of you and and
maybe folks watching think of
the environment department as
solely a regulator but we've
contributed over forty seven
million dollars in grants and
loans through our department to
communities throughout New
Mexico and that's before the
bipartisan infrastructure law
and inflation reduction act
tsunami of money came to the
state of New Mexico so we have
more money to give out
And I'm equally in proud of the
way we've implemented our
mission in in in the in the
sense that we've created limited
English we've given
opportunities to limited English
proficiency New Mexicans to
participate in the permitting
and rulemaking process sees like
we've never done before
We if you know of COVID was a
rough time for all of us and our
department on on a high note we
kept a hundred thousand
businesses open
we work with them so that as
their employees got ill we can
help them get back on their feet
as quickly as possible and we
also had the honor of crawling
through the sewers of New Mexico
to sample for COVID in
congregate care and juvenile
justice facilities to ensure
those populations were were kept
safe as well
You know when I started this job
in twenty nineteen my very first
week the department of defense
launched a lawsuit to prevent
the cleanup of P. five us around
town an airforce base that was
my first week
and then after that we we not
only fought back and I'm proud
that we fought back as New
Mexico because in taxes the
department of defense was doing
just the opposite they were not
suing Texas in fact they were
cleaning up P. I just under the
same laws we ask them to do so
in New Mexico and I'm also proud
in that whole time we never lost
sight of art Scott at Hiland
dairy where we helped we
provided him with eight hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to
handle his polluted dairy herd
so we knew who our target was
and we knew who was impacted and
we used our regulatory
jurisdiction in a way that hold
someone accountable and
supported our local dairy
industry
Just as I wrap up madam chair
members of the committee you
know it you heard a lot of great
things that the cabinet is doing
with respect to their employees
their internal fate facing
operations we're no different
we're building our our staff
engagement we've measured our
employees engagement meeting how
they feel about the their job
and the management every year
since year one twenty nineteen
we've stood up it digital
recruitment and retention
measures unlike any other
department I'd say we are very
much on the forefront of the
environment department of that
we've offered diversity and
inclusion trainings we've
expanded the use of the
opportunity scholarship or we
offer the opportunity
scholarship to our own employees
and said if you want to go back
to school we where rather have
you as a part time employee then
leave to go back so we've
embraced things that the state
is doing internally
I as a management team you've
read the books which which is
how to change things when things
are hard and let and let me just
tell you they've been hard but
we created a common vocabulary
and business accu men among our
management team so that we're
all on the same page about how
we lead such a large
organization
and I'm proud that I've had over
a dozen employees tell me that
they feel comfortable being out
at work as as an LGBTQ cabinet
secretary myself so as the pro
tem said we have four core
values science innovation
collaboration compliance I I
hope that you see that we
demonstrate those as verbs and
not now it's in the way we do
our business thank you.
Thank you and.
is there anyone in the audience
who is here and support.
All right
let's go ahead
very me like Florida I want to
be too late so it's just have if
there's two folks who would like
to to to come up and and speak
for one minute each.
Madam chair members of the
committee that Liz Mikel charm
with conservation voters New
Mexico we are to support this
nomination secretary Kenny has
been a leader in rebuilding the
environment department which was
decimated by the previous
administration he also has been
a leader in taking on the
pollution caused by the air
force's use of DFA's the
referred to he doesn't always
agree with us but he's always
willing to listen to us and to
consider our position and we're
to support of his nomination
thank you thank here.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you
president pro tem Stewart for
sponsoring secretary Kenny my
name is Laura Sanchez I'm the
executive director of our
government and public affairs at
PNM and we have enjoyed a very
collaborative relationship with
the secretary and his staff he's
a professional he has a lot of
very good professional folks at
his office we work with them
he's very approachable he's not
just a regulator and there's not
just the very important aspect
of compliance with the
department but they're also
innovators they work very hard
to try to craft policies that
make sense in our for our state
and he's so good at recruiting
and and having to do good work
workplace to having wonderful
employees that we enforcing post
one of his one of his attorneys
to come over to us and we we
apologize deeply and we are
grateful.
So thank you so much and we urge
you to vote yes for.
I think you have.
Is there anyone online in
support of the reappointment.
Okay thing number back to the
committee room anybody it not in
favor of the reappointment of
opposition.
Thank and what about online.
I'm not online cemex we'll go to
questions on the committee will
start with that are Pirtle
followed by Senator budget.
Mr chair thank you madam potent
thank you Secretary you know I
there's a to other things that
we don't see eye to eye on and
that's just going to happen in
politics the one thing I can say
is because with when said about
every other sector here's if I
call you or send a message
responsive always willing to
help any way you can your
Department always treats anyone
that I deal with with the utmost
respect and so I I do appreciate
that and then I received a
message from distribution in
Mexico the state publicly thank
you for everything you've you've
done with the P. fuss and
continuing to do and ensuring
that the federal government is
held responsible whenever they
they do a huge spill or
environmental thing that they've
they've historically done for
hundred years unfortunately in
New Mexico so I hope you will
continue to fight for New Mexico
as every single one of us fights
for the citizens and
constituents within our
districts you continue to
continue to do the same so very
much appreciate you in the work
that you do
from the small issues I call you
with the large issues always
willing to help always
responsive thank you thank you
then there's the family.
Thank you Mr chair madam chair
and senator for bringing this
forward in Mr Secretary could
you talk about how you go she
ate.
opposing views on New.
Rules or you know rulings that
might come forward.
Yes Mr chair the senator with
respect to we have a lot of
opposing views that come forward
and I appreciate both C. B. N.
M. and P. and speaking on my
behalf
but we have a lot of opposing
views that come to the
Department whether those are on
permits or rulemakings one thing
that we try to not be is
We we can disagree without being
disagreeable and we try to bring
stability stability to those
discussions we take and I know
when I was here in twenty
nineteen I remember Senator
Pirtle asking this question will
you come to communities who are
most affected by permits and
rules and and we did that we on
our ozone rule making we went
from Farmington down to Carlsbad
and everywhere in between to
hear all the divergent views on
our ozone rule making for oil
and gas rules we also as a
referenced in my remarks can
have a dialogue about pros and
cons on a rural or permit if
people can't participate if the
have limited English proficiency
whether that Spanish or
Vietnamese or whatever other
language so we've opened the
door to to including those
individuals through both
translation and
other services for our
rulemaking and at the end of the
day
Mr chair madam chair and Senator
what what we wind up doing it is
having negotiations on a lot of
these issues and bringing
parties to the table and see if
we can get resolution before we
have to bring in a legal
adjudicatory kind of body on
things so we're trying as much
as we can we are guided by law
in how we do things but that
doesn't mean that should be the
minimum not the maximum.
Thank you very much.
Think is that it would have
Senator McKenna than senator
Morris followed by Senator
Ingle.
thank you madam chair
vice chairman and
Senator Stewart I have known of
the secretary for some years now
and it's been always a.
Really wonderful exchange has
been very helpful and I want to
point out something on page four
of his resume chairman of ice
chairman and committee members
our secretary has three
publications and one that we
should all really be proud that
we have such a calibre in our
environmental Department is he
wrote to resource conservation
and recovery act unraveled he
wrote the book on the very
stringent regulations that we
all have to abide by and so it's
just it's just wonderful that
New Mexico has such as solar
environmental Stewart and
In our secretary so with that
thank you madam chair Senator
and vice chair thank you senator
Senator Moores thank you Mr
chair thank you will serve
Center pro Senate pro tem
Stewart and thank you secretary
obviously you're not as well
like the some of the other
cabinet secretaries
and honestly if I say this
I can't figure cap secretary I
disagree with
more than you and I can't figure
cabinet secretary like as much
as you you're you've always been
a a credible and gentlemen
you're charismatic you're you're
always open to our side and
industry and I just want to
thank you appreciate you and and
consider your friend after the
last four years so I appreciate
you
I do have a question I we talked
a little bit yesterday but we
could go a little talk about a
little more about some of the
other public comment periods
during during some of your
permitting processes and your
flow just like we do as
legislators we get flooded with
form may also we get to our.
And on the issue will get a
thousand emails are all just
form letters that we all get it
it's it's it's cumbersome some I
want to ask you about that I
know you have regulatory
processes you open it up for
public comment and you have
unique emails are COVID with
Pacific concern but then you
also get flooded with emails and
comments that are from national
internationally sometimes which
is important orders how do you
help industry to make sure that
they're responsive to public
concerns but aren't overly
responsive or overly burdened by
all these these spam Marcia
called spam but you know what I
prefer to.
yes and madam chair senator
Morris thank you for your your
comments and I appreciate that
you're always willing to listen
to me as well
and work together with respect
to your question when we have a
public rule making or a public
our permit process in which
we're asking for public comment
those comments can be either
unique comments written by an
individual or they could be as
you're pointing out a form
letter that signed by multiple
New Mexicans or whomever and
sent to us so we what we
typically do is look at the
public the unique comments we we
share them on our website but we
look at those you need comments
addressed them individually and
then we look at maybe the
hundred or one thousand or ten
thousand comments that came in
and we look at those as well in
in a singular sense and say
they're duplicate it from this
many people so we we break that
out on our website and indicate
unique comments and I forget the
term we use but I'll just say.
On unique.
comments
but we we we do want to hear
from all.
You know we do to listen to
everybody but we do categorize
them and and look at the weight
of those differently I think we
do that as legislators when we
get individual comments or hand
written letters which are rare
nowadays verses the spam that we
get I think so I think that's
important for you guys to do so
I appreciate that and I just
want to echo what Senator Pirtle
I I've always really appreciated
respected but you you're willing
to take on the federal
government as we have those
conversations about the federal
government's mismanagement of
our environment around the state
for hundreds of years and your
willingness to take them on it
we have a lot of resources a lot
of power and that's a fight that
we need to do to protect our
environment here in New Mexico
so I just want to applaud you
for doing that and we continue
to do that for the next four
years thank you thank you madam
chair thank you senator Senator
center.
Thank you Mr chairman of your
courage.
About the the the.
But the the Senator that can and
I can't remember what the heck
it is anymore but I heard it to
them many times hello this is
the federal government handling
this pretty co chair every
airforce base United States had
the role doing the same thing is
the federal government doing
what you think they should be
doing or have should have done
by now on that.
madam chair and senator no I
don't think the forces doing at
the debate defense departments
doing what they should be doing
and and the fact that they have
this problem nationally does not
mitigate the problem they have
locally in New Mexico what so
ever and I know you're not
saying that either
and.
Madam chair and and Senator
Ingle what I would say is you
know until the defense
department stops devoting New
Mexico taxpayer dollars to
fighting a lawsuit such that we
can actually come back to the
table and and negotiate the
actual cleanup we're not we're
we're diverting time and energy
and resources in the wrong
direction.
Because of their lawsuit.
That said I do think that they
are cleaning up on base at
economic the problem is that the
cows of the horses out of the
barn and P. five has left the
property line and they don't
have a plan to clean that up and
and when they do tell us that
they want to clean it up they
want to clean it up under their
own authority without state
oversight which is completely
unacceptable and and to Senator
Moores point I will content I'm
a native Philadelphian we food
Santa Claus I'm perfectly
capable of of continuing this
fight as as we we go forward
that was a flyers game though
But but I I don't think they're
doing enough to your point and I
I really do think that they need
to up to value the communities
in which they are doing business
and the industry in which
they're affecting.
Well I understand your answer
but the thing about it is is
what what we have when this
happened particularly with
industry like the dairy
industry.
Basically.
Not only was he he put out of
business the value of this land
is nothing.
And that happens anywhere around
that base that land is
basically.
It's not sellable for anything
that may be a dryland pasture
and stuff and I've got plenty of
that who the hell wants to go
there but the thing about is is
I think there should be from
other angles we need to go to
this a federal government
nothing else should be the owner
of that and pay whoever that is
just a hell of a price because
they have ruined their business
and art was a is a you know
very.
Very large very much did a lot
of of drugs she did cheese milk
and the rest of the things and
the thing about it is is.
You know eight fifty sounds like
a lot of money but that's just
that's a lot of a shot gun
shells compared to the damage
that's done there and it's all
over the country everywhere we
had a base I don't know what to
the base and the and I'm a
GORDNER they had some to but
they don't their water situation
is a little bit different there
but the thing about it is is we
we need to be going forward with
this and it's not the state's
responsibility but it's our
responsibility.
To
To make the federal government
pay and I can't imagine that
this has gone on this long and
we haven't had better results
from this and I'm not blaming
you because I know the court
system at its best years the.
I can slow digestive pattern
sometimes but to.
I think what we need to do is
make sure that we
We are still still in this fight
because it's not it's going to
take years for this to be
settled and it's not going to be
anything that's I worked with
Ron curry on on different things
like this and you know there's
such a such a little
understanding of agriculture
state government anymore and
it's not anybody's fault there's
just less than five percent of
us are even remotely involved in
in the state and I think
sometimes when you do rulings
and stuff you need to have for I
determined that you can just
call and say.
You know I'm not in your
business what's this going to do
because they're a huge industry
that employs a lot of people
pays good wages and generator
tremendous amount of income for
the state state thank you.
Thank you madam chairwoman
defect.
Thank you.
And you know as when you were
doing your introduction that at
one point.
Use that I think you kind of
describe your your regular
regulatory approaches a holding
folks accountable while
supporting them which I think is
is absolutely the right approach
when it comes to to to
regulation in the state I also
didn't know that you guys crawl
through sewers.
That sounds like a terrible job.
To anyone who wants to come
with.
I I I enjoy the.
But now I I I I I really
appreciate your your focus on
meaningful compliance
and I think a very appropriate
approach to regulation so thank
you for for your work.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to echo thanks on behalf of
my Senate district you've helped
with the major contamination
plume and espagnole Act to
helping with something what
which might seem not as vital to
some of you but which is very
important to rural New Mexicans
which happens to be septic tanks
and so you've answered every
call I've ever had and I'm very
thankful for that and so with
that at what's the pleasure the
committee.
Two passed by Senator panics
second by senator Morris but
have a roll call vote please.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez Senator McKenna
and I vote twice.
Yes senator Morris yes Senator
Ortiz P. now Senator Pirtle
Senator phonics.
Senator Stewart center at a meal
yes Senator Duhigg yes.
Seven two zero we will be seeing
you later on in the Senate for
congratulations.
Having the meeting back over to
our madam chair and with that we
are rules and recess.
Okay near the beginning okay
sounds good I'll be done.
