More Senator Campos Senator
Brandt this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator do hate.
Senator Hemphill Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator McKenna now I senator
Morris.
Centerman yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
to be there today by governor
Elmer daughters former sent a
new fund so pueblo governor
traditional leader please remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be there today by
What town.
Mazembe tacky tali na no we we
in the number of Korea and said
the of equality among all right.
Saying.
Tamo no recording.
the dog is not be a game of
immunity nine nine we have with
them quality.
Like you know Dynamo go live you
The to our our normal it took a
beating well prepared something
of COVID dumping buckets and not
to do it the point of requested
noted common one we want to and
then it will be their only till
April you were biking all of my
we see Porsche and Alemanno good
that tie in and not the.
With this.
This brings your final day.
Translation to my blessing this
morning it's a stand before you.
Okay now for our children
elderly and everybody else the
most involving a great big thank
you to each and everyone of you.
And to bless each and everyone
spirit protects you and give you
a in the future no more long
live.
To each and everyone of you as
you leave this place so with
that thank you very much.
of the United States of America
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
of New Mexico and is this symbol
of perfect friendship among
United cultures.
Good morning Senator is glad to
have you back I yield to senator
morning since we were here just
a couple hours ago
Mr presidents
units that we go about our
business announcements and
miscellaneous we are in that
governor Thorez for being here
it is very appropriate and we
very much appreciate you being
here on our last day to give us
another side to all of our lives
and all those who have helped us
do this and so I very much
appreciate that
units consent to allow cameras
in the Senate chamber in the
Senate gallery hearing no
objections Senate the gallery.
Cameras are allowed in the
just want to thank everyone for
welcoming me into the Senate
each and everyone of you staff
and and leaders and members but
also want to wish of my wife a
Happy Birthday today she was
so I just please so please abuse
here today please help me wish
of my beautiful wife and just
all of the Happy Birthday thank
you Mr president thank you
senator Maestas further
announcements and center how do
got a lot of that and Los Alamos
high school the best of luck as
they compete today thank you Mr
president thanks Jeremy I just
information center how to meal.
the whispers I just want to
thank everyone box halfway this
literally the half way day of
the session we had our baby a
little more Donnelly PO and it's
been a lot of sleepless nights
baby is doing fantastic we look
for to get back getting the heck
out of here and started are all
live together as a family so is
one appreciate everyone's been a
family thank you Mr president
thank you senator Morris.
Senator Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you for the opportunity
family.
Out of Roswell.
This is a great of for many
years they were the backbone of
the sheep industry of the state
Mexico cattle growers but he his
dad and his granddad and for for
generational they ran the Ross
And it essentially kill the
sheep industry in the state in
Mexico but Bronson is with us
today.
Ross will be shown that part of
the family had some brains.
Here it is with us in the
Madison.
And I appreciate it so much when
pretty obvious the the good
looks came from EVA so
It's a but I just want to thank
everyone the session
blast just I really enjoyed that
so anytime you want to put me on
when those committees I'd be
glad to be on it
you know that it's but I also
and just thank him for for being
willing to come in service our
chaplain we've had some great
conversations and then my office
and then the whole way and you
chaplain and and you know let's
just see if we have to hog time
to keep them here
and let's just let's just make
in the permanent chaplain for
about.
Are the the the ones that
cleaner restrooms.
Because honestly those restrooms
can become really a mass and so
clean and it it just it means a
lot to be honest you know the
that you get to have a clean
restroom to use sometimes when
you go places that are public
that didn't happen so I just
think our janitorial staff for
get that signed in into law
thank you lieutenant governor.
Thank you Senator Brandt further
announcements.
We have further announcements
Two hours and twenty two minutes
a sorry about that.
First.
We talked about Smokey bear
yesterday got a lot new
information people try to
veterinary hospital which was
then taken over by his son and
is currently run by his
granddaughter and is less than a
mile from where I'm standing
But I have one other thing just
because I know that senator
Wirth this really worried that I
might talk for two hours and
twenty two minutes.
the popcorn Patchen have a group
huddle.
Thank you.
Thank Senator Steinborn.
job it's really some of the
hardest workers in this body.
First here before we get here
last to leave no matter what the
conditions no matter the late
of applause if we can.
truly thank you Mr is present
thank you Senator Steinborn.
We have any further
announcements Senators.
Si no further announcements.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth thank you Mr
those in there is a committee
report that's in then we have.
Some concurrence calendars a
eighty twenty is Senator Diamond
and Senator Ivy Soto Senate bill
one oh seven custody hearings
twenty one is Senator souls
and then we're going to go to
third reading and just to give a
a line up on third reading of
what we're going to do start
with item seventeen house bill
two seventy one Senator Shendo
thirty three Senator Ivey Soto
twenty one house bill four fifty
nine Senator Neville
we'll see where we are and where
we go from there with that Mr
president is that we go about
our business messages from the
house we're in that order
business messages from the
house.
forty seven as amended by the
house and further amended by the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk the general show the
message from the house has been
received.
journal so that the message from
the house has been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in a gross copy of
Senate finance committee
December days McCutchen chief
clerk the gentle show that the
message from the house has been
received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take is that next
order of business I thank you Mr
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifteen as amended has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually hearing
no objection the reader to read.
House bill ninety three as
amended do pass as amended
the committee part has been
adopted in the journal show that
they were active on individually
the reader to read Mr president
your to do sherry Committee to
whom has been referred to Senate
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee port has been
adopted I'd like to announce to
all the members of the officers
the Senate have signed an open
session Senate Judiciary
consent we go that our business
concurrence and I would yield
to senator Servan tastes for
concurrence counter number
eighteen Senate bill four twenty
six Senator months he was
of affirmatively Senate Bill
explain to us what those
amendments were.
Thank you Mr president present
the house Judiciary Committee
added to the definition of
Committee added definition of
person to assure that it
identified only governmental
actors that would be subject to
civil rights actions RG in the
Thank you Mr president a move
that the Senate now concur with
the house amendments to Senate
bill for twenty six as amended.
Enters the body to vote yes.
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the Senate's concurred with
the amendments to Senate bill
for twenty six is twice amended.
nineteen Senate finance up for
Senate bill two eighties twice
amended center by the I thank
you very much Mr president I
asked that the Senate concur
with the house amendment to
Senate finance committee
legislation which is perfectly
fine it was others fifteen point
five million dollars in the
budget in the house bill two for
this purpose.
Thank you senator that any
with the amendments to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill two radius twice
amended and as for a voice vote
Senator is is a motion to concur
with the house amendments all
amended.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president next up
is concurrence counter number
twenty Senate Judiciary sub for
substitute for Senate bill one
oh seven is twice amended and
urged the body to vote yes
Senator philistine yes what
those amendments are.
At predominantly when the
department filed a petition for
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
information concert concerning
the petition name telephone
numbers date of birth and
information about of of that
personal information will be
provided to the tried
enhanced case review and the
amendments were also consulted
with us in the process so with
that Mr president I move that
the Senate concurrent house
amendments to Senate Judiciary
thank you Mr president.
Well the of.
Will sponsor here like I'm just
got some questions on the
this then Senator Diamond Dale I
tribe or pueblo so we have to
send all this stuff what.
We sending it to.
Then is our point of contact
each placers are a.
within CYFD custody there are
contacts point of contacts the
law does have provide contact
information and so what we're
doing is us at the office the
Mr president.
The CYFD it is this.
On one of the nations tribes
have contact information to
provide provide information to
leadership of the of the tribe's
probe us.
To the Mr president
lands I'm just trying to I mean
if if if the CYFD takes custody
in Shiprock is that different
than if they take custody in
Families have residents both on
and off tribal lands so they may
know.
Grandma lives on one side and.
Mom lives on the other side so
where the child is in and when
the child was taken into custody
That would CYFD takes custody.
But everybody in the
neighborhood knows everything
about it because well they're
apply so it was it you know
mom's house which was off tribal
land to grandma's house was on
tribal land.
Do we still have to find all
this information even though
And then the last one is the
type of placement Mr president
what what type of placements are
we talking about here.
tribal family members.
So.
I don't think that answer my
question this implies that
What types of different
placement can there be Senator
Diamond Mister president senator
Senator types placement the
child could remain directly
next of kin placement you're
providing information back to
the tribes that they have the
information to be able to locate
that child if necessary.
tribal member or can it be off
tribe non non Indian that that
becomes the foster family
will always be given back to a
tribal family members.
Senator.
Okay Mister president so that's
where the priority goes that's
Is that possible so CYFD is in
charge not on tribal land and
that's where mom and child live.
yes Senator so
Is that.
In that situation Mr president
does that.
Move the child far enough away
Only literally a few feet away.
Does that make sense Mr
president senator I'm not the
case manager and I'm not the the
judge in that case so if it's
thank you senator any further
debate.
Si no further debate Senator
Diamond close on the
concurrence.
Mr president I move that Senate
By voice vote by vote centers is
been a motion for the Senate to
concur with the house amendments
to Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate third floor Majority
Leader Peter Wirth takes that
next order of business thank you
Mr president the.
concur with the house amendments
to Senate bill one eighty eight
as amended.
Seeing no objection center we
please explain what those
amendments are thank you Mr
Chile reached your round and
that aromas with us all the time
so they took off in the fall and
I would urge the body to support
the concurrence Senator is is
it got a lot of media attention
to the to we to criticism
because we were ways a lot of
time on these kind of more
memorials and things like this
and it just so that we have
from debating things like this
when we have real issues like
mental medical malpractice taxes
everything else so I just
encourage those you know it's
it's hard to tell student groups
and constituents and I come to
you with these great ideas and
cute and so I really do think
that this bill against the
sticky award this year because
it really has been a waste of
time it really sends a message
to the people New Mexico that
have to I I may be able to agree
that we do a lot of trivial
stuff I remember when I was in
the house we used to always have
a memorial on topics fund or
something and and that would.
things that adds to our mistake
is the state the smell over of
roasting Chile and I think
actually this is adds to our
value in why people come here
really does have value thank you
Mr president any further debate
centers with center pirtle and
thank you Mr president and you
know I'm a little disappointed
they took off in the fall
because any any chili that's
fall was a little bit of a
protection of actual green chili
that's grown right here in New
Mexico by our local farmers
whether it's down in the lower
off and being roasted so yeah
you can roast chilli year round
but it probably didn't come from
New Mexico thank you Mr
president.
Thanks Center Pirtle any further
amendments to Senate bill one
eighty eight as amended and ask
for a voice vote senators is
been a motion for the Senate to
concur with the house amendment
to Senate bill one eighty eight.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
The next order of business.
Thank you Mr president
adjourn until twelve OO one PM
the Senate will come to order Mr
present us is consent that
consent that the rules we
suspend the record journal show
be suspended the record shows
that.
Journal is been read in full
an approved subdivision approval
the Judiciary Committee the no
objection it is so ordered.
Senator Ivey Soto item twenty
get ready on that one then
Senator Sanchez
on number twenty one for fifty
item number twenty house bill
two thirty three Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much this
president's present us as
because some of some of the
records show that all actions
for placing House Bill to thirty
Thank you very much Mr president
this president all this bill
simply restructure certain parts
of our of the it adds a couple
division's
Senator is we're debating house
bill two thirty three as amended
all the start with center share.
Thank you Mr president so Mr
president will the a sponsor who
really went to that really fast.
so Mister president how many
divisions does are all the have
today.
This president has to it has a
seven divisions.
be adding two more divisions to
our LD.
Mr president can I can I get the
Senator to introduces expert
witness who he's looking at.
to have my eyes for witness the
superintendent RLD Linda
Trujillo gently on the floor.
Seeing no objection as sergeant
arms US court our expert witness
into the chamber.
president I could just see him
it looked to me like he was
looking at a wall over there wow
that's.
Is there something on the wall
that I'm missing so I'm glad
Senator Morris.
I.
Senator.
seven divisions today how is
adding two more going to make
are all the
more efficient.
added by executive order
twenty some years ago so it's
actually been functioning but it
wasn't in statute LFC
recommended that it be added as
separated out to build support
the rest of them.
So Mister president boards and
commissions has been around for
for twenty seven years.
nine nine year span and okay
So if it Mr president if it's
been around for twenty some
years.
Of.
the the staffing going to change
is going to get a new office
Why why now this president
statute and so that's where LFC
when they did a program
evaluation they said if it's
going to be functioning as a
division you kind of really need
to have it show up as division.
this president it was not a
subdivision it was a it was a
full division.
and and so it and effective
never really Division lies
Okay Mister president so no new
staffing no new desks no nothing
but a but a name plate on the on
the door or the desk to.
And and I ask about this
because.
Don't we have a statewide.
Division of information
technology.
Be part of that non cabinet
positions can subscribe to it
however each each agency has its
own office of I. T..
This this breaking up of of IT
throughout our whole system.
I'm I believe it is part of the
When he's finished talking in
the back row.
Senator Padilla would yield to a
question.
thank you Mr president so
we're talking about the
information technology division
in regulation and licensing.
I'm spread.
My biggest deals a yes Mr
president will the with the
Senator well the.
Broadband Senator please yield
information technology division.
In regulation and licensing
division I'm I'm questioning.
Do we not have a statewide
O. the need this actual.
Information technology division.
Mr president is this is not my
legislation I'd like the sponsor
before sponsored answer that but
related projects and
initiatives.
This Senator would like to ask a
question Senator Ivey Soto so Mr
well I was.
over the state when we have a
statewide.
organization and I was truly
hoping that Senator Padilla
could sort out the so it's not
particularly to our L. D. but I
president they work together and
it is important that they have
actual staff in the various
divisions across state
government so that they can
coordinate that way into the
real time work that's needed.
willing to you Senator said are
you still willing to yield.
Not considerate thank you Mr
president session so thank you
Mr president so Senator Padilla
said something that that.
division that would regulate
other.
Technology divisions or is it
just an in house thing.
I'm just president does Senator
it would not so for example if
you look.
the minister Services Division
doesn't to regulate anything
else other than providing
administrative support for the
rest of the substantive
presents our share.
They really started to step up.
What they're doing in terms of
for example having
occupational professional
paper that we've been using
they've been under the
administrative services division
but they've kind of grown at at
to a point where just simply
supports the work of the other
divisions that are the more
substantive natures of that of
the RLD.
increase our staff however it
does make internal budgeting
easier.
Okay so Mister right so we
So this is simply again just
like the other one a name change
for a subset of of.
The people that are that we're
longer in the minister's
Services Division.
Okay Mister president so I
think.
The.
I think I understand what
they're doing I'm I'm just still
there for for LFC to to look at
in the in.
And I would appreciate that I
mean I appreciate the hold.
Effort to to make the budgeting
really improve efficiency or the
or the boards and commissions
going to be managed better with
a separate division instead of.
Mr president.
That's all I get from Senator
Ivey Soto he Ivy Soto said every
bill and I get a yes.
president we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill two thirty
floor amendment number one to
house bill two thirty three is
once amended.
See no objections center
Mooresville explain what that
amendment as thank you Mr
department is called the
apartment but is not actually an
apartment in the eyes of what we
do here as the as the head of
the department as a
amendment would do is make this
departments as we're doing a re
organization actually make it
what it should be and that is a
Department in and a cabinet
present and miss present.
Well I think I agree with the
amendment sponsor on this.
on in terms of of how best to to
or all organized the leadership
of this department.
as a cabinet position what we're
doing is giving the Senate a
state the important part about
of or understanding or L. D. as
it touches about twenty five
percent New Mexicans in some way
shape or form for some type of
municipalities regulatory with
every barber or anybody that has
a license they they touch in one
shape or form so I think it's
important that it be a cabinet
level secretary position we have
Mexico urged the body to support
the minute any further debate on
the amendment.
Senator Baca.
the senator the spent the bill
sponsor yield center so the deal
is presently have built thank
you Mr president so I was a.
I was a wondering and I'll go
maybe I missed it what the
rationale is for having this a
stand separately in different
than what our other departments
do.
It is true that the super
generally terms of the pleasure
of the governor.
And that is a position that.
I guess part of the discussion
Should be.
Under the governor as a full
cabinet position or whether this
department should be independent
different ministrations such as
you know in much the same way
that we do with superintendent
insurance.
So that's that's the reason why
time to figure out what the
right model should be and
whether we wanted to be closer
to the governor or whether we
wanted to be.
Kind of its own ship.
president thank you for that
answer Senator what was was that
option discussed early on I see
this this bill this bill
end of the session here.
Was president and Sir Baca.
This is the first
time that this has been
discussed.
Thank you Mr president and I
think you sponsor for those
answers I'll listen to the rest
of the debate we'll see how this
ammendment goes Mr president and
the amendment so thank you Mr
president it makes sense to me
that this of this whole
department be upgraded some.
industry motor vehicle sales
loan companies.
Independent Trust Company as
escrow companies credit unions.
Thanks.
Senator Senator money to go to
the chair is finisher.
Thank you Mr president just the
polity okay eschatology that's
but that is such a broad span of
things from eyebrows to banks.
mortgage companies.
We also have the alcohol control
So the construction industry
there are so many things that
are sold brought in affected so
many people in so many different
ways so it's not just the.
everybody is so yes the lenders
licensed.
But most of us somehow deal with
the bank or credit union or
mortgage loan company so it's
They're very involved okay so
literally it's a hundred percent
of the people in the state of
New Mexico that are touched by
that it really is to all of us.
So.
Mr president will the sponsor of
the amendment you.
anything in that nature must
present.
Agency presentation share no
it's still the regulation
licensing department it's
considered a apartments and it
also work what we're doing is
just taking of one staff person
who was appointed by the
governor to top of this
department changing her from a
conversations with three
different people who have been
appointed to this position by
various administrations both
Republican and Democrats and
meetings they have that that
that to access to government as
if there is secretary it is a
very well respected position a
coveted position because it is
level position and treat them as
a cabinet level position and
thus for in our perspective why
this is important for this body
is it that they will go through
confirmation hearings him we
through the regulations they do
from dental to construction to
alcohol to weed marijuana
utmost respect for and.
for specter pinions and done a
was governor and I are for the
doctor who done it Papadakis
operator just did it as an
executive order and it's kind of
more of more often to what it is
now what it's a it's a good
be done in the reorganization
process Mister president.
Senator sure so Mister president
really this is R. L. the
reorganization.
And in senator Morris is exactly
Enter energy minerals and
natural resources Indian Affairs
we've got a lot of cabinet
positions out there in while
they're all important.
directly or indirectly not like
I said the barber but also
everybody to get hair cut is
touched by our LD and some some
The FTEs if it's the still the
same number of people the same
budget the same everything why
We do this for.
So many people so many cabinet
secretaries so many boards of
of our universities but if
you're not going to U. N. M.
you're not touched by that at
least not in the same level as
is our LD touches people so it
information technology division
is currently under the
administrative division.
Why not why not.
with everybody else and this is
a this is a pretty simple
amendment all it does and in
Senator Ivey Soto as words I
think what it really means is
officials the elected
representatives ought to have at
least a look at in the state and
Mr president we do have further
debate on the amendments with
Senator Woods situation debate
on the amendment.
Center was thank you Mr
president.
on right now in this country you
know everybody's trying to say
we we we have no problems we
have no runs we have no things
going but.
State banks and you know how
important state banks are.
You think about the cannabis
industry.
Think about it.
very important department I
would surely support this
amendment Mister president thank
you very much.
We have further debate on the
amendment Senator Gallegos
followed by Senator Brandt
Mr president deal but I don't
know where to stand and you can
where you can still see him.
Should we switch status and Mr
Senator Moores a closer to the
Agency presentation I I like
your amendment I just wanted to
visit with you so.
Being that I'm in construction
And I'm wondering were there
discussions in the interim of
about this were there any kind
of such surveys done on the
amendment would be considered
slightly on friendly just
because the time that we're
dealing with and not because of
the public policy issue that
we had discussed doing an
amendment at that time and there
was good consensus we did we did
take a vote on that Mr president
but there was good consensus
that this is the direction we
upstairs and and work on
amendment and Representative
right after I I betting process
so that it was actually what we
want to do so the public policy
remember Senator I go so I once
was on the fourth floor in the
office with our president's up
there and we did a lot of work
with our old the and it was
something that's been on my mind
to the governor of the cabinet
sectors have I know the current
our cabinet superintendent is
treated as such to with respect
Mr quite frankly reserves I
by both us and the fourth floor
what is.
Never because it doesn't have
that title so something as we
discussed for a long long time
indicated to me on the three
different ministrations of the
server always treated us a
cabinet secretaries both by the
fourth floor with full access to
the governor just like any other
however they never had had to go
through the our confirmation
process and don't have the title
of secretary they have the.
tweeted as and in both from
operation and in our eyes Mr
president Senator.
seeing some similarities in the
that's what I was trying to go
with this we've got house bill
Levin on of item twenty nine
today and and I was checking to
and they found that their third
party was his child advocate
bill in and I'm hoping we'll get
to that later but Mr president
center I like the idea that you
but I just you know a notice to
the similarities in the two
bills and of the value to us
having
quality people in quality places
just wanted stands for that in
in there again make the
connection to house bill nine
which is a Democrat bill sponsor
or to my neighbor to the left in
look forward to this ammendment
passing and
look forward to hearing house
bill eleven leader this morning
amendment senator Morris to
close.
Thank you Mr president I'm glad
we had this debate we had it in
Senate rules I'm glad we had on
the floor so if this amendment
so maybe I'll get one next week
affirming or all the licensed
person
are there are my dental
appointment on Monday are all
the our banking as are all the
get that it's my it's not the
it's it the process not the
policy of the students staff or
hope we have a conversation move
forward so that we can elevate
session but I hope that future
legislators can kick pick up
this baton I move this in future
if we have another bill in front
of us for our I'll do with the
time to actually get this done
man Management what.
Really.
Now now this issue Mr chair of
the amendment Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator my Estes voting no.
Etcetera etcetera the rigs are
you voting no.
Senator yes voting no.
Senator how to mail voting no.
By a vote of twenty nine the
affirmative nine in the negative
senator member number one has
been added to house bill two
thirty three as twice amended.
Senator Moores.
Senator is we're back on the
bill.
Any debate on the bill.
Say no further debate on the
bill Senator Ivey Soto to close
tries amended do now pass us as
because as of the record show
that the rules but called all
those present but in the
affirmative as of those voted in
the negative pressure fans
Senators we're voting to your
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Thirty six and a permanent three
in the in house bill two thirty
three is twice amended has duly
passed the Senate Senator Ivey
Soto was president of the
colleagues on behalf of myself
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
Thank you Mr president.
H. before fifty nine will
increase the percentage of ward
funds for stallion owners
improve the quality of our
resources will entice readers to
bring additional and better
brood mares to breed to these
new stallions and we'll give
Morris could you please Senator
Moores.
Thank you.
We're debating house bill four
fifty nine.
Anyone wishing debate.
president I do so Mr president
do we need a law.
For horses to breed.
Senator.
I can go any further.
Any further debate senators.
Thank you Mr president center
why do we need to increase the
distribution to the owners out
of this fund.
This is Mr president and then
Senator it's a greater incentive
for more
Thoroughbreds and quarter horses
in our state.
our state or from our state it
just gives more money to the to
the winter doesn't.
Such as.
Mr president center no this is
Senator Steinborn presence
Center is that new language.
Mr president and senator no okay
so they already have to do that
Senators we do have further
debate on the bill with senator
Byrd I just want to stand Mr
person in full support of of H.
B. four five nine it will it
downs and and of course bring in
that particular area is a real
bone for us a lot of New
Mexicans work in this industry
in New Mexico thank you Mr
president thank you Sir but we
do have further debate on the
bill Senator Ingle thank you Mr
president senator Burr yield
something the other day about a
past occupation you had we did
used to be a jockey.
Senator Burt I in no Mr
Present but that's the only
thing is I thought I know this
can those CD's not much
resistance are on the top I
to a question or two on this
very particular bill Senator
Ingle do yield.
exclude yourself from this vote
you do not raise pay for horses
I would just wanna make sure
that the body knows that you
all of you do have some
irrigation Hey I would raise
there would not be many horses
left.
Senator was well I knew that
I see no further debate centres
not just because of the bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
that house bill four five nine.
Do not do now pass and I ask
all senators to your seats
please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no.
Senator souls voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator menulis voting no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting no.
in fifteen the negative house
bill four fifty nine has barely
passed the Senate's.
Senator is.
Thank you Mr president I thought
of business thank you Mr
president stay on third reading
of legislation ideal Senator
Sedillo Lopez for House Bill
fifteen or on third reading of
legislation Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
hearing no objection Senator
Sedillo Lopez to explain the
bill.
Mr president this bill online
state law with federal law to
expand the scope of immigration
Thank you Senator Lopez Senators
we're debating House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifteen as amended and I
yield to Senator Brandt.
Thomas present center I I
haven't gotten to see this bill
anywhere but I I I I did look it
up last night.
And I'm not sure houses answer
my phone when I'm on the Mike
I'm sorry Mr president
if you want me to I still can
okay.
But
policy is really around it's
really the Feds responsibility
so why are we changing
immigration policy in the state
juvenile of special immigrant
juvenile status status.
Is a special form of immigration
law that allows humanitarian
and but the immigration laws
pretty interesting it differs to
state law with regard to the
all this bill does is expand the
the jurisdiction of the state
court up to the age of twenty
one to provide an immigrant
want to change the age of a
child to twenty one.
I mean in in our laws.
You know we pretty much say once
I'm not sure why we're wanting
to do that Mr president this is
only to expand relief to
immigrant children in this
So why am I and I just still not
understanding why we want to for
this even this group of people.
is it just so we can get around
some of the
deportation laws this is to
expand relief that the United
there are many many
circumstances it's simply
expands relief to them that is
allowed by federal law.
Senator Brandt.
Their third eighteen to twenty
one year olds are not children.
In any culture that I know of in
the cut in the world are
eighteen to twenty one year old
Mister president the age of
twenty one is defined by federal
law has
has being a child and that and
eighteen other states defined
and ours would be limited to
this circumstance every other
issue about major would be
eighteen.
Senator read so much present
to twenty one in Boteler twenty
one until we're twenty one now
Senator just reminded to go to
the chair thank you Mr president
I appreciate that only.
states to determine what the age
of majority is for this statute
and what we would do is we would
expand released to these
children.
There are many children now who
are.
Because otherwise after being
here being abandoned abused or
neglected they are in
additionally subject to
deportation.
immigrant young adults.
Do they stay in our foster
system Taylor twenty one.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Greater protections.
For immigrant young adults then
we offer for our own.
Young adults.
Is subject to the juvenile court
jurisdiction up to the age of
twenty one.
Those kinds of issues.
Senator Representative.
This presents and I still am not
understanding why you would have
a guardianship if you're
eighteen.
for the court to determine.
Senator right.
This presents as we're trying to
Maybe having that authority to a
judge but we are the ones that
are deciding to change the
policy that the judge can I
guess decide whether he wants to
provide a greater protection.
To immigrant children who are
abused then to American children
who are abused and so I don't
the reason we want to change
this policy and just saying that
the federal government allows it
is not a reason.
Why do we want to change the
policy.
who've been abused that we're
going to change that policy but
for our own children who've been
abused we're going to still say
they're adults and eighteen
explain to me why we want to
children are Americans and so
they have access to all of the
benefits of being an American.
Immigrant children do not.
to know where because they have
lived most of their life here
this is an opportunity for us to
show our state policy of
an education kind of stands to
contribute by getting an
education this is an change to
ensure that they can give us the
benefits of what we have done
being deported to know where
since they have no other home.
Senator just reminder we still
are on third reading we can just
keep the volume down to anymore
Immigrant young adults have to
be in the.
The system before their age
eighteen and then we're
Senator Lopez Mr president may I
have permission to bring in an
expert.
Senate Bill identify who your
Easier maybe easier to
understand right now the bill is
changing the definition of a
child to any unmarried foreign
president they would not be able
to claim this because they would
have not been.
Determined to be abused.
abused neglected or abandoned.
president which means that they
would have had to have lived
here at least six months before
they could apply for this
release.
Senator right so thank you Mr
change the definition out of
twenty one would they then be
able to qualify for these.
Special privileges.
any definitions here we are
lining the statute to federal
law.
Eighteen other states have a
landed to federal law and that's
exactly what we're trying to do.
state court then they would have
to take that predicate order has
part of their application for
this immigration relief under
the immigration laws.
Is there any requirement from
the other eighteen states that
have done this that we have to
do this no Mr president.
This presents senator then I'm
not up to us to say well the
federal government is telling us
to do this for the federal
government is doing this so we
should that's not a good reason
You know twenty year old
children.
to come across the border and
say I was abused I was abandoned
privileges again that we don't
even offer to our own children.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Mr president the immigration
But the of all laugh inside on
that one because I don't think
there for all we have you know
millions of people coming across
There in the worst time of COVID
in our country people are coming
across the border we do bother
to testing for COVID.
We just everyone else no one
else is allowed to leave the
a good job
Verifying people I think it's
kinda laughable.
But I think the main issue here.
Is that we are redefining child.
abused who've been abandoned
who've been neglected but we're
going to offer that to young
them special privileges to be in
our country because they're
going to claim.
That they were abused in the
country they came from thank you
Mr president.
questions with the bill sponsor
please you Senator Lopez deal
yes Mr president I yield thank
you Mr president senator just to
If this laws pass right we we
can already do all this for for
those people this is
also had a clarifying question
and you'd mentioned I've been
trying to look up the federal
law on this I just haven't been
able to find this part in my
question pertains to page three
is this identical to federal law
or are there any differences.
Senator Lopez Miss Mister
Okay is okay
All right well then I educated
state law actually have some
questions on that and
discussions on CYFD bills this
session.
And
there was a lot of opposition
that I heard.
In committee.
you're accusing of parents of of
you know not being able to
provide the services or provide
for their child but but here we
I I see kind of a disconnect.
if if the way that this session
has gone if we're going to put
some of this language in to some
of the other bills the other
have known to take reasonable
steps what if they were from
this this different culture this
year or this different
background this different
socioeconomic status and I
Where the disconnect is.
And it's it's says right here
who who is without proper
parental care.
poor what if it's their poverty
that is.
Making it so they can't find
that proper parental care.
You know so so where's the
in this bill will let let's
remember this bill let's
remember this one when we come
back.
And try to put language for that
You know what why can't we have
this type of language and maybe
I'll maybe sponsor disagree with
me on this but I I don't see
this language in other sections
of our law right here number
number two subsection of number
child's well being.
So I I would just ask us all to
really reflect on that why are
we so approving of the language
would not have had any
additional questions and I I
won't I won't take much longer
so I know we're getting there
but it says
It says let's see reasonable so
responsibilities okay for the
child because of a physical
disorder.
I I actually I didn't I'm sorry
I didn't catch and committee
blindness and so I I just want
to make sure
Mr chair and senator you know it
says because of physical the
physical disorder I mean it do
we have other protections in the
make sure we're not going to be
discriminated against parents
solely based on a physical
disability.
Senator Sedillo Lopez neat Mr
chair.
are paralyzed from the neck down
or maybe whatever the issue is
with the parents physical and
able to do that inability to
care for a child is up to the
just maybe another reminder I
think the legislation to come
back and be very clear that we
we certainly will not ever
penalize apparent solely for
having a physical disability
I think is federal language
there there's basically a
religious exemption written and
and that I A. once again just
I asked so many times for
religion respect for religious
exemptions for conscience
protections we have not gotten
them my best over and over and
over again I've debated ad
lawsuit but here we have a
really really good example a
great example that you know once
again I just haven't seen and
and other other bills and it's
the constitute grounds for abuse
of the soul because for B. is so
wonderful wonderful religious
exemption I'm very glad to see
that in there so thank you for
other areas of the law that that
kind of intermarry with this is
far as how we protect our
children how we protect parents
that have physical disabilities
thank you very much Mr president
So Mister president so we start
out with with abuse neglect and
abandonment.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Mister chair Mister
twenty twenty one years old
Senator president.
Is it one of the most important
is a work permit.
Senator.
So Mister president do we give
Senator so Mister president do
we give thirty year olds.
one but not sixteen and not
twenty two.
Get work permits it to in my
queue my on the right track Mr
president Senator Sedillo Lopez
Mr president a sixteen year old
immigrant a federal immigration.
Agencies.
Senator so Mister president.
The whole.
I was not abused neglected or
whatever the one abandoned but I
still want to basic training at
age seventeen an interesting
S. military I served with one
who is from Mexico I served with
one from Iran in that the the
Iranian one was.
Course he was he was older than
twenty one he's actually been in
the Iranian army before he came
here.
So.
We have we have places for.
those things and there's then
they're serving the country
that's feeding them.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president someone
immigration relief from joining
however that is beyond the scope
of this of this bill.
Sen center chair Mister
president I understand it's
When you can treat a twenty one
year old as if they are an
adult.
Because they're in the military
and they are an adult.
kids they're brought here and
they need some help.
And I get that in fact
I hired one.
And.
Because well she was she gone to
elementary school and junior
high and high school in San Juan
college and so I ask do you
speak any other languages
And is the sole do you speak
northern New Mexico.
Castillian Spanish or do you
speak Mexicans budget is Mexican
once I have recently been
naturalized I am now in
American.
Wow okay so tell me your story
and then I wanted to see her.
So I know that the children come
here not on their own accord
all the time.
And in this particular case.
She's been great she's worked
for me for a long time now.
sixteen seventeen year olds are
quite capable of taking care of
themselves and they come across
the border alone all the time.
president we actually do have a
system in New Mexico for caring
for children up to the way up to
the age faster our children have
been abused abandoned or
neglected and that is a program
age of eighteen these children
who have suffered this trauma
are simply not ready.
Senator so Mr president let me
go down a different path here.
I'd Mr president I'm sorry I if
there is no cost to this program
of.
The court time I think was
described in the FIR has
them and house them and closed
them and who's going to pay for
that.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Mr
president their guardians and if
they get a work permit they will
So Mister president.
Senator so Mister president if
that.
Why do we even need a loft the
taxpayers.
rules of the church why do we
need a law office Senator
Sedillo Lopez this is to take
advantage of an immigration
benefit that is already
available in federal law.
Do we have any further debate
senators.
Si no further debate centers the
Lopez to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president.
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
Senators tier seats please.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator is we're gonna go to
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business senator
Wirth thank you Mr president Mrs
and we got a bit or business
nineteen Santo Tom and item
sixteen is Senate is Senator
Pirtle and item fifteen is
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and the
record show that all actions for
placing
for house bill eighty three
hearing no objection Senator
Tallman to explain the bill
thank you Mr president to.
This bill eliminates the
podiatry board.
the please Diatraea Association
and well as the medical board.
Thank you Sierra Sierra you wish
to proceed.
substitute for house bill eighty
three anyone wishing to debate.
See no debate Sierra gonna close
substitute for house bill eighty
three.
Of do now pass and I just
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
By a vote of thirty seven of the
members of the Senate we're
going to the next item that's
going to be I believe it house
of a house bill two eighty six.
And I yield to you once again
Sierra.
Replacing house bill two eighty
six on final passage has been
taken.
And that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
federal law with regards to
tending of the front windshield
of motor vehicles.
Current law number.
Yeah stand for questions.
Senator share so Mr chairman
it's not quite a wall but it's.
A huddle.
it's and I lived in Los crucis
at the time so Los crucis need
start windows.
Missouri doesn't like dark
windows because law enforcement
can't see through them what is
As long as seventy percent or
more visible light is
transmitted.
Senator so.
Mr president what does this bill
do.
Senator shares you Mr president.
What is our lives it it are we
it's seventy percent or sixty
percent or ninety percent were
weak.
Senator share our Mr president
okay so we're talking about the
windshield that thing they call
the eyebrow five inches but now
we content the entire.
Mmhm windshield.
thank you senator sure we do
have further debate senator
Munoz thank you Mr president
sponsor yield Madam yield Mister
president to sponsor yields
the whole windows tinted and and
got cited in Arizona for
violating Arizona law.
Sierra.
center and Mr president to so
long as they're in the federal
compliance of the they should be
okay because of federal law
takes precedence.
Senator yes so Mister president
does this meet federal
hot in Arizona and so they
tended the whole front
windshield a and got side in
Arizona they currently have this
the eyebrow tended in New Mexico
by gonna violate federal law or.
Something's gonna happen because
if they get cited then who's
going to be responsible for that
ticket and say New Mexico losses
I can do it and they're gonna
Sierra Mr president and the
thank you for the question the
that's why we're doing this law
schools if they're in compliance
with the federal law they should
be okay.
degree.
Mr president and Senator seventy
percent.
Seventy percent so what what is
Yes.
Winchell Mr president maybe
that's a wind chill in a Tesla
hear the question was a present
I think it was mainly because
laughing so hard because you
held up the window is that a
windshield in a Tesla.
Sierra.
Mr president I I just it'll be
interesting to see what happens
when officers and other states
when you leave what their
interpretation of the law is
even though New Mexico law
allows you when you go to court
be in violation and and they're
going to cite you so you're
going to create some incidences
of
Mistrust in Arizona doing this
so.
Thank you Mr president I I
Not to Hickey is holding up
seventy percent.
The forty percent of his left
hand.
And the twenty twenty percent in
his right hand.
I'll have to confer with
Legislative Council because I'm
not sure we're allowing props to
help with the passage of bills.
We've this apparently started a
new president.
Mr president I move that the
house bill two eighty six do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate of the record show
that the role is been called and
To your seats please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Thirty two in the affirmative
zero the negative house bill two
able to Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action
replacing Senate memorial city
one it's been taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
was a gentleman named Frank
Boyer had a vision he was
African American freed from the
civil war and he had a vision
for community and so he he
to move but they're still a lot
of errors and ancestors that own
property in black them but what
I found unusual growing up and
Ross always knew about it but
those that of the with the
county the Postmaster General
anybody that might have
information on how to gain
access legally of the State Land
Office that we work together and
We have debate Senator Ivey Soto
you very much because president
president when I saw this
memorial I went looked it up it
really is a fascinating history
and our current general body do
a little research on black dump
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate Senator
pernah close and thank you Mr
president I wish we had a little
contributions especially the
Chavis county New Mexico and all
the heirs ancestors I can still
trace their history back to this
community so Mr present I move
Senate memorial city one do now
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of forty two in the
affirmative on the negative
Center moral seventy one has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Pirtle.
That sent more sixty nine as
amended all you'll to Center
Gonzalez thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record shows
hearing no objections centered
on the alleged explain the
memorial Mr president and
members so all this does is so
allow for the village of questa
Cuesta money.
And this is all it does.
Senator Stewart debating Center
moral six and I'm as amended all
you'll to Senator Gallegos.
Mr president with the center
Mr president center I heard this
in committee and I just wanted
to compliment you for bringing
this forward in the discussion
we had there Mr president
Mr president if that's if I
heard your question correctly of
the owner of the water.
All Mr president and members it
is chevron mining.
really key things for our
schools but I really thought is
a huge benefit for question for
the area that they would allow
those water rights to be used by
vital this is for question the
values that they have for you
know it's one of those things
being from San Luis valley that
I know how hard it is now
expensive water is but I really
chevron for helping one out with
this what that are you thank you
Mr president thank you Senator
Gallegos is there any further
debate on the memorial.
Say no further debate on the
the Senate that the record shows
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
vote in the negative by a show
of hands centers where voting
senator Morris sixty nine as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
members I don't know if I've
president Ms consent we go that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous we're in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president we're
going to go to messages from the
is a mistake it was a house
memorial so twenty three is
Senator Ivey Soto Senate bill
two forty six we're gonna do
that first and then twenty two
is second that is Senate bill
from the governor the reader to
read.
Senate executive message number
thirteen corrected the honorable
Mimi Stewart president pro tem
and members of the New Mexico
fifty six the legislature first
session twenty twenty three
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor general
show that the message from the
substitute for Senate bill two
forty six as amended by the
Senate and further amended by
the house and request the
concurrence of the Senate to the
house respectfully submitted
next order of business messages
from the house.
I thank you Mr president is that
we are a business messages from
the house.
You're not here no objection the
reader to read.
Senate and further amended by
the house and request the
concurrence of the Senate to the
house amendments respectfully
submitted Lisa and Marty's
McCutchen chief clerk.
fourteen as amended by the
Senate Joint Memorial three.
And returned same here with
respectfully submitted the same
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
respectfully submitted the same
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
General show the message from
the house is received.
Mr president I'm directed to
four oh two as amended by the
Senate and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
December does McCutchen chief
clerk journal so the message
from the house has been
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted the same
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk
journal show the message from
the house has been received and
start with concurrence calendar
number twenty three a house
changes the Senate health and
public affairs committee sub two
percent bill two forty six is
twice amended Senator Ivey Soto
thank you very much Mr president
as twice amended and I recommend
that we vote yes Mr president
said Mr president I Mr you can't
hear me and I can't hear him I
have no idea what we're doing
Senator is just want to make
especially source staff can
hear.
We're on that are order business
concerns calendar etcetera so
that explain what those
amendments are thank you very
of amendments we took care of
that the other thing was
automatic no general officers
have to take a class and the
houses want to clarify not to
exceed ninety minutes for that
a request unanimous consent to
wear hats in the chamber then he
will debate the amendment
senator Morris.
Mr president Matt where having
chamber.
that in statute Mr president
Senator Senator Ivey Soto thank
you very much this president
answer Moores whose cowboy hat I
think is larger than the sun.
state's office was fine with
that the class they were
developing was an hour long
anyway.
Senator Moores Mr president but
these things change over time
and usually the with of the
they have that regulatory power
themselves so I'm concerned as
to why we're doing this in
statute for such a specific
amount of time Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Moores Mister president
Center appreciate the difference
between the two are you can go
into details about what the
differences but but why put it
in statute with the question is
why the ninety minutes in actual
I don't.
Senator Morris.
are not present from the
amendments are what what is the
motion we're trying to accept
there are moments or that we're
out there we should encourage
that we should take our time and
really analyze why ninety
these classes that none of us
really know about except for one
is on point person in here
probably actually on the
resources classroom right thank
you Mr president thank you
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty six has twice amended
house amendments to that bill I
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the Senate has
concurred with the house
amendments to Senate health
president I move that the Senate
concur in house amendments to
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
the house or the Senate floor
amendment as being too vague and
the second thing they did was
add a section on purchasing
Thank you centers CENIC centers
we're debating.
Seen Senator to debate Senator
from the committee on oversight
reform from the US house of
representatives now this one
fifteen months old Mr president
this is a this from December of
twenty twenty one so it may be
all means and so forth and and
how it how it deals with us here
in New Mexico.
And as I try to read this the
bill the bill which which was
of other places and and get get
the same pharmaceuticals for a
lot less money and so how do we
deal with this how who does what
to who and I think that's what
morning so I'm I may have missed
some of the critical parts of it
but.
But now that I've got it in was
just scanning over again try to
make sure that I refresh my
memory on everything.
prices in New Mexico down to an
acceptable level that is for New
Mexicans in a and I believe
that's really the goal Mr
president with the sponsor of
If it's the same person Mr
president thing yes
It was my description accurate
we're trying to bring the
pharmaceutical prices down to an
acceptable level.
drug probe drugs at a low price
so Mister president what is a
three forty B..
Senator Stefanics Mr president
quantities the states have the
abilities to set into statute
what groups can do it and
already our state corrections
system does it but now we want
What was what was that term she
used just a minute ago about
hospitals and and who Senator
Stefanics thank you Mr president
the federally qualified health
in rural communities so
Mr president so the federally
qualified health clinics is that
all the health clinics would
that include the
companies and most of them are
stand alone they could be
associated with the university
of New Mexico hospital
Presbyterian the Farmington
hospital but they are set up in
meet federal standards and they
do so serve Medicaid patients.
So Mister president senator I.
San Juan regional Medical Center
in Farmington is but there are
other.
Other primary care clinics in
indigent patients and those that
are qualified under Medicaid we
certainly could use more
federally qualified health
clinics around the state.
They're having a connection fit
right now behind me I have PBMs
that are having a connection to
which.
And what I what I fear Mr
president is that we we have
once again put ourselves in the
middle of some kind of parochial
fight that that we can't sort
want to lower drug prices
because that then lowers our
premiums and that makes all of
us happy so for premiums go down
because drug prices go down then
more of us can afford insurance
prices and and so they want to
do things but they have a
different take on what's going
on and then the PBMs there any
completely different world on
this but some of the PBMs are
the next five minutes or you
gonna shut up and let it pass.
And I don't know Mr present I
truly don't understand.
With no food or water and making
figure it out before they're
allowed to eat or drink this we
could come up with a good plan
on how to deal with this and
I do but completely believe.
The goal of this bill and the
goal of the Sanchez.
that without the amendment that
I put on.
I fear that we've gone exactly
the opposite direction that.
What could possibly go wrong is
that we actually increased
prices of pharmaceuticals.
And by the way up I prefer to
a better you know huddle and
cuddle so.
Anyway Mr president.
That is my concern.
I don't know if this was worked
me not to let it go no kill it
no not okay.
I don't know.
And frankly I don't think I can
no.
Once drug prices to go down and
they think pharmaceutical
companies are manipulating
things.
In the insurance companies want
to do something else.
I move to concur and I asked for
a voice vote centers is been a
motion to concur with the house
amendments all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
S. that we go that our business
messages from the house on that
order business messages from the
house the reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
Lisa and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk the journal so that the
message from the house has been
received.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth mistras I move the
crystal diamond senator Jeff
Steinborn and senator Cynthia
Lopez to inform the house that
the Senate has completed its
work Senate Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth Mr
you us Senator Craig Brandt and
senator Brenda McKenna two of
them form the governor that the
Senate has completed its work
for the session Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth Mr
I second the motion Mister
president.
Senator Peter Wirth Mr president
I move that the Senate adjourned
sine die second the motion.
