There
are we.
We're webcasting of half.
Good morning everyone I
apologize for getting a late
start on I want to thank you all
soo I told would not have to be
here right now for coming so
quickly and also for agreeing to
to fill in for Senator Schmedes
as well so and.
Is is jumping in at the last
second so I'm going to just talk
for a little while he can look
at the X..
James first yes yes we'll start
with with James Allison before
we get started and and I'll hand
it over to the vice chair for
confirmations
had for remind folks the the
procedures we have for Senate
rules so Act for public comment
you need to have signed up at
least an hour before the the
hearing we have a list here of
folks who have signed up for
public comment for this today
for those of you who so wish to
get public comment but did not
sign up you'll allow you to
indicate your support or
opposition with with our raising
your hands
but with that we will go ahead
I'll turn it over to Mr vice
chair.
Get started start with the
conference for the public
regulation commission.
Mister James Allison come up to
the table there's that sponsors
unable to me this this morning
but Senator Williams we'll be
presenting.
As a reminder there's ten
minutes both between the
introduction from the Senate
sponsor and that.
The learning center thank you
for joining us good morning
madam chair in the structure of
the thank you for having me
today I know they wanted beauty
here.
To present these that PRC
members I'm happy to present
James Ellison James currently
works and at Sandia national
labs we're for some really power
and has a wide government
relations in the in the
background
In the electricity in the whole
wide brought all of the amended
over again since I only had this
for three and a half minutes.
James is all you.
You.
Thank you madam chair vice
chairman Hermio and this
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
before you today
It's my honor to appear before
this committee as one of.
Governor Lujan Grisham's
nominees for PRC of
commissioner
Thank you Senator meals for of
introducing me and and for
sponsoring the.
I'd like to of briefly talk
about my background about my
interest in why I applied for
this position in the first place
and.
So my thoughts of what I might
do at the PRC if confirmed.
I was born and raised in coastal
Georgia.
My mother was an elementary
school teacher my father of a
postal worker.
They.
I was fortunate to have a
supportive parents they believed
in the power of education and
they believed in me
I went on to Clemson University
and studied physics and
political science after here in
Japan hi stated M. I. T. did
master's degrees in mechanical
engineering and technology and
policy I then worked for the
eighty S. corporation overseas I
was in the former Soviet Union I
became the manager of a thermal
power plants as well as a
distribution company.
After eight years I returned to
the US began work at Sandia
national labs and focused on
Energy systems I studied natural
gas and natural gas networks as
well as power systems of
focusing on of integrating
renewables into the grid
evaluating the value of of
energy storage and
Studying of resource planning
for utilities
Why was I interested in this
position I do believe that New
Mexico is at a crossroads we
have of one of the most
ambitious
renewable portfolio standards in
the nation not only is
increasing renewable energy the
right thing to do it's it's the
law at the same time it is a
challenge for our our utilities
the mandates are four levels of
of renewable generation which
are utilities have not achieved
this requires
Getting used to appropriations
in a different mode.
Our utilities are use to very
ability in the demand they don't
know when a consumer is going to
turn on a light switch up but it
because of of a lot of history a
lot of data they know.
Pretty much what the aggregate
demand is going to be of they're
not used to having a large
percentage of power plants where
the output of those plants is
very able and where they cannot
fully predict what that is
Also as we get closer to twenty
forty five of.
It will become necessary to have
some mix of long duration energy
storage as well as for renewal.
And that's currently a challenge
apart from pump storage hydro
there's no clear winner in the
long duration energy storage
technologies there's no proven.
Long term storage outside of
palm storage hydro
and utilities are currently
thinking about using hydrogen
for that former renewable
generation however to date there
doesn't exist a commercial power
plant that operates on a hundred
percent hydrogen of these are
all challenges I am confident
that these challenges can be
overcome I believe it requires
no where is of of the challenges
and it requires taking steps to
support our utilities and having
the resources they need to deal
with these challenges while at
the same time.
Being concerned and focusing on
the reasonableness of of the
cost of power of so my planted
the PRC if
if I'm confirmed
First and foremost I aim to be.
They are minded and and natural
in making decisions at the at
the PRC
I believe that the PRC should
become more proactive instead of
just getting applications and
requests from utilities in
dealing with those we should
have more of our own plans for
how to improve
how to improve utilities and
service in our state and
implement those plans one
example that we've already
started working on is
reliability standards looking at
the reporting of reliability
data from utilities distribution
company Representative
reliability especially and
looking at establishing some
minimum reliability standards
for for our distribution
companies
I would like to work towards
improving the internal capacity
within the PRC with filling
vacancies with with high quality
candidates
I think we might need to to look
at the of the salaries and and
think about are are we offering
enough to attract top candidates
of I do want to personally
engage in issues of beyond the
purview of the PRC sections as
regional transmission
organization of formation of I
think that.
At the PRC we're in the unique
position of interpreting and
implementing of the law
dealing with energy and
utilities.
And I think we of.
We have some lessons learned and
will continue to gain lessons
learned from that and I would
certainly be happy to share
thoughts about how to improve
the of renewable energy act
based on
based on those lessons learned
of.
In conclusion it's it's an honor
to be here before you today and
I appreciate the opportunity to
to speak.
Thank you Mr president questions
or comments I'm gonna go to
members of the audience is there
anybody here in support of
confirmation.
I think that hands are raised
you will be given one minute to
he has yeah so do you have said
we have organized support and
I'm gonna go to the organized
years.
house.
I also models so we don't do
that very often in the state no
effects to it we
so it was a very important and
because my concern has been.
Because of speaker you got offs
unethical behavior in this
process that is tainted what
should have been a very hello
committee hearing a process we
should not be getting emails
about about about this process
we should not be the letters to
the editors not the sea and all
those press here if we wanted to
take the energy out of the PRC
after the turmoil last couple
years and we wanted people with
your prior qualifications very
please with your ability is
interested in this job because I
and I know we are share your
concerns about the salary to
that's a different matter just
for but
thank you for very topical
answered very tough questions
and I really really appreciate
that and I really appreciate a
look forward to working with you
in the future thank you madam
chair thank you so.
Thank you senator Senator Ingle.
I'm sorry I had the next on the
list.
All not right now.
Transaction question for the
sponsor.
What might want to those
offline.
Senator Ortiz Pena thank you
madam thank you so when you us
and was real.
As of the members of the
committee I.
Thank you for being willing to
take up unlike Senator was
delighted to hear them I wish
they would always be here for
the meeting
the thing is the thing is like
making sure the.
The.
You usually structure Regulatory
Commission and the story gets
full plate for us because this
is such an important decision
I'm sorry about that Senator but
only the webcast is down so you
might just policy more we get
that back on have it your.
It.
The question.
You have
You had talked about the need to
to hold utilities accountable to
me me personally the standards
what what is that so.
What is holding them accountable
of like.
Thank you madam chair that's
That's a very important question
I I think that first of all
accountability starts with with
data getting
accurate data on a timely in a
timely manner and to advertise
that data so that everybody is
aware of how are are three
utilities performing
in that regard
I think that area needs to be
improved
So being aware of of this
situation it is an important
first step and in the case that
a utility is is not meeting the
of the renewable portfolio
standards
I I think the commission needs
to to both of.
Consider what
pressure to bring on the utility
as well as what it can do to
assist the utility in in meeting
those those mandates.
Thank you very much Mr chair
that's that's all I have thank
you madam chair we have one that
there's a set of questions from
senator for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you Mr also for
being here I do have a few
questions about the process if
you can if you have knowledge if
if if you wouldn't mind
I was curious we're deadlines
extended or waived for certain
individuals that that applied to
be on your C. or W. PRC
commissioners.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle the
the the only thing that comes to
mind would probably.
Apply to me and perhaps one
other individual
I understand an email went out
to to all of the all of the
candidates at that point to
answer a question here
unfortunately of the email sent
to me went into a spam box and I
was on aware that it had been
sent by I did not receive a
telephone call or other
notification and
When I did get the call why
haven't you sent it in of the
the committee did give me of an
extension to to get my question
here in.
And Mr chair facility so that
was for two candidates I I
believe I know it was in my case
and I I believe it was I believe
one other person experience the
same issue thank you thank you
was there anything else within
the
Mr chair Senator Mr Ellison
were there any other candidates
added to the shortlist after any
deadlines that were made.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle I'm
I'm not aware of that I I don't
know.
And that Mr chair Senator Mr
Ellison
We're currently can I know you
speak for yourself but we're
currently do the three PRC
commissioners reside what which
which Townsend.
Of.
Chair Senator
I currently of Livin in cedar
crest.
And
You know I think it's probably
better that the other two can't
should speak for them selves.
And then Mr chair Senator Mr
Ellison I think my concern is
going to be
I mean you're you're more than
qualified for this position
you're exactly who the the type
of of professional that we
wanted but one of the biggest
concerns I had whenever this
came up was was the geographic
diversity
that was going to be potentially
lost doing going to a process
such as this before they were
districts
we we insure that there was
somebody from say the eastern
part of the state or the western
parts other northern central
in I believe the other two are
also from either Bernalillo
county or Santa Fe County or
somewhere in that area and so I
I do have a concern that when it
comes time for rural issues for
utility issues down in my next
words that
you know we might we might get
the short end of the stick and
so I have that concern whenever
a large part of of my district
is agriculture and and not too
far as oil and gas to depend
heavily on on regulated
utilities to to feed and fuel
the world I just hope that.
you know we'll take into account
the the needs and and the of
once of of my area as well and
not just that of Santa Fe County
and and early of that you know
sometimes we're forgotten but at
the end of the day people have
to eat you want fuel your car so
you get to work and so you know
it's just a concern of mine I
had it back whenever we pass
this process and that's not on
you obviously but I hope in the
future we can find candidates
from from around the state as
opposed to just one centralized
location thank you Mr.
The Senators.
Thank you Mr chairman I move
that to pass on the confirmation
for James Ellis thank you with
the second from Senator PM if I
can ever all public.
Yes yes Senator defense yes.
Yes you are yes
yes center how to mute yes.
I'm here yes and Senator yes
yes yes yes yes and you won
excuse thank you for that was
that you will be going to the
Senate for today's resolution
makes it possible.
Thank
you for all time.
Thank you secretary.
We will be back in just one
minute so in this is the time to
ensure that we can get off the
recovery is an asset your
presentation over twenty to ten
minutes and then I'm gonna
shorten the amount of time on
COVID because we are scheduled
to be on the for the love and.
Thank you for joining us.
Senator every right thank you Mr
chair.
the pleasure meeting again in
talking to a little that is and
one thing I want to bring up his
in New Mexico right is born in
Santa Theresa went to the the
New Mexico State University and
got an economics and finance
degree
his mother lives here maybe
moving home to take care of a
little bit and so he is one of
us from New Mexico was born
raised here he spent the last
fifteen years in DC at the
federation have federal energy
regulatory commission in the
offices of the marketing
regulation energy policy
innovation for Smith working on
complex because cases it in HSD
priorities with a focus on
regulated more a utility markets
in design transmission in
planning in the west and
southwest he's very well
educated well let him go into
that but I want to present
district game at your.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee.
I am.
My my name is Gabriel accurate
commissioner pointy to the PRC I
am thrilled at the opportunity
to serve New Mexico New Mexicans
as a commissioner of the PRC.
I've spent my entire career in
utility regulation at the
federal energy regulatory
commission in Washington DC.
And it has always been my dream
to return home as a regulator.
My dream of serving New Mexicans
will come true if I am confirmed
today.
And I want to thank the governor
for appointing me.
Senator Munoz for sponsoring me.
And all of the colleagues who
have helped me develop the
regulatory experience that
qualifies me for this position.
So I was raised in someone part.
I want to make one clarification
that I was not born in New
Mexico as actually was born in
Kansas.
But authority brought it but
since the age of I don't know to
you know I was I was raised in
someone park and I went to
school at NMSU and it was there
where eight became interested in
energy after college I moved to
DC to the kid to begin my career
in public service.
In my fifteen years at for I
started as an analyst working on
filings by utilities that are
regulated by New Mexico I did
details to the office of
enforcement to the policy office
went back to my home office
became a manager.
I became a senior policy advisor
on working on western issues and
then I did another detail as an
advisor to.
commissioner at thousand
commands who is still sitting at
for.
And throughout that time I was I
was just doing my job I did not
realize that I was training for
this position.
At first I experience have
changes in laws technologies
industry practices and consumer
preferences can require require
regulatory regular I'm I'm sorry
to interrupt you but it sounds
like the director of LCS is
asking the everyone pause
because of what passes out even
though it continues report.
So.
We didn't catch that Mr.
So the the webcast is down we we
continued on.
Has recorded and folks public
members of the public could go
back and watch it later but the
director of LCS is asked that
that we please hold in place
until we get the webcast back
up.
I think that is an important
thing to do with respect to.
Environmental justice.
I think there are concerns and
the commission.
Has to make sure that.
Communities are engaged.
And and and and all say the same
thing for for consumers in
general as well.
There are.
Issues that I've seen with some
of our processes that I hope to
be able to fix such as R. E.
docket system which is clunky
and not intuitive I A. believe
that we need to make it more
user friendly so that.
Consumers and people advocating
for environmental justice can
access information more readily
and be prepared to make better
arguments in front of the
commission.
Because I I also believe that
we.
Need to make decisions based on
the record.
And so we we need to make sure
that.
Communities have the resources
they need.
To submit something to the
commission.
Thank you very much and thank
you madam chair Mister chair.
Thank you senator Senator
McKenna.
Thank you
vice chairman of the neo and
madam madam chair thank you
Senator menulis and
And Mr are you there.
Right I to have this into
questions what if any practices
that the previous PRC model
utilize that you would like to
see possibly used in the three
member model and then what a new
opportunity exists to consult
with New Mexico's indigenous
indigenous nations and pueblos
have you considered how the PRC
could do anything differently to
engage with them thank you.
With respect to the first
question I think that a lot of
strides were made to have the
advisory staff that is needed
to.
To put the commission in a
position to be successful in
making decisions that are in the
public interest I A. I believe
that we still have a ways to go
I and is that that is something
that I've been focused on.
With respect to the second
question.
I would say that it's the the
same the same thing I think we
need to engage communities I
really appreciate.
The governor's abolition that
tribal Advisory Council.
And I wholeheartedly agree with
the comments made earlier by
commissioner appointee James
Ellison.
To.
Have a division that is focused
on consumer interest.
That in conjunction with as I
mentioned earlier being able to
them being able to access
information
that's critical.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair thank you that Madam
chairman and thank you senator
thank you senator Senator Ingle.
The thank you Mr.
Necessarily have some questions
are you familiar with the two
major electric companies in New
Mexico.
Chair Senator yes ma'am we have
the NM and who else.
Well we have el Paso electric
and we have S. PS and I think
those are the ones that you're.
Yes direction.
The way if you if you really
look into the electric.
Take a look at action officer
one strong version Mexico nation
get the best rates dollar
customers and if you look at the
different generate you'll be
shocked and how they have
generator electricity show.
Get time to get the job are you
most passionate time of because
there creating a really a good
electric company is basically
just
I.
Nobody here from.
One of the questions had to
watch movie.
Her it used to be heard and
heard many school the cascade
our school Scooby Caskey.
Okay our middle name right I
started shortage but
I mean a.
And what thank you very much
appreciate your willingness to
serve on this body.
Please.
I can ever help you with
anything let me know thank you.
Chairman Ajit.
New Mexico Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
okay
you already answered my question
I think some of us what what
you'd like to see happen as far
as consumer protection I would
just encourage you all to
transparency I think is
essential an essential element
of consumer protection hi it's
not all that so I would I would
encourage you all to at to
really focus on making sure that
those the resources are there
for consumers to meaningfully
engage with the commission and
and I get issues with their
utilities addressed but I I'm.
Also curious what.
you Mr Ellison had talked about
his vision of what holding
utilities who aren't meeting
those renewable portfolio
standards accountable what what
do you think that might look
like yes to hold hold them
accountable.
Thank you for the question
I think I think under the
current law what it would look
like it is
good either the PRC or maybe the
attorney general's office taking
them to court if after repeated
not meeting the standards
occurs.
The.
The PRC does not have
the sanctioning authority for
example for for does have that
And so I you know that could be
something that could be
considered to be to make the
PRC's
That a guest jurisdiction
stronger.
I a I don't anticipate that
being a requirement I anticipate
the utilities meeting the
standards and the PRC working
with them to make sure that they
meet the standards so I don't
believe that is necessary.
Thank you that's all I have
Mister thank you to the public
Senator Pirtle.
Chair thank you senator thank
you Mr dealer I do I do have a
concern I was informed that you
don't currently reside in New
Mexico is that correct that's
correct and so Mr chair and
senator Mr dealer I'd I'd I just
want to echo entry were in the
room earlier but you know I do
have some concerns specially
with rural New Mexico and
decisions that are going to be
made because our our poverty
levels just within my County are
are much higher than the state
Bernalillo county.
And so a lot of the things that
are being said with with some of
the what's the new flashy term
of environmental justice for
whatever that means
is how are those policies in the
decisions are going to be made
is one ensure that when when
those decisions are made to take
into account that there's people
that are having decide between
feeding their families and
paying their electric bills and
if we do some of these pie in
the sky things that that people
want
what's going to be the effect on
on those people that are living
paycheck to paycheck and so I I
have that concern and and.
I I don't know and have you ever
Mr chair Strickler if you ever
been down and in my neck of the
woods down in Travis county
rural all school next year.
Chair Senators yes I have I grew
up in southern New Mexico.
And and in the process of
hopefully purchasing a house in
Roswell you.
No around here but
Thank I know where you're
talking about I grew up in some
part New Mexico
You know I remember as a kid
growing up.
one fact that was told to me was
that someone park was one of the
pores of codes in the night is
the United States.
so I I recognize that your
concerns are valid I think that
is.
A concern that is that should be
taken it into account it is part
of the public interest that I am
supposed to be considering when
making decisions.
And and Mr chair Senator this
regular I I do appreciate that I
it does bring my attention
though to it it appears it was a
job posting
on linked in or one of the
social sites where if it's it's
very very specifically it
specifically says looking for
advisor to work on New Mexico's
transition to zero carbon
resources resource adequacy
community solar grid
modernization so much more I'm
just curious Mr chair and and
and Mr I Gilera if if we're
looking for
an adviser that's already going
to have some type of agenda how
are they going to be able to
advise you income from but much
needed mutual of the role to
just give the facts and not give
opinion when making some of
these tough decisions.
This is the chair Senators thank
you for the question
Those those are things that the
the laws require FOR the PRC to
consider when making decisions.
I also think that.
We need to have a a division
that is focused on advocating
for consumers because that is
not something that we have right
now.
And.
A.
I have an interpretation of the
public interest just like
everybody else does so I need to
take into account what the laws
say.
And.
The interest of consumers as
well so it's it's a fine balance
sometimes but I recognize the
point that you're making an Mr
chair because I I I appreciate
that very much and I hope you'll
be able to to do that I think I
have confidence that that you'll
definitely try to but just just
always consider you know the the
the the poor
trying to make that.
A that electric bill because I
think that's a huge issue
especially with inflation and
things that we have going on now
that that we all need to be a
little bit more because you know
just think about and
take into consideration when
making decisions so thank you Mr
she.
Thank you senator Senator Baca
thank you Mr chairman I I just
had a couple of questions was
struck in the
as was stated you you don't
currently reside in New Mexico I
may have missed this but do you
have plans Mister chair Mister
of the letter of residing in New
Mexico at some point.
Absolutely I am I can't wait to
get my family here we we put in
an offer on a house that is
being considered right now.
so at I am very excited to to
start this new chapter with my
family so yes we will be moving
here right now I'm very that
that comforts me to hear that I
miss that.
because I don't think I I've
been to support of of of of
basically people living out of
state in governing within New
Mexico from the from that type
of position the other thing I
would ask you is do you have any
operational experience I saw the
most your work for for was it
was policy type of of of work
all state do you have on any
operational experience in
generation transmission
transmission distribution any of
those.
I have experience with respect
to transmission planning for
example in the rules that
utilities must follow for that
and I am familiar with the the
process for procuring generation
for example I in terms of
you know have a been a
transmission or generation
planner if that is the question
no I have not I've I've been a
regulator.
Of my of my next to my next to
hello thought would be this is
just
Regards to a reliability of of
the system here in Mexico and as
you stated is it's in the law
and we're transitioning over to
more renewables I I think it is.
On arguably or want to guess it
could be argued but there are
there are liability issues when
it comes to renewables of the
wind is blowing one stops
the sentence out some goes away
there's those types of issues I
I don't think that we have the
storage out of Quincy to support
our load within the state and so
what in your opinion
Is is going to be some
resolution for that issue that
we will face at some point we
come to that issue versus
reliability on the grid for
businesses and residents of the
state.
Chair and senator thank you for
the question I I absolutely
agree with you that variable
energy resources add complexity
to the grid.
I and we have we have challenges
ahead and you know whether we
have more renewable energy
renewables are not we have
wildfires and.
You know a lot of other factors
a lot of other factors that we
need to be prepared for.
I think one of the things that
we can do is be open to more
innovation as you mentioned
energy storage is critical.
and can help a lot I also think
that regional markets can help
if we have.
If there is easier access to
regional markets then we can
build more generation here.
To be traded when we don't need
it.
And.
This is so I I think that's
probably one of the the.
Biggest concerns is resource
adequacy.
And the same thing if we have
access to regional markets we
have more access to generation
when we do need.
But when you speak to regional
markets Mr chair describing that
are are are you referring to to
essentially buyer on call
contracts from other areas
surrounding us or is that is
that what you're referring to.
I am referring to
Markets that make it easier to
trade energy so we can you know
that there are there is for
example PNM is a member of the
energy imbalance market
the southwestern part powerful
is in the process of creating a
market.
Those are the types of programs
that I'm referring to.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
incentive for answers thank you
senator Senator to thinking of
thank you.
I would move A. S..
Growing up here this is that as
regulatory commission we have a
motion to have a second second
by Senator Stewart I never roll
call please.
Yes Senator Baca yes Senator
Ingle yes Senator Hemphill
Senator Lopez is accused Senator
McKenna yes senator McCain is
yes Senator Moores yes is one
of.
Our test Senator Ortiz.
Yes.
You know yes Senator Pirtle yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stefanics yes.
Trending yes.
Yes.
Yes secretary had a meal yes
your hand you yes and senator do
the yes connected to the yes yes
and yes and wanting to estimates
that are more than the essence
of time to go ahead and
explain I just wanted to prove
really appreciate your vote on
sensors Senator no please bring
some integrity back to this
commission so we needed it
started out with the taint
because of the process.
Thank you because our only way
to get rid of used to impeach
you that would create some
integrity back.
Thank.
Thank you so we have gotten
permission from our floor leader
to go a little bit late and and
circular will we'll see it on
the floor to go a little bit
late on to the floor so we're
going to take at is Ronald on
and then we're going to get SB
three sixty four done so but
I've please everyone be very
very brief in your questions and
your answers thank you madam
chairwoman as well.
This will come.
Thank you.
Madam chair of.
This morning I have a the owner
of of presenting of Mr Patrick
J. o'connell as the PRC
commissioner.
That's work experiencing
technical background making
highly qualified to represent
New Mexico in New Mexico so
utility customers is almost
thirty years experience makes
him well versed in how
generation and transmission
projects are planned developed
approved and constructed and
he's done so with equal
dedication to a successful
transition to a clean energy.
It is capacity with the western
resources advocates Pat worked
directly with utilities and
regulators in New Mexico
Colorado Utah Nevada and Arizona
he is an incentive you of how
the confiscations of progress in
each of those states his work
resulted in a network across the
west that would help in building
trust needed for progress well I
have a keen for New Mexico
electric utility customers.
Federal comment over twenty
years twenty years of experience
working in and around the trick
gas water and waste water
utilities that experience
creates a deep understanding of
how regulators can and should
shape utility performance of the
services they are regulated to
provide.
He also has a deep understanding
of interconnections between
utilities and health services
they provide our daily life
essentials and and growing and
and grow driving academies.
Pass extensive experience
provides understanding utility
investments on tribal lands must
be respectful of tribal
sovereignty will deliver the
standard quality that we expect
everyone else.
His unique and valuable insight
into the new as a pipeline and
transmission lines spending
tribal lands path has worked
directly with tribal communities
sure the industry standards take
sovereignty issues into account.
For the last four years he has
worked for the western resource
advocates an independent
environmental protection
organization and served on the
board of the coalition for clean
and affordable energy he's been
a regular participant at the PRC
frequently opposing his former
employer PNM.
His past employment with PNM New
Mexico gas and his work as an
advocate for mitigating climate
change environmental justice
makes him one of the most
qualified candidates the
governor could appoint him.
On a personal note I I met Pat
years ago I worked in the
college of engineering to
graduate in may of nineteen
ninety it came to work in
college of engineering in August
of nineteen ninety never had a
chance to to to see you as a
student but I did learn from Pat
after Madam when he was it PNM
that as an intern he worked for
my uncle George who is our
sergeant at arms George was the
director of of public works for
the city of Albuquerque will not
director but worked in the
public works department and and
and it pretty much she said I
don't so much for me uncle in
those early years and so forth
so that's kind of our family
connection so.
Right then done wonderful work
and I presented to the
committee.
Mr Khan.
Thank you.
Hello I am Pat o'connell I am
the chair the New Mexico public
regulation commission I'm here
today asking for your
confirmation of my appointment.
I want to start by thanking the
governor and senators Shendo for
their faith in me and thank each
of you for your service to New
Mexico each bring your own
perspective to your duty and
we're all better for that.
I appreciate the opportunity to
make this introduction this time
is yours not mine I will be
brief.
seeking an appointment to the
public regulation is the answer
to a call the public service for
New Mexico my home.
The PRC plays an important role
in providing essential services
that we need to live together I
believe that I have the
experience dedication and
determination to help lead this
agency.
In fulfillment of my oath of
office I will maintain the high
level of professionalism I have
established for myself I will
always make decisions based on
New Mexico's public interest.
Professionals have a duty to
start their work early and to
lead professionals also have a
duty to listen and to learn from
the wisdom of others I'll be
transparent in my work explain
my decision so that we can move
forward together.
My understanding of what is in
New Mexico's public interest is
informed by who I am I've lived
in New Mexico my whole life I
carry with my fifty five years
of living working and living New
Mexico.
I hope this introduction is a
relief stepping this year
journey I want to share your
goals and work together for a
better New Mexico thanks again
and with that said I stand for
questions thank you Mr call
before we do that there was more
than I supported for opposition.
Conferee artist support one
person will be speaking on
behalf of all those after Doug
how speaks for three minutes all
name the names who are on the
list for support the diabetes
you're now on for your three
minutes into part of the
country.
Western energy imbalance market
and an incoming board member of
the western resource adequacy
program.
I've come today to speak in
favor paddle COVID paddle
Connell's appointment of New
Mexico Pierre city I've known
Pat professionally for a little
over a decade having first
become acquainted with Pat when
I was fulfilling the term as
commissioner and piercing in
twenty twelve and Pat was often
witness for PNM in hearings
before the commission my
experience part was that his
testimony and enter in those
cases was professional and
objective path of course was
testifying on behalf of the
utility company but I found his
testimony tonight there try to
underplay over play nor office
Kate issues when Pat spoke you
knew that it was important to
listen even if you didn't agree
in the.
A few years later after I had
left the PRC and patted left PNM
I had the opportunity work with
Pat as a colleague patted joined
western resource advocates as
one of the New Mexico research
experts in that role he and I
provided expert witness
testimony to the PRC and several
utility cases involving the
energy transition act right
cases in on renewable energy
cases ultimately because of his
subject expertise and
professional experience Pat was
asked by W. R. A. to take the
position of director of clean
energy programs across the
entirety of their western state
footprint not just in New Mexico
and I think that speaks volumes
about pets commitment to our
state schools.
Today Pat has become recognized
across the western states as a
clean energy expert I currently
work regularly with
commissioners in almost all
western states on regional
transmission organization
development and these
commissioners have all
congratulated Pat and so to have
him join in their ongoing
regional forms as in New Mexico
Representative the western clean
energy advocates a group of
about forty environmental
advocacies have also been
sending messages of
congratulations have a strong
defender of the energy
transitioned Act was appointed
to the commission I know that
some of expressed concerns a
path who is a former employee of
PNM would not be impartial on
the commission when I was
appointed to the PRC.
I had come with eighteen years
as an employee an officer of a
very large investor owned
utility company I can attest
that my inside the walls
knowledge of how utility works
how it makes its money and the
regulatory strategies that
employees were invaluable
knowledge and tools for me as a
commissioner I believe the same
inside the walls knowledge will
make path and even stronger and
formidable commissioner.
As a W. R. employee Pat
testified in favor of the PNM
having great merger and that too
is given some pause as to
whether or not he should serve
as commissioner in case PNM and
other great come back to the PRC
with another merger request Pat
has done in my opinion exactly
the right thing by preemptively
recusing himself from any future
funding by PNM and have a great
seeking a merger this is exactly
why we have refusal.
As for any other P. potential
future cases that PNM comes
forward with that the PRC the
question of whether Pat should
recuse himself now would be pure
speculation and what those cases
might involve I have over have
every consonant confidence and I
believe you should that path has
shown that he'll remove himself
from any case in which there is
even a perception that he cannot
rule impartially with that let
me thank you for speaking my
support Connell thank you for
your comments
of the house we put your
presentation I will part of his
time into my support and just
for the record the others were
in favor were Terry called
Madeline sim lab chef Jim
McKenzie.
Add to that right S. Tim singer
Tammy fill fill fill fill a horn
and Chelsea Canada and next
speaking in opposition is Paul
Gibson Paul you'll be given
three minutes when you're ready
come to the table Representative
can state your first and last
name for the record thank you.
I thank you chairman and
chairwoman my name is Paul
Gibson I am the co founder
retake Our Democracy you four
thousand member nonprofit
organization that advocates at
the roundhouse regularly.
I stand to oppose the nomination
of Patrick o'connell not because
he's not qualified because I
believe he violates the conflict
of interest.
can the first.
Recommendation Representative
requirement for New Mexico state
PRC member is quote and this is
in New Mexico statute is court
candidates must be independent
of the industry is regulated by
the commission Mr Connell was an
executive PNM for twelve years
of New Mexico gas company for
eight both PRC regulated
entities he testified often at
the PRC in support of PNM is
commitment to sustained use of
fossil fuel based energy despite
the economics close clearly
favoring a switch to less costly
but less profitable renewables
o'connell provided testimony the
PRC on multiple occasions.
On the PNM San Juan generating
station four corners power plant
we acquisition cases claiming
that coal investment was cost
effective for twenty years Mr
McConnell also supported and
provided testimony in support of
PM's reinvestment in Palo Verde
nuclear generating station in
sworn testimony at the PRC in
twenty thirteen fourteen and
fifteen Mr o'connell advocated
for PNM is called re investment
in San Juan generating station
he advocated for investing
hundred fifty million in.
Pollution controls and other
capital expansion expenditures
in fourteen months later the PNM
board voted to close the plant
stranding assets those assets
even well after leaving PNM he
testified in favor of the having
great merger.
He's conflict of interest in
relation to the that mergers
sort regions history recused
himself from the murder case
should come before the PRC again
however this Lee this would
leave the PRC with just two
commissioners to decide one of
the most important contentious
issues the PS here PRC has ever
heard what's more the PRC will
face many other important
decisions involving PNM and
after a decade of testimony in
support of PNM rate increases
for LA by coal and nuclear
investments how can o'connell be
expected to be impartial in the
fifteen future PNM or other high
you cases.
Patrick o'connell may have the
required education and
experience has experience comes
from deep within the
organizations cultures the PRC
is charged with regulating well
it is not up to you to identify
a better candidate Caroline
click for has fifteen years of
direct regulation experience she
knows the rules the process and
the issues and should have been
the first Peck how can a process
purportedly designed to
professionalise legislator come
to this matter enrollment.
Only the Senate can protect New
Mexico from previous PRC
predisposed to approve whatever
the hell he was propose it will
take courage to stand up to the
governor on this but failure to
do so after for years this is
appointments for six years the
longest possible term we deserve
thank you very much thank you so
much for your comments and just
ratio has not to comments are
there anyone in the audience for
the conference.
Very good and that if I can ask
if there's anyone in the
audience who does not support
the time frames of opposition
thank you same online do we have
anybody in favor opposition at
eight yeah can I have a list
right here I did in the test of
the time will then go to
questions and comments from the
committee will start off with
that or more.
No actually I I believe senator
Sanchez leave soon if if you
money here I just wanted to
apologize I have a medical
appointment I am leaving at
eleven fifteen if I was here I
would vote yes thank you
Senator Moores.
Thank you secretary so there's
lots of software works.
Take care of yourself answers
them Senator
I I really appreciate your
qualifications are actually
still work
recreation you're you're you're
comments but if I would like to
have the same concerns that
we've talked about
I personally respect that fact
the researchers self well we all
have conflicts up here and in
government and how you handle
the complexes the way that is
the true measure would you
handle it correctly I'm not
worried about there only being
two members for this one
particular case because you
always have to have to members
to pass anything I mean if
you're crucis self or you go to
note still needs to members so
that that to me is not an issue
it's how you respond to the
conflict on the Senator the is
what concerns me and and
the talk about what I think was
a very honest and technical
process with with speech
regarded in you know I think if
you had not resigned as the
nominating chair you probably
would have an ethical violations
that you're in and move forward
so it's very convenient to step
aside at the last second so I do
want to go through that you're
if you go to your calls chair on
this recall Senator could you of
these could you answer the same
questions I asked earlier you
are qualified
you have to be a from an
accredited university and ten
years of experience correct yes
goal of those.
back to the the interest on the
fight the financial issues and
one of things that concerns me
about the test one and
everything else is do you have
any financial interest in any of
the regulated industry your
money centers are not doing any
consulting work correct correct
that my one job is the public
regulation commission I don't
have any financial interest in
any of the companies PRC
regulates this after senator Mr
college you have any like stock
options left from PNM to have
any financial investments
outside of mutual funds which
would control retirement you
have anything like that that is
tied to any of the regulatory
industry that will be now.
Nope no stock opened at
and going back to the questions
of just everyone else did you
have any conversations I know by
your previous public testimony
but did you have any
conversations with speaker Egolf
chair Senator about any the
mergers the potentially could be
looking at including the PNM
yeah I also work at that and
give you the answer both the
water the whole list of people
governor the staff of
legislators everyone yeah
through the nomination process
that was a question that was
explored first by nominating
committee
speaker Egolf was present at
that time so the question was
asked what my.
potential for needing to reduce
myself was based on my history
of extensive experience
testifying from the Public
Education Commission there were
two cases at that time that that
were the potential one was the
merger case and one was New
Mexico gas companies right K.
New Mexico gas companies right
cases been decided by the
commission so was down to one by
the time I talked to the
governor's office and gave them
the same answer and madam chair
senator
Was the question about how you
would handle a refusal or how
you would vote on a particular
case
I believe the question was
whether I there was a potential
I would need to recuse myself
and the answer that yes but
again the nominating process it
it was very transparent the
videos are still out there those
measures Senator I just want to
make sure the the answer is that
no one is talking about how you
would vote on a case how your
position leanings were on
particularly the economic case
for all the other cases the
questions were directed towards
which you need to recuse
yourself not the outcome or your
position on the merits of the
case thank you for that
clarification center yep that's
right the questions were not
about how I would feel it was
are you have the potential to
need to recuse yourself and
what's the list.
And that goes for everyone the
governor's together staff
cabinet secretaries speaker
legislators yes.
Okay those are my concerns have
financial concerns the process
and your qualifications I
appreciate your honest and
transparent and I appreciate
thank you thank you thank you
Senator Senator Pirtle followed
by Senator vodka and seven.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Shendo thank you Mr call
I do have a question is in the.
Comes back to the issued of
diversity of of the commission
is there any potential that when
there's a state right K. dealing
with other issues excel from
from my neck of the woods that
that we could have the the
actual commission meeting in in
the area that they serve whether
it's Carlsbad arousal or any
town in between.
Yes Sir Senator it's certainly
that is a possibility it was a
past practice of the commission
to travel around the state
And that is something that
personally I think we should do
to help with that the concept at
that we all are representing the
whole state and
Other questions that the
commissioners things like
Environmental justice requires
you to actually talk to the
folks are gonna be affected
directly by the decisions you
make that can't be done sitting
in Santa Fe.
And and Mr chairman Mr I really
appreciate that that answer who
makes the decision on where the
location of the meeting is going
to be.
I believe that's up to the three
commissioners and and frankly
that's what one of the other
questions that we've heard is is
there a something the former
commission had done that we
should maintain and I think they
did a great job of managing
through the pandemic and and
using tools like zoom to allow
them to continue to do their
work and to provide more access
into the process so I I really
think that's the answer for the
futures let's go to the
communities are being directly
affected and take advantage of
the broadband service that we're
hoping to expand and make wheels
meetings available the is to.
That Mr chair Mr call thank you
for that and and I'd like to
just wanted to echo appreciate
the fact that that you were
willing to recuse yourself to
ensure that the public
understood that any decision
that's going to be made that
there there wasn't any type of
bias or impropriety in the
that's just the nature of having
professionals that or from New
Mexico on on the commission and
it's going to happen happens in
this body I recuse myself before
I remember when I did it my
first year and everybody looked
at me like I was weird but you
know I feel like that was the
right thing to do to to get that
out to the public that that so
that they knew I was trying to
Dodge a vote or anything like
that I just was letting the
public know that there was
enough of a conflict that I felt
that the public deserves to know
that and that I shouldn't take
any action on on that issue so I
I do appreciate that and I hope
moving forward.
You were able to find a way that
that maybe it's there is a
conflict anymore you're far
enough away from it or if
there's enough distance that
that you can take action but I
do appreciate that you know goes
kind of back on us for only
making a three person commission
that when there's some but one
person with a conflict of
interest now it's just too
commissioner so that was just
probably lack of foresight on on
our part of not making it a five
person Commission but and
there's there's all kinds of
things is for learning and
trying to transfer over to this
new appointed board or appoint a
commission there's gonna be some
some growing pains so with that
Mr chair I have more questions
thank you Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr chair and madam
chair thank you Senator Shendo
and thank you Mr o'connell for
being here this morning I to
what receive numerous messages
about this conferee and do do it
I did my due diligence and spoke
to
Mr o'connell's appears and in
fact
came back with some high
recommendations for this
conferee.
and I do want to I I do want to
acknowledge how much I
appreciate the engaged public
that means you're paying
attention and I cannot.
I'm just really proud of the
public paying attention to what
New Mexico is doing with the PRC
I really enjoyed our
conversation
Mr vice chair senator and Mr
o'connell yesterday we talked
about a variety of things and I
know that you're civil engineer
from UNM so it was wonderful and
that your father worked at
Sandia national laboratories and
that one of his keys for
selecting a house where you grew
up with so that he can walk to
work this.
so with that I have the same two
questions
vice chairman Senator and Mr
o'connell as I did for the other
two countries and that is Mr
McConnell.
What if any practices that the
previous the previous PRC body
did would you like to see
possibly utilized in the new
three member model.
And secondly.
A new opportunity exists to
consult with New Mexico's
indigenous nations and problems
have you considered how the PRC
could do anything differently to
engage with them thank you.
Thank you senator I appreciate
our conversation yesterday also
The the first item I I tried to
touch on it.
A little earlier that you know
there previous commission was
the commission had to deal with
the pandemic and the changes
that brought on and did a good
job of pulling us through they
continue to do their work and
they have resulted in a system
that's more accessible and
transparent bet and then the
system was before so I applaud
the hard work on that and and
will continue that and and I
tried to.
State we can build on that by
now that it's easy to connect we
can also get out of Santa Fe and
get into other communities so.
The next that relates to the
next item also because I think
one of things I've observed in
my years working in this space
is
It's easy for the commission to
sit and wait for decisions to
come to the commission I believe
public interest in New Mexico is
best served if the decisions
that are brought to the
commission have the pin.
Work through at the community
level so whether it's indigenous
group or some part or any other
community in New Mexico
I think we can demanded and
asked that utilities and
developers have a real process
where they engage community
members before developing
projects or other changes that
will affect the fabric of those
communities before it reaches
the commission and then finally
I was elated that the governor
created the commission that she
did when the three of us are
going to be a commission was
appointed a believe having
worked across the region and
also have a friend who's a
college professor in Alaska The
New Mexico is situated so that
we can become a model of
consultation to tribal groups
and I hope that this Commission
can be a fun launching point for
that.
Excellent thank you vice
chairman thank you madam
chairman thank you senator thank
you Mr Connell thank you senator
and so I just have one question
before I go over to the chairman
they have several constituents
right and not delay here you so
you would recuse yourself from
the pandemic right K. I have not
committed to committee recusing
myself from the piano okay so
there was just so you know I'd
have the constituents right who
I talked about the testimony
supporting spin of the
investments in the fourth
quarter to twelve point of order
one generating station both of
which are central and peanuts
right cases and it's going to be
a major decision when it comes
to rates and customers so thank
you first for your brief
response and seven handed over
to the general.
Thank you Mr vice chair and
senator Mr Connell
ten I was very happy to see you
recuse and and the case work
that you did because that's the
one about the the merger correct
correct and and you refuse and
that one because you were you
gave testimony as a witness is
that right yes the the rules are
clear I gave testimony as an
expert witness in the the matter
in controversy is the phrase but
you can translate that to the
the docket in which the.
applications made.
And and I would just encourage
you and and I I.
I I'm I'm happy to be here doing
so so far but but going forward
looking at the.
That line where it talks about
recusing where you've been a
witness in in the matter of
controversy which I don't know
that that would be just the one
doc I I I would agree that
broadly but it's also if you've
been an adviser or consultant hi
in matter controversy so I I
would hope that you are reading
those and considering the I
think as broadly as as language
on the paper here appears to me
in our statute when you're
considering refusals in future
cases but I was happy to to get
the opportunity to to chat with
you before this hearing I really
appreciated that you gave us
your answers to the the
questionnaire that you submitted
to the nominating committee and
and I found that really helpful
and I I know that some of my
colleagues as well so I I
appreciate that information
and I will look forward to
seeing
how things go in the future and
and to hold it up hoping that
the same integrity on future
cases that you are on the US
that happened K. thank you thank
you thank you madam chairman
Senator to the people the motion
for the motion to have a second
second from senator Morris I
never woke up please.
Yes thank you after yes Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez yes Senator Lopez
Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris yes
thank you more yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes elsewhere.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator budget excuse
Senator Stewart fifteen Senator
how to meal yes Senator had a
meal yes and Senate doing yes
yes yes ninety three excuse.
That very quickly madam chairman
just to explain level of I had a
great conversation with Mr
Rippon yesterday and then I to
fund his answers in depth that
we've that included in his
conversations that we had during
the nominating process I thought
that was very helpful I think
the level of expertise city
representative far outweighs any
potential that he may have and
it's it's also not a conflict of
interest of work for somebody I
mean if if you don't have an
interest in the ongoing
operation of or profiting from
the conduct of the business to
simply of work for them doesn't
create a conflict of interest I
think his decision to recuse
himself in the merger was was
advisable over very good and and
I and I and I have every
confidence in his ethics so
thank you very much.
What kind of loss on the Senate
floor leader and so when I have
those back to action.
Thank you Mr vice chair and so
we are going to very quickly
here SB three sixty four Senator
Baca.
Congratulations thank you I
didn't get a chance.
Madam.
Revert.
Also power.
Shares of Sir.
We're gonna get started here
this bill so folks could could
exit the room quietly so that we
can continue with our work and
get down to the floor.
Senator Baca taken away
regulations.
Thank you madam chair members
and colleagues in the Senate
rules committee for your
consideration I have Senate bill
three sixty four Senate bill
three sixty fours clarifies
prohibitions for legislators all
give you a brief background on
on the the occurrences that led
to Senate bill sixty four in
response to ethics training
presentation of the state ethics
commission was asked to issue
some clarification about a
legislators ability to work with
state agencies on behalf of
constituents and use official
ledger the letter head this is
something that is routinely done
by I think all of us the reason
we're here is to serve
constituents in my belief on
January on January seventeenth
of
the this they issued a statement
saying that we could not do that
on January seventeenth myself
and senator Wirth issued a
letter to the chair of that that
they should rescind Mr Roni is
and informal opinion they often
refuse to not to do so and
instead of the submitted
proposed amendments to our
statutes as we all know that is
right reserves to you the
legislators and therefore we
submitted this bill and I
presented here today what it
does all basically is on page
two of this bill this is simply
clarifies language allowing us
to Representative to a state
agency.
As a legislator either in any
way really it doesn't specify as
long as we're not receiving
compensation and it is for the
benefit of constituency can get
paid and you have to be
servicing a constituent and
that's all it clarifies the rest
of language simply refers to
professions such as attorneys of
where you are authorized to
appear for the state agencies
but obviously you are not to
reveal yourself as a state
legislator or two Representative
that there would be some
recourse in anyway for a
non a non agreement by whatever
party you are in front of with
every agency and without a stand
for questions.
Thank you senator we did not
have anyone sign up into the
opposition is anyone in the
audience here please raise your
hand if you're here to support
these raise your hand for here
in opposition anyone on soon all
right Senator Moores and then
Senator.
Garcia
but one is three line.
I would.
Indicia it's a
yes Representative it's really
any any sort of indication in
the Latin that you might give it
is what it is and what that
would be in reference to
ourselves would be something
like letter head of oral
presentation a saying that we
are in fact legislators is what
we refer to in our case terrific
question Senator Moores.
That was I don't know where you
can learn that station.
Senator Lopez.
Mr Senator Moores I was going to
make the two small.
The eighty fourth partisanship.
All my calls.
Anyway I appreciate it thank
you.
Right thank you with that we
have a motion from Senator Lopez
seconded by Senator Moores and
just one quick question chair
Senators kindnesses but so the
the thing about not using your
name when you contact them as
senator Ortiz Y. Pino leaving a
message for a secretary Scrase
for example.
That only applies if I'm getting
paid in using my.
The
private professional occupation
to contact on the phone just
representing your constituents
can I can I just say that.
You madam under this bill there
would be no restriction madam
chair and senator for
representing that you are in
fact a state senator when you
were calling on behalf of the
constituent back that was thank
you madam chair.
We have a question is there any
objection to the motion seen
none do pass with eight to zero
and we will get down to the
floor and I believe this bill
will be heard on the floor today
the committee members are
absolutely with that rules is
in recess.
