Senator Hamblen here Senator
Hemphill.
Here.
Senator Lopez.
Senator my Estes.
Senator McKenna now with.
Senator Moores.
Senator Padilla your Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator po.
Senator Sedillo Lopez here but
isn't it and now with Senator
share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You now have a quorum Mister
And Revenue father Richard
energy New Mexico state Senate
chaplain please remain standing
for the pledge allegiance to bin
that today by Senator share
Today is Ash Wednesday as many
of you may already know.
And on the Christian calendar it
marks the beginning of lent now
ashes we display as Christians
allow our inner humility to be
outwardly and shamelessly
displayed.
As Quincy is economically
Catholic rights even if this
Capelli and Lutherans Moravians
Anglicans Methodists Nazarenes
as well as some of our friends
at Baylor's Truett seminary and
An act of faith which is also
marked not only by prayer
fasting and giving things up god
I'm gonna miss chocolate if but
resurrection of our lord.
Scripture in genesis reminds us
that we were wonderfully made
with our creator breathed life
into dust.
To help us to find the love and
kindness that makes us good
neighbors as we discuss and
commandments to love god and to
love our neighbors help us to
remember these commandments
throughout today and the rest.
what is right and what is just
help each one of us to have an
open heart an open mind and a
loving spirit to see the good in
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
Getting started for us avail
you'll to Senate majority whip
appreciated the words on
compromise and how that's so
critical important in this
building as we do our work thank
you with that Mr president I
just I would like you to
Thank you very much Mr president
so I'm just going to go into
some announcements here units
consent to take us to that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous no objection we're
in that order business
Memorial thirteen survivors of
suicide day from the president's
table.
See no objection will remove
Senate Joint Memorial thirteen
Mr president units consent to
remove Senator memorial twelve
John Paul Taylor in the memory
from the president's table.
Seeing no objection will be
removing.
very much Mr president will be
Senator serve on this and that
is to be read today for the
reader.
Mr president units consent to
remove Senate memorial fifty
Senator Ortiz he Pino and that
is not to be read today but the
Senator the subpoena will handle
that one.
Mr president today is aviation
day at the legislature in the
halls of history so please stop
the John Paul Taylor funeral
arrangements are as follows the
rosary will be at six PM on
Thursday February twenty third
the funeral will be at eleven AM
on Friday February twenty fourth
crucis the telephone number
there is five seven five five
two six two four one nine with
that information that Mr
president the and events that
we're going to mention here The
And Mr president with that
before we go on to other
announcements I do want to for
the information of the body who
the folks that are here right
now we are going to go into
formal third reading and we're
We will also be doing item
number five that will be Senator
Stewart item number six Senator
monuments and item number eight
Senator souls.
Good morning Mr president thank
you Senator Padilla.
I want to Senator Brandt has
another emergency bill Senate
discussed a process that will
kind of address the needs that
we have to make sure bills are
being properly referred and get
the penalty for making a
shooting threat to be a fourth
degree felony he had the bill
last year that made it a
misdemeanor and so Senate bill
needs to be in the Senate
Judiciary Committee and then go
to the Senate finance committee
so what what I'm gonna do is
Judiciary with a second referral
to Senate finance and then what
we're gonna do is once the bill
is into the proper committee
of the meeting they should have
the committee adopt the
substitute for discussion
purposes only I visited with
director Burciaga at the council
bill only want to make sure that
all the proper analysis can be
done for the bill but that way
the bill will be up
everyone can review it and a
going to follow up you know I
might be able to Senator Brandt
or any other members just
questions about the process and
then I'll make a unanimous
consent motion with respect to
Senate bill five thirteen thank
you senator Peter Wirth for that
the process clean and completely
legal to on being the legal
challenges later on
Bill into that committee and
then at the sub will get posted
online so the public can read
the bill thank you Sir works for
for working with us questions
that thanks Center rent any
further comments from senators.
Affairs Committee and sent to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
and then to the Senate finance
committee.
Senator has been a unanimous
consent request.
this this minor tweak will
address the concerns that came
up yesterday and again this is a
just historically this is a
this much cleaner moving forward
so that's that's all I have
thank you Mr president thank you
senator Wirth senators rand that
order business announcements
miscellaneous.
And Nicholas Nevada's is a
junior in Los crucis who is part
of our CTE programs there he is
exam or for his pilot's license
he is currently taking pilot
training yes about twelve hours
and will very likely solo next
students going through the pilot
training program with the cost
of instructor pot the airplane
gasoline for it yes and
everything fully covered there's
he is the one that is already
past is yes on the first try
some people and indicated that
getting a pilot's license is
equivalent to getting a master's
in order to do that and so very
proud of him and if his parents
could stand up there up here in
the the gallery they came up
with him this is the first time
to Santa Fe but I'm sure they're
about us.
Senator souls further
announcement Senator Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president I did
I had sent memorial forty six
dealing with the Mescalero
so I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that that of memorial
be referred to this in Indian
rural and cultural fair.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Any question Senators.
Senator we can visit on that to
make sure the process is done
correctly and then we'll come
back to it on the floor.
Any further announcements.
of business messages from the
house of representatives we're
in that order business messages
from the house of
representatives reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa am Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk.
The gentle reflect that the
message from the house has been
receive.
committee reports the reader to
read.
This president the rules
committee has approved the
following certificate of
congratulations certificate
Center how to mail I move
adoption of the committee
report.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that that we
certificate number seven.
Certificate number eight.
Certificate of recognition
certificate number eleven.
Certificate number fifteen.
Certificate number sixteen.
Certificate number seventeen.
To forget number seven.
Certificate number eight.
To the following Shannon Johnson
Katy M. Duhigg chair Senator
Hemphill I move adoption of the
committee report centers we have
a motion to document report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye those opposed may the eyes
referred Senate bill one seventy
eight has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
We X. yes okay that we accept
all the reports and that they be
read as one for the record.
Senate bill three thirty to do
pass.
Senate bill one ninety two that
a do not pass but that Senate
finance committee substitute for
I move the adoption of the
committee report senators we
have a motion to document report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye those opposed may the
eyes have it the committee port
has been adopted and the General
under consideration reports that
same has been duly enrolled and
grossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
move the adoption of the
committee report.
Senator have a motion to that's
pretty poor all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes habits
Committee to whom has been
referred to Senate memorial
forty eight has had it under
consideration reports that same
has been duly and are rolled and
Thank you Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report centers we
have a motion to adopt committee
poured all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
forty eight.
Senator Mike over there to take
us to the next order of
business.
Thank you Mr president out takes
Third reading provided and I
would ask the body's attention
as this memorials placed on.
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
fall preparatory to its final
passage see no objections the
reader to read Senate Joint.
The reader to read.
a nonprofit organization that
offers support groups to serve
the needs of people suffering
the loss of a loved one by
suicide and whereas survivors of
virtual meetings with attendees
from across New Mexico and even
outside the United States and
whereas support groups are led
by peers who have experience in
who benefit from the sharing of
experiences and approaches to
the loss through suicide and
whereas meetings are also
frequently attended by mental
health professionals who offer
important to remove the stigma
of suicide for survivors and to
speak out about mental health
issues and suicide and we're
just survivors of suicide
Mexico that February twenty
second twenty twenty three be
declared survivors of suicide
day in the legislature and be it
Martinez speaker Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk house of
representatives how we see
Morales president.
Memorial thirteen the food on
its final passage subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Thank you Seneal just a reminder
to the body that it is a Joint
Memorial set has been ordered to
be printed.
Michael Sanchez leading the
effort with this too with this
suicide survivors day you know
it's it's intense you know I I
personally and in just you know
I'm just really troubled by
teenage suicide this this is not
acceptable so so it just would
welcome any comments of people
gallery after we're all done
that I wanted to do so as well
as my guests here on the rostrum
so and leave the floor open for
any any comments on this
guests who are with us on the
rostrum.
Senator Brandt followed by
Senator Steinborn Senator
Gallegos center by the.
As a veteran and disabled
veteran.
You know veterans are committing
suicide rate about twenty one
per day.
And we were taught not to talk
about those things right we were
told in the service to man up.
military and so most folks that
have been you know in the
military for a long time been
out for a long time.
Yeah we need to be making sure
they're getting the mental
health.
And I appreciate some of the the
recent changes that they've made
in that area but there's so much
more that needs to be done and
The suicide is really the
answer.
We have to have hope.
And for me I believe that hope
My father in law served three
tours in Vietnam twenty years in
the army and just two weeks ago
In a hospice.
These are things that he should
have had that mental health
counseling for long ago.
But the other issue that we're
dealing with and and the sponsor
of this moral brought it up was
teenage suicide.
And unfortunately it's it's
The rate of suicides in our
children skyrocketed.
And some communities they hadn't
That we never closed our schools
again at least not for over
here.
Because it's not good for
children's mental health the
our children are getting the
help that they need when they're
dealing with the the issues that
surround them in this world.
And so I think the sponsor for
bringing this I thank him for
thank you Mr president and thank
you center for bringing this
moral for you now there is a
policy we can we can invest in
to help kids who might be
advocates come to me and asked
for more funding for school
based health centers.
And we know when we look at
what's going on with our kids we
see what's going on to maybe be
a safe place for the students to
talk to.
So I say this.
Number one my my heart and
increasing funding for school
based health centers so that we
can try to achieve that every
school has a social worker in
the school Medicaid can go to if
I spoke to one of the health
centers in my community this
morning and
Yeah they they get basically no
state funding from it and
they've gotten some federal
finance we really look at this
along with other vulnerable
populations and kind of step it
up a little bit thank you Mr
president thank you.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
center Greg.
Mister chair Mister president
etcetera I've had a system in my
family have had no Cole a cousin
friend and neighbor but I I
don't know if everyone knows and
PTSD that they have there but I
just want to draw attention Mr
president to return our our
chaplain Reverend Richard New C.
he has a program that helps
his effort in to people that
have served our country in order
to give them the option so I
thank you for your memorial I
think that we do need to
Thank you senator Morris Senator
Padilla followed by Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you very much Mr president
I appreciate senator o'neill
continuing to carry the torch on
I think Mr president when you
were a member of the Senate to
while back in two thousand
fifteen the first year that I
was the web by we have a serious
young man try to do as much as I
possibly could and I learned so
much through that experience and
I think that one thing I would
leave with families and folks
that are dealing with this kind
of stuff is.
whatever you have to do to reach
that that human being in some
way shape or form to help them I
I miss him every day and his
mama my sister Mrs and every day
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator o'neill for for once
again bringing this memorial
forward
because they've taken the the
pain and the sorrow that they
felt over the loss of their
daughter.
of self fourth street from
downtown to of any this is our
chose and and the the idea is
that there would be butterflies
or whatever artist would be
encouraged to do it in each
would be in memory of somebody
who did commit suicide and I
think it was a beautiful step
matter how of seemingly well
often and and settle the a child
might be and and preparing for a
remember that those who who who
are left behind can convert that
sorrow that incredible.
Romero's who are up there and
and when they get introduced
later on I think we'll welcome
them thank you Mr president
thank you senator participate
now Senator Sedillo Lopez.
with bills with ideas who have
experienced tragedy and they
turned their tragedy into
advocacy for others so I'm
really inspired but I I felt
hotline and it's important to
know that no matter what you're
feeling no matter how to how
much despair you have.
There are always options and
texted or chat at nine eight
eight lifeline dot org and the.
The data they've kept of from
people who contact the the
tragedy that just leaves so many
behind hurting is just really
sincere really real and and I
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciate the sponsors of
bringing forth this important
areas where there are holes and
so families have unanswered
questions and losses in their
their lives.
and I appreciate my colleagues
experiencing trauma to those
families that are solid and
happy and I I want to bring
light to the LGBTQ community as
well as being.
LGBTQ youth are more than four
times as likely to attempt
suicide than their peers.
According to the Trevor project
the estimate that more than one
At least one suicide every forty
five seconds.
Forty five sec.
the triggers that may come from
all of us tried to share in your
experience troubling to support
you.
We we would never know unless we
actually experience it
ourselves.
sure that everybody knows that
to reach out if you know of
somebody who is suffering from
trauma from of challenges in
eighty four million dollars in
mental health care.
It is up to us to make sure that
not one more family experiences
the pain and the loss and the
Mexico and thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Hamblen
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and.
issues just don't the stigma I
don't want to bring it forward
and I agree with my colleague
Senator Hamblen that we as a
And we have to be sure that
individuals who have it and and
and again I would say most of us
go through some brief period of
something about that it was some
legislation but again this is
that that.
It's it's so hard I
health for the family and so
we've got to make access to help
instantly available and so I
thank you for bringing this
Si no further debate.
Center near close thank you Mr
president and before closing
them before introducing in my
she's not with me at that to see
but she's always with me in
spirit and our character so
anyway her this is just one
memory of her brother who killed
himself.
in the small Montana town.
And I had a big impact on her
it's called Steve Burke.
grass for his first place.
One late August afternoon I.
Steve drives the rusted Wagoner
nouns.
He masters the art of spelunking
takes is Montana state tennis
team to Davis California the
procession of months in tennis
with the blast he stops his own
part.
So that's a bone of from Jones
award winning book called those
the rules for called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative.
Except those voting in the
negative by show of hands thank
Senator all forty two members
Because it is a Joint Memorial.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Five of twenty the affirmative
zero on the negative Senate
Joint Memorial thirteen
survivors of suicide day has
the survivors of suicide so from
up in the rostrum and please
hold your applause till the end
of we do have Keith and brandy
Romero if you two could stand
up.
Desiree woodland board member
breaking the silence Debbie
Jones James survivors of
suicide.
Lost survivor Vivian Keith
suicide Lorraine Baca Jenny
Taylor Nancy devoid again
members of survivors of suicide.
Members from the throw community
center process of banality is
something in Neal Trista Lee
and Isaac John so if effect.
The body can we welcome them and
stand in honor of their of their
presence here today thank you.
Just for the record for the body
and those this and in the
We're in that order business
third reading of legislation I
yield to Senator by the IEP.
Thank you very much Mr president
on now you'll to Senator said
He was present was present move
that Senate Joint Memorial
twelve will be not printed but
and not refer to committee but
it re read a third time in full
preparatory to its final
passage.
Memorial expressing the sorrow
of the legislature of the
legislature at the passing of
former representative J. Paul
Taylor the conscience of the
three surrounded by his family
and care givers and whereas born
a little after World War one it
is one hundred two years J. Paul
both of which shaped what has
become known as the greatest
generation the Manhattan Project
the space race with Russia and
Neil Armstrong's walk on the
nineteen sixty four and the
federal voting rights act of
nineteen sixty five.
The rate of American in just a
vote in New Mexico.
The Vietnam conflict.
the information age.
New Mexico's quite those sent an
audio and September eleventh two
thousand one when the world
with Coronado in fifteen forty
J. Paul Taylor had an abiding
love for history and whereas he
was quoted and used in a
newspaper article as saying I
was always interested in history
Mexico State University and
after the war worked for the lot
last crucis public school
district as a teacher principal
County from nineteen eighty
seven to two thousand five and
served on multiple health and
Human Services interim and
standing committees during his
eighteen year career as well as
budgets and whereas J. Paul was
the embodiment of Roosevelt's in
democratic ideals and was a
tireless advocate for those less
fortunate particularly children
justice and whereas another of
office passions was New Mexico's
cultural history and two
thousand four as chair of the
two thousand three
reorganization Committee he
shepherded through the
departments aging and long term
services Veterans Services and
Indian Affairs and whereas as a
legislator of the decade and
similar awards in nineteen
eighty nine eighty nine ninety
one ninety two ninety six ninety
Hispanic historian
architectural conservationist at
the quarry and antiquarian and
builder of libraries in his
native New Mexico and for his
peers as they have passed at
least four memorials
recognizing and praising him and
whereas like his awards his
of the national Hispanic
cultural center and the Branigan
center in Los crucis he served
on numerous other historical
New Mexico State University St
Paul Tudor social justice
symposium and the charter school
J. Paul Taylor academy have been
named in his honor and whereas
decided to give one final Magnus
magnificent gift to the people
of the state they loved the
Taylors donated their national
historic home and property in
permanent cultural monument and
historic site.
And whereas Representative J.
Paul Taylor will be remembered
in the New Mexico legislature as
come will visit Misia and the
Taylor rentals but LA misi a
historic site and know how this
extraordinary citizen served his
state with unparalleled
the great gentleman from Dona
Ana County and that it expresses
sorrow our heartfelt sympathy
and sincere condolences to the
loving care your caregivers and
friends.
And be it further resolved that
the legislature expressed its
sympathy and condolences to the
community members of Misia who
that a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the families of
the honorable J. Paul Taylor
signed and sealed at the capitol
see more on this president
Sherri due to Lujan chief clerk
New Mexico state Senate.
Thank you operator for for
reading that and all you'll to
explain.
Thing is present agency present
I do appreciate very much the
reader and the opportunity to
have the memorial read I know
that home on Paul's passing
earlier that many of you all had
family's funeral services for
Friday and the committee Los
crucis coming together I would
just want to share with you that
I can do to talk to Paul usually
hundred and two years old that's
just the kind of energy that
Paul always demonstrated it
you've you've all heard it's
pretty hard to find any
talk about is gives his service
the experience that I have a
Paul was as a father to his
children is grandfathered his
family as a husband to his wife
It was a celebration a gathering
of our community in ways that
very few things bring us
together anymore seems is it as
a society as a country as a
courage and his example that
always brought our community
together we'll do that again in
the coming days and I appreciate
members of the Senate
Thank you Mr president I think
Senator Montes for doing this
the family
are often times that gets of
forgotten or the time isn't
taken.
So having this written tribute
Si no further debate Senator I'm
sorry Senator Stewart center
store.
Thank you Mr president type I
just want to thank Senator
kindergarten he really was we
called him the conscience of the
legislature he he truly was he
could just he could just do no
wrong in what he said and what
models like this to look up to
he certainly wasn't is one for
me thank you Mr president thank
you senator Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president I'd like
to thank the sponsor for
all of us were hoping that he
would be an true J. Paul Taylor
form and continue to live year
after year after year because he
was such a force in our
them and how he's shaped our
community and affected our kids
and and and been such a a
important factor in our
education and improving the
and so it's nice to see that we
are able to tribute to have this
tribute to him for his family
the many of us called friends
but also just to have this
proud of our native son and very
happy to honor him today so
thank you Senator serve on this
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Hamblen Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
he was also started off in the
school board and Misia and then
ended up becoming a trustee in
the village of the State it
maybe even for eight years I
sure last time that he chair
with me one time was when
governor Johnson was the
governor and of course not a
governor Jay Paul's party
set up a new system of services
to the neediest New Mexicans and
much to J. Paul surprise he he
got called up to governor
anything and was a conservative
libertarian and shape I think
asking like why are you up what
what made you come around on
this and his answer was your J.
embraced it because of who J.
Paul was in the credibility had
on the issue I thought that was
a pretty incredible story so
just want to share at and
applause are going to be a state
monument he has truly priceless
New Mexico artwork is collected
every inch of that house so one
of these days when you're in the
Si no further discussion.
Mr president Senator Wirth I
Something that I many of us
would want to do but are not
able to do and I just wanted him
Any further discussion.
Thank you Mr president president
appreciate the remarks and again
I know many of you all had a
chance to express many much of
that previously I have a
challenge for all of you because
authority to the monument I hope
really that what we could
ask all of the members of the
Senate and the legislature to
make a small participation and
join us as partners in what I'm
that we join his gift with our
own of support.
The Mr president I I move now
that Senate Joint Memorial
want to centers we're voting on
Senate Joint Memorial twelve.
In memory of J. Paul Taylor if
you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five the
affirmative you're on the
negative senator moral twelve
memory of J. Paul Taylor has
passed the Senate Senator about
this.
Thank you for the members
be sending more fifty five
Senator Ortiz Pena I'll take as
to that order business
announcements miscellaneous when
that order business analysis
miscellaneous Senator Padilla
thank you very much Mr president
thank you senators about this
will be held at the basilica son
I'll be no Catholic Church at
twenty two eighty CHI up into
pilots in Misia of the rosary is
going to be at six PM on
Thursday February twenty third
back to that order business
third reading of legislation.
And that order business serving
legislation center for this
thank you very much Mr president
Fentanyl awareness day be put on
its final passage subject to
debate amendment or substitution
I guess we're not going to read
it is my understanding but I
wanted to say a few words about
if I might.
feel the the impact of the
scourge of what we've got with
fentanyl is something that we
totally we're not prepared for.
Pennies it's available almost
everywhere.
Any drugs at all are are are
available you can get fentanyl
there because it is so so
And it and when it's mixed in
with other substances people can
be using something that they
don't realize has fentanyl in it
we we tried to deal with that
unaware that there was fentanyl
that they were using in the
other drugs that was mixed in
with it people die.
Because it's still available
and because it's not necessarily
something that they deliberately
are going after they're they're
trying some other drug but then
to those been mixed in with it.
and it never is that good again
it's just a straight downward
trend but you're always trying
to get that back to that
original high so it's
particularly addictive.
die a fentanyl overdose and I
would list share one thing Mr
president that serenity mess
which is one of the best
treatment facilities around for
graduates of the program young
people who'd been through the
program got off of whatever
drugs they were taking in the
past and have been rehabilitated
and sent back out into the
community.
And and so this awareness I
think is is a first step now we
have to do something about it
but but I just want to urge the
members anybody here in the in
join in this we would certainly
welcome there debate on the
subject thank you Mr president
thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
SNH me these.
was completed by the commission
on combatting synthetic opioid
trafficking is a bipartisan
report that came out last year.
of our problem with the old
opioid epidemic which began in
the mid nineties with oxycontin
and other prescription opioid
medications that were falsely
mail carriers different opioids
directly to the the United
States now what is occurring
according to the executive
summary is that Mexico is the
the people's Republic of China.
Now bring this up because we as
a state have a very unique and
special responsibility not just
matter and determined where the
problem is.
We have a very unique
responsibility.
And this is a great resource for
developing legislation for us to
And they have to principles
number one is supply disruption.
Number two is decreasing the
domestic demand.
harm reduction efforts.
promoting recovery from
substance use disorders
looking at the illegal firearm
in the one that's available
policy on this I highly
encourage you to look at this
document is incredibly
insightful incredibly
informative and it's evidence
based and I commend the Senator
need to sponsor the yield on it
except that the.
And I I don't even deal with the
first comment I want to make is
is the morals a little
Albuquerque centric.
just the mayor of Albuquerque's
problem I see sitting out there
this is a statewide problem we
have and we've had problems with
in twenty twenty one ninety
percent.
Of some eighty thousand opioid
related deaths involved
fentanyl.
southern border have occurred at
the point point of in.
In twenty twenty to eighty four
That's just what was detected.
How much got through that
wasn't.
Border patrol seized twenty two
Last year the D. E. A. sees
enough that no to kill every
American.
Probably more than once.
If you're not familiar with the
fennel powder just a few months
ago a law enforcement officer in
Florida.
Because fennel powder can be
absorbed through the skin.
Fortunately.
They have already adopted what
we've done here and made sure
that nor can was in every police
fifty times more potent than
heroin.
According to the DEA.
More than seventy thousand
people died of overdoses from
drug overdoses and more lives
lost than the combined
equivalent of the US military
personnel killed during the wars
If we've ever seen one.
It is killing more people in our
country than anything else.
But it's final.
They think they're taking
something completely safe.
And then the do an in the
We know where it's coming from.
I don't think there's any
disagreement between the two
parties of where it's coming
from.
It's taken from China to Mexico.
It's maxed New Mexico to make it
into whatever they want to look
like in the.
Do you know where it's coming
from and then it comes across
the border.
We've got to do something about
the southern border.
We really want to get serious
about saving people's lives.
We're not a nation without a
secure border.
We must have a border that is
secure so that this poison.
Will quit coming into our
country and killing our
children.
But if we can cut off the supply
they'll go back to something
safer like you know one.
How many times here thank you
We need to cut this thing off
like you cut off the head of the
snake.
We've got to cut off the supply.
Make them quit sending those
supplies to Mexico.
because New Mexico is the path.
That that'll takes to every
town.
Every.
Thank you Mr president Senator
ran Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president
I want to make people aware that
incredibly toxic deathly toxic
this drug is and how pervasive
something about it next year in
legislation.
Miss that moment and this year
in legislation something we have
to do is.
Make vaping so expensive with
the tax that are use just can't
afford to get there and
something like that will come
forward and the tax proceeds
this but he and I have talked
about.
Maybe doing the impossible but
actually banning vaping in New
economic interests but it
doesn't even come close to the
death and the deaths were having
in our young folks we have to
get rid of the vaping which is
This president I'm all set on
this one thank you.
Senator Gallegos.
all being on screen ward in
Mister president body we had
school board association here in
the capital recently in when I
go over the breakfast served
fatalities students are in their
district and I think it's one of
those things I think Dr center
Hickey for bringing it up that
we really need to look at what
group of students are into the
vaping and they don't know
what's going into it I like the
way Senator Brandt had talked
about it.
Most kids don't realize what's
our nation by closing the border
to protect our students and our
church of our state but it goes
beyond that it would actually
they're catching a lot of it
it's not all of it and when it
gets into our schools it's a
real huge huge disservice to our
children because they do not
with that thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator because.
sorry Senator Griggs thirty five
encompasses Hidalgo County.
Most of the New Mexico Mexico
because those cannot claim to be
blissful and ignorant any longer
because the crisis that has gone
on on the southern New Mexico
border has not.
shooting and murder of officer
Jerry and Jerry state police
officer and our state mourned as
they should to add and to this
day we do when I walked into the
never been acknowledged by
statewide elected officials
because it was so well connected
with the criminal activity
that's happening there on the
border in unfortunately somehow
affiliation really regardless of
where you live in New Mexico or
America this is this is ground
zero where we're at.
sourced they are under funded
there are miles along the Mexico
Mexico New Mexico border that
lacks critical communications
situation it has and the
increase affect how that's
coming over has only made it
worse I encourage anyone to
reach out to the communities of
animus Lordsburg dimming and
being made aware of the
financial crisis I say then so
what now so what there's been a
crisis what are we gonna do
walking watching back home from
from Lordsburg.
All of Luna County almost you
know find this comical that
we're sitting here.
hope that together we can agree
there is a crisis and we
collectively come together to
address it and bring solutions
thank you.
Representative I mean we do have
We're just talking about one
substance and when we talk about
resources to battle all the
substances
you know the funding that has to
behavioral health and raising
that tax
it's going to battle several
things and this is one of them
and we like to think that well
it's just that now but that nose
And we think that just depend
all alone
with that would attach to its
can be enough we have a crisis
throughout
are in that manner those that
think they know what they're
doing and our constituents are
suffering.
From it and our children are
So those substances and I
believe it's alcohol is probably
one of the basis and all these
are built upon it.
So I think that sponsor for.
But if there's not people out
there to do these things and
they're dealing more with these
crisis is inputting Bundy that
they could be spending on other
things than behavioral health
Thank you senator we do have
further debate we have center
quite a Hemphill followed by
Senator the Lopez.
Thank you Mr president ten thank
all the things that were said I
think it's really important to
discussed but I also want to.
the diction but why the pain and
so I really appreciate the words
that Senator Pinto we're sharing
about mental health because
that's the piece that we can't
the states are really getting to
the root causes of these issues
thank you Mr president and thank
you for to the sponsors of this.
sitting here wondering whether I
should raise the fact that we
have so little resources the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee in the
interim task me with a little
white paper about how to raise
first funds that are cut and so
the tax on alcohol the excise
tax on alcohol which is a brave
Tax.
money those funds come in but
they're the first ones to get
cut and so again I just want to
stand in support thanks senator
should not forget that thank you
thank you Mr president.
Si no further debate.
doing was originally going to be
the sponsor of this the memorial
at the request of the City of
Albuquerque following their of
fentanyl awareness summit and
memorial which is not printed
and therefore not read here
does call for a collaborative
collaborative approach among law
but also to work collaboratively
and and and to work in a in a in
a united fashion with local
government as well as the
forty two members of the and the
lieutenant governor be shown as
voting in the affirmative.
Seeing no objection by a vote of
forty three in the Fuhrman is
there on the negatives Center
those who have who have the.
Whose lives were taken by
fentanyl with us today and I'd
like them to stand up and if you
hold your applause until all of
twenty.
Then I have Lisa so the quite.
well who also lost a loved one
so the members join me and in in
welcoming them and thanking them
for taking their sorrow and
the agency consent to go to with
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection one that order
business analysis miscellaneous
and over the I thank you Mr
Albuquerque mayor Tim Keller who
I'm sitting in his old seat here
as it turns out he occupied the
seat for a two years of his six
years in the state Senate and I
know that the last more was
something that he's been working
Senate by the thank you very
much Mr president I think is
back to that order business
third reading of legislation and
those who are following us it is
it's Senate Joint.
Committees of the two Senate
Judiciary Committee says two
percent of bill thirty five and
it's the all the justices to
changes and I yield to senator
Martin Hickey.
for placing Senate bill thirty
five on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
incredible value to the state of
New Mexico there was a bill
passed I think it was
Senator Ivy Soto ten years ago
to initiate.
anesthesia person in the state
we are now at that ten year
period where that bill is
sunsetting and so what this bill
A supervised by the medical
board working in all hospitals
in all class state counties not
sixteen other states it raises
the supervision by an
anesthesiologist from three to
one two four to one so that we
know from miss so many other
medical school has to go through
and then they have two years in
which state receive a master's
degree Spence out thousands of
that allows anesthesia
assistants to become a permanent
feature in New Mexico and when I
finish I would also when we
so I'm now open to debate thank
you thank you senators are
debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five Senator Ivey
Soto.
order to order to enable
anesthesiologists need
assistance to be able to
practice in a limited setting in
New Mexico.
Is is we do a better job I think
of empowering our mid level
health care professionals are
the most of the places and.
Is something that will reduce
the time for people have
surgeries it will enable medical
procedures to take place there's
a provision that takes place
with us
bringing this bill I'm happy to
support.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ortiz beat.
from two groups of mid level
practitioners of dealing with
the seizure of the anesthesia.
The the anesthesiologist
assistants and the certified
groups was resolved and in what
way it was worked up.
Senator thank you senator Ortiz
Pino for bringing this up I I
nurse anesthetists and what's
wonderful is that well anything
in health care it's it's always
a little difficult between
learned to work together so well
and that we had some.
Differences and and sites that
we work all that through and I
really want to commend the
will put you there two years now
anyway Senator Senator Padilla
and I along with the eight of
the organization came together
few changes to make in Judiciary
and I just I'm I'm so pleased to
have this initial experience
working something through with a
fellow senator and really
Senator and I also Mr president
want if the anesthesia
assistant senator Senator Hickey
we are on third reading we're
still debating all I'm sorry
well that was senator
participate does have the floor
they just swept right through
but there is a lot of work that
went into negotiating with these
among these two groups both of
which are highly valued and I
registered nurse of.
Anaesthetists will be able to
work in in all the rural
counties or is it the other way
around Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes thank you the
certified nurse anesthetist
certainly work in those counties
but they also work in the Ruhr
other world class a past be
we do have further debate with
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Hickey for bringing this
bill and on behalf of all the a
going to bring up the C. R. N.
A.
kind of tension that existed at
the front of the session and on
the scope of practice you know
able to move forward and in a
way that helps patients across
the state so I know the As in in
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with the
would have the population to be
able to use with the one and for
is that the reason we're keeping
it that way.
We're keeping it that way
because the anesthesia
and the essentially with the
shortage of anesthesiologists
getting them into class B.
I just want to clarify that you
know this is an issue that's
long overdue me and Senator
Griggs worked on this when we
were part of the public affairs
UNM they're good enough to work
everywhere under the proper
supervision and so I appreciate
you bringing this and glad were
faint finally getting this
available or could looking madam
chair Mister president I
thoroughly enjoyed working with
Senator Hickey on this on this
legislation and all the folks
that brought came together both
the As in the C. R. A.'s as you
really works for all of New
Mexico including the most rural
parts of New Mexico and I want
to thank Senator Hickey for his
hard work on this thank you
thank you center for the any
further debate senators.
And ask unanimous consent of the
Senate for Senate bill thirty
five that the record show that
the rules been called and all
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Thank you Mr president and we'll
do introductions later thank
you.
Senate we we can do that this
moment you can go ahead and
introduce your guest.
Senator Jackson okay thank you.
Thank you Mr president I would
get a actually before we go on
to our next item
president thank you Senator
Padilla thank you senator Ortiz
Pino and now anesthesia
assistants who are doing an
here to with with hearings that
didn't get all the way through
they've just been phenomenal and
that kind of dedication is a
dedication you're going to see
just a pleasure to have here
working in the state of New
Mexico that.
miscellaneous reason I broke Mr
president with third reading is
I want to let the the members of
the body know that if you are
purchased photos for the class
photo or any of your individual
photos you can pick those up in
Senator Tallman centers where
that order business serving
legislation and that's item
number two on your calendar
Senate bill sixty three
appointed executive office
Senate bill sixty three on final
passage is been taken and it is
now subject to debate.
I meant and substitution no
Of positions such as a
superintendent of schools and
the.
She soon city managers but this
Permit the publication of all
names of everyone who applies
for these high level public
official positions the bottom
line Mr president is that.
You can
Job that is why many
organizations higher in the
disclosed they say forget it.
The opposition claims that we
are attracted multiple
candidates they're doing a good
job successfully somewhere else
nationally for.
Police chief they only got one
candidate from a big city.
They have received a.
It was a top level position he
was system working in the
community relations division the
last time APS one out for.
York and he was unemployed at
the time.
Also the last time Los crucis
would offer school
superintendent they didn't
receive one application from a
name one person that is served
in a high level position in New
Mexico has gone on to a better
and bigger position.
Sure this may not be the perfect
of this far outweigh the
negative aspects.
There are multiple organizations
university presidents UNM.
N. A. T. S. just to name a few.
So Mister president this bill
So thank you Mr president.
I stand for a.
Your question thank you Mr
Tomlinson as we're debating
Senate bill sixty three.
Senator with the supply to
governor appointees.
Mr president center actually
not.
Mr president Sir one.
Mr president Senator is a
publicly appointed position
Jeff.
Senator Brandt doesn't apply to
publicly appointed positions or
does.
Mr president senator I think
that's a flaw in the bill.
No the if the but I mean they're
political appointees then maybe
department of education you know
things like the department of
transportation and on all these
things.
Shouldn't we know who the
And the Senator we
None of the states that we
Mr president Senator I I
although I think it's a great
idea I'm afraid if we put that
in there your bill would get
vetoed and so I'm not going to
is that they were political
positions and we've now had for.
in Lawson well just a little
over four years so I do think
because I don't want your bill
to die with the veto so thank
you madam president and very
glad to see you up there and Sir
Center K. cups.
Thank you madam president in
center would you yield for this
Okay from the settlement of
present and it's okay
absolutely.
significant issue and it brings
up that although the bill does
not applaud all applicants only
finalist there may still be
Senator Tallman.
Thank you repeat the question
again.
President senator please repeat
the question.
applicants only finalists there
may still be a concern regarding
privacy of the finalists and I
was just trying to find out
madam president center if you
Madam presence Senator I I see
it is a significant issue it's
during your FIR and and all
The seeing no other debate
senator Clemente close.
Madam president I move the
affirmative except those voting
and negative show of hands the
Senators we are voting on Senate
bill sixty three.
Roll call.
The clerk will call the roll.
Senator Baca center Baca votes
knows Senator Brandt.
interest about this Senator
Vontaze votes yes center
diamond.
Senator Diamond both snow Center
do heck yes Senator Duhigg both
Senator Griggs votes yes Center
Hamlin.
Senator Hamblen votes yes center
Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill votes yes
Senator Ivey Soto both CS Center
our meal Senator meal votes no
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan votes no center
Lopez.
Centerman yes centerman yes
votes yes internet fail.
Senator Neville both CS intro
now.
Pinto yes center pandemic about
CS Center pearl.
Senator Pirtle votes snow Center
pope.
Centrist maintenance votes yes
interested DO Lopez yes centers
to develop is both CS Center
share.
Center share both CS Center
Senator Stefano X. votes yes
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn both snow Center
Stuart yes Senator Stewart both
CS Center Thoman yes etcetera
Senator Woods votes yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt both snow Center
for.
Senator Burt both CS.
By a vote of thirty one in the
Senator Sedillo Lopez for the
next third reading.
Let us know who that expert is
did not only Wilson.
Seeing no objection a search of
Senator Sedillo Lopez on third
reading thank thank you madam
Senator Sedillo Lopez to explain
the bill.
Thank you madam president.
option for children and creates
early parole eligibility for
those serving long adult
sentences for crimes committed
when they were children.
I got a letter this morning.
Particularly when a life is lost
we mourn with those who mourn.
And when the person who caused
the harm repents and shows that
our songs the firm that every
child is loved by god they are
precious in his sight.
Every child matters every child
is worthy of our care and
This letter was signed by the
members of the New Mexico
conference of churches and
includes faith leaders and and
the churches from throughout the
state Presbyterian Lutheran
There have been changes to the
bill since last we saw it.
We work diligently during the
interim session to change the
the same we're ending life
without parole as a sentencing
option for children and we're
creating developmentally meeting
full timing of parole for those
serving long adult sentences for
Now in rare and extreme cases
parole eligibility will be set
at twenty or twenty five years.
For first degree murder other
than felony murder an individual
not will not be eligible for
are eligible for consideration
for parole these changes reflect
an effort to account for the
heightened consequences in
extreme cases.
would continue with that I I
turned to my co sponsor.
Senator o'neill.
Thank you Senator nail thank you
to Senator Sedillo Lopez and the
folks behind this effort
meetings reaching out which is
the right thing to do with any
to two victims concerns to
district attorney's concerns you
know it's not as if
realistically you can't expect
everybody G. and this a great
sponsored by Senator Pirtle that
that really I believe is
symbolic of this whole effort
and so all I know is it's the
right thing to do you know it's
the victims and it's important
that we listen to the victims
you know but at the same time
we're policymakers and I feel
I I I I'm honored to be a co
sponsor thank you.
Thank you further debate Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you madam president and I
just wanted to thank the
sponsors and for the Judiciary
Committee of not able to be
consecutive arses concurrent
sentences which I think did
improve the bill and take a lot
of my concerns with it thank you
madam president thank you other
debate on the bill.
There were three kids from
Farmington that brutally
murdered people brutally
murdered.
They were given life in prison
which million thirty years.
pretty young they were forty
seven when they got out.
One of them still lives in
Farmington a little kind of as
of leper.
church wasn't long enough.
Wasn't long enough.
We also have another another guy
He got the same sentence my mind
he was self defense.
But I would on the jury.
We have another guy.
Today he's a model prisoner
everything you hear about him
he's the guy that.
That the families have not
recovered from that.
So can we forgive him yes.
And the families still have to
live with that today.
I understand where this is going
in in in this this particular
guy I think this is exactly guys
they're talking about because
now he's more a model he helps
So I'm still torn on this but I
don't think I'm going to support
it.
Because I think the victims are
ignored here.
particular case these cases the
one guy I think the service our
forgiveness.
The first three that I talk
about they actually didn't ask
This is a this is a troubling
issue for me and I will admit
that.
But I do think the victims have
to be considered in this and
And I just I'm it troubles me
but for the victim sake I think
I'm going to vote no.
Yes madam president I will yield
seals.
Madam presence Senator just got
a couple questions so.
I'm sort of troubled with that I
I thought in law we could go
back in remove any kind of
penalties.
Matt madam secretary us madam
This is affecting sentences that
have already been imposed so
it's not affecting it's not
affecting somebody
sentences that happens for
example when a of Supreme Court
finds a certain law
unconstitutional or in this case
if we pass a law about the
if you recall we also affected
convictions of of marijuana
people who'd been convicted for
only marijuana so it is
something that isn't within the
lost power to do
Thank you for that madam
president Senator so could you
tell me how many juveniles we
have New Mexico prisons right
now.
who will be affected by this
bill.
Madam president and senator I
was asking about juveniles is
there a difference then press.
Six.
Madam president we don't know
how many of them are still
our analyst shows that there's
zero juveniles in New Mexico
state prisons and so madam
president Seri here discussion
Madam presence Senator so in our
analysis shows that there are
zero.
Juveniles New Mexico prisons are
correct statement and president
center.
That is because madam president
that there there are no
juveniles right now serving life
five madam president serving in
prisons in adult prisons for
crimes they committed while they
were juveniles.
Thank you for that Madam
presence Senator then I would
Madam president this would
affect the people who committed
seventy five how many are up for
parole currently in that
building that they're such young
age they would not be is that
right and present Sen.
parole life a life sentence find
for parole after thirty years.
Thank you for that matter what
madam president what this bill
does is it limits the option for
presence Senator than mine at
last question is do they still
get good time so if they madam
president Senator had a thirty
year sentence with the cat could
question was would the state be
eligible for good.
Madam president.
will be eligible under under
this bill they'll be eligible
for parole in fifteen years in
twenty years or in twenty five
I I was madam president center I
was under the impression I did a
bill years ago and a lady
called lashed out because
Breanna Lopez her mother was
required time because a good
time but then president center
you're telling me that does not
exist.
there is no good time for for
because of the complications in
the ages I thank you for the
time and present a yield.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator my S..
keels thank you madam president
gentle lady of.
We appreciate the debate I'm
sure would have forty two
opinions on this on this bill
but only two choices I stand in
in strong support of the bill
Or are they merely have the
opportunity to apply for parole.
Madam president that's the it's
it.
Thank you madam president gently
and then also is there.
Is there a juveniles who are
excluded from this this act or.
said there there's a tier system
here and so
if the tier system is that it
would be fifteen years for
violent crimes.
somebody who commits multiple
murders.
Thank you thank you madam chair
gently that's that's what I
recall of thanks refresh my
memory that
articulated in the statue rather
they can then be tried as an
adult of fourteen year olds can
also be tried as an adult for
the crime of first degree murder
so we're talking about children
decision and then the court has
a decision whether to sentence
someone as an adult or a child
if someone is sentenced as a
child the maximum penalty can
twenty wanted to we send some
till.
You know without the possibility
of parole.
And that's a difficult decision
to make this one actually I
believe because if we put a
appropriately in the in the in
the adult system if you create a
homicide regard to how young you
are in my opinion you should be
census in the adult system and
so victims of folks are
If you're concerned about the
victims this may can help you
know one or two defense on the
margin to get out you know
twenty years or fifteen years
later also consider that and
That you're supervising without
any hope of getting out.
That person has zero incentive
to behave zero incentive to
Of the but if someone has a
flicker of hope if someone
possibly can get out in twenty
years that's going to curve
behavior a lot and so if you
talk to the correctional
incentivize
good behavior for those folks
who have zero incentive to
behave and lastly madam chair of
madam president
It's about how do we.
conduct ourselves in a civilized
society in a modern society here
in New Mexico how do we create
getting out of this image is
just not who we are as New
Mexicans thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator any other
debate on Senate bill sixty four
because of the reminded of our
mortality our inability to to
predict what one person or what
we ourselves I do in the future.
Woods when somebody is a child.
We should to treat them
differently than when they're an
adult and no matter how brutal
the crime might have been
Not totally mature not totally
free from the effects of
hormonal.
Pressures whatever they are
there's a lot of difference
this this makes a lot of sense
it doesn't require somebody who
hasn't learned who hasn't been
proved to us and changed who
isn't ready to be released out
Predictive you know the the
notion that you can definitely
predict something about somebody
into the future takes that out
of the equation because we
when you lock somebody up in a
prison.
We're paying a lot of money for
nothing we get nothing from
them.
would benefit so this I think is
a is a smart Bill I would hope
the members would join Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Senator nielen
in backing it thank you madam
support the bill issue.
And when we do we see different
things as we go along we see the
fact that the sponsor worked
or support the bill
me those are positive things
with these are challenging
questions for all others.
didn't do something that put us
in a bad spot.
There are there are numerous
ones a yes in jail right now and
When we talk about the the issue
that occurred that put them
where they are.
There's numerous things the
And I don't know of a judge
it's not infallible.
Show what the judge to do in one
cage.
Winds up in a situation that is
intermountain will.
And another one does not.
and or an individual that could
benefit or at least have the
opportunity for a whole it may
not have that to.
that it's hard to justify any
short of early relation.
But
I think if we as we hear a
hope that we will make the right
one and that the
the individuals and the parole
board takes its duty.
people
and when there's those
opportunities
to give those people hoping that
that can occur thank you madam
for.
No we we're speaking madam
president earlier about.
About should we consider.
Sentences different for.
that separates juveniles and
that determination is actually
listed on page twelve I believe.
sentence madam president.
That determination the illest
out has eight.
Eight categories with many many
different factors listed there
these are serious questions
serious questions undertaken by
a judge.
So after this determination this
link the determination with all
should be treated as an adult.
And essentially given a sentence
the equivalent to is if an adult
had committed the crime.
All this bill comes down to when
you strip all that away is are
we loosening sentences.
myself to that part of the bill
to to think that that might be a
correct determination that they
should get parole The should not
However.
This bill doesn't do that.
what it does is it a it lowers
that.
Pass the determination that the
judge already made.
And you know the other thing
that was mentioned here is
should as a society individually
we should be that madam
president each one of us should
be forgiving and merciful I
believe that but that is not.
It is a mercy those are things
for an individual those are
things for god those are things
for faith.
feel better about yourself we
hope you do we encourage that.
Through the process but at the
end I need you to get an
education is just that.
I know she's worked very hard
madam president on this bill and
I I can see the developments
since the last iteration.
compromise for so they wouldn't
be here.
But have the playing field been
equal what they oppose it I
would guess they probably would
structured right now and so you
do what you can do Mexicano
it'll less bad.
I simply cannot support this
bill and for those victims thank
you thanks Senator Baca do have
any further debate.
I am really grateful that we
were able to restore some
bipartisan support on this issue
I want to thank Senator Pirtle
What I was telling them about
the existing of practices of the
probe board would not change so
I really appreciate that we are
other stakeholders for prolonged
deep discussion about these
important issues.
And we're proud that we've
arrived at a version of the bill
But we must hold them
accountable in ways that leave
room for their potential to
experience transformation
positive transformation.
SB sixty four does exactly this.
And with that.
Mr president I ask unanimous of
that the record of that the rule
that the records show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
You wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Woods voting no.
Center share voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator smitteez body now.
Senator Ingle voting no.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative a in the negative
colleagues and I I do want to
mention I'm not going to
introduce them but there
individuals up in the gallery
whose families are now offered
hope because of this bill and
I'm sure they're very very happy
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions placing Senate bill
seventy two as amended on final
passage has been taken now
place a fund for our wildlife
quarters act that we passed in
twenty one of the department
transportation game and fish
are priorities to fix so we stop
killing ourselves while life
ruining our vehicles so this
puts in place of fund so that we
this gives us that vehicle I
stand for questions Senator
Stewart Senators we're debating
Senate bill seventy two as
amended Senator Brandt.
I am but my understanding is
this is to provide safe quarters
for for animals to get across
our roadways which actually
really helps us as drivers to
passed several years ago this
just puts the mechanism for us
to get money from the feds to do
that so madam president this
just creates a fund for that the
Senator brand we do have for the
debate we have Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and I
wanted to be sure and let them.
Tim know that I actually read
Senator Stewart Mr president
well I thought it was seven
hundred pages long but you might
be right and I and I have a read
it I certainly have read their
eleven priorities so thank you
this is what this is about and I
did note in that report that
they may not know the benefit of
this for number of years it's
not something we're just going
is expensive and and we have a
lot of needs with our department
of transportation but certainly
I think this is one of them
thank you thank you Senator
predators and lions and Tigers
and bears we won't have an issue
of game crossing the highways in
the future thank you Mr
president.
super valuable to wildlife
because wildlife need large
amounts of habitat in their
territory for reproduction and
just for the existence of their
size of their habitat where they
get to exist so so thank you for
this legislation thank miss
present think centre thank you
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Ingle.
certainly and pickle to support
this bill in my years of here.
I have hit to do here coming
And it's not because
I still haven't caught up with
with put premiums rate of what
it costs them but anything that
going up and down those roads
and
It's just one of those things
that you the dear beautiful in
this country and they're very
Buck deer on the loser heads and
just run around every corner and
thanks to the dark though but
anyway Mr president I certainly
support this bill and hopefully
question Mr Dale not happy to
yield.
Madam protium unnoticed there's
a five million dollars
appropriation to start this fund
would that be required for
more from the feds I believe for
wildlife crossing it's a three
to one match but I'm grateful
that LFC determined that they
would at least put that much and
that's what it is is a three to
one match three three from the
Feds one from us.
And then one more quick question
Senator Mr president it it
really depends in some places
you can make them small and some
they have to be Baker
and we're not just using over
project which is US five fifty
north of Cuba they're asking for
for over passes I underpasses
President Mr president for over
passes I under pass.
So nine for forty five million.
Okay thank you Mr president.
Sinister to close on the bill
thank you Mr president I I
appreciate the conversation
about this very much I move that
for those voting negative by
show of hands Senator seeds
please we're voting on Senate
bill seventy two as amended
creating a wildlife quarter
Fund.
Senator Baca voting no.
By a vote of thirty seven in the
affirmative to in the negative
Senate bill seventy two as
amended has duly passed the
Senate Senator Stewart thank you
thank you so much was present in
the members of the.
forty four is amended that'll be
senator Munoz ran that order
business serving in legislation
able to sentiment us thank you
Mr president us as consent of
the Senate the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Say no objection senator Munoz
to explain the bill.
Mr president and members of the
body a few years ago when we
change the PRC up and we had a
a building that would work for
the PRC and it is the old E. R.
B. building and in statute
because they are a
new building and they will move
in afterwards parking is pretty
much what they have it it
culminates with the need to and
may had need may come back for
center Steinborn Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
with the senator here for
question Senator when USDA
yield.
Mr president center and yes
thank you Mr president center
center can ask for my expert
witnesses from you have the
David Archuleta and other
written and from the PRC.
See see no objections sergeant
Senator Steinborn if you will
there is an appraisal done where
we got a copy the appraisal it
was done on March fifteenth of
twenty twenty two.
In the proposal on the bill it
Senator Steinborn okay Mister
president and senator and.
Sorry is the appropriation in
this bill for two point five
million or to per two point two.
Okay Mister president senator
and and can you tell us why
there is a discrepancy there
center for the appraisal came in
at two point two five and then
the appropriation is for two
point five so I'm just curious
why the amount being
appropriated being requested is
amendment in Senate finance
strip the appropriation of two
point five million sold gonna
put it back in the budget at the
correct amount.
Committee Mr thank you Mr
president what what you're
you senator for those answers.
Thank you Senator Martin.
Any further debate senators.
the Senate do now pass on.
To pass on Senate bill one forty
five as amended and just the
representative the record show
that the rules being called and
bill one forty four and do now
pass and asked as amended and
asks and yes consent of the
Senate the records show the
rules being called and all those
present voting affirmative
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
four as amended has passed the
Senate sentiment us thank you Mr
president I think that was a six
no nose right.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
seventy seven as amended
is on final passage is been
taken that is now subject to
requires is that new home
residential construction be
offered and that was the
amendment offered to have a
photovoltaic or a does D. G.
and that's what it does.
Thank you senator souls.
We do have debates we have
Senator Brandt followed by
Senator share.
Senator Representative thank you
questions I do appreciate the
amendments that you made I think
they made the bill a lot better
I think offering instead of
requiring it it is a much better
that you could add that as an
option to your home is that the
way that would work Senator
sells Mr president Senator could
work in a number of ways the
builder they're building a
number of these may already have
Center right president Senator
by doing that would then be able
to be rolled into your mortgage.
Centers sold Mister president
senator that would depend on
your mortgage company some
companies certainly will roll it
might be a separate kind of a
mortgage there's quite a number
of ways it could work.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator
I said I appreciate the fact
that it's being offered in not
worse especially when some of
the companies and actually you
you have to have a higher credit
rating sometimes to get the
know when I had my home built I
actually had a to twenty plug
put in that's all it is is to
twenty plus I think it cost me
about two hundred dollars to
have one put in the backyard for
really helps and yes Sir sure
that is for my back it's a
medical situation for me it
actually helps me quite a bit
but
brand we do have further debate
we have Senator Schmedes
followed by Senator about this
then Senator Kernan Senator
committee.
Mr president yes.
All right thank you Mr.
Senator serve on this.
Senator Kernan.
amendment that went on in our
committee just curious I I I
know things sometimes when they
go to the other side there are
changes that sometimes we're
Mr president and senator it is
not my intention to try and
encourage that thank you very
much I think I think that I
think it's a good going forward
as it is and and appreciate
And Miss Suazo present senators
so with this affect homes being
constructed currently that have
not been completed.
be retroactive to any current
contract.
In in Mister president senator I
I do have a little bit of a
concern I think you know as we
start to require sentence things
conservative we put things like
this and we mandate that when
someone's building a home or
doing a home that we put in
certain certain things like this
I don't necessarily think that
it's a bad idea I just don't
the sponsor deal please
seneschal jailed yes I do
Senator soles of my vote against
the bill you recall and
conservation committee but it's
been amended and I'm I'm trying
I understand the amendments now
means that with the contractor
would offer to a new home
homebuyers certain things is
that right.
Mr president yes.
to the homebuyer what is the
consequence to the builder for
not offering to to do this.
Mr president I mean they would
be in violation of the law these
those are offered as options if
a homeowner were to complain
that they were supposed to be
offered and worked there and I
suspect there might be some sort
of remedy against the builder.
well too so yeah I I I I get I
think I'll probably support your
bill but I I think it's
important for the members to be
cautious about passing bills
that really have no consequence
so while I appreciate your
have one and so we went when we
introduce some past of things
that tell somebody you should
offer something and then if
there's not a consequence of
that do we have to really ask
things that were hoping to
impose on people and so
required somebody to offer
something and then having no no
consequence really for them
failing to do so should give us
trying to do here rather than
aspiration thanks just wanted to
do have further debate with
seminars thank you Mr president
with these are sponsor you
Mr president and senator I don't
believe there's any cost to
offer the a system of systems
typically and they are regularly
in order to put up there were
some concerns among third couple
of months ago when they were
such supply chain problems but I
think most of those have been
worked out at this point.
for the solar because you're
using any of a two hundred
twenty and probably service to
you do the Chargers so would
that change the electrical
get rid of natural gas and
everybody wants to go to
lectures and I'll use my house
for example my my stoves gas but
electrical fire the amp service
that this may cause to for
builders to resign a house with
a higher amperage or service on
but raising a two hundred amp
service to four AM service on
the house could be costly
especially with low income
housing in if if they're
could get pretty tricky I did
read in the FIR that that C. ID
construction industry is still
having an issue with how to
regulate this rural center have
you talked to see ID and how
them since it was changed to
where it's just offered.
The presence there I think
that's something we need to look
at and see ID because the idea a
but the cost to a homeowner is
going to change even though it's
just an offer right everybody
wants all the bells and whistles
on their home and anything that
careful as we promulgate these I
think centers serve on this.
Cutting it right we're we're
suggesting that they do this
which is not a bad thing but if
someone wants to reduce their
utility bills for twenty years
before I could pay for the the
service of solar so of it's just
an offer I think that but I
think it's going to get very
costly so thank you Mr president
that Senate bill seventy seven
as amended do now pass I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
rules been called and that all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
Senator Griggs voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Byrd voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
I have a lot of twenty three in
the affirmative fifteen the
Been sent here a few years and
we passed things like this on
construction.
And I'm not holding any anything
our construction industry
division we really really need
to go very very slowly on these
things and let sometimes the
that they have to be done and
then many times you have
companies to start manufacturing
products that are
the price may be better the
price may be good but the
duration of the product itself
will be very very shallow thank
you.
homeownership as they will not
have an electric bill and their
total monthly bill will be
reduced thank you.
Essentials.
Senator my compared to take us
to the next order of business
business message from the house
the reader to read this
president I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the house has
passed house bill one twenty six
as amended by the house House
three House Mexico consumer and
public affairs committee
substitute for house bill
seventy three as amended by the
house.
House bill one forty eight and
request the concurrence of the
reiterate.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house joint memorial
six and requests the concurrence
the next order of business thank
you Mr president I think is that
noted next order of business
introduction of legislation.
We're on that order the
business.
introduced by Senator o'neal a
joint resolution ratifying and
approving the sale by the
General Services Department to
Bernalillo county of real
property located at four
Senate joint resolution thirteen
introduced by Senator o'neal.
House joint memorial six
introduced by Representative
Hochman be healed a Joint
Memorial declaring February
twenty second twenty twenty
memorial six having been read
twice by title is referred to.
Is to be placed on the president
stable that's house joint
memorial six to be placed on the
senator Katy M. Duhigg and
Representative D. Wonda Johnson
and act relating to elections
amending and enacting automatic
registration of voting location
prior to voting provisions
defining the unlawful use of
disposition of voter data
mailing labels or special voter
vote upon release eliminating a
requirement that a voter's
registration be cancelled upon
felony conviction and conforming
the restoration of citizenship
enacting the native American
voting rights act to protect
polling place access and address
other election and address other
a general election a regular
regular local election a school
holiday making conforming and
technical changes amending
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary house bill
four.
protecting access to
reproductive and gender
affirming health care providing
for enforcement imposing
affairs committee then Senator
committee that's house bill
seven.
Senator my career takes the next
order of business thank you Mr
president I think his to that
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
twelve or one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
unanimous consent that the rules
we suspended and that the
journal show that all those
present in the morning session
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee there's no
objection it is so ordered
center for the thank you very
Thank you very much Mr president
I move and I've already worked
this out Mr president with the
both sides of the chamber I move
that house joint memorial six B.
not printed not referred to
center by the thank you Mr
president I will take us to that
order business announcements
miscellaneous and that order
business center for the thank
you very much Mr president I
you Mr president I'll take us to
that next order of business
third reading of legislation.
When that order is is there a
legislation center for the thank
you Mr president
Thank you Mr president may I
restate my motion Maria.
Thank you Mr president I move
explain thank you very much Mr
president for members of the
body we did act on this Senate
version of this measure earlier
today
Anyone wishing debate.
See none Senator by the end of
close thank you very much Mr
president was a very robust
Reminder to those who are
participating virtually gonna
Five of thirty six affirmative
you're on the negative house
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
This present your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Benny Shendo junior chairman.
Of the.
I've moved it.
thank you all other four glasses
of.
read.
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill one thirty two that it do
not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for some
Senate bill two twenty I do
pass.
And that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee and further
recommends that it not be
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill two fifty one do
pass as amended and thence
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill seventeen without
recommendation and that's
referred to the Judiciary.
Senate bill one forty three to
pass and then just referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Benny Shendo junior chairman
Senator Shendo I move adoption
adopted the journal show that
they were acted upon
individually.
The reader to read.
Mr president your rules
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two ninety
Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator Hotmail Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports but we
pass and that's referred to the
health and public affairs can.
Senate bill one eighty six do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance.
Senate bill three ninety one to
Senator Hemphill I move adoption
of the committee report Senator
there's a motion to adopt
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye
those opposed may.
The committee report has been
adopted.
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill four
hundred has had it under
consideration and report same
without recommendation and
that's referred to the finance
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually
hearing no objection the reader
to read.
Senate bill forty one without
recommendation and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
submitted senator William P.
souls chairman Senator cells I
move adoption the committee
report centers we have a motion
to adopt the committee report
all those in favor signify by
Senator Mike with the to take us
to the next order of business
thank you very much Mr president
thanks to that the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous and if chairs
would like to make some
announcements that be great we
are in that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
please be probably have a hard
stop at five so three to five
Senate judiciary today thank
you.
Senator C. Cepeda thank you Mr
president Senator health and
have to get home in order to
watch it the we have built by
Senators how to meal Lopez
Pirtle said he'll Lopez to fed
ex.
right away maybe get out in time
for the game thank you Mr
president I guess there's a
subpoena Center semantics thank
you Mr president all members of
the Senate are invited to hear
rights and they will be about a
half hour available for
questions and answers and we
invite you to come before we
move into our bills thank you
very much.
they're looking at so by all
means feel free to be there at
ten thank you Senator o'neill
center many of us.
Senator Costa the Santo ni O.
deals just as vice chair of in
in in rural cultural affairs I
yield.
and find out I don't know like I
I kind of know what that is but
boy that is an interesting title
and that's and Senator Pirtle
and senator Joshua Sanchez.
the goal posts home designers
and a hand offer Mr president I
do believe it has something to
do with the Super Bowl so I
don't think it's every Monday is
a legal holiday but it has to do
Senator yes Mr presence and you
know what a legal holiday costs
the state in New Mexico daily Mr
president I'm ready to do it
here this bill and keep an open
mind you're making some
is present that's interesting
billion here and and so it's
interesting to me of members on
your we handed out a sheet today
the junior bill came out of
think we've got everybody
cleared up because we're not
having anybody squawk to just
about any issue the junior but
verify that everything is there
and the sheet and it's by agency
anything F. it's already there
so we won't want any amendments
on the bill we just need to make
everything from salaries to
hunting and fishing to a
firefighting to take PED to the
you know funds in federal funds.
Office but today I think the
governor's office will have
their matches back to us we'll
try to get those to you either
Start filling our capital sheets
as we move forward so you guys
all know where who that if they
exec once part you are not and
get that that bill bills in the
house and then move it over to
the Senate for our projects
I think that's very critical
that we get capital dining out
Let's say at three o'clock today
at three thirty thank you
senator Senator just for
clarification for those who are
participating through web cast
the the junior bill that you
refer to flexibility over.
