There are Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Integrate.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Center my **** Center McKenna
here Senator Moores.
Centerman yes Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Etcetera pulp.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Center Thomas.
I think you just and that was.
At.
We're missing one Mister
president senators we're lacking
a quorum.
invocation to be led today by
brother John Shannon order the
Celtics insistence at St mark's
seminary.
And remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
but the.
Good morning ladies and
gentlemen and thank you for the
honor of offering a prayer today
and the story chamber.
those among us who enjoy the
great abundance offered here.
Let us not forget those less
fortunate members of our
community who have both material
In the name of the father the
son and the Holy Spirit.
In the silence of our hearts
unspoken words let us give
rejected for those who suffer in
justice today for men and women
who cannot provide food for
their families and for whole
communities who fear today and
table drink for the sole shelter
in the night and open arms to
welcome us the blessings of
heaven the blessings of earth
every human family.
Lord grant the power of wisdom
and discernment to the men and
women in this chamber is they
continue their important work
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
Good morning once again Senators
thank you for joining us today
and I'll turn it over.
for your service again we
appreciate it and.
Just those moments of pause are
a good thing so I really
appreciate you being here
silence for center gave us but
let's just hold on on that we'll
wait till we get everyone in for
that I just think that's a very
important thing a couple of
announcements today is swept
want to one day and department
To hear the state of the
judiciary our Chief Justice
Shannon Bacon will be there and
we'll see if we maybe Dawn and
our beloved staff member the
well of Fernandes who passed
away there's funeral
arrangements have been maybe
ten thirty A. M. is the mass at
the cathedral basilica of St
Francis a reminder regarding
financial reports those are due
one week from today you need to
taken today and tomorrow or when
you need to be there to get
photos taken you're responsible
for scheduling that on your own
time starts at eight o'clock
registration transactions
they're going to be in the house
lounge from eight to noon and
one thirty to five today and
tomorrow others a memo that was
sent out that has information on
that if you have questions call
law maker presentation and
luncheon in room three eleven at
noon.
The New Mexico auto dealers in
New Mexico roadie assess
Association the New Mexico
Legislature dinner at the la
Fonda hotel in the Lankan's
bowling from six to nine o'clock
that's by invitation also the
hickory Apache nation provided
dinner is at the end of Loretta
Lady of Guadalupe parish hall
starting at seven AM by
invitation with that members I'd
yield for any announcements yet
Thank you Mr president also
would like to excuse if you
folks this morning six using
Senator Katie Duhigg until she
returns to the chamber also need
to excuse.
Senator Gregg Schmedes Senator
William I'm sorry bill souls.
And I think that's it for the
moment thank you thanks center
by the.
last night it was hard to get up
this morning I think it was a it
was a real heartbreaker but.
We must for John we must forge
ahead in any case and I would
like Mr president and members to
of ornament and clay ornament
those have been brought to you
by
wings for life the program in.
incarcerated in the imprisoned
and with the returning citizens
when they come out and tries to
help them with all the needs
that they might have it upon
their return from being in
is with us today and she has a a
a strong advocate with her as
well of the person that many in
this chamber will recognize.
wings for life with with the
various activities and so with
the members please join me in
welcoming those two of my guests
today wings for life president
and and feel sweet and former
a guest with me a visitor one of
my constituents a self taught
street poet adventurer world
Thanks energy Sabina center how
to meal Mr president I yield to
senator Ortiz the people Senator
stand up and be welcome to the
New Mexico Senate.
Senator had a meal Mr president
unanimous consent to introduce a
apprenticeship training
committee Bobby Baca a good
friend of mine the vice
president of the international
brotherhood of electrical
apprentice local union six
eleven has four hundred
craftsmen and women working in
Los Alamos which as you know Mr
president as part of my Senate
district there are two thousand
welcome my guests to the Senate
chamber.
stroke recently as a young
little girl is she's at UNM
hospital Thiago rights stroke
survivors did not have excellent
odds for making a full recovery
ask for a few minutes of silence
as we pray for young anti.
Senator can please rise for a
moment of silence.
Other announcements we have
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president a
unanimous consent interest
officer starting the enlisted
ranks like myself intelligence
officer in a foreign service
officer as well lives on the
east mountain cedar crest and
I see no further announcements
Senator Wirth.
You Mr president so again I do
our senator John sapien his
father has had a number of
health issues and commissioner
sapien was always here on
opening day was always good to
see him and I just thank I'd
go over at noon I think at this
point what we'll do is go to the
introduction of legislation and
and again we'll take a pause
when our our Republican caucus
legislation the reader will
read.
Senate bill nine introduced by
senators Neville and worth and
act relating to conservation
creating the conservation legacy
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate conservation committee
then Senate finance Senate bill
nine Senate bill one seventy six
response recovery and hazard
mitigation and cost share
requirements of state and
federal funding programs
increasing the annual transfer
from the New Mexico area ation
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
conservation committee events
Senate finance Senate bill one
seventy six Senate bill one
treatment in New Mexico and
creates a substance abuse
treatment plan aimed at
addressing the substance abuse
treatment needs in this state
Senate bill one ninety.
finance Senate bill one ninety.
Senate bill one ninety four
introduced by Senator Tallman
and act relating to private
sector retirement aligning
provisions of the New Mexico
definitions in the New Mexico
work and save act requiring
certain employers to register as
participating employers and to
automatically enroll their
employees in the New Mexico work
ninety four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business the
transportation committee events
Senate finance committee Senate
water protection permanent fund
creating the water protection
fund making appropriations
Senate bill one ninety five
Senate bill one ninety five
having been read twice by title
act relating to fireworks
amending the fireworks licensing
and safety act to allow the
governor or in certain
circumstances a more or board of
county commissioners to
bill one ninety six Senate bill
one ninety six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one ninety
creating the infrastructure
planning and development office
providing powers and duties.
Making the director of the
office of the chair of the
making an appropriation Senate
bill one ninety seven.
Senate bill one ninety seven
having been read twice by title
act relating to lotteries
amending the New Mexico lottery
Act providing for the anonymity
of lottery winners providing
penalties Senate bill one ninety
Senate bill one ninety eight.
Senate bill one ninety nine
introduced by senators woods and
diamond and act relating to
ninety nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee vents
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one ninety nine.
Senate bill two hundred
for professional services that
involve a regional water project
with an estimated cost of more
than five hundred million
dollars Senate bill two hundred
Senate bill two oh one
introduced by senators bill
Nelson Tallman for the
legislative finance committee
and act relating to state
government enacting the state
powers and duties creating the
government accountability
coordinating council
transferring functions money
records person property and
contracts pertaining to audit
Committee vents Senate finance
committee Senate bill two oh
one.
Senate bill two oh two
introduced by senator Munoz and
institutions Senate bill to to
Senate bill to to having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
department of health to collect
and report demographic and
compensation data on
developmental disabilities
direct support provider agency
employees amending the section
three having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee then
Senate finance Senate bill two
or three Senate Bill tool for
of workers of the employee
leasing contractor be treated as
a single employer welfare
benefit plan Senate bill two oh
Thence Senate judiciary Senate
Bill tool for.
Senate bill two oh five
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
is an act relating to taxation
the Senate tax business
transportation committee events
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two oh five Senate bill two
oh six introduced by Senator
Hamblen and act relating to
natural resources department to
distribute federal grants to non
governmental entities and
individuals selected by the
federal government for programs
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two oh six Senate
bill two oh seven introduced by
senators metes and Senator
Diamond and act relating to
Senate bill two oh seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health public affairs
committee.
Thence Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two oh
seven.
Senate Bill to await introduced
application or website by state
and state employees or
contractors on state government
devices or networks requiring
the executive legislative and
Senate bill two oh eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee vents
Senate Judiciary Senate bill two
article I section two in article
seven section five of the
constitution of New Mexico to
require primary elections for
election and to require instant
runoffs by ranked choice voting
to be used for general elections
for all partisan offices Senate
joint resolution seven.
vents Senate judiciary Senate
joint resolution seven.
Senate memorials seven
in celebration of community food
and farm initiatives toward
ending hunger and strengthening
the statewide food system Senate
Senate memorial eight introduced
by senators McKenna how to meal
Pinto pope and Shendo and others
Several more late having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee and
Senate Judiciary that center
recipient Hiroshi H. Zamora for
his patriotism and a life lived
with honor Senate memorial nine
central moral line having been
read twice by title is ordered
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
will be in tomorrow at eleven
o'clock so now the a time for
committee chairs to make
announcements about committees
tomorrow and I understand the
wanted to do a moment of silence
for Senator guy a goes so we'll
just wait for him to get in to
do that but I see we've got some
reps coming in the door as well.
Some of arms.
Representative Bob.
Why.
Good morning the Senate governor
for joining us with a message
from the house the message has
been received and I'll turn it
over to senator Wirth to then
turn it over to Senator Brandt
before leaving and I believe
have a Senator Shendo is got an
announcement and then I'll make
a motion that going to committee
the whole Senate Mr president if
I could have the body join me
Center box Senator Gallegos
mother passed away early this
morning and so we just want to
pray for him the family as they
go through this time father god
we just thank you so much that
you are a god who comforts god
who.
Father I I've gone through this
recently myself and I know how
hard it is and how difficult it
can be.
But we know that.
Working and all the mess they
have to go through this give
them the strength in the comfort
bring David back to safely just
and we pray.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Senator Shendo thank you Mr
president.
These your Senate tax business
the transportation committee
will be meeting at one thirty
thank you thank you passionate
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president Senate
Education Committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at nine
hearing that bill
but that is not a clock tomorrow
morning room three eleven thank
you Mr president thank you
Center souls Senator many of us.
waiting for one agreement on the
house and and they're moving a
little slower trying to put oil
over there and they just keep
resting up and so if they don't
have their stuff ready tors in
Google doc she will help you
fill out staff and Senate
finance can help you fill it out
they're completely different
guidelines so so be prepared
we're gonna put money in non
the other thing is next week
Senate finance will be eating
lunch at a school cafeteria.
And so we're checking the school
meal and gives a good experience
provided so it'll be a fun trip
maybe we'll have the state
police Senator Stewart show for
us.
And and have a school lunch and
and French fries.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Munoz.
Center how to meal thank you Mr
president just a reminder that
the Senate rules committee will
Mr president thank you senator
Senator Ortiz subpoena.
Thank you Mr president and the
Senate health and public affairs
committee meeting will be
tomorrow afternoon a half hour
senators to fed ex Hickey the
Tallman Sedillo Lopez Baca and
Si no further nonsense Senator
Wirth thank you Mr presidents I
ask unanimous consent the Senate
resolve itself into a committee
of the whole Senate for the
tomorrow morning Hey no
objections the Senate will now
resolve itself into a committee
the whole we will meet read out
here in this section of the the
chamber and the Senate having no
