Position. If you're online,
please let the zoom operator now
if you are here, please go to
the table over there and let Mr
he Oh, no.
Um, but otherwise, Senator go
ahead and proceed. Thank you,
Madam Chair and I'm gonna just
this so I don't blow anyone's
ear out there. Senator Michael
Padilla. I'm here to carry the
confirmation for Theresa Casado,
Those for C. Y F D Cabinet
secretary.
Um, I will tell the committee
ahead of time as I publicly
disclosed many times in the 12
years that I've been here. I
have a very close connection to
this department. I did grow up
in the foster care and a number
of other issues when we were
growing up here in New Mexico
lived in seven different
counties in the All faiths home
in Albuquerque. And so I have a
special place in my heart for
what happens with the Children
that are affected by this
department.
And I ask all of you to do the
same as I know you do. I know
that we have a lot of very
powerful voices where C Y f D is
concerned, And I think that we
have to have somebody leading
this organization that can
process all of that. Listen to
it, figure out what's noise and
what is actionable and I think
that we have found someone
that's able to do that now.
Um, I just want to tell you a
little bit about our country
this morning and and the reason
why I support her.
Number one. You probably are not
going to find another person in
state government that has the
vast knowledge and experience of
how to get things done. And so
if there's something that I
leave you with this morning
before you hear from the comfrey
and you hear from the people
behind me, and that is that this
person knows how to get things
done, and this department
requires both real time. Quick
action, timed and
And and thoughtful action for
the future. And I think that
we're going to be in very good
hands here. Um, Teresa, I'm just
gonna Madam chair. If it's
alright with you, I'm gonna
refer to her as Theresa because
I think that's a great way to
talk about someone who has a
personal relationship with the
work that she is going to be
doing. Um, she has a bachelor's
degree in business
administration and management,
which has served her very well
and all the roles that she's
had.
She has over 20 years'
experience in state government
as the director of operations
and human resources. She's been
a director. I'm sorry, deputy
Chief of Staff a deputy Cabinet
secretary of program coordinator
Project manager, director of
operations director of senior
services chief operating
officer, most recently across
the vast, you know, engine that
is state government.
And now for the past eight or so
months, 6 to 8 months she's been
acting as the Cabinet secretary.
I want to let you know that in
all of those roles she has had
multiple hundreds, probably
thousands of interactions with
this particular department and
now that she's been leading it
for a period of time. She's sort
of fitting right in like, you
know, like a glove there, um
And I will tell you that, um, we
we need somebody who knows again
how to get things done. There's
going to be marshaling of
resources from multiple state
departments in order to get the
work done for this department,
and so I think she's going to be
able to do that for us. And so
as I am, you know told you about
my connection to this
department. I typically am asked
to carry confirmations. I rarely
do I
Uh, raised my hand and say, I
want to do this. And so, madam
chair and members of the
committee I want you to know I
called Teresa and I called the
governor and said, I think you I
think we're finally where we
need to be where this department
is, and I would volunteer to do
this and so in that effort and
volunteering this way, I I did.
I heard a lot of themes from
both sides of the aisle as we
were. You know, this was getting
into sort of like the public
town square if you will.
Members of the Democratic caucus
members of the Republican caucus
and some of those themes are
this. Um some of the questions I
was asked, You know what is
going to be different? What's
different about this particular
individual? I think right out of
the gate. We're going to see a
reorganization that listens to
all parties across the state.
She's already gotten into bus.
If you will, and driven up and
down. I 2540 gotten off of the
main thoroughfares and right
into the deeper parts of our
state to listen to people, I
think right away out of the
gate.
That's very different.
She's building an organization
and structure.
And a team that modernizes how a
cases handled from start to
finish and looking at it from a
methodical standard. Also
believe that you know what's
different is she is more than
willing to accept help. As a
matter of fact, she's asking for
help.
Every conversation I've had with
her every interaction I've seen
her having with multiple
individuals and multiple
meetings that we've been in
together. She wants everybody to
be a part of the solution here,
and I think that's also very
different instead of a timed
approach to this or that, or
whatever. She wants this to
everyone to be involved in this
The next theme strategic
planning.
Um, she right now isn't just
going to drop a big, you know,
Phone book of a strategic plan
in our desks. You know, she she
is working very hard to first
build a framework, which is a
very good approach to it by
listening to others and then
making it adjustable and real
time. Some of the strategic
questions that she's asking is
what is this department needs to
look like in the short work term
while we're reconfiguring it,
redesigning it re implementing
it.
And then medium and long range
planning for all the things that
have to come into play here from
human resources, and how do we
develop people to technology and
what technology can be used to
streamline the work of this
team? The funding that may be
available or not available? And
what does she need to make this
work? And then, of course,
bringing in what I call in my
business? We call them SMEs
subject matter Experts or the
department might need additional
Brain power to solve a
particular issue. Particular
individuals are coming back into
roles that did very well in the
past, and they're bringing new
individuals into this department
for the future.
Second of the third theme is
focused on child well being.
She's helping to create. She
helped us to create the early
childhood education and care
department that I carried and
also one of your senior analysts
here because we wanted to take
early education basically out of
the emergency room and allow C Y
F D to focus on its core
mission, And so that's exactly
what Theresa helped us to get
done there. You know she's
looking at family services and
families that are in crisis.
It's not just about caring for
and loving and hugging and
raising the child that may be
affected. There's services all
around that child that need to
happen for that family in order
to successfully lift them up
into the next stage of their
lives. Focus on child well
being. She's developing
strategies and policies that
will help when a child is being
essentially extracted from a
home at two in the morning, and
possibly PTSD is setting in and
that's going to stay with that
kid the rest of their life.
She is working really hard to
wrap around the services that
are going to happen to care for
that child so that they're not
immediately taken. You know, to
a conference room that may be
cold and sterile and
uncomfortable. She's looking for
ways to make that that change
for that very gentle.
Life and experience for that
child, something that leads them
to something positive rather
than being treated like more of
a A, you know something that
someone that that that is not
cared for, So I just think this
is gonna be one of the critical
elements that we're going to get
from this cabinet secretary.
The next theme is a focus on
employees.
Um, if you work at C Y f D right
now, you probably don't want to
turn on the TV or read the paper
because every little while
you're being blamed for
everything, and so, Theresa
being a 20 year veteran of state
government, she understands that
and she is looking for ways and
she's committed to building a
work environment that promotes
employee wellness and self care.
Um, somehow, both of my sons
wound up becoming masters of
social work and something that
I've learned and I hear this
from Teresa all the time, and
that is self care for these
employees.
They're dealing with very
emotional and and, uh and and
really horrible situations and
in some cases, and so while the
child is important in this
situation, the worker is also
just as important so that they
can have a positive you just
just the other day. Um, we we
buried the social worker that I
had when I was two years old,
and I had a relationship with
it. We want to create those
kinds of relationships so that
they have someone they can look
at the very positive influence
in their life. And Teresa's
absolutely working on that.
She's committed ongoing training
and development through, um, you
know, for the employee's career
throughout not just initial
training to come into the
department, but the entire time
there in that role and whatever
roles they may held hold and
she's committed to achieving. Um
you know this this ratio that
national NSW, the National
Association of Social Work
provides with all of their vast
research and information that
they have across the country and
across the world, but creating
ratios for child to caseworker
child to investigative case it
may have to happen.
Child to you know other services
that are provided by this
department.
In the last theme that I really
heard a lot from people on that.
I believe Theresa is going to be
extremely helpful in working on
here is training and development
for the management of this
department. I constantly receive
feedback on we'll give them my
manager is this my supervisor?
is this and so in a lot of ways
we're going to focus on the
management team, not just the
entry level caseworker entry
level social worker.
And then also implementation of
quality management tools, so
they were checking what we think
is happening in the department
and making sure that we're
meeting a minimum set of quality
standards.
So madam chair and members of
the committee for All of those
reasons, I'm very honored and
proud to present to you, Theresa
cancel those as the Cabinet
secretary for Children, youth
and families they would like for
her
John, Can you hear me? Yes.
Okay. Um, so in May, when I took
this role, it was a temporary
situation to really help
operationalize and look at the
structure of C I f D and what
was needed and use my skills to
help them set that up and
organize it so that they could
be successful as time went on.
I became very passionate about
the work that needed to be done
at C Y F D. And with each
passing month, I think it became
more clear to the governor that
my heart was at C Y F. D.
And it was an incredibly
difficult decision to make.
But I am 100% committed
To the staff that we have there
to make sure that they have the
resources that they need and the
skill set and the training and
the support so that they can go
out and do the work that they
need to do to ensure that the
Children in the families in our
state
Have the opportunity to thrive.
Thank you. I will probably need
this.
Um, because it's not just about
waiting for those kids and those
families to fail so that we can
step in and help them. It's
about supporting them right
where they are today and giving
them the tools that they need to
be successful, and I truly
without any hesitation believe
that I can help to lead a team
to do exactly that.
So I want to thank the governor
for her faith in me and for
giving me this opportunity to
continue to serve new Mexicans
in this new role.
I want to take a little time to
tell you about myself, which I
think Senator Padilla did a
great job of covering my
background. But I was born and
raised in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
and graduated from Santa Fe High
School. I'm one of six Children
that was raised by a single mom.
She's here with me. Today. After
I graduated high school, I went
to work in the private sector.
And I didn't choose a career
kind of chose me by
circumstance. I had a daughter
to raise graduating high school.
And I took that opportunity to
figure out what do I need to do
in life?
And I had an opportunity to go
work for a law firm. I entered
in there. Um, as a as a copy
clerk. Essentially, it was a
giant lawsuit. You know, I
didn't nuclear company versus
Alan Dale insurance, and it was
pre computer and so managing
documents for a lawsuit of that
size was an incredible task. So
taking documents and making
several copies and putting them
in a filing system, So if we
were doing a deposition we could
accurately find everything with
respect to this person.
Everything with respect to that
topic without a computer system.
I eventually moved my way up and
then worked myself into a
paralegal position where I
continue to work as a paralegal
and worked in the legal field
for 24 years before joining the
public sector.
I came into government.
Under the Richardson
administration.
I started him in his office is
the executive assistant to his
chief of staff.
I worked my way up in that
office during the director of
operations and then deputy chief
of staff for operations where I
oversaw the hiring of all exempt
employees. It was at that point
in time that I was able to
realize the importance of the
individuals that serve at the
executive level in those
agencies and finding the right
person to put in the right job.
So that that agencies, goals and
mission could be met.
For better government for
constituents across the state to
make things easier for them.
And that's what it's always been
about. For me. It's not a job
it's about how do we make
government better for the people
that it serves? How do we remove
barriers for them? How do they
come into a system and know that
they are better off when they
walk away because of government,
and that's what government's
role should actually be to
remove barriers for the
constituents that it serves?
During that time I saw a need at
the Department of Workforce
Solutions when individuals
really wrist rug Ling and
unemployment was difficult to
obtain. It was a system that
hadn't been updated in quite
some time.
And I asked the governor if I
could go to workforce Solutions
as a deputy secretary under then
Secretary Ken Ortiz and help to
fix the solution for
individuals.
It was incredible learning
experience for me where I got to
travel the state to all of our
workforce offices and figure out
what those individuals did to
help people find employment.
They worked on developing
skills.
On resume preparation and just
giving people the confidence
that they needed to be able to
go back out into the workforce.
And when that didn't work for
them, or situations were
different. We made sure that
they had the ability to get
their unemployment so that they,
too, could provide for their
families and continue in the
state of New Mexico.
After the Richardson
administration, I stayed in
public service.
I was fortunate enough to get a
job with Santa Fe County.
I went in there at a time when
the county senior services
program was splitting from the
city. The city had taken over
that for several years and
managed it in the county just
didn't feel like the seniors
outside of the city limits were
getting the care that they
needed, so they decided to take
that program back. I was able to
come in and help establish that
program at Santa Fe County.
We provided services from senior
to seniors all the way from
Edgewood up to Santa Cruz. We
had seven senior centers that
had essentially been ignored and
needed attention to get seniors
into those and to make sure that
they were providing services. It
was incredibly difficult to
obtain funding from non Metro
Area agency on aging at that
point in time because the
funding for this area had been
dedicated to the city of Santa
Fe.
And all they were willing to
give was just partial payment.
The county was amazing and stood
up and came to the table to
provide those services and I was
fortunate to be able to help
develop that.
And I feel like they had an
amazing program. I took a brief
hiatus from Santa Fe County and
went back to the private sector.
I had an opportunity to work for
Burrell Enterprises.
Um and was able to come in and
assist with the creation of the
barrel College of Osteopathic
Medicine.
This was a complete startup. I
was involved in the construction
designing the project helping
through accreditation. Securing
financing for the project,
helping them get their staff on
board writing policies and
procedures. And I think that
that college is a huge success
and an amazing asset to the
state of New Mexico.
Following that I was back in the
public sector. I went to North
Central, who is the parent
company for non Mitchell Area
Agency on aging to see how I can
help to develop policies and fix
a system that could better serve
seniors across the state, not
just that Santa Fe County but I
took my experience from there
and the issues that I faced as a
provider.
And try to fix those policies
and procedures within a system
that could deliver services
statewide. Some of those
policies are still in place for
some of those providers.
I missed my seniors. I had a
great opportunity. The person
who had replaced me was
retiring. Um and I was able to
go back to Santa Fe County and
continue serving seniors across
the state. I did that until I
came to work for Governor,
Michelle Luhan Grisham.
During that time I served as her
director of operation or chief
operating officer.
It was able to help establish
our cabinet, higher exempt
employees and figure out the
right people in place to help
move the agenda of the
administration forward and I'm
really proud of the work that we
were able to. Do you know all
through so many different crisis
is and its state over the last
five years we dealt with a
It was able to help establish
our cabinet, higher exempt
employees and figure out the
right people in place to help
move the agenda of the
administration forward, and I'm
really proud of the work that we
were able to do You know all
through so many different crisis
is and its state over the last
five years, we dealt with the
global pandemic that nobody had
ever seen. The likes of we dealt
with fire fires that nobody had
ever seen. The likes of and our
goal at that time was to ensure
that people
Were safe.
No matter what we did, it was
always making sure that people
were safe and still had access
to services that they needed.
Um, during the wildfires, we
were in the north, constantly
making sure that there was
shelters, making sure that the
federal government was being
responsive. Um, and dealing with
all types of individuals at that
point in time.
During that time is really when
I perfected my skills of
understanding the importance of
working across agencies of
working with our local partners
with working with local
governments and the federal
government, and everybody coming
together to the table to affect
change that is meaningful and
lasting. That is exactly what I
intend to do it. You know, I
hear a lot and as a senator
alluded to you read a paper. You
listen to the news.
Everything is negative about the
work and I can tell you it is an
agency that is in need of a lot
of change. That is very clear to
all of us. But it is also an
agency that has dedicated
employees that come to work
every single day. Despite that
negativity, this is not a job
that they chose. This is a job
that chooses them.
It draws you in, and it's
amazing the work that those
individuals do, and Senator
Padilla talked about that
relationship that he built with
his caseworker. It's still
happens. You know, people talk
about office stays and how
terrible that is, and it is not
an ideal situation by any
stretch of the imagination those
kids need a positive home a
positive place where they can be
comfortable, but right now for
some of them, it's the office.
It's their caseworker. It is
where they feel comfortable and
they feel supported.
And sometimes we, you know, have
that conversation with them, and
it's like, why do you continue
to come back here? We find
placement for them and they come
back and they're like I feel
comfortable with my worker
there my support and that's what
we need to be able to do across
the state. Regardless of what it
looks like in every different
community. We need to build that
support for those kids. That's
long lasting. It doesn't end
when they're 18.
You know?
It doesn't even end for me At my
age. I still need my support
system.
And I need them almost every day
to help me get through the
trials of life because life is
hard, no matter where you are
and how you walk through it.
So we are making some change.
You know, it may not be as
noticeable to the outside world
right now. But if we are taking
steps towards positive change
and building that communication
that I skill that I bring to the
table and having that
relationship with our Cabinet
and with outside partners is
critical to the success of C Y
F. D.
You know, we were able to
establish 30 Day checkups for
kids in care. I don't know how
many of you have tried to reach
out to your provider recently to
schedule a well check, but it's
not gonna happen in 30 days in
any community across the state.
The outside community and the
providers that we have are
limited.
I'm not saying they're doing a
bad job. They're doing the best
job that they can with the
resources that they have in the
staff that they have. But it
doesn't happen in 30 days and
with the help of Department of
health, we were able to work
through a process and HST
assisted us with the C E. O s
where we have a plan in place to
get those kids the care that
they need within 30 days.
You know, we were able to send
letters of direction to, um CEOs
through H C. A. Some of those
regarding the Keira
Plan and what that looks like
and what the CEOs need to do and
bring to the table, you know,
and that happened through
coordination and collaboration
with the health care authority.
We were able to remove barriers
for hiring. We worked with the
union and with state personnel
to minimize the number of days
that those positions had to be
placed on a post. It used to be
14 days. We limited it to three
so that we could quickly higher
up, but that also had to be
looked at carefully so that our
HR depart
Ointment, which had now taken on
the responsibility of all hiring
across the agency needed to make
sure that they had the staff
available to process everything
to get those letters out timely
to run background checks on
individuals and then to do a
proper on boarding because
there's nothing worse than
hiring a ton of people at an
agency and not not being able to
onboard them or train them.
So taking that responsibility
and streamlining that to our HR
department and removing those
barriers from the staff that
needs to run programs and giving
them the ability to run their
program without the barriers of
having to figure out finance or
having to make sure foster
parents were being paid or
having to do HR packets. All of
that was removed in streamlined
into part of our reorganization.
And I think to date that has
been one of the biggest
successes that we've had is
taking that and removing that
from program and enabling them
to really focus on the jobs that
they need to do. And now we're
building back bigger and
stronger so that when we bring
people in, they are properly
trained. They do get what they
need before we send them out.
To do an investigation or find
permanency or find a placement
for a child, you know, or deal
with somebody in the juvenile
justice system. We want them to
be well trained, and we want to
support them, and that's exactly
what we're doing right now. So I
asked for your patience as we're
building it from the inside out.
Um, because those
Systems that are in place
internally will definitely help
as we start more of the external
work and support the services
that need to be done in our
communities.
Um
So, as I said before, I don't
believe it's a failing agency
were full of the dedicated
staff and I have to thank them
and my leadership team. I'm
grateful for them for believing
in the mission and joining with
me to do exactly what we need to
do for this state.
I couldn't do this work without
my support system. I mentioned
it before, and it goes way
beyond my family who I will
introduce to you in just a
moment. But it goes with my work
support with the team that I've
built throughout the years. I
still have individuals that I
sometimes need to call. You
know, Sometimes it's people just
completely unexpected as this
morning. I, um
Roamed into Senator Do Higgs
office because I needed a moment
because I was incredibly
emotional about today and
speaking to you, especially in
front of my family. Um, but I
got that support. I got what I
needed, and that's what we need
to create for the kids and the
families of our state. I can't
do that without your help. I
can't do that without my
leadership team without the
staff at C Y F D without our
advocates are partners, the
media.
Um
And even our critics. Everybody
needs to come to the table to
identify what we need for kids
and let's all pull in the same
direction to create that safety
net for those kids and those
families and make sure that
they're not failing that they're
thriving, and it's because the
government has stepped up to do
exactly what it is. We do
support them and make sure that
they
Have a strong foundation and
then can thrive on their own and
be there when they count, But
I'd like to take a moment to
just introduce my family because
they really are my biggest
support, and I could not do this
without them. So I have my mom
Ruth, or cheese who dedicated
her life to raising six kids.
She was a state employee works
for Legislative Council service
and then continue to serve in
the legislative session for
20 some years, working both on
the House and Senate side. I've
got my husband, Dennis, because
all those
My kids with me today, Serena.
Ryan and Eric.
And my grandkids Dominic
Christa.
Alicia and Vincent.
My grandson. Sean couldn't be
with us because he's working,
and that's incredibly important.
But I'd like to thank them for
always being my support system
and allowing me to do the job
that I do. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and as
you heard my introduction,
secretary designates an
introduction. Almost every
aspect of her career has been
Very focused on
Touching the lives of families
and individuals, and I think
that's going to serve her. Well
here. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator and
Secretary, doesn't it?
We have a number of people
signed up to speak in support.
Um so I'm gonna gonna call you
up one by one. If you would come
up and and speak into the
microphone. We're starting with
Mardell Trujillo, uh, and if
everyone would limit their
comments to about two minutes,
and I'll keep time for you, and
if you don't mind, I'll let you
know when you have 30 seconds
remaining.
Madam chair.
And members of the committee. My
name is Mardell. True? Hell, I
am the sister of Teresa
Cassadaga. Our mother, Ruth
Ortiz is a single mother raising
six Children worked at the
Legislative Council, where she
taught us hard work and to
always be respectful of others.
Theresa embraces these
qualities.
She can be counted on for her
support, encouragement and
advice.
Even though she is a second to
the youngest.
Our of our siblings. All of our
siblings look up to her as a
family matriarch.
As a mother, grandmother, great
grandmother and aunt, too many
nieces and nephews. She
continues to be a matriarch to
the younger generation, where
she is a force of stability.
And advice when life gets
complicated for them.
She is responsible, trustworthy
and dedicated.
I ask that you approved Teresa's
nomination. She has the
determination, compassion,
integrity and skill set to help
our Children of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Former Secretary
Debbie Romero.
Good morning.
I'm honored to be here to appear
before you today.
Okay?
Can you hear me now? Okay.
Um again. Good morning. I'm
honored to be here to appear
before you and I just want to
take this opportunity to thank
each and everyone of you for the
sacrifices you make. I know you
make sacrifices professionally
and with your families, I know
the time and effort that it
takes to do your job. So thank
you.
I also wanted to tell you that
that's exactly what Theresa
does. Theresa sacrifices
On a daily basis. Um, she spends
lots of time working and a lot
of time time without her family.
Um, but as she mentioned they
are
Fully committed to what she is
trying to do each and every day.
I got to know Teresa during
Governor Richardson's
administration.
And I got a taste of her work at
at that point.
Once that administration was
over, she did go to Santa Fe
County. I was working at D F a
doing Capital outlay, and I
would get phone calls from
Theresa asking for help making
sure that her capital, Ali
requests were done correctly.
She wasn't gonna submit anything
that wasn't correct.
I also know that Theresa if Cook
didn't show up, she could. You
could find her in the kitchen
with an apron on cooking.
If a driver didn't show up, she
was driving a ban to make sure
the seniors in rural new mix
Santa Fe County got their mills.
That's the person that Theresa
is.
Her time and energy are hard to
match.
You know when emergencies
happen, she's organized and
deployed resources seconds
quickly.
I'm going to get to the bottom
of this. Um, I think the her
most skills are her
organizational skills.
Her high level thinking.
And the fact that she can make
tough decisions and that's
exactly what I f D right now
needs right now is someone that
can make those tough decisions.
I humbly request that you
support her confirmation as
Cabinet secretary of Children,
Youth and Families Department.
Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary designate
Jen Schreier.
Hello.
Son. Great. Good morning. I'm
Gen. Paul Schrier, Cabinet
secretary designate of the aging
and Long Term Services
Department in former Cabinet
secretary of the Tourism
Department, Madam Chair members
of the committee. I am honored
to stand here today and
supported Teresa Cassano's for
her appointment as Cabinet
secretary of C Y F. D.
I consider Teresa colleague, a
mentor and a friend.
Her operational capabilities,
her talent, recruitment skills
and her deep knowledge and
experience in state government
will no doubt serve her well as
she embarks on the
transformation of C Y F. D.
Over the last five years. I
found Teresa to be confident
strategic, gracious and humble.
But what I admire most about
Theresa is her heart for public
service and the fear strive to
make government deliver for the
people of New Mexico.
Theresa could retire now.
She could kick up your feet and
enjoy time with her family, Her
grandkids and her 90 year old
mother.
But her conscious heart and work
ethic got in the way and she
decided to step up.
Because our Children need her.
Theresa has the courage and
stamina to continuously expect
the team at C Y F D and herself
to provide the highest quality
of services to ensure the best
possible outcomes.
For the most vulnerable Children
in our state.
Well. She was chief operating
officer for the governor's
office. She invested in me
professionally.
I've learned so much from
observing, listening and
brainstorming with her 30
seconds because we both are
highly driven women.
That love to get things done at
the highest level of excellence
on a more personal note. I have
told my husband several times if
we ever have an emergency, you
call Theresa
Because I trust her with my
Children and my family.
And to leave C y F D. It
requires the highest level of
trustworthiness. Madam chair
members of the Committee
Teresa's character is
impeachable.
With a talented network of
skilled professionals.
That are ready and willing to
support her in this endeavor, my
wish for Teresa's that she
continues to leverage her
professional relationships.
And call us because Theresa, we
got you.
In closing. I truly believe
Theresa has the grit to be to
break the deep rooted agency
systemic issues and rebuild and
I ask you to support her today.
Thank you. Thank you, Secretary.
Uh, Alicia Serrano.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
the members of the committee.
Thank you for giving me this
chance to speak. My name is
Alicia and Secretary Gonzalez is
my grandmother.
There are a lot of things I
would like to say. But I know my
time is limited. So let me tell
you the main reason why I think
she is a great if not perfect
fit.
I know, I know that I say this
because I know she cares about
kids, especially my brother,
Vincent and myself.
My dad is a single father and
he's raising us by himself, so
she's stepped into the mother
might like
Paper.
She has been my mother figure
for the last eight years. She
gets a Cisco helps us with
homework.
She's a processing every
decision. She makes every
holiday special.
She finds time to do all of
this, Even though she works long
hours. I know she has worked
most for life to provide a good
future for her family and
herself.
This shows her dedication. I
know she's a hard worker because
she stays
Late most nights and takes work
home and other She also has a
heart made of gold and is one of
the nice people you ever meet.
Thank you. Thank you very
Don't true. I'm sorry to
interrupt. I'm not sure that the
mic is picking new. I start
over. You
know it is okay. Okay here
online. Thank you, Um
All right, uh, and the deputy
secretary operations and
programming at C Y f d man,
Those studying with me are the
Secretary designates Leadership
team.
I have known the secretary
designate professionally and
personally for over 30 years.
It's my honor to state that on
behalf of the entire leadership,
Team F D.
That we stand in support of her
confirmation as Cabinet
secretary, as we are fully
committed to the vision that she
brings to C Y F D and
respectfully requested her
confirmation. Thank you. Thank
you.
Rachel O Connor.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Rachel
O'Connor. I'm the director of
the Community Services
Department for Santa Fe County.
I have, uh, the honor of being
here today to support the
nomination and confirmation of
Teresa Casada as as secretary of
C Y F. D.
Madam chair. I've worked
personally with Theresa.
Over a time period of 20 years
in almost every professional
government position that she has
been in in the state of New
Mexico.
And I want to point out some of
the things that I think Theresa
brings to the position.
And first as his sponsor,
alluded to a tremendous
experience and knowledge of all
levels of government in the
state of New Mexico, including
both knowing what levers to push
in government to get the change
that needs to occur.
At C Y F D and that is crucial
in bringing forward
Uh, new growth within the
department.
Secondly, I think that
Secretary Sather's
Is a change agent.
And throughout her positions in
both state and local government
has served to be a catalyst for
improving the lives of the
people of the state of New
Mexico.
And last. Um I think it's
important to know that Teresa's
a very straightforward person.
And I think she'll be honest
with the state of New Mexico.
the people of New Mexico and the
Legislature in what change needs
to come forward. What resources
and things need to happen to
improve the services. Uh, for
all of our benefit.
So for that reason I asked that
you support both Teresa as a
person as a professional, is the
secretary of C Y f D. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Secretary sorry to Nyon.
I'm um Madam Chair members of
the committee. My name's Sarita
NYR. I am the Cabinet secretary
for the Department of Workforce
Solutions, but maybe more
importantly, from today for
today I am a former treatment
foster period and I adopted my
daughter from the F D system
over 20. Years ago, she grew up
to be a social worker who now
works for Theresa in fostering
connections program, which is
one of the bright spots that we
don't hear enough about.
In the department like Senator
Patty, I take this position very
personally, and I was thrilled
when Theresa decided to step up,
not just because of her heart
and her courage and her brains
and all the things you've heard
about because I've gotten to
work shoulder to shoulder with
her for many years now, and I
know she has what it takes to
get the job done. And as the
workforce secretary, we are
fully committed.
To helping her hiring every
corner of the state to get the
staffing. She needs to make the
change.
Thank
Madam chair. Um members of the
My name is Rick Eastern. I'm the
secretary from Mexico Department
of Transportation.
Um I first met Teresa Cassano's
When I joined the administration
in 2019, and like most of you
thought, um, I felt she was a
very scary person.
Um,
My second thought was instead,
she's really just a leader that
doesn't know how to tolerate
laziness, status quo and
ineffective work. And so if you
do any of those things, she's
pretty scary.
As a professional, You know, we
encounter a lot of people along
our pathway who make us better
either because they show us what
not to do.
Or they show us how to be.
And for me, Teresa will forever
make a mark in my professional
path. Who's taught me that?
There's always one more thing we
can do.
And by the way, it needs to be
done yesterday.
I still remember the calls I
received from her the first
Um, asking me to be in charge of
two agencies.
She said. We have to do this.
When she called on Thanksgiving
night and gave me two days to
set up vaccination sites in
three different counties, she
said. We have to do this.
Theresa overseas and agency were
her decisions will impact the
well being of so many people
more so than the rest from
making sure people were
vaccinated to making sure people
were safe from fires and had the
resources that they need.
To making sure that everyone
received their UI benefits so
they do second homes in their
cars.
This is a woman that doesn't
tolerate excuses. We have things
that we have to do, and we have
to do them now.
She is crazy for doing this, but
she's also capable
I ask that you supporter. Thank
you.
Thank you, Secretary Designate
Armijo.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. I'd
like to start by thanking Teresa
for having the courage to step
up to lead C y f D, um I want to
lift up to you. She has many
superpowers, and those are those
have been testified to today. Um
they get it done Now. That is no
joke. That really is real. We
have had many conversations.
Late at night and on the
weekends, really trying to get
kids to the right place and
access to care, But more
important, I really want to
reiterate her expectations that
the Cabinet
Work together. I have seen under
her leadership and over the past
12 months as we've kind of
worked more closely with Teresa
in my role, um, how essential it
is that we work together and in
particular for the Human
services Department and C Y f D
to build that partnership and
relationship. We are working
together to transform a system
and it cannot be done alone. So
I just really thank her for her
partnership. She has reinforced
those expectations and is really
building that culture and I
think you and standard
In support of this. Thank you.
Um, Secretariat to foil Lucero.
30 seconds.
Thank you, Mariana Padilla.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of this committee. My
name is Mariana Parole. I worked
very closely role. I've worked
really closely with C Y F D.
And their leadership team and
really know what? This age. I'm
a former foster parents and also
really want to thank Senator
Padilla or sponsoring so much
has been said about Theresa,
That really can be said, But I
just want to really iterate that
her across all branches of
government levels of government
and particularly in the state
are just immense.
She is so talented. She builds
teams. Great teams of Dewar's,
Um I often tease Teresa that
she's the fixer.
The word I can't or it's not
possible is not in this woman's
vocabulary.
We? This is the person that we
need. I know truly in my heart.
There is no other person that
can lead this agency the way she
can I ask you all respectfully
for your support of her today.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sandra Emanuel. Good
morning.
My name is Sandy Emmanuel. I'm
the CEO of behavioral health.
In Santa Teresa, New Mexico. I
am not a government servant. I
am a provider, so I have a
unique perspective.
I'm not a long term friend. I
haven't known you my whole life
I met you briefly last year and
I was left with hope.
After our meeting. I had hope
And trust was instilled hadn't
had that before.
I've been at the peak for 10
years we partner with C Y f D we
depend on Seaway f D to do the
work that we do, and
I left knowing that Theresa is a
bridge builder.
And I appreciate that. I'm
shaking and getting emotional.
I'm a social worker myself for
34 years in this community, I
have an adoptive grandson from
the seaway of D System. I raised
a social work daughter, Um, the
work that we all do is
incredibly meaningful and
incredibly matters.
It's It's who we are. It's the
heart of who we are. It's like
you said the career chose you. I
think we're all in that boat.
She knows that it takes all of
us. She has the skill set. She
has the passion. She has the
operational mind the brains. Oh,
my gosh, Meeting with me
yesterday I walked away still
feeling that same hope in that
same trust that was instilled
the year before. I
wholeheartedly support this.
This
Confirmation. And I thank you
for the time that you've given
me and the work that you have
already done and will continue
to do. Thank you so much.
Thank you and our last speaker
is going to be a secretary
Elizabeth Roginsky.
Hmm.
And and as she's making her way
up. I know there were other
folks who had signed up. Uh
We would probably be here all
day if we went through him. Good
morning, madam Chair members of
the committee. Um and we are
here. Education secretaries, uh,
coming to support in full force.
The confirmation of Teresa
Cassano's, um I have had the
pleasure of working with her for
four years. Four years ago.
Today, I sat here with Senator
Padilla and was confirmed.
The issues that we've seen at
Seaway of D R systemic. What
we've just heard about Teresa
and her own lived experience,
and all the people have worked
with her is what it's going to
take to address the systemic
issues or collaboration and
coordination. She exemplifies
that we share the building
together. I'm leaving at nine.
She's still there. I come back
at 730. She's still there. I
don't know.
When she sleeps. Um, but again
this commitment but also what
Deputy Secretary Salazar said
she's put together a top notch
leadership team. She did that in
record time because she knows
what it takes. And I think that
you all can feel good today
about this appointment. I
remember when Theresa was asking
me and I said, I don't know if
there's anyone else in the state
who can do this job because of
what Senator Padilla said.
She knows the networks. She
knows the people and we have all
as education secretary has
benefited from her wisdom, her
compassion as people have said,
But that force of collaboration
we cannot solve the problems in
this state with one single
agency, and we know that by
coming together around C y f d
Around Theresa's leadership, we
are going to transform not only
C y F D, but communities all
across the state.
Through education through health
through economic well being
through family and community, So
we stand in strong support of
this nomination of this
confirmation, and we hope you
all do as well. Thank you.
Thank you, Uh, would anyone in
the audience like to raise their
hand to indicate support? Please
do all right now we did not have
anyone sign up in opposition.
Don't believe that's changed if
anyone wants to raise their hand
to indicate opposition pleasing
none. We're going to go to the
committee.
Senator or TCP now.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Senator by the F for
sponsoring Secretary designate
and Madam Secretary designate
Good luck and and I think
everybody has said how how
courageous it is for you to take
this on.
Secretary Greg Genske just
mentioned systemic.
Problems at the department.
That has not always been the
case.
In
20 of 2003.
Right after Governor Richardson
took office.
The department got from out out
from under a consent decree that
had been imposed.
Starting in 1983 or 80, for
about 20 years. It lasted 20
years, and the department
consistently attempted and
failed to get out from under
that consent decree during those
20 years.
Finally achieved it.
With low caseloads.
Trained workforce.
Highly skilled staff, most of
whom had master's degrees in
social work in those days.
And foster care families
sufficient that they never had
to use, um, their offices to
take care of kids.
And we're actually we actually
closed.
All faiths receiving home, which
had been where we used to place
Children.
When they were removed from
their families, and there wasn't
a foster family immediately
available. We had enough
emergency foster homes.
That that we were able to say to
to all face. Thank you for all
the years that you've done this
But we really don't need you
anymore because families are the
better setting than this
institution.
Over the last five years, ever
since the first Cabinet
secretary assured us in one of
our meetings that we were
putting a stop to the idea of
using
Offices to house Children
overnight five years ago.
He said that to us
And it hasn't happened yet.
Ever since that he made that
comment. I thought
1520 times. Oh, I wish we had
not closed all faiths.
Because at least
There was a skilled staff there
around the clock who could watch
over Children?
And while we don't necessarily
want to place Children in
institutions
It's so much better than placing
them in an office and so much
better than placing them in a
hospital emergency room.
We're so much better than
placing them in, uh, Sequoia.
Which we had to do, I guess you
had to do over Christmas.
All of those things are not as
good as all faced with better
would be to have enough foster
families and madam Chairman
Madam Secretary Madam Chairman.
Madam Secretary. I just wanted
to ask you the the
The key to both.
Having kids in offices and two
staff turnover and to the
inability to recruit more foster
families.
Is how we're treating our
current foster families. Could
you tell us what's going on
regarding that? I know when we
met with you. And in early
January, you indicated the
department's goal had been to
have 130 foster family hadn't
department hadn't you hadn't
been in charge of it all that
time?
You hadn't been able to even
recruit 100.
But the goal for this year was
200.
How are you going to accomplish
that? What? What are your plans?
Forget Madam Chair Senator Pete
very much for those questions,
and I share those seems office
days. Um, I'll address your
question on the foster families.
So in the Kevin s litigation,
they have Yes. Can you guys hear
me?
Should I start over?
The requirements under the Kevin
s litigation have been set out
for us with respect to
recruitment for foster families,
So those target numbers that we
are aiming for are set by the
litigation, and we've agreed to
those
I believe the target number for
last fiscal year. What I mean
last calendar year was 191
families.
We did not meet that number. We
I think we're able to get you. I
believe it was 63. It could be
plus or minus a little bit. Um
But when I came in one of the
issues that we were having, as
you mentioned is how we are
dealing with our current foster
families. Payments were not
being made to them in a timely
manner, and that was leading to
a lot of frustration and we had
to figure out how do we support
our current foster families?
Because there really are
ambassadors out there in the
communities and if they're not
having the experience that they
need is a foster family, It's
going to make it incredibly
difficult for us to recruit.
Foster families around them.
Because all we need is somebody
to say one positive. One
negative thing about it, and it
takes so much rebuilding, so we
focused on really rebuilding
what we were doing for those
supports. We change the system
in way payments were going out,
and currently it is a much
better system. There still are
hiccups every now and then that
we try to address immediately
when we know about them.
But really making them a
priority. Um, has been a focus
for us also streamlining the
system so that when foster
families indicator family, it
doesn't sit in a queue at C Y F
D for two or three months before
somebody actually gets back to
them. That doesn't show them
that we are really interested in
having them on board and that
was happening.
You know, people were expressing
an interest and we didn't have
enough staff. They weren't
getting back to them. But our
internal process also wasn't
very streamlined. We could get
started. We could reach out to
them, but we didn't have enough
people to do home studies. We
didn't have enough people to do
the paperwork. We didn't have a
great schedule, so all of those
needed to be fixed before we
could really go out and do a
concerted effort on recruitment.
We are at that point now where
we are ready to roll that out.
We have brought a conscious
Tractor on board who has done
this in Portland's and recruited
foster families there were using
his same, um
Techniques to do that there and
starting now in February, we are
bringing on somebody to help us
with social media and, um,
campaigns that will help to get
the word out and build interest.
Um and so we do anticipate that
we will be able to recruit more
foster families and get them
through the process and
licensure in a timely fashion so
they could start serving those
kids.
We also need to make sure we're
giving them the right supports
and the right trainings right
And one of the important ones
for us is really trauma,
informed training, they need to
understand you know what they're
dealing with. And I think part
of the problem that we see with
office days is oftentimes these
families taken an individual but
don't really understand the
trauma.
Or what that youth has
experienced and aren't really
equipped to deal with the
situation and oftentimes that
then ends in a bad experience
for the youth where they're in
the house for two or three days
in the family's like I really
can't do this, and then they end
up in an office and the same
thing, and then they're back in
the office, and that
Putting a youth in those
different
Situations in and out in and
out, I truly believe is more
harmful to them than us
supporting them in that office
until we can really find the
right situation for them. And so
that is something that we're
looking at, as we develop a
process to end office stays, you
know what does that look like so
that we can be more supportive
of the youth and not just the
need to have them in a
placement?
Madam Check. Madam Chairman.
Madam Secretary. Thank you so
much for for for for your
approach to that.
Um, I would just suggest that
maybe we ought to at least until
we can catch up.
Consider the possibility of
finding an excellent vendor
provider who could provide
Around the clock care rather
than continue to use the offices
because it does not look like
it's going to change anytime
soon.
But if we had a place that could
stabilize the system until you
can find enough foster families
that might be in an avenue to
pursue. I just suggest that it
Um, Madam Chair, Senator or TCP?
No, We are very, very close to
doing exactly that. Um, we have
a provider who is going through
the licensing process right now.
Um, And as soon as that is done,
we have a facility. It's already
been equipped. Um and that is
exactly what we will do. But we
will focus their on really
making sure that the the youth
is supported. Um, and that
defined the right placement for
them and then do that transition
within.
That location so that we're not
taking the youth and putting
will actually bring the
interested foster family in to
coordinate and be a part of the
services that we're providing
there. Um, And then hopefully
that will be a better thank you
and Madam Madam Chairman and
Madam Secretary, um
When when that consent decree
was lifted.
In 2003.
Shortly thereafter, Things
started going south again long
before you had anything.
To do with the department. This
is not your responsibility, but
now you've got to pick up the
pieces. I think we could track
that, beginning to the decline
in the department.
The caseloads getting larger the
number of professionals being
hired going down.
Jobs being filled with people
that really weren't able to do
those jobs and so
The deterioration just spread.
So the decision that was made in
and I have to say that I was
already in the Legislature when
I heard about this. I don't know
when the department stopped
Responding to allegations of
abuse or neglect with services.
And began only responding to
substantiated cases of abuse or
neglect.
By taking
Custody.
And it must have been around.
I don't know 2010 2012 because
we started hearing and I
remember sitting in a committee
hearing testimony to that
effect, but we don't work with
those families. We only work
with substantiated cases of
abuse or neglect when we can
take legal custody and have some
leverage, and it just struck me.
that was never what the
department was designed to do.
And I think your plan for a
family services division.
Would start rectifying that.
I mean, over the last several
years have been a number of fits
and starts in this direction of
because those are the families
that you can actually prevent
removal from member having to be
made if we provided them with
lots of good wrap around
services
and and substantial services
cash to pay the car repair.
Cash to pay the back rent so
they don't get evicted.
Things like that. Also.
Family support.
But it seems to me that we have
to make the distinction between
the family services Division of
the sort you've described to me.
When we met
And the investigative
Police arm of the department.
And if people think that when
somebody comes to offer help
from family services or their C
y F D, and they're the ones that
Have the hammer. They're the
ones that can take your kid
away. It's going to be very hard
so that somehow make maintain
that distinction in the mind of
the public and in the mind of
the families. That comfort
service is crucial. I wonder how
you're planning on on dealing
with that. I'd love to hear your
plans for Family services
division.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator or
cheesy Pinot. Um, thank you. I'm
really excited about our family
Services division because I feel
the same way. I feel like we
wait for found, um and I truly
feel like if we can provide more
support for them upfront, um,
and meet them where they are and
what they need that we will have
less individuals that we have
less investigations. You know,
less individuals in juvenile
justice and so
Um, you know, really standing
that up and doing those
wraparound services, one of the
initiatives of the Children's
Cabinet is the family resource
centers, and that's a
collaboration with many
agencies and that is to have
like two technically a one stop
facility for individuals in
their community that has not
just state resources, but local
partners as well.
So they can go to one of these
if they need rent are all
together in one location, So
it's not well, I can't help you.
You need to call HST or you need
to call. You know the rental
assistance program or you need
to call for life or, you know,
that's just so taxing on
individuals that are struggling.
And if we can have these
resource centers, um in one
location and says
Along with county providers or
local providers, so that if
there are other wraparound, they
can make those appointments.
They can be right in one
location to get those services
and really support the family.
So we are in full support of
that, with the Children's
Cabinet. We're working with some
of the other agencies.
To get those stood up in a
couple of communities so we can
pilot it and see how that works.
Um, with respect, you know, the
high caseloads and the office
stays. I think one of the other
contributing factors that we
really can't ignore is the fact
that we lost so many providers
in our communities across the
state that provided those
services.
So the loss of those services
and then the issues that we
face, you know, early on in this
administration, you know, kids
were at home being home schooled
and all of those services, you
know?
The need for them amplified in
the opportunity to nation that
has put us in a state that is
untenable, and it's like I said,
We need those private providers
we need to do. Um more work with
HST to recruit more providers to
come here that will offer those
services. But then we need to
make sure that those providers
that do come here have the
expertise and the training to
really deal with the clientele
that they're serving New Mexico
is a very diverse community, um
people from different
backgrounds.
Everybody needs are different
across the state, and we can't
do a blanket approach and expect
Um, Madam Chair, Senator or
cheesy Pinot? Um yes, the
department was in support of
legislation that was presented
previously. I think there's
currently legislation. We do
have some concerns, And as you
said, we want to be open and
transparent in government. We
want to be able to provide
information on things you know
that sometimes go wrong. It's an
opportunity for us as a
department to learn from that
and understand how we do things
differently or better.
Um
But we also want to make sure
that we are protecting the
rights of the individuals. These
are kids often times, and they
may have siblings, right, maybe
one of them.
Is deceased, but they have
siblings and maybe something
comes out that talks about
You know, sexual abuse and that
remaining child is still there
and we want to protect their
right to privacy and information
be harmful to them, So it's
really a balance of what goes
out and what we're able to make
sure that it does.
Well, thank you very much, and,
uh,
I mean,
I wish you will. I think you you
accepted an incredible
challenge, And I think if
anybody has the energy to tackle
it under the circumstances that
the department has reached
You would be the one and I and I
would love to have the continued
dialogue between you and
particularly our interim
committee.
Will hold some hearings this
summer and hopefully you'll be
able to come and update us on
progress That's being deserve a
chance. I'm not sure why you
want to take the chance, but but
we certainly are grateful for
you being willing to tackle us.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Hermia.
Thank you, Madam Chair and so
thank you for stepping forward
And so two things that caught my
attention when you were doing
your introduction where
something we do as chief of
staff that the laboratory when
he talked about onboarding and
training. It's important that
employees feel as part of your
work family and that you're
developing them that sets a
solid foundation for success
when it comes to employees.
And he talked about management
training and development that
gives them a career pipeline. So
when you don't only feel as part
of the family and you feel that
you're welcomed in, you get to
see how you can move up in the
ranks, and that's important when
we started thinking about
employees.
So in that topic of employees,
I'm wondering what will we do to
help employees and their mental
health? They do see so much
happening, but I want to make
sure that your employees are
covered and there's resources
for them when it comes to their
wellness and self care.
Madam Chair Senator had amigo.
Thank you. I agree. You can't do
the work without the workforce
and having a healthy and happy
workforce is really what we want
to create for them. We spend
more time at work. My family can
attest to that. Then we do with
our families and so having that
positive experience for them and
creating that environment is
really important to me.
Um, we do have services for our
employees. We have available to
them. Um, you know that can be
extended if needed. We also have
the ability. We have somebody in
house that they can call that
can provide support to them, Um,
is available to go to different
locations across the state that
being said, I don't believe that
That is enough.
So we're exploring other
options. I know. Um
specifically, you know, for
firefighters or first
responders. They have systems in
place that are incredibly
effective. And so we're looking
into. How can we be? Um so that
we have that statewide response
team that can immediately
respond to individuals when
they're in crisis or even not
just when they're you know,
having a difficult day or a
difficult case, and they need
somebody that they can just
talk. Um, we're also looking at,
you know
Which trainings do we need to
give our staff that we really
kind of overlooked relevant to
certain staff? Because not
necessarily. Sometimes I may be
working in a completely
different area of the
department. But one of my
friends might be working in an
area where they're dealing with
trauma. And how do I get trained
to be a better support to
understand what they're going
through and so really looking at
the training as a whole for the
department and how that benefits
our employees.
Um And then you know, looking at
that career ladder as you
mentioned, you know, as we were
doing our pillars we really
looked at the stages so that we
give opportunity for people to
grow. Not everybody always wants
to be a supervisor and
supervised individuals, But we
should have a path for them so
that they can still continue to
be successful at C Y of D and
move up without having to be a
supervisor or leave the agency
to, um
Do something differently. Thank
you for that. And madam chair.
My other question was answered
by Senator I was answered
already and asked by my cousin,
senator or TCP know about how we
recruit families to step in, and
not many people know this, But I
was a nanny and as a nanny we
took in a child from C Y f D and
understand the love and support
that Children need and it's not
just about providing a roof over
their head.
It's about showing love and
compassion. And when I hear
people asking why you're taking
on this job, it's because you do
show love and compassion. And so
it's not that you're crazy for
taking on an agency. It's that
you believe in the future of New
Mexico and white Children need
you and I don't think you're
crazy at all. I think you're
leading with love and heart. And
I appreciate you for that. And
so I just want to make two quick
comments. Madam chairs. I want
to thank any employee who's
listening.
For their dedication to the
department for the work that
they're doing to ensure that
Children are safe to ensure that
they're making things better. I
think that they don't get enough
appreciation for the work that
they do.
And so the other thing, I want
to remind all the senators as we
can be part of the solution and
how can I help as a leader in
northern New Mexico to help you
succeed and to help protect
Children in the state of New
Mexico? I'm a phone call away
and it's I might not be a member
of your team, but I'm a member
of this leadership team as a
state government and I'm here to
be part of the solution.
And not part of the problem
whenever you need me and the one
last thing, Madam chairs, I want
to just make a comment to Alicia
Serrano. I don't think at your
age I would have had the courage
or the confidence to stand up
and speak in front of a crowded
room. And I think that your
confidence comes from a family
who loves you so much, and I
have faith that your grandma
will put that confidence and so
many people around you Mexico
that Children will feel loved
and saved. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, Madam chair. No
further questions.
Thank you, Senator Morris.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Center our meal. We might
be looking for a nanny. So maybe
we can talk about that and more
than the Senate jab. You give me
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Center our meal. We might
be looking for a nanny. So maybe
we can talk about that and more
than the Senate Jab, baby.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Center our meal. We might
be looking for a nanny. So maybe
we can talk about that and more
than the Senate jab. You give me
your hired Senator Teresa. And
again, I echo some of the
comments. God bless you for
taking on this this job and very
proud of, um, I think we are
personal conversation we had we
had. We did talk a lot about
The issues and the challenge and
this is as we talked about the
most thankless job, state
government and I can't believe
you're wanting to do that, or
you were drafted stepping up and
I appreciate that. Um, but it is
we talked about there's a lot of
concerns because you headline in
the paper, some of them pretty
damning, including this with the
latest report.
So it behooves us as this
opportunity, Since this is
really a job, interview or
evaluation for you after nine
months here, um, after taking on
this difficult job to go over
some of these things, and so I
would like to talk about this
report that just came out and go
through it. Not in great detail
because I think we have. We
don't have a lot that much time.
Um, but I would like to address
some of the issues here because
it was. It was very damning.
And
Yeah, And I'm not gonna blame
you. I think this department and
as a whole is
Um
I don't know if it's manageable
at this point, and where in the
macro level what really concerns
me as a governor, it seems that,
uh, C y f to use burning and
she's playing the fiddle.
And here we are in the sixth
year of her administration. She
has refused to message any
bills. You said there was a bill
dealing with the bill messaged.
You said earlier, Senator, it's
my bill, and no, it has not been
Didn't think it happened.
Messaged, Um I didn't realize
yours and that's concerning.
There's a lot of bills out there
that lets the executive isn't
willing to work with six men six
years administration
By the time we do legislation on
these issues, we're going to be
in her seventh. Not going to
take effect until the last year
of her administration, and it's
too late as a lame duck
governor. Um so I I don't blame
you for that. I blame um
Having said that? I think your
leadership skills are important.
Um, I just hope the ship isn't
sinking at this point. And
you're you're you're able to
bail long enough. So I would
like to address this this letter
to hire them so they didn't
actually win, But there's the
second paragraph was very
damning to the whole system. Not
to you, but the whole system.
They said we had hoped when
undertaking his visits to county
offices for months After our
last visit, we will see evidence
of improvement. However, we
heard and observed was the
contrary. We heard about
deteriorating condition and
crisis situation in most of the
offices.
In our assessment, the issues we
identified in September of last
year remain and for the most
part have been there has been
little to no progress and
addressing him.
You guys agree to a corrective
action plan, and then they
further state the states. Weak
performance, implementing many
aspects of the action plan.
Appear to have worsened the
situation.
And so that's my comment about
is the ship going down? Are you
bailing fast enough, and it's
very concerning because
To continue analogy When the
ship goes down, Kids die Could
you address
Um, is in details. You can this
letter and some of the comments
that they
Um, Senator, Do you hear Senator
Morris? Madam Chairman. I'm
sorry, Senator Morse. Yes, I
would love to address some of
the issues in that letter. Um,
but first I just wanted to
address I didn't get a chance to
respond to senator had, um, you
and I just wanted to say when
he's asked what he could do We
are reenacting our respite
Foster program. And so we would
love to have any of you serve as
respite.
Um Foster, because I think that
really has a huge effect on our
foster families and gives them
some support. So I just wanted
to put that out there for him.
Um, Senator Moore is with
respect to is the sink the ship
sinking. I don't believe that it
is and I don't believe that it's
going unnoticed. Or that I can
actually say the governor is
ignoring the situation.
I had an very important role in
her office, which she gave up
and we've redistributed that and
I see, Um Diego here who has
taken on a lot of the
responsibility that I had while
I was there, and so
For her to, you know, actually
give me the opportunity to go
there. Um, says she does take
this serious and she is paying
attention, and she believes that
I am the right person to go and
help to, um stable that ship and
make sure that it doesn't sink
and that we get the opportunity
for kids that they deserve. Um
so
It is incredibly important and
there is a lot of work that we
can do right now at Seaway FD
That doesn't know that that's
important. And I know that we
want to codify that and make
sure that moving forward we
don't end up in the situation
that we are today.
But that work doesn't have to
stop. It can continue. We can
have those conversations about
what are the right things that
need to be done to move it
forward. And then we can tweak
that and look at it as we start
to roll that out across the
state, and you know there could
be things that right now we
think this is exactly what is
needed. But as we roll it out
and start to look at it changes
Which I believe in the interim
is where we can work on those,
and then we can really just what
I didn't want to do was
introduced legislation and then
it gets enacted. And then two or
three months into it were it's
like, well, that doesn't work
and we should have done this or
this needs to be included in
that, and then we're back here
next year asking for changes.
And then again, asking staff to
kind of, you know, redevelop and
retrain and re look at the way
it's doing so A lot of that, for
me was really strategic to give
myself an opportunity to really
wrap my arms around the issues
that we needed to address and
how we best, um, face those in
work forward with them. So
That was really you know where
we are in legislation with
respect to this letter, the
cabin s letter. Um there are so
many issues that we agree need
to be worked on. But as I
mentioned earlier, you know
there are several things that we
agreed to in the cap. Those are
things that we are still working
towards.
We haven't stopped working
towards them, but we're also
trying to re establish the
foundation of the agency. So
some of those things as I said
One of the requirements was 191
foster families.
I couldn't just go out and start
recruiting foster families. I
mean, I guess I could have I
could have, you know, done day
and night across the state to
try to find 100 and 91 people
That doesn't seem like a huge
number. To me. It seems doable.
But to bring them into a system
that wasn't yet ready to provide
them the support that they
needed to be foster families
would be unfair to them. They
probably wouldn't have stayed as
foster families they may have
taken kids in for a month or two
and then realized that we
couldn't support them the way
they needed to be supported, and
then they're going to say this
really isn't for me, and then
we're going to have a child who
is now just placed again and
facing additional trauma.
So I really need time to wrap my
arms around. What are we doing
to support those foster
families? What are we doing to
make sure they're getting paid?
What are we doing to make sure
that we have training for them?
That's relevant to the issues
that the individuals that they
would be taking in that they can
actually meet the needs of that
child. And so when I say I'm
looking at the foundation first
I mean,
I don't want to sit up here and
make it seem like I have excuses
for why we haven't done the work
that we've done, but I think
there are things that need to be
done first, before we can just
dive in and do that. So That's
one example on foster families
where we didn't meet those
requirements. You know the other
was the 30 days. Um, well, child
check. They had a requirement on
us that said, every child that
comes into state custody
Has to have a well child visit
within 30 days.
In a normal world that seems
reasonable.
In a world where you don't have
providers, and you can't get dot
and meet that their idea for us
to meet that was for me to hire
20 them placed in our offices to
do these checks for kids.
I don't even think I could have
hired three nurses if I had
doubled the salary of what they
were paying. They're just not
out there to be hired. And so
there are obstacles in meeting
these, but it doesn't mean that
we're not trying to. We worked
diligently with, um, healthcare
authority. They did or they
worked on the fact Maybe one of
those kids had a well child
visit two weeks ago.
That doesn't alleviate us from
our responsibility. We still
have to do that. So we had to
manage away Where am CEO would
have that check up and pay for
it.
Um so we worked through
healthcare authority to remove
that barrier. We then worked
with Department of Health to
say, Okay, we're going to make
every effort that we can in that
child's community to get them
that visit. If by day 20. We
can't do it Can we bring Can you
step in to help us to meet that
need? So we signed an MOU with D
O h to come to the table to help
us.
So that took time for us to set
up those systems so we didn't
meet that delivery herbal, But
we're working towards um, you
know, hiring caseworkers. The
Vacancy rate and protective
services is the lowest that it's
been since 2020 to 20% vacancy.
Our department has a 20% 4, so
technically we have hired what
we can in our protective
service. We don't have enough
people there right now. It's not
enough to meet the need and get
caseloads where they need to be.
So that means I have to keep a
higher vacancy. Do the work that
we do? Um, Where do we hire the
staff to meet the needs that we
have today? And where do we keep
positions vacant due to our
forced vacancy rate.
So we're looking at, you know,
hiring people 20%. That's really
good. We're gonna try to get it
down to 18 and hire more
individuals. But then we have to
make sure that we're doing the
right job in training them. We
can't just hire people and say
Okay, Here you go. We're going
to right size caseloads. And now
these new employees have a
caseload of 10. They're not
equipped to do that. Yeah. So
we're setting up our training
and our policies and making sure
that when we onboard them, we
give them the sufficient their
caseload.
They're well prepared right
things and they're ensuring that
kids are safe. The last thing on
earth I want to do is send
somebody out.
They have no idea how to conduct
an investigation. Things look
good to them, but they don't
know what to look for, and then
they leave that child in a
situation that is unsafe. But we
say we've gone we've visited.
we've assessed were good. I
don't want that to happen. I
think that is really dangerous
and so setting up those systems
so we can meet the caseloads is
what we've been working on. Now
we're hiring and we'll get
people train.
And with that staffing that we
have, assuming we don't continue
to lose people as quickly as we
hire them. We will be able to
We haven't Kevin s and maybe we
haven't gotten there but to be
able to show the progress that
we're making so that when we get
a letter that makes it look like
we're completely failing in
every area. It really gives us
an opportunity to say. Um
Willingness to work with us and
now you're going to hear
feedback, because, um
So the the letter really
specifically talked about the
hiring freeze, and before that,
it talked about the 2000 case
back Backlog and Virgilio
County, which obviously is half
of this committee's, um
Districts. I mean, what jumped
out obviously because it's in
bold is that this is a clear and
urgent safety risk for Children.
Again. That means kids
potentially die. Um
And so it sounds like you have
some plans. Can you give us an
idea as you're doing is reports
to senator I'm sorry for
interrupting, but we're not
picking you up at all for the
weapons getting feedback also.
So it's it's
Put these into the,
um I think you heard my
comments. Um
Where would we expect so in a
year?
Where should those backlogs
again? I'm gonna be selfishly
asking Madam chair, Senator
Morris. We do have a plan in
place. We immediately started
looking at that backlog.
Caseload. Um, we have brought on
a contractor who worked with C Y
f D for quite some time and did
investigations to kind of take
the lead on that and really look
at you know where those are. But
people are already out starting
to do. Some of those
investigations were said that
kids were never visited.
Um, what we're finding is
oftentimes staff left and never
entered case notes into our
system. And so they're going
back and looking through that to
really try to figure that out,
But we are getting out to those
houses immediately. That's been
a priority for us this week, and
we are putting together a plan
to address the backlog, whether
that be bringing that previously
worked for the department.
Or, you know, figuring that out
because, as I said, we've hired
people, but they are not ready
to take on. And so we are
working on a plan. I'd be happy
to kind of talk with anybody if
they have ideas on what that
needs to look like, But we're
addressing that, um and as you
heard from many people that
spoke today, a year for me is
way too long.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary. And I think you
address some of the other points
already in the letter, so I
won't behoove the staffing
issues. It sounds like we're
working on them, and Senator or
T y f d kids put in lockup for
holidays was obviously a, um,
scary headline, and it sounds
like you're working on that
issue. Did our product would you
like to do you have anything
else Because that was
This was scary.
Um, Senator Do Hig. Madam Chair,
Senator Morris. I take full
responsibility for that. So the
holidays were coming up. It was
four days. Five days we had I
believe nine kids that were
anticipated to be office stays
at that point in time.
I never intended it for it to be
a lockup situation. I was
looking for some place that
would have the ability to house
all of those kids so that we
could alleviate staff from
having in different counties to
have to work over the holiday
weekend and they could be home
with their families. But we
could still have the kids in a
safe environment.
The plan was really to have
them. I called Secretary Alan
asked if we could borrow one of
his casitas at Sequoia. It
wasn't because they were going
to be unlocked Ida Holiday meal
and maybe movie night and in my
mind, it all sounded wonderful.
Um, it absolutely did not turn
out that way. We got calls from,
you know, youth that night that
felt like they were being
punished and they were in
lockup.
Um, the next morning, our staff
went down on Thanksgiving
morning. Some of my leadership
team was there. They moved the
kids back to our Albuquerque
office. They still provided the
Thanksgiving meal to them, and
we took them back to the office.
So I apologize to anybody who
was offended by my decision to
do that. It really came from a
place where I thought
That it would be beneficial to
kids to be together under one
roof for the holidays and give
staff um the background. I mean
the availability to be home with
their kids. Um, I want to thank
Secretary Tafoya Lucero because
some of her staff was willing to
come and help with them that
weekend so that our staff could
have some time off. And, um
It obviously was one of the bad
decisions. Hopefully, the very
few that I will make as we move
forward.
And Madam Chair, Senator
secretary. I appreciate that.
Um, thank you for that
clarification. It sounds like
you have and I will leave it at
this letter speaks for itself.
I might still vote now, but it's
not gonna be. It's not gonna be
a no vote against your
grandmother. It's gonna be a no
vote against the system and the
governor and I'm going to
encourage the governor to
actually work with the
Legislature for a change because
this is deals with kids. Life's,
um so I appreciate you
appreciate our conversations. I
can appreciate continue to work
with you.
And I thank you for stepping up
to do this job because it is the
worst job in state government
and it's It's a thankless job,
and I appreciate you so, but I
do want to send a message to the
governor that she needs to take
this serious and start working
with the Legislature because any
kid who dies any problems that
happen in the future she owns.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Senators, phonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
brief. I've had some time with
Thank you, senator for bringing
this forward.
I'm going to support this
candidate, because, um
She did not create the majority
of the problems. Problems have
been going on for years.
But I do have a question. Um
Do you believe that there's
anything in your department?
That should be divested.
I personally believe madam chair
that that the department has too
many responsibilities. So is
there anything that could be
done?
Um, transferred done outside in
private with private enterprise.
Have you thought about that?
Thank you, madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator Stefanik.
Those are things that we're
looking at. As we do this
restructure. I mean, I think
it's one of the reasons that
early childhood was created to
really focus on. You know what
needed to be done there with a
home visiting and the early
childhood and getting them ready
and prepared for school. So
removing that from the
department, I think was a great
idea, and it is proving to be
incredibly successful. We have a
Hugely successful department and
we're reaching a lot of kids. We
still work very closely with him
as secretary, Greg Genske scared
We're in the same building and
we talk often, um, were of great
support to each other, and I
really do appreciate that. I
think taking some of the areas
that we do and really focusing
on retention, um, intervention
services.
Um
Is critical, but removing that
and putting it in another
department. Really, I think
would separate and we would lose
that bond that we have with our
staff and the ability to work
together because what happens
now? Well
In my vision of what will happen
is, you know a case will come in
and maybe not rise to the level
of investigation or taking
custody of a child. But that
family still needs services and
were co located with those
individuals and we're in those
offices and having those
conversations about what do they
need, And how do we support this
family? Or maybe it's a family
that did have an investigation
and kids were removed.
But now there's reunification
and so
That case worker has critical
information of that family and
background and they are right in
that same office with now the
caseworker that's going to be
doing family services and
continue so those relationships
and that camaraderie that we
need to build as rad work
together and having those
conversations as we continue to
move things and look at it.
There may possibly be situations
where something might be a
better fit and another another
area, you know, and we'll make
that recommendation at that
point in time and have those
conversations and make sure that
you know the families and the
kids that we serve. It may be
that as we're doing that, maybe
something could better be served
by privatizing it or contracting
it out of the department to get
a better opportunity to serve
kids and families. So
We will be looking at closely at
all of those as we continue
streamline the department.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Manager.
Thank you, Senator Nyberg.
Thank you, Madam Chair and for
Stepping up.
It's my hope that
You're a long term.
Person in this position because
I think the only way we
Have success is to have
stability.
And have stable, effective
leadership. And I hope that
you're that person so
It's my desire to to express
that.
Um
I need not look. And you and I
have discussed this. I need not
look madam chair beyond
My own, uh, community.
To highlight the urgency.
That I believe your department
faces and maybe we're just a
microcosm of the overall thing,
but
Um, it's very apparent in the
community. I come from.
That, uh, we need to do
A much better job in addressing
The needs of our Children who
are in very dire, so I like to
ask a few questions regarding
that.
Um
Last spring, representatives
from your office came to Roswell
and met with exchange and the
foster families did express of
variety of concerns that they
had
With respect to the department.
And you've you've addressed a
couple of those items of what I
consider red tape. Streamlining
procedures getting
reimbursements taken care of
promptly and we appreciate that,
Um
But there was also a sense of a
lack of support generally, and
so, could you talk about some of
your efforts to provide more
support to foster family and
you've talked about recruiting
or getting more foster families
involvement? I don't see the
numbers necessarily. But But
some of those efforts of
providing not just the
streamlining of process and the
red tape
Maybe this support that
You would like to see given to
these foster families to
encourage more.
Madam Chairman, Senator
neighbor. Um, yes, thank you. I
believe the first thing that I
noticed when I came on, and we
were talking about foster
families. Aside from the payment
issue, and those issues was that
we don't have a good support
system for them, right. We, for
some reason did away with
respite. Foster care. It wasn't
something that we license any
longer at the department.
It is something that we are now
starting to continue because
everybody has to have a break at
some point in time, right? We
had a situation recently with,
you know, um, a mother who had
twins that she was fostering,
and they were both sick. They
were in the hospital, and so you
know, just seeing them struggle
to not have that support or
somebody that could help when
the baby's came home, and she
herself was sick and not have
that
We? We have to do a better job
of building that. So we are
looking for respite, foster
families that can be anybody who
can take kids for a weekend or
even help drive them to school
or just any supports that we can
implement that will help the
foster families to make it
easier for them to continue to
do this. Um and I applaud them
for doing that.
It's a difficult situation, you
know, you get your in your
lifestyle and interrupted by
maybe taking kids across town to
school or making sure that they
continue with their therapy and
they might be enrolled in
activities that require you to
drive them here and there, so
the support that we can give
them is really important and
also helping them to build their
own network.
Maybe have some sort of, you
know, networking events with
foster families where they can
come together and really talk
about the challenges and share
experiences because I think
that's the best way for you to
Maybe learn of other things that
are available or that can help
or can distress you. You know
somebody who's going through a
similar situation that is, you
know, really the best therapy
that you can have so building
those supports in different
communities for foster families,
and we're going to start doing
that.
You know, in an early step by
really building out social media
platforms for them to be a part
of so that they can, you know,
join and have conversation in
their own private setting, but
also get tips and send in
information, and it'll give us a
way to know the struggles that
they're dealing with. Right. We
hear often foster families don't
feel supported. But what does
that mean? What do you need from
us?
To be able to fill you.
The training, I think is
critical. And that is one thing.
Um, Senator Stepanek's where we
really are looking at. Does that
need to be outsourced by
somebody who really has a great
curriculum built and can follow
up with those foster families
and make sure that it's
enhancing their experience and
giving them what they need to do
that and so building out that
training for them is really
important for us right now.
Um and Madam chair and and let's
crusaders. I think that that
meeting that you all had in
Roswell. I think you went around
the state. Um
I think the families that
attended that meeting and the
people who attended that meeting
were very appreciative that
Here was
Your office secretary's office
coming into our community and
wanting to listen to find out
what you found out some things,
but I would encourage you to
continue to keep that dialogue
going and have
Annual trips around the state to
see if the
People who are engaged with the
department if yesterday if their
needs are being met, or there's
still some problems and concerns
because I think that dialogue
was very important and kind of
highlighted. Inspector. The
fostering portion of your
responsibilities highlighted
some of the issues and you were
then able to address them.
Um and I'm sure there's some
some other concerns so I would
encourage you to continue that
outreach effort and maybe make
it an annual, uh, part of the
Secretary's office. Um
One other urgency in well,
there's several other urgencies
in Roswell.
Second one is is the Children
living at? We've talked about
that.
Um, and office buildings, Not a
good place, And you've
acknowledged that
Um yeah, and the staff that's
there. It's It's not just
Not a good environment for the
Children or teenagers that are
there. It's it's not good for
the staff as well. And so
Somehow we have to, uh, address
that issue and tackle that
issue, And I think Senator or
DCP? No, uh, recognized one
facility that maybe in
hindsight to we shouldn't have
closed down and looking forward.
I think we should look at maybe
that that mistaken looking
forward
Uh, look at some of those models
and and seeing if new Mexico
needs some regional facilities
or a statewide facility. I
agree. We all want these
Children to go into loving
foster families, but
The fact and you know it better
than I. The fact is, there's
some Children that foster
families for a variety of
reasons will not take
And we have to have a place, not
an office building. We have to
have a place to house these
Children with people who
Are trained to deal with the
sundry issues they bring to the
table.
With people who can provide some
education. In my opinion, some
Life skills.
And maybe some technical. These
Children are soon to become
adults and out in our community,
and we need them to be able to
take a place. Would you talk a
little bit about maybe your
vision, uh, to address these
Children who are currently
living in in the offices.
But
Cannot be placed in foster homes
and
Mr Chairman, Senator Neighbor?
Yes, Absolutely. It has been one
of the most challenging
situations to try to figure out.
You know, everybody wants them
to be in a loving home ourselves
included. Everybody wants them
to remain in their community.
They probably should. Everybody
wants them to have all of their
services right there in that
community, and that would be a
perfect situation. But it's not
where we are today. And so, um
It means making decisions that
are not going to make a lot of
people happy, but I believe it's
the right decision to make for
the kids so that they can have a
proper chance and an opportunity
for a transition that's going to
be meaningful for them and sets
them up for success. So as I
mentioned to Senator or TCP, no,
we are looking at an
alternative, which will give us
an opportunity to have
Um
It's one place where we can set
up all of those services. We
looked at doing that regionally
and right now it's just It's not
something that we can do. It
would take probably 12 to 15
staff members to staff one
location 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, and as we've talked
about our case slows are high,
and we don't have very much room
left in our budget to hire.
15 people to be in one location
to deal with, you know, anywhere
from 2 to 5. Individuals that
are in office stays, and so we
And talk about having all of
those programs that you alluded
to the most important thing for
us for those individuals is to
ensure that they have the
ability to receive services that
they need, whether that be
through our behavioral health or
a contractor that comes in but
to really assess them and
identify what do they need to be
successful? That will help us
them.
Right. Do they have any needs
that we really need to be
painted over to the foster
family that we're recruiting to
be able to have them be
successful, so
Educational services, whether
that be via local school or an
online service that we would
cater it in their in their
community. Um, it would also
have to have job training skills
because, as you mentioned these
are older youth that we're
dealing with that, at some point
are going to need to be out in
the community and be able to
have those skills that they need
to be able to be successful. So
we've been in communication with
the local community college to
talk about setting that up.
Setting up programming for
individuals. We bring them in
and making sure that we have a
path forward for them. It also
needs to include financial
literacy. I think that needs to
be done with all of the youth
that they have to be able to go
out and we can get them a job.
But are they then?
Um
Big job. Thank you, Senator. Um
and so putting all of those in
place has taken us a little bit
of time. But we do have a
provider. As I mentioned
earlier. We're going through
licensing. We have a
Building that's been renovated.
Um, you know, we're making it as
um Is it the perfect situation?
Absolutely not. But we get
pushed back from individuals. I
believe that we will. But I also
believe it's the right thing to
do for kids so that they have an
opportunity to thrive and
continuing to bounce them in and
out of placements is not
working. And so hopefully this
will be something that can
alleviate that.
I'm you know, open to other
suggestions that people have, um
Welcome to talk in more detail
about it. But as I said, we're
very close to licensor. We're
very close to opening and we're
really excited about the
opportunities that it will
create.
Madam chair, and that's because
Otto's I'm
Pleased to hear that because
The offer Tourism's number one.
As you pointed out for the
Children, but it's not a good
place for him because of the
staff. It
Takes the staff away from from
other things that they need to
be doing and frankly, I think,
is a source of
Morale issues and some other
issues that are cropped up. And
in Roswell, its manifest itself
and in people being at their
wits end calling the police
having them come and and making
this a a an escalated matter
instead of a a matter that
should be calm down and
And I've met some of the some of
the Children that were
I saved Children. Some of the
teens that were
Living at C Y F D office Right
before I came up here, and they
were
During the day at our local Casa
video games and other things
they were not in school. They
were not being educated. They
were spending their day in front
of TVs and gaming sets. Uh,
frankly,
Well, that's a safe environment.
It's not an environment that's
going to assist them in
Preparing them for life.
preparing them for what happens
after their 18 years of age. And
so I'm I'm glad that you
recognize you that that's an
issue that we can
Um
Tackle and even with the some of
the backlash that that we can
have a place it's better than
Children and and get them. The
support also have them.
Go into some education pursuits
tending technical vocational
pursuits and try to get them
prepared for life.
Um
What also 11 concern and in
Roswell was the backlog of
investigations and things could
you talk about? Are we making
any progress on the backlog that
exist in trying to deal with
some of that? I think you
touched on it earlier with maybe
some
Staffing issues make some
progress afford because that's a
child safety concern.
Madam Chair secretary, Senator
neighbor. Yes, we are working on
that. As I said, we sent staff
out. They started going out
immediately after that, To
really look at those were not
been seen by the way of D, um,
we prioritize those to make sure
we had eyes on those kids and
those families. Um, we are
working a plan. But as I said,
we have hired more staff, but
they're not ready.
At least all of them are not
ready yet to take on a caseload.
So we're determining internally,
you know, do we bring in
additional retired investigators
that can come back on contract
to help us clear that backlog or
do we kind of just readjust and
send? You know Tiger teams down
there to those specific areas
where it is problematic, but
with limited staff and limited
investigators?
Sending them down there to do
that than just puts their
caseload further behind. So it
is something that we're working
on with the leadership team to
try to develop a plan to be able
to go statewide and I've
advocated for a couple of years.
Now that, uh, our efforts to
provide college for all
Maybe a great initiative, but we
really ought to
Be looking at using programs
like that to accommodate needs
of the state of New Mexico.
And I would argue that
If we need, uh social workers if
we need nurses if we need other
Uh,
Professions filled
Provide college for all for
those particular, uh, areas and
allow those students to have
their
So called loan repaid after they
contribute four or five years of
service to the state of New
Mexico, and that way the state
has a pipeline of those
professionals now coming to the
state, providing back service to
the state, and I think the
citizens then get a return on
their investment in those folks.
Um so I would encourage you to
use your position to maybe yet
Advocate for that, as you, uh,
talked to the governor on that,
Um
With respect to the breadth of
the department. You, uh centers
Delfonics? Uh, asked about that,
and
Um
I can understand your question
and keeping family education may
be tied in with the foster care
or the maybe the abusing neglect
part, but
I have a real concern with the
breath of the department because
you also do juvenile justice.
Really?
Part of your responsibility is
to deal with juvenile justice
and and I'm kind of concerned as
to whether or not
That really fits within your
department and whether
I agree with the senator, that
maybe it ought to be
War focused your attention ought
to be more focused.
And specifically on the abuse
and neglect and I think the
fostering portion of this other
stuff to me is a I were in your
shoes and be a distraction for
me because I think you need to
be laser focused on uh but the
Children there and let other
agencies that frankly, may be
better equipped to deal with the
juvenile justice aspects of it.
Out, and that would require some
legislation on on our part, But
could you comment on on that you
did a little bit with centers?
Phonics, but I'd like to know
about that piece of it.
Sure, Madam Chair, Senator.
Neighbor. Yes. Um, we have
looked at, you know, juvenile
justice and what that looks like
a lot of the cases that come in.
There are not new.
Actual active kids who are on
probation, some of the cases
that come into juvenile justice
come in from the school
districts for individuals who
are, you know, maybe truant or
excessive absenteeism at school.
Um and so those are cases right
now that we're removing from
juvenile justice and those will
be sent over to our family
services division, so
Families in need of supervision
are not necessarily those that
need to be an officer. Um, those
can be have significantly. Um I
won't say reduce because we
haven't reduced the number. But
the vacant FT have been
allocated to go in so that
juvenile justice really is just
dealing with individuals who are
on probation or waiting. A court
hearing and those that just
needs are moving into family
services so we can work with
those families to determine.
You know what is needed. So
again, I see that as that
pipeline need. It may not be
that the child needs to have a
system. Um, you know, maybe once
we look at that and figure out
the Reuben you know, maybe that
is something that sits better
somewhere else. And so they
said, we are looking at what do
we need to be doing to do that?
Well, I would encourage you to
look
Look at the department and and
see if we knew
Maybe.
Provide
More focused for you to to to
assist and I think my opinion,
the agency
And it's not your fault. It's
probably our fault and maybe
maybe the governor's fault. We
We have just piled lots of
things on on you, and frankly,
it's it's difficult at best to
get your arm all and and as a
result, I think we're
We're seeing the value of the
system. Yeah, And so I think we
as a legislative body needs to,
uh
Take some action and do
something alleviate that burden
and we need your advice is to
have figured that out in the
next six months or nine months
we made I would encourage you to
get the governor come in special
session to talk just about your
department and what needs to be
done.
I think I feel strongly that we
have to be part of that solution
with with your recommendations,
and it just can't be done by the
executive, Um
And then
Finally, I'd like to talk a
little bit about, uh
An issue that is one that in my
community even tragic, and that
is
The policy of the department to
reunify families as as its major
goal and
That's resulted in maybe a
couple of deaths in my
community, and probably a number
of deaths statewide.
Yeah, and I just
I would encourage you to
Make the best interests of the
child your top priority.
And look at the child and its
welfare.
Reunification may be in the best
interest, but in many cases it's
probably not, and we've seen
that come to fruition with some
Horrible events in the state.
Yeah. And so could you talk a
little bit about
That priority with respect to
whether it's still
reunification or whether we're
trying to move more towards
looking at the best interest.
Sure, Madam Chair, Senator,
neighbor. Um, yes, I will. You
know, I think reunification for
families is critically
important. You know, kids always
feel like that is their comfort
zone regardless of the situation
at home, so it's something where
we really have to make sure our
staff is properly trained to be
able to work through that case.
You know, And you know if
there's reunification, make sure
that family is following that
case plan if they have to do a,
B and C in order for that
reunification to take place, and
somebody needs to be monitoring
it and making sure that it's
happening and that it's
effective, right. We can't say
Well, they did. A and C B wasn't
as important and we're going to
do it. We really if we're going
to set out a plan for that
family to be successful.
There has to be follow up and
follow through and then there
has to be supported that family
After that reunification
happens, right? It's not just
you did everything here is the
child back in this house. It has
to be where we're there to
follow on that case and make
sure that it's working because
it's not just, you know, it's
still stressful for the parents
who the child is coming back
into.
You know, maybe they have, you
know, gotten past required that
child to be removed and they're
feeling better about it, but
they still need that and make
sure and keep hiking and if not
be there to support them and
continue that. But that doesn't
necessarily mean that reunion
and really, what we need to be
able to do is make sure that
we're providing the support
early. We're doing those values
because if reunification is not
possible in some situation
And we want to make sure we get
stability for that child early
on and so really having staff
that's trained to look at that
and have you know our providers
working hand in hand with us to
make those evaluations and those
decisions and then providers you
send an individual for services,
you know, and often times
there's barriers in those
services as well. Somebody may
have
The best in town, and then they
can't get in to see a provider
or see those services. And so we
need to make sure that that's
you know, happening in an
opportunity for them so that
every child has an opportunity.
Madam Chairman Asato sleeping
when I
Raise this issue with your
predecessor Justice Field, um
after a death and Chavez County.
Uh, you know, we asked that the
Words on the paper be changed,
so to speak, and and that it
Big knowledge that we're really
after the best interests of the
child and
Um, I got a little push back,
and I'm not sure that
That that goal has ever been
been changed, and so I would
just encourage you to look at
what
You're sending out to the
particularly the field offices
that have to implement these
policies.
Yeah, and whether or not that
is, is the top priority or
whether it's still reunification
of the family because in the
Travis County case we had the
sheriff's office.
The local Casa.
And the district attorney's
office. All saying, Don't send
the child back.
And yet
C Y F D, who ultimately makes
the decision.
Sent the child back and two days
later.
Child's gone.
And so
We were trying to Justice V.
Hill try to highlight
How the words on the paper the
You know the goals.
We're having an effect on what
the agency did. And if that's if
it's been changed great.
But if it's still the same, I
would encourage you as strongly
as I can.
Please put the best interests of
the child.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And, um
Ms Casada is you're sitting in a
chair that many persons, of
course have come before.
And during my tenure on this
committee over
Many years.
There is always hope with
everyone who sits in that seat.
To do well.
Four environment Children.
And families, too.
So for your willingness to
continue on this journey.
Um, kudos.
For your willingness to do so.
and I echo what Senator Morris
said, because it's not an easy
job.
And we've said this to other
secretaries for other jobs that
you have taken on that are in
the room today.
They're not easy jobs, but this
one I think is
More close to home for many
people.
Because it it affects Children,
but it also affects families.
And we all have. Some of us have
connections and involvement with
C Y F D I to have one.
Um
And this was under a prior
administration.
Or another secretary, I think
was trying to do right.
But
I learned a lot.
About the internal workings,
both at the county level.
Um, the issues at the state
level and how a system needs to
change.
Madam Chair. It's not just C Y f
D.
But it's a system.
The police.
Those who are investigating
What training are they
receiving?
Because they're the ones who
also go on the call.
And if you don't have an officer
who was trained and understands
how to deal with trauma.
Who knows how to ask the right
questions, Etcetera. You're
never going to get to the bottom
of some of the issues that is in
front of you.
So
Um, it is C Y f D s
responsibility, but it goes back
to those who are part of the
team.
Enforcement doesn't always get
it right either. And madam
chair, Um
Federal law says that we have to
reunify family.
Federal law gives us a directive
as to what the timeframe is when
a child is removed from a home.
If they can't go back to their
home, then there has to be a
permanency for that child so
they don't languish in our
foster care system. That's
federal law.
The problems that are within C Y
F D senator or TCP no has had
experienced in the system.
There are others in this room
who have had experience.
But what I believe, madam chair,
um, Secretary to be
Um, is that there are
Um, I think some circumstances
of where we and I said this to
every secretary that I had met
with over the years.
It's called HR.
Human resources.
Working with our staff.
Working with the team. The
people who are actually out of
the front line.
Those are the most important
persons that we rely on as a
state.
To help our families.
And I know you've talked about
it others before you have talked
about it, and it's hard because
you're working internally within
a system that needs support.
When you have, um staff who deal
with trauma every day they go
home. What are we offering to
them, and it's the same with
other first responders.
Dealing with trauma. You get
your own PTSD What you dream
about at night. It affects you
for the next day when you have
to go back out and do that hard
work.
And every secretary who was sat
in your chair has said Yes,
we're going to work on it. And I
hope you continue to work with
what you have shared with us
today because it's not easy.
Sometimes there needs to be
changed within staff.
And I'm not saying it or
rotation.
The part of that goes back to
training.
And training is so important,
Madam Chair
Because if you don't train work
with and support your staff
You're gonna have an exodus.
You're going to have people who
stay for whatever reasons they
are, but it's the negative
energy that continues to foster.
And I've seen that over the
years and some of others of us
have also, but it's internal.
That needs some help. It needs
some work.
Um
What I would hope. Um
Madam chair. Mr Sato's is that
You begin to also look at who's
the investigator and I'll bring
up 11 incident while there's
three of them, but I'll speak on
one
There was a child, a six year
old who was raped.
The same exam was done.
Proof was shown.
And yes, she was sent back.
We had investigators. Yes.
But we also had police who were
negating what the same exam
said.
I petitioned a secretary under
the former administration.
Who said no, I have nothing. I
can't do anything.
I think the secretary has some
power.
To change if need be, especially
if there's evidence to show
through a sane exam that a child
had been sexually abused.
There are instances across the
state that I have dealt with
over the years and it comes up
to your level. Madam Secretary.
And I even petitioned the
governor, the former
administration and she poo pooed
it.
Even though she had
Experience down in her county
with regards to these issues.
Those are issues. I know that we
talk about on this committee
That's in the news about how
serious and some of our Children
We have a key stuff, but it also
goes back as they say once
again, just to reiterate Madame
chair. It's the system. Those
who are also investigating not
just our department and the
state level, but the police.
And those others who are part of
the support systems in the
because we all know
There are biases in community
and we have to be very careful
on that.
And that's a tough job in a
tough role that you and your
staff have with regards to this.
Um
Senator TCP No kind of stole my
thunder. We did used to have,
um, a place in Albuquerque.
And I know we used to receive
Children from different parts of
the state because that was a
place that was safe.
You know, United way we used to
support that many times over.
There was always chances to go
visit. It was the fostering
community.
So with what you're suggesting,
Madam chair Ms Cassano's. I hope
that that would be maybe
something in line with what this
particular entity used to
provide.
Because it should have been here
a long, long time ago.
And I'm glad that someone made
the recommendation for that to
be looked into because it really
Provided a safe space for our
Children.
Um, I know there hasn't been any
questions, Madam chair, but I
wanted to see what with regards
to our Native American families.
You know, we have some
legislation passed.
And I'm very proud that we did.
The governor signed it.
With regards to what we do about
separating Native American
indigenous Children from family.
If I may ask, Madam Chair, Ms
Cassano's What are you doing to
recruit and work with Native
American families?
Who can then take care of
Children who have to be removed
temporarily.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
Thank you. Um so
We have an incredible director
of office of tribal affairs. Um
Donna Lynn has worked tirelessly
over the last year in really
building out those relationships
with tribes problems in the
nation. We
We have increased the number of
F T E s that we're doing in that
office to give more support.
But honestly, as we were really
building out what we were doing
across the state with respect,
we determined that that was
something that really needed to
be built into the training that
we do for all of our staff.
So we did the cultural awareness
training for individuals across
the agency to make sure that
that same lens that we were
looking at Children from tribes
public or the nation is the same
lens that we're looking at all
Children with They all deserve
that same cultural awareness
They all deserve that same
opportunity to be developed
within their communities with
individuals.
Um, that share their same
cultures. And so it really
opened our eyes to what was
needed with respect to
individuals and not just saying
we're gonna build out an office
of tribal affairs that deals
with those individual Children.
We're gonna train our staff
across the state to recognize
that and be able to deal with
that issue. So if
A native child is living in
Carlsbad.
And comes into our custody.
We're still looking at it
through that same lens, and it
doesn't require somebody coming
from our office of tribal
affairs in Gallup.
Is it gala for grants?
That office to come down there
to deal with that issue. We want
to make sure that across the
department were trained, um and
having that sensitivity and
having that care for all of the
kids that come into state
custody or into our contact. Um,
and so she's at the table and
our leadership meetings. She's
part of that team. She gives her
suggestions she does trainings
across the state.
Constantly and she if I showed
you the list of all of the
tribes and publishers and
meetings that she's engaged in
over the last six months, um
it's incredibly impressive. So
it is something that we take
seriously at the department.
We're working on making sure
that we have everything in place
to do that. We did ask for
additional positions, um, to
help with the training that
we're doing across the state for
that in the engagement that
we're having with, um
The tribes and pueblos and
nations. So
Um, that is one issue. Um, the
other question that I want to
address with respect to
training. Um, I agree with you
that oftentimes one force mint,
um, you know, don't fully
understand the realm of the work
that's done at C Y F. D.
Um, as a leadership team. We've
had conversations about getting
in early, um, at the training
academies so that when
individuals are coming on board
as a law enforcement officer in
the state, whether it be at a
local entity for a sheriff's
department or local police,
department or state police,
we're looking at building some,
um
Trauma, enforced training into
their curriculum. And also, just
of course on, you know, C y of D
and how we work together and
what that needs to look like as
we move forward and do those
investigations, So we're working
with state police on trying to
incorporate that into the
academy's trainings.
Madam chair. I appreciate that,
because one of the issues
because of rural New Mexico many
times it is the state police who
are the investigators. If other
there's other, um, circumstances
And I know they haven't uh,
particular.
A group of persons who go out
and that are I think, have a bit
more training, but I don't think
it's big enough. But again, it's
staffing issues and how many
officers they have available to,
so I'm glad to hear that, but it
needs to continue.
Um, Madam Chair.
Um, there was mentioned by
Senator Nyberg with regards to
juvenile justice.
And
And I mentioned this before. I
was, um
Just made that the governor had
placed in her.
Public health order.
About, you know, suspending the
Juvenile Detention Alternatives
Initiative.
And it's It's very distant,
heartening to hear and to learn
more about
What has been suspended,
Although I know the courts are
continuing. There's differences.
you know different parts of our
government.
Um, but what I wanted to ask a
couple of questions Madam chair
is with regards to juvenile
justice.
Um, C y f d.
Has oversight of facilities
Where are juveniles are
confined? Yes.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez. Um
no, not of the where they're
detained prior to adjudication.
Mm.
Madam Chair. Um
Why not?
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
Those facilities are run by the
counties. There are four across
the state in San Juan Bernal,
Leo
Um
Believe Hobbes and Las Cruces
Those are county operated
facilities. We run the
facilities.
And the reason why I asked that
madam chairs because my
understanding that C I f d does,
um
I guess you could say get
clearance for some of the
programming and such that they
do within
Are detention centers.
That's what I'd understood,
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, c y
F D, um, goes in and does the
reviews and the licensing of the
facilities.
Um, Madam Chair? Um Miss Casado.
So
Um, anything that deals with
juveniles, then if there's like
extended confinement, otherwise
called solitary confinement.
Um, the issues on
You know, having cameras in the
restrooms and showers where
these Children are being kept.
I mean, there's a whole laundry
issue, Madam chair.
So see why FD has nothing to do
with that. Madam Chair, Senator
Lopez. No, we don't install
cameras or oversee those. Um, I
know there are pre requirements
for those that they follow. Um,
but we don't oversee those.
Okay. And Madam chair. I wasn't
insinuating that C y f d put
cameras in, but I'm aware that
there are some cameras.
Where these Children take
showers.
Um, in facilities that were
there, housed before being
adjudicated with their confined
at this point.
And there's some some concerns
that I have. And if you don't
maybe that's something, Madam
chair that we need to talk about
offline because of C Y f d.
Doesn't these are still
Children?
Within the state of New Mexico.
Um, who have made for whatever
reason they are in there. Some
who have committed, you know
some some heinous
Potentially because they haven't
been in front of a court. So
there's still accused.
But I think there's some issues
Madam chair that maybe we need
to sit and chat about
Um, because Madam chair is my my
Understanding that C Y f D does
have some
A semblance of approval of some
sort within with regards to the
system.
Madam chair when we have
Children who are being placed in
some of these facilities.
I think that we still need to
keep an eye on it because there
are other issues where whether
it's Bernalillo County, Dona Ana
at the John Paul Taylor Center
farming tonight wherever they
may be.
Um, making sure that we're still
taking care of the safety
yesterday. Those Children
But also the involvement of
their families.
So maybe Madam chair that give
you something else we can chat
about as after you get through
today.
Because I have some concerns.
Madam Chair.
Um
And it's you know, because
there's also some issues about
sedation of young Children. And
I say young, because they're
under the age of 18 and
somebody's facilities.
What are the protocols?
Are. There is if there's no
guidance from the state, then
I think maybe we need to have a
little more care more look into
what's happening with our
Children.
Um, within these facilities, so
I just wanted to bring that up,
Madam Chair.
Um
And, um
But I would also hope Madam
chair is that we can continue to
to look at
Um
I'm getting off of the juvenile
justice for right now.
When we talk about our foster
families, resource families for
for those Children who have been
removed temporarily.
I would hope that, um
We don't
Criminalized poverty.
Because many times these
families for what a traditional
middle class family is supposed
to look like, doesn't look like
that in many parts of our state.
And I know I've spoken to the
secretary Grogin ski and others
and I know there's been measures
in this body.
I'm being brought forward to
help with financial issues in
your financial help, making sure
there's food and all the other
necessaries.
Our school systems are well
aware of this.
But Madam chair. I think it's
still a concern that I have from
any legislation that's
introduced that we don't
criminalize poverty.
Just because the middle class
family doesn't look like the
family that's across the street
for me or in the next street or
in the neighborhood.
Doesn't mean that there
Not trying to do right for their
Children.
Madam chair. I hope that that's
where we began to look sure that
we're making an offering help.
Which is why we did the office
of Family Representation
advocacy because that's the
other part of the system with
regarding ADL items.
To have accountability.
If a child is referred, What do
we do to offer help?
But then sometimes need legal
services. I mean, there's so
much more to the system and just
what we have had a chance to to
talk about today, Madam Chair.
So I hope at some point in the
future, um we can share some
time.
But, um
I just want to make sure that
we're not criminalizing poverty
and taking our Children away
just because parents
Need help.
So with that, madam chair. Um
again. I wish you well.
Um, we're all here to work with
you and help in any way, shape
or form. Um, but these are some
concerns that I have, and I
voiced him before Madam chair
and many different committees
upset on
Federal law says that we're
supposed to view now by
families. It's not the state.
It's the federal law.
A timeline that we have in our
initiative at the state level is
to make sure that Children
Can be returned to a family and
safety.
But also with supports, And
that's something that we have
yet to work on, Madam Chair.
I appreciate thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much for those
comments. I appreciate it. I
would love to schedule some time
to speak offline. I think you
know a lot of the work that
we're doing in our family
services and other areas. Um,
address some of those issues and
concerns that you have, so I'd
love to have that car.
Thank you, Senator Pirtle.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary Designate for
being here today.
Um, you know, I think we saw
almost every Cabinet secretary
here to support you. One notably
who was absent, though, would be
Secretary Alan.
And
I didn't see him here. It's
probably wise on his part.
Um, just with the exchange and
in the way that a colleague of
ours was treated in secretary or
Senator Brantley
You know, as a member of this
body and a friend of mine, you
know the way she was treated.
For speaking out and raising
concerns with what's going on in
the state. I don't think was
It was fair to her and really
fair to to the Senate as a
whole. So I just wanted to point
that out. Um, but
I have a question. Sometimes we
gotta set just these small
goals, right?
Um, when we're trying to improve
what's the goal of yours say for
next week for the department?
Um Madam Chair is like Senator
Pirtle. Well, my goal for today
is to make it through
confirmation so that staff feels
like they have a leader who is
going to be there with them for
the next three years. And you
know that it kind of ends that
turmoil for them, Um, goal for
next week for me would really be
to make sure that we're moving
forward on the supports that we
need for our staff. That's been
something that we're working on.
Right now. We have a couple of
things that we're really close
to getting to
Um, but supporting them to do
the work that they do. Um, right
now is important for us so that
they can continue to do that and
be leaders for those new
employees that we're bringing
in.
So then madam Chair and
Secretary designate what? What
would be your goal for the month
of February? What do we want to
have accomplished by February,
28th.
Um Madam Chair, Senator Pirtle,
Michael for February. 28th is to
have made a significant
Movement on the backlog that C I
f. D is seen, Madam Chair and
secretary designate.
What would be your goal by the
end of May.
Um, Madam, Chair Secretary,
Senator Pirtle. Um, there are
quite a few things that you
know, I would like to see moving
forward in the department by the
end of May. Um, I think at that
point in time, I would like to
see that we are fully staffed
and that we have a training
system in place that supports
that staff to get the training
that they need to be able to do
their job. And madam chair and
Secretary. I would like to see
those in writing.
I'd like to see those, um,
passed out to every employee
within the department to know
from the top. These are the
goals. These are what we need to
have accomplished in a short
period of time.
Because the reality is with what
we're seeing. Um, we don't have
time.
We've got to get it done, and
we've got to get it done now.
I'm not gonna sit here and claim
to be some type of expert in C Y
f D or C one of the issues or
what I can tell you is just from
what I'm hearing from friends of
mine that are sitting in the
audience that that are at the
ground level that are dealing
with foster kids and families
that we have to do something.
And so I think at this point
just being from a manager
position in my employment that a
lot of times what happens is is
we have all these great grand
ideas in our expectations. Just
don't get down to the boots on
the ground.
And so if we could get that
done, I think that's a step in
the right direction. But the
reality is, um you've been here
nine months and I'm not hearing
enough specifics today.
That's That's what I'm hearing a
lot of generalities and and they
they sound great.
Um, but what I'm not hearing is
specifics. What are we
specifically going to do?
To turn this department around
because there have been ideas
put forward.
And by either Senator Brantley
or Senator do Hig or House
members that have brought ideas
forward and we passed a
constitutional amendment
yesterday. I think one of the
most compelling arguments, um,
surprisingly came from from
Senator Munoz when he said, Um,
at this point, we just got to do
something.
We've got to do so we gotta try
something because being 50th
51st 50 seconds depending on who
you calculate in in the
calculation is not acceptable.
So I would like to see more
ideas coming from the fourth
floor to us.
I'd like to see more ideas
coming. Um, um from you.
And and, frankly, I would like
to hear more from the boots on
the ground. I want to hear from
the foster families. What What
do they have to say?
There's a story um, that was
told to me one time at a
It was at a class to learn how
to be a better leader within
your business, and it talked
about a
A company that will just say
whatever they shipped out, they
filled boxes.
And they kept having these boxes
come across the
Assembly line, and they were
empty.
And so all the bigwigs in the
company got together and they
spent millions of dollars to
come up with the system that
when these empty boxes came
across the line, you know the
whole assembly line would stop.
So they could go get that empty
box.
Well, they kept getting these
reports back empty boxes, empty
boxes, empty boxes. And so they
Trying to figure out what's
going on. And then all of a
sudden, one day there's
No alerts. The system doesn't
stop. Everything's going smooth
because there hasn't been an
empty box alarm.
And so all the all the higher
ups in the company go down to
the line where whatever is
happening, and they go down
there and they see a box fan set
up on this line to just blow the
empty boxes off.
So that it doesn't stop the
whole system.
And so the moral of that story
is sometimes and it was from a,
um you know, lower level
employee basic level employee
that was just tired of having to
stop what he was doing.
To go restart the assembly line.
And so I think the point is
sometimes we we think you know
we're
Appear trying to top down
approach. When really, we have
to go down to the bottom level
boots on the ground, find out
what they truly need.
And support them that way, and
that's how we get buy in, and I
think we're at that point
because I think it's such a dire
situation.
The morale within employees. I
mean, these are all people that
are doing this and just it's
like our first responders that
Senator Lopez brought up that
they see these things.
But yet they still choose to get
up every day and work a
thankless job many times where
they see things that they can't
unsee and yet they still show
up.
And they still put in the time.
And so I think that's really
where we're at. I want to see
more specific goals out of your
department. If you could give
those to us, I'm not going to
support
Your nomination. It's nothing
against you.
Um, but I just think at this
point I need to see more and I
and I hope I wouldn't root root
for the ship to sink. That's for
sure.
I want you to succeed.
I want the department to
succeed.
There's too many kids out here
suffering that we have to read
about and see. And those are
human beings experiencing things
these things that we're reading
about, and so I'm hopeful that
you're able to turn it around.
Um, you know, only three years
left to do it. Or maybe you do
such a fantastic job. Um, the
next governor who have whomever
it is keeps you keeps you on
board.
Um, but I definitely am rooting
for you to succeed, but we're
just out of time and we need
Thank you, Senator Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, secretary designee for
coming forward. I, uh I want to
first appreciate your desire and
willingness to help I can see
that it is heartfelt.
I can see that with the amount
of family you brought with you,
um that that to me, No offense
is is much, much more compelling
than all the secretaries in the
room. Um, but so I want to thank
you for that. I wanted to ask
you first. I've heard different
numbers. Um, six months, nine
months.
Madam Chair and secretary
designee. How long have you been
Madam chair?
Minority floor leader Baca. It
has been. I believe. Nine months
I started at C Y F D in early
May.
Okay. Thank you for that. Thank
you for that. So, um uh And so
that clear? Clarifies that
question for me. I wanted to ask
you to and I was looking through
your resume and
Hmm. You do have extensive
experience in government, and I
applaud that, and I believe
there's a lot of value to that.
Um, what was a little bit
lacking to me? That I thought
was, um any any training in the
areas of like behavioral, health
and and or child or child care
those kinds of things can you
make me feel a little bit more
comfortable by filling in some
of those gaps as to why
As to what you have to bring to
the table when it comes to those
types of their Children, Youth
and families. Sure, madam chair
Minority floor leader Baca. I
don't have any specific expiry
experience in behavioral health.
Um, the work that I did at Santa
Fe County, working with seniors
and really navigating for them
to be an advocate to make sure
that they got through that area.
You know, helped me really to
kind of understand and identify
and be able to add elation with
respect to childcare.
Specifically, um I will let my
family kind of speak to that. As
I mentioned at the beginning of
this I was a teen mom, um,
graduated high school. I had my
daughter Serena, who served as a
juvenile probation officer for
16 years in the administration
for C Y F. D.
She probably would love to go
back and do that. It's really
her passion. But unfortunately
for her with me there, that's
not an option. Um, she continues
to work in state government. She
actually has been a government
employee longer than I have, um,
and can retire before I can,
but, um so
She's with us here today. My
son, Ryan, who is also a state
employee. Does capital outlay
for d F A, Um, his two Children
with him. Krista and Dominic.
She is a freshman going to
school, wanting to do social
work and contribute back to the
community. My son Eric, on the
end, who was a single father? He
is a nurse went to nursing
school just recently. Last
couple of years.
And his two Children who are
with us today.
Um, my husband, who was an
educator working for Santa Fe
public schools, retiring after
educating and going back to
continue coaching and mentoring
young adults and my mom who was
an incredible example for us on
just how to do the right thing.
How to make sure that the work
you do affects people's lives in
a positive way.
And so I think they bring that
to the table, so maybe what I
lack in actual training and
experience I make make up for
and just the work that I've done
The struggles that I've had. You
know, when we talk about not
letting poverty be a barrier,
Just success. Um I think I stand
here before you today to say.
Nobody knows.
The path that I've taken to get
where I am today, and it takes a
lot and I recognize that in the
families that we serve, and I
want to make sure that we're
giving them those opportunities
so someday they can stand up and
say I made it and it's because
somebody gave me that
opportunity and somebody saw
what was needed.
In a system that was lacking.
And thank you for your answer,
And I to Madam Chair and Miss
Casada scan can relate. I grew
up in the fields of blend in Los
Chavez and Morales.
Um doing hard labor growing up,
and so I know what that means,
and I was given chances along
the way, too, so I can
appreciate that. Um, and my
experiences and your experiences
as you know, are
I can appreciate the what you're
surrounded with, but I would
feel much more comfortable if
you had some more direct direct
experience with C Y F D with the
issues facing or youth in this
state, um and have been, I guess
in that system because some of
these positions that I see here
although very good agency work,
and I have no reason to believe
that you've ever
Done a poor job at any of these
are there, um, somewhat
attenuated in regards to the
position that you're the next
thing I'm going to has been
touched on already. And you told
me you've been in the position
since May. We're now in January.
It was, um and I do not fault
you. I want you to know that for
the troubles the agency faces
This is, uh, has been going on a
long time. I was just looking at
an article from Actually 2020
had our esteemed senator. Your
sponsor, Madam Chair, um,
responding to KR accused cuties
questions about, um some of the
items and see why FD and and
rightly so. Rightly so, Miss
Madam Chair, Senator.
Padilla gave real Frank answers
to them about the problems he
saw and see why F D and how we
needed to address it. But here
we are sitting much much later
down the road about a chair and
he had nothing has been done.
And so I got a little bit
troubled during your testimony
to hear what has been
accomplished so far, and we've
had, you know, close to three
quarters of the year now to do
something, and what I heard a
lot of was, um, I'm getting
situated on putting my arms
around it that that sort of
thing and initially
Initially and I'm gonna be I'm
gonna disclose something here.
Um, I considered supporting your
nomination today and in
consideration I was, um I was
going to request some messages
for Seaway FD bills, but
I upon further thought, I think
that that's inappropriate.
Um, I don't want to do that. Um,
this should be a headliner for
the executive and for your
agency, it should be, if not
number one number two behind
crime on the list of things to
get done this session.
So to wait another year is
simply just too long. We cannot
do it. And the problem is
extensive enough, Madam chair
that you're going to require
legislation to assist you to do
your job, none of which has been
presented or even seen in the
committee this year, and so that
is very troubling to me.
Additionally, um and
unfortunately, you had a
directive coming in. We had this
This report that came in that
we've been talking about and and
this report is actually based
upon
This corrective action plan,
which came from the Kevin s
settlement that you're well
aware of
In that corrective action plan.
it designates certain steps to
be taken.
In each of these steps, and some
of them are things like
workforce caseload, and I won't
go into each one. But they're
out all outlined within that
action plan.
Each of those items starts this
way. The parties agree that the
following commitments will be
implemented to improve
compliance.
It is not a suggestion. It is
not an item that is to be
examined.
And then to be acted upon at
some later date. They all have a
date attached to them as to when
they were to be completed. Most
of those dates have passed.
This letter that we received in
this report is a follow up on
that case Action plan.
In this letter. What they didn't
know is that
And they even have a quote in
here and I'll see if I can find
it. But
Their their Their idea was that
the agency has been weak and
what they have done in many of
the areas that as as that they
examined in regard sex case
action plan some of the language
they use. Um and what that tells
me is that this isn't being
looked at as a crisis and Madam
chair and I'll ask you
Madam secretary designee. Is it
crisis mode at Seaway FD right
now.
Madam Chair, Minority floor
leader Baca.
There is a crisis in the work
that we need to do.
But operating in crisis mode
will not get us the results that
we need. So as I mentioned
earlier, when I came in, it was
really to take a strategic look
at this is where we need to be.
But how are we going to get
there? And I think I laid out a
lot of the issues that we were
working and offered to meet with
his body quarterly, moving
forward to give a report of
where we are on those
commitments in Kevin S.
Um
Because it's a commitment to
work towards those numbers, and
we are 100% committed towards
doing that. There has been steps
and there has been progress.
Is it to the extent that's
required in the cap? No, it is
not, but there have been steps
in progress towards meeting
those goals.
Oh, repeat my question. Then
Madam Chair and Madam secretary
Designee. Is there a crisis at C
Y f. D.
Madam Chair, Minority Floor
leader Baca. Yes, there is a
crisis across the state. Thank
you. Thank you for that answer.
Thank you for your frankness.
and that answer. I have not
heard that yet, um, from from an
executive level that that there
is a crisis there and and this
report would tend to agree with
you and I'll show you some some
support for your position that
there is a crisis.
This is a clear and urgent
safety risk for our Children.
Quote from there. We believe
there are conditions now that
are unsafe for Children and
unsafe, believe leadership must
take immediate and
extraordinary steps.
To stabilize the conditions in
many of the C Y F D.
In some, the agency must begin
acting like there is, in fact, a
crisis that threatens Children's
safety and compels new. Urgent
barrier breaking activity.
Barrier breaking activity.
We don't have a bill that is
being heard in a committee.
The cap.
Should have been completed in
December.
We don't have time to assess to
a great level.
They pointed out within that
cap, the issues that were cited
the agency and the state agreed
to abide by that by that pro
program and and they have not.
In reviewing that some of the
news articles I have four
reasons why it's an emergency
that I can say.
Victoria's Martins.
James Duncan Omari Varela.
And Leland Valdez.
That is the urgency that we
face.
And that is why this should be
front and center.
And I do believe your heart is
in the right place. But I think
that
The fact that you have been on
the job for that amount of time.
I feel like we she should have
seen more drastic action between
then and I'm not blaming on you.
You can't call us into special
session, but maybe we should
have been called into a so I
want to appreciate your
willingness to serve.
Unfortunately, I'm not going to
be able to. I would love for you
to prove me completely wrong.
And my commitment to you is that
if you do that, I will. I will
come to you and I will certainly
acknowledge that But whether
that happens or not, you will
have. I know my full support in
revamping this agency because it
is broken.
And you know, on opening day I
was questioned about C Y F D and
it was one of two agencies. I
believe that needs to be and I
don't take this lightly
dismantled and rebuilt.
From the ground up.
Um it's a big step. It's gonna
be tough.
I wish you the best to look, I
think you're going to have the
votes here today to get through.
Um and we need you. We didn't.
We need you to do a good job.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator. I
don't have anyone else on the
list.
So I'll have a couple of
questions and will someone will
make a motion.
So, um
So there's a policy Advisory
Commission for C Y F. D.
Uh huh.
And
They come before this committee
as well for and I've seen it.
Folks, uh,
Seems like folks aren't staying
on that commission. I think at
least three people is going on
with that group.
Um, So Madam Chair member of the
committee's We do have a policy
advisory group. Um, we have had
a couple members resign. Justice
Barbara V. Hill was on that
policy advisory committee and
committed to being on it for six
months, and she did.
Um, do that, and she's moved on.
We were vetting somebody, and
that didn't come to fruition.
And so we're still trying to
fill that.
In addition to filling those
vacant positions, I think that
the work that they do, um, needs
to be more meaningful for them
over the last Let's see, we've
executive order requesting the
policy Advisory committee was
done last February in March and
April. We assembled that team
and I believe our first meeting
was probably May or June.
Through that the duration of
those meetings that has really
been kind of more of a report
out of, you know, here's what
we're doing restructuring so
there hasn't been much
opportunity for them to really
take issues that we have and
really come back with, Um
Advice for the office on how we
deal with those, and so there
has been conversation with the
remaining five members to really
talk about, you know, changing
the dynamics of what that looks
like and doing some committees
where they really are looking at
issues and building consensus
with advocates or people within
the community to identify and
look at a specific issue and
then make recommendations and so
Um, that is how we are going to
reestablish that committee, um,
following the legislative
session. We have not met during
the session. We did a January
early January meeting, um, and
have not had another one since.
But we will be looking at that
to make sure that the work that
needs to be done.
And that there are tangible
deliver a bubbles that can come
out of those meetings. Often
times, people get together. They
have something like you need to
end office and we know that we
recognize that but there's
really no
Ideas or thoughts on how we do
that, And so it would be more
engaged as a department in
myself as a secretary and really
working with them. There are no
requirements of that advisory
council to provide reports but
you know to be an advisory
council. I appreciate that
answer. And I appreciate you
saying that that the department
needs to be engaged with
With that commission. Um, I've
heard some concerns that
There's a bit of a disconnect
where they might come up with
something, but it doesn't
necessarily get translated to or
put into practice by the
department. And so would you be
willing to have don't know if it
would be appropriate to be a
deputy secretary who, uh, who is
assigned to attend those
meetings so that we're sure that
the work being done?
By that commission.
Means something in and actually
gets translated into into
action, or at least
consideration by the department.
Um, I don't share members of the
committee. Absolutely. Um, I
think the more people that are
looking at it and providing
solid information on how we can
change this. Um, the quicker we
can start seeing some of the
results that are expected to be
seen there.
Thank you.
Um
What do you talk a little bit
about and what the office of
Children's rights is within zero
YF D and and what's going on
with them? Absolutely. Madam
Chair. The Office of Children's
Rights was established, um, in
this administration to really be
able to provide advocacy for
individuals, Um
That are seeking our help for
both Children and foster
families. Um, the director of
Children's rights left in. I
believe September or October and
so we have done a complete
review of what that needs to
look like, and we have revamped
that we've now created it so
that it really provides
advocacy, Chin and ESA and
Um, from so that they have an
opportunity to understand what
questions are coming into the
department and where people are
really needing assistance, and
so right now, the for a director
to lead that, um, when it was
established, it had a director,
and it didn position that
reported or worked out of the
offering that out, it will have
a structure underneath it that
will have
Okay, So you're gonna gonna
specifically have 10 positions
that are dedicated to that
office. Uh and
This will be full time positions
yesterday, will will there be
any kind of credential
requirements for folks working
in those positions? Um, Madam
Chair? Yes. So the director of
Advocacy, um in the previous
individual, Um we are looking at
credentials of that level, so
either to manage at that level
or has extensive advert side or
with a on
Profit or foundation that is
done manage individuals
underneath that position.
Thank you.
Um
We
So there was some discussion
over the interim about Social
Security benefits that for
Children that
We're being kept by the
department. And I understand, uh
You were very responsive when
when that was raised.
Um
So the directive that that
stopped that happening and that
expires on March 1st of this
year. Uh and
And I believe that when that
directive came out
They said that they were going
to be policies and procedures
around that we're going to be
issued in September of last
year.
I don't I don't know that.
I have not seen amendments to
the
New Mexico administrative code
that would reflect that so have
those policies and procedures.
Been created and distributed or
what's what's happening with
that. And what's the plan going
forward since that directive
ends in March, Madam Chair
member of the committee
That directive was entered. Um
and we immediately the policies.
The procedures have been draft
vigils, so we worked
illustration to try to set up
separately, which we were not
able to do as a department. So
then we, um it just last week
came to the visuals and so, um,
now that we will be set up, um,
we will finalize the policies
and procedures and those
Thank you. So, so all all the
funds will be combined in a
single account I and so how
Commingling is going through my
mind. Uh, that sounds
potentially problematic. Madam
Chair members of the committee
at sounded problematic to me as
well. Which is why I continue
those conversations and didn't
just take that as an answer,
But, um, I've been assured
allocated, including any of
those, um, operate literature.
Thank you.
Um
So there's there's been some
talk about Kevin s and and talk
about the letter from the co
neutrals and
And I don't. I'm not gonna. I
think a lot of the things I was
gonna ask on. I have heard and
this is not to
Uh, disparage anyone. I have
heard some concerns that
I get Kathy Kunkel was as been
added to your Kevin s, um, legal
team.
Who she was a former secretary
of D O H, uh, she was also a
longtime council on that for the
state on the Jackson case. Ah,
where, um
And I have heard concerns that
this indicates rather than
And wanting to come. Do
everything you can that the
state can to comply with Kevin
s. This is kind of a sign that
You want to quash? Kevin asks
and make it go away. Can you
please address that?
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee. Um, that is actually
the opposite of why I brought
her in. I think Kathy has
extensive experience in working
with departments and
understanding the intricacies of
those lawsuits.
We were trying to manage that in
house with staff who was then
trying to manage that. Um And so
Secretary Armijo and I talked
about bringing an individual in
that could be the liaison
between the co neutrals, and our
department could get the
information and figure out a way
to track it and make sure that
we're on track and have all of
those delivery Bals.
Um, if you look at what is
required under Kevin s, you know
it was the settlement, um, the
cap that was negotiated and
several different, very specific
things and having somebody who
understands that and can manage
it for us and really keep us
responsible to targets. Um, but
could be that person to work
with the continuing to do the
work.
Um, is valuable to us being
able. Thank you. And you talked
a little bit about this. Uh,
recently when we had a hearing
and judiciary, but 11 of the
comments that was made about
kind of why
What's the problem with with
with Kevin S, Uh, one of the
perceptions from the plaintiff's
attorneys was a lack of buy in
from the department to Kevin s.
And to working with the co
neutrals and who I understand
are very good at what they do.
Um and
This isn't a situation where we
don't know what the solution is.
We know what the solutions are.
It's just a matter of being able
to achieve them and and the
state has agreed to achieve that
doesn't cover everything, but
it's a good structure and path
forward.
For for addressing some of the
problems we've been discussing
today.
Um
And you, you address that
perception that they felt like
There wasn't
Much buying from the department
on that. Can you talk about
What? Your approaches to Kevin s
and how you plan to approach
complying with the agreement of
the chairman. Members of the
committee? Yes. So when I came
into the department, it was
right when they were negotiating
the cap, So we had one meeting
in June and then it needed to be
signed. By the end of June.
There were many, many areas
where you know we needed to
improve. We agreed to those and
I am 100% committed to meeting
those
I pushed staff really hard in
the very beginning. Like we've
got to get this done. You know,
they say that 200 foster
families. We've got to get it
done. They say get all these
kids. Well, child. Well, it
wasn't as easy as me just saying
Get it done. There were barriers
to actually meeting those
requirements. And so you know,
we've worked to remove some of
those barriers, but we are 100%
committed.
To meeting. What we need is
requirements makes
Kids and the families in our
state in our custody. It makes
it's the right thing to do for
them to get them the services
that they need so for them to
say that we're not on board and
we're resistant. I mean, nothing
is further from the truth. We
want to make sure that we're
providing what we need for those
kids immediately Following that
hearing, I did get noticed from
the co neutrals that said they
in no way ever said that they
had no way ever indicated that
they would not have said that
And they were, um, you know, not
incredibly happy that that was
how it was perceived during that
hearing. So, um
You know we are committed to
meeting those requirements. We
will continue to work with them
on a regular basis. We meet with
the CO neutrals once a month. Um
and we will continue. As I said,
I'm happy to schedule quarterly
meetings with his body to kind
of give the report out on where
we are. And if there are
barriers that we're running into
to meet some of those, um you
know an honest conversation of
how do we remove that barrier?
No, no, I I appreciate that. Um,
I
And Senator secretary I
I I think that the that kind of
quarterly reporting out would be
incredibly valuable. Um, I know
you're also you have a draft of
your strategic plan. Uh, once
that is finalized, I think it
would be good for this body to
get a copy of that as well. So
that we kind of know
Know what your internal
standards are so that when we
see things going on
We kind of what the framework is
to interpret that against.
Um
You are in an incredibly
difficult position. You are
inheriting a lot of problems
that you have nothing to do with
your also.
We are in a state that has
Really high poverty, the highest
adverse childhood experiences in
the nation. Lots of substance
misuse. And then when something
goes wrong with after all of
that building up
We say it's your fault.
And that's not fair. Um
At the same time. I think there
is a lot of very legitimate
anger and frustration from folks
who have not had good dealings
with C Y F D for quite a while,
Um and clearly a lot of and some
terrible fallout. Uh, from
issues had that that we haven't
gotten our arms around yet.
Uh, So while I feel like you,
you are probably unfairly
pilloried, uh and probably will
be going forward. I understand
the frustration of those folks.
Um, and so this was we had
spoken before your confirmation
and one of the things I was
really happy to hear from you
was what sounded to me like a
real willingness.
To work with your critics
instead of against them, Um
I think the the folks who are
working on things like Kevin s
have the same goals that you do.
Uh huh, and have have some
expertise that will be helpful
to you and same with the
community groups that are
they're doing advocacy around
this and so
I
I I've always
Been kind of stumped as to why
it's been so adversarial rather
than collaborative, given that
everyone is actually pulling in
the same direction.
Um so I'm looking forward to
seeing
A different approach on that
with you. I am definitely going
to be voting for you on the
floor, and I appreciate your
willingness to do
What
Seems to me like one of the
hardest jobs in state
government.
With that. I believe, Senator.
Uh, go ahead.
Senators clinics.
And let's have a roll call vote,
Senator Baca.
Senator Bacho votes No, Senator
Lopez. Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Moore's is excused Senator
Neighbor Senator Nyberg votes.
Yes, Senator or TCP? No. Yes,
Senator or TCP. No words. Yes,
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle votes No Senator
Stefan IX. Senators to Stefan IX
votes. Yes, Senator Stewart?
Yes, Senator Stewart's Yes,
Senator. Army. Oh, yes. Army
abouts. Yes, Senator. Do Hig.
Yes, Senator. Do you hate votes?
Yes. And with eight Yes, we
will.
Proceed to your confirmation on
the floor of the Senate later on
today. Thank you so much. Thank
you very much,
Okay. Thank you. Mhm 19 chair.
Can I tell Senator Baca's
hurdling yourself? We're gonna
do a quick stop in room 326 on
the way to the floor for
