He didn't think that these were
bills that we're gonna need any
extra time and so I think we
should be able to get through
our agenda pretty easily. We're
gonna start this morning with SB
135, Senator Wirth. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members, good
morning.
Uh, Senate Bill 135 uh
addresses.
An issue that's come up in our
legislative council, uh, with a
statutory requirements in
section 10-8-5, which is the per
diem and mileage statute, uh,
that basically requires a 3/4
vote of the New Mexico
Legislative Council at a
regularly called meeting to
allow for interim expenses,
travel expenses out of state to
be paid to a legislator
has not been, it's not running
or has not been re-elected. So
in other words, there's a gap
when someone decides they want
to retire, uh, this statute
basically says,
That they're not entitled to out
of state travel reimbursement
unless the council steps in with
a three-quarter vote.
So in looking at this and
visiting with the former uh
legislative council director
Raoul Bursaga, um, what this
bill does is just eliminate the
three quarter vote. They're
already is an exception for the
legislature in the statute. This
just eliminates the vote. Uh, I
would note that this is a
separation of powers issue.
The legislative branch under no
scenario should have the
Secretary of DFA telling us how
to run our business and in fact,
there's a statute directly on
point that I'm going to hand out
section 2-1-9. I think I gave
those to the secretary. If we
could just hand that out uh
2-1-9 out of state travel.
Section A says out of state
travel of members, officers and
employees of the legislative
branch of government shall be
exempt.
From approval by any member of
the executive branch. So again,
I'm not sure what the history of
this statute was it deals with
Also, the executive branch, but
it did exempt the legislative
branch yet put in a threshold
vote. We should determine
ourselves if we want to have
that threshold vote. We should
determine ourselves if we want
to approve this travel, the past
number of years, I think,
Senator Townsend, when you were
in leadership, and I know Mame
Protem, we've always allowed
this. Again, I think the
thinking is we've got members
who serve on various Senator
Neibert's a great example. He
was on, I believe, a number of
The Energy Council. And so, um,
Again, all this bill does is it,
the legislatures already
exempted from this. It just
takes out an executive
requirement that we then go
through our council with 3
orders uh vote, so that's the
extent of the bill. Happy sta
for questions.
Yeah, we did not have any anyone
signed up, uh, either in favor
or in opposition, uh, members of
the committee.
Gallegos, but in turn, Lord
Leader, and just going back to
Senator Liber cause we also had
it, um, representative.
How was that handled on their
trip this year.
Energy council.
So Madam Chair and Senator
Gallegos, the last number of
years we've taken a vote in the
council to allow that to happen.
So again, I think the general
sentiment was that we understand
the value of this. And again,
that's our decision to make as,
as a branch. We don't need a
statute telling us what vote we
have to have in the Legislative
council to do this. It just
eliminates that. It doesn't mean
we can't decide as a body.
We don't want this to happen. We
can do that, but again, that's a
decision that should be made by
our branch and has nothing to do
with the DFA secretary telling
us what thresholds required.
I think I'm chairing for so
historically, I thought the
floor leader of pro tem did
that, but you're saying if they
are not, um, coming back, then
it goes to the council, so this
would put it back the pro tem
and 4 L only. So Madam Chair, I
think this would put it back to
whatever we decide to do.
OK. So basically right now under
this statute, uh, without this
change, it's basically saying,
yes, we can, we can do this, but
we have to have a three-quarter
vote of the council.
Uh, once if this passes, then
we'd be in a position where
we'll determine what process it
is and it could be that we
defer, typically it's the prote,
uh, and the minority leaders and
the speaker on both sides if we
decide to do it that way or the
council takes takes the vote
itself and we bring this issue
to the council, that would be
for us to decide how we want to
do it. And I could certainly see
the, the protam is as, as the
chair of the council, co-chair,
you know, might have some
thoughts too.
about how we do it. I just think
the point of the bill though is,
that's our decision as a
separate branch of government.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, so.
So this, this bill would mean
that we wouldn't have to approve
it by counsel.
But what you're saying is that
then it's sort of open. It's,
it's not decided anywhere.
Uh, I, I wanna make the decision
that when you're a sitting
legislator, even if it's your
last year, and you are not
running for reelection, you are
still a sitting legislator, and
you should be given a mileage
for the energy council, the
uniform Law Commission. These
things are important for us to
go to and you know, it's not
like we kick you out of doing
everything in June of the year
you didn't run, run for
re-election, so.
So why would we have, if we pass
this bill, what do we then have
to do? So you're, you're saying
we would have to make a policy
because this just takes it away
from the executive and takes
away the 3 quarters vote, which
we've done repeatedly every year
that I've been sharing it.
So the, the nice thing about
this bill is we can do whatever
we want.
And I think we would have that
discussion. Do we need to put a
policy in place that just
clarifies that there's not an
issue with this or by silence,
is it just assumed the councils
in agreement on that. I think we
can do that ourselves and figure
that out, or there may be
members that say we don't want
to do this, and that's again, if
there's a by the council that's
the direction we want to go,
that's where it should happen, I
think this would give us the
flexibility to allow
The council on behalf of the
legislature to make that
decision versus having DFA
somehow involved in our internal
process. Madam Chair, we, I
remember over the last few
years, there was one year where
we said, no, no, you can't get
mileage and pretend you can't go
anywhere if you're not gonna
continue to run, uh, and then
A few members came to us and
said, what did you just do? And
so we had to have, we had to
undo that the very next council
meeting, so we have gone back
and forth on the policy pending
on who is on the council and
their feelings about their own
colleagues, so it'd be good,
have a real policy. So thank you
for bringing this. Thank you,
madam chair.
Thank you, Senator Block. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator Wirth. Um, Madam Chair,
this is really just a staffing
issue. Um, we just, and I know
the staff is very, very busy
with all the bills coming
through, but, and thankfully
this is a
Um, you know, bipartisan bill, I
think it's going to get
unanimous support.
Um, the analysis, though, uh, is
there a policy when the members
get the analysis from the staff,
because getting it just before,
maybe it's just me, I don't mean
to complain.
But just getting the enough
information from the analysis,
um, before we dissect the bill.
Is, is it possible to get it a
little bit sooner? I mean, this,
you know, SP 135 is pretty
simple.
Um, not a big deal, but in some
later on we're going to have
some tough bills come through
here and it'd be nice if we
could get the analysis just a
little early so we can study it
as members, and again, I'm not
sure what the policy is. I know
the staff is doing the best they
can, but
Thank you.
And, and Senator, uh, we're,
we're on this bill right now. So
I think that's something maybe
we can talk about.
When we're, when we're not on
this matter, um, but we'd be,
I'd be happy to have that
conversation. Maybe we can talk
about that before we start our
confirmation training, uh, later
on today.
Uh, well, the, the, the
analysis, ma'am was for this
bill.
Yes, but yeah, the, the, the
issue that you're you're raising
in general is, is a little off
topic for this bill. So I'm
happy to have that conversation.
We're just, we got to stay on
our, on our topic while we're
on. Thank you.
All right. Any other members of
the committee?
Now.
All right, we're on a motion for
a do pass. Uh, is there any
objection to that motion or
opposition to the motion.
See no, Senator, you have a new
pass. Thank you.
All right. And I know Senator
Souls is uh
chairing in education, so we'll
just go to SB.
124.
Um
And as we're getting close to a
vote. That's we're gonna move on
to the next agenda item, which
is Senate Bill 109 PRC and
supporting agency. Oh, I'm
sorry, that's Senate Bill 124
correction. Superintendent of
insurance subpoenas with
chairwoman Du get a warning,
chairwoman. Good morning, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. These, uh,
Mics get weird for you guys. Let
us know. We will use the
handheld one instead.
I have here with me this
morning, Alice Cain, our
superintendent of insurance. And
Mr. Chair, this is a bill that
will give the superintendent
subpoena power. The
superintendent is responsible
for regulating our insurance
companies, and she needs to be
able to get the information, uh,
that she needs in order to do
her job, uh, most agencies do
have, uh, uh, regulatory
agencies do have subpoena power.
We give subpoena power to all
sorts of boards.
I and commissions uh that
regulate things under RLD, um,
so I, and I my understanding is
that almost.
Every other state if almost
every other state, uh, gives
subpoena power to their
insurance regulator. So this
would
Give that subpoena power to our
OSI.
Superintendent, do you wanna say
anything? Yes, uh, thank you so
much, uh, Mr. Chair, committee
for allowing us and senator for
supporting this. Uh, we're
looking for the subpoena power
uh before a hearing, so we can
do investigations. I'm trying to
expand our enforcement
capabilities, and this is really
mostly for fraud and unfair
claims practices, uh, it's it's,
it's really hindering our
ability to find out what's going
on in the marketplace. We have
to call it here.
And what we'd like to do is do
an investigation prior to that
to decide if it's worthwhile to
go forward to a hearing, uh, and
most other states do have this
subpoena power and I understand
most agencies here in New Mexico
have a similar power.
Thank you for that.
Now there's nobody who signed up
and organized support or
opposition of your bill,
Senator. Is there anyone in the
committee room in support of the
bill.
See none any in opposition.
Very good, by a show of hands
for those of you in the
committee, if you have
questions.
Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And correct me if I'm wrong, but
don't.
Uh, you have the right or
demands currently, other than a
subpoena, I mean.
Do you not have the right to
demand that information today.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, senator, I'm
sorry, I'm not doing the mic
correctly.
Uh, we can ask, but the
materials we're getting often
are insufficient. We do data
calls. They're not always
accurate, some some uh companies
just refused to produce the
data, so, uh, sometimes we're
running blind.
Thank you.
Senator, do you have additional
questions?
No, sir, I'm sorry. Senator
Black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I'd
like to propose, uh, to the
Senate Rules Committee the
following amendment to Senate
Bill 124.
Uh, on page 2, line 16.
After the semicolon there next
to the word action, uh, strike
the remainder of the line and
also strike line 17.
And strike through 18 up to the
semicolon leaving the word and
18.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
would ask, um,
Senator Doha and, uh, the
superintendent, if they would,
um.
They think that's a friendly
amendment.
The center there's been a
request for an amendment on page
2, line 16, after the semicolon
to strike the remainder of the
line through line 17 up to 18,
and keeping that semicolon is
that a friendly amendment,
Senator?
Mr. Chair, yes. So I believe
what what Senator Block is doing
here is he's removing the
language that a lot that would
that says you can also delegate
that subpoena power to staff.
Generally, when we have used
that language in the past, that
is only when we are giving speed
and power to a board.
Uh, we are not giving it to a
board in this situation, so we
don't need that language. So
that is a friendly amendment.
Very good. So the senator has
agreed that this is a friendly
amendment. Is there anyone in
the committee in opposition of
that amendment?
So Senator, I'm gonna need you
to, um,
Present motion to move the
amendment.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, could you
repeat that? Sure, I'm gonna
need you to make a motion to
move the amendment for adoption,
uh, Mr. Chair, I'd like to, uh,
make the motion, uh, on this
amendment for adoption. There's
been a motion. Is there anyone
in the committee in opposition
of that motion.
See none, we have an amended
bill.
And block any further questions?
Uh, no, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thing then.
Senator Stewart.
Mr. Chairman, I move a do pass
on Senate Bill 124, as amended.
There's been a motion for a do
pass on Senate Bill 124 as
amended.
Is there anyone in opposition of
that motion?
Senator, you have a two pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All these giving the gavel back
to Chairwoman Duig and a text
message has been sent to Senator
Souls, asking him to come up to
present his bill.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair. We
will all just hold on a minute
while Senator Sos comes over.
Yes, in fact, committee, I, I'm
meant to, to tell you after
we're, we're through with our
legislation, we're gonna do
another kind of mini learning
session for the, the folks that
we're going to see for
confirmations for, for next
week.
And Senator Block while we,
while we have this time.
Uh, we can talk about what you
were asking. So, generally, the,
the analysis, I, I approved two
of the analyses at 10 o'clock
last night. I approved one when
I got in this morning. They're
usually not ready ahead of time.
If, when, when they are, we're
happy to send them out ahead of
time, but we're
We're not, we're not holding
anything. It's just usually the
same same thing happens in
judiciary. We all see the
analysis when we sit down at the
at the table. Uh, that said, if
you have bills that you
You wanna talk, like are curious
about, want to learn more about
before you're coming into
committee. Feel free to, to come
by the rules office at any time
and, and come talk to Natalie,
our analyst, um, who I'm sure
would be happy to, to talk to
you about.
What she's looking at and what
kinds of things y'all should be
thinking about.
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I appreciate
that, and again, I know there's
a lot of stuff that goes
through, um, the staff on, on
all the committees, um, I, it's
just, I'm one of those.
Anal guys that tries to get as
much information as possible to
make the best decision and um, I
get a little bit flustered when
when stuff comes right at me at
the last minute. I haven't had a
chance to digest it. So I, I
totally understand. I'll adjust
as best as I can. But, uh,
again, I want to thank the staff
for trying to, uh, I mean, 10
o'clock last night, so. Yeah. I
was already in bed.
And unfortunately, Senator
Block, as you are, will probably
very quickly come to learn, that
is, uh,
Doing stuff at the last minute
and is kind of a a hallmark of
our legislative process. So, go
ahead, Senator Stewart.
No, I, I, uh, uh, here, I, I
understand, uh, where you're
coming from, but
I, I have never served in a
committee where we got the
analysis of the bill ahead of
the committee meeting where we
first were hearing the bill.
Ever, it's just kind of the
nature. I mean, if you can, so
now, we have, is it 300 bills
between the house and the
Senate. I mean, I think it's at
least 300. No, we're in the
200s, so it's gonna be more like
4 or 500 bills have already been
introduced, and we're in the 2nd
week.
We have, we're not even at the
1st 10 day marker, because we
haven't received a per diem
check, so, you know, I, I'm not
trying to apologize for the
legislature, but I sort of am
because it's just the nature of
the beast that we're dealing
with, but I like having you here
because it's fresh eyes and it's
like, oh yeah, this it's just
very problematic the way we do
things, but the way we do things
is almost the only way.
To do it unless you want to
extend the legislative session
significantly more than 30 or 60
days, I see you shaking your
head, so that's what we're up
against. Uh it's a little better
in the interim committees where
we don't really look at bills.
We look at subjects and topics,
and eventually get to bills, uh,
but, uh, that's a time where we
can dive deeper into issues and
subjects, and those interim
committees.
usually come with uh committee
endorsed bills. So those ideas
have been worked on and, and
you'll know more about them. Um,
I've never seen the bill that uh
Senator Wirth just brought never
even a thought of the concept,
but never even thought of how to
get around the fact that we
every interim we have to decide
if we're gonna give mileage and
per dam to people who are no
longer gonna be with us the next
year, so it's just the nature of
the beast and I hope you can
start incorporating that nature.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Before
we move on from this and go to
Senator Souls, one more thing,
uh, you know, the FIR is an
agency analysis or I'll posted
online. So to the extent that
you're wanting to do some
research on your bills, I would
encourage you to look on the
legislative website, look at
those analyses that are posted,
uh, and that, that should help
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
was just going off of what
Senator Harramio told me that we
were going to get all the
information we wanted once in
advance.
That, that sounds like.
All right, we're going on to
Senate Bill 109. Senator Souls,
go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, this bill came, uh,
we've had a change in the public
regulation commission, a couple
of years back, uh, they've been
functioning fairly well, working
out the different pieces of it,
uh, as a result, I think there's
been enough time, uh, over the
interim, I've been working with
Choyaori about.
Fixing some of the language that
didn't match with a new
commission that is made up of 3
appointed members instead of
elected members and some things
that needed updating. This bill
is a result of that to make
what's in statute match with
what the agency actually is and
does now. Um, I don't think
there's a whole lot more than
that. There's a number of
places, but most of them you can
see there are uh some small
changes that they talk about
agency instead of commission of
There's some strikeouts, some
additions and different things
of that sort, some date changes.
There is an amendment that we
have to it that came as a
result, you see, we have new
commissioner Neibert sitting
with us as he was able to go
through this. One of those
changes is in the past, the
commissioners were not allowed
to take anything of more than $5
of value, uh, when they're out
places that if somebody was
gonna buy them a soda or
something like that. Well, $5
hardly buys a soda anymore. So
that has been moved up.
The $20 so that they can pay
their share of, for instance, a
shared Uber ride to where the
meeting is. And so most of it is
that type of issues, uh,
certainly if there are
particular things, we'd be happy
to go through that. Toya is
certainly an expert in this
area. She works within all of
these policies on an everyday
basis. And again, uh, our new
very capable commissioner Nibert
is here in support also. They
really are the experts that they
work in all of this.
But with that, we are open for
questions.
Thank you, Senator, and, and
before we move on, I'll, I'll go
ahead and offer this amendment.
Uh,
And so I will move the
amendment.
That's in our souls was just
describing. Is there any
opposition?
To adoption or discussion on
that amendment.
I, I, I want us to go through
this bill. I, I want us to go
through the amendment. It's the
first time I've seen it. Um, I,
I, I don't want to vote on an
amendment that I don't really
understand. So if they could
walk us through the amendment.
I'm sureurry could do that. In
that case, let's wait, let's,
uh, let's wait to, to get to
that. Let's first go to, uh, see
if there's any public comment. I
think we had one person, oh no,
we had no one signed up in
opposition or, or in support of
this bill.
So, yes, now would be the
perfect time to do so. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. These
amendments, uh, that
Commissioner Kneer and I
discussed and then discussed
with uh Senator Sewell's a
couple of things. So first is um
on page 5 line 25.
Uh, change strikes.
Excuse me. After least trying to
get there myself.
Uh, we strike the remainder of
the line and insert in lieu
thereof 2 hours of ethics at a
course by such educational
institution or by a recognized
provider of a professional
licensing board by which a
commissioner is licensed in
each.
So that it goes on to read in
each 12 month period that the
commissioner serves in office
that just specifies a little bit
more what that exit ethics
course would look like or who
might be providing.
The next change is on page 6,
line 17.
After the comma, strike the
remainder of the line, strike
all of line 18 through 20 and
insert in lieu thereof, the man
shall be referred to the ethics
commissions for review,
sanctions, and discipline.
And that change is, uh, well,
this bill has been a long time
left untouched. Some of the
sections haven't been touched
since 1998. And so when this,
uh, when the ethics commission
was created, this bill wasn't
changed to recognize that and so
now rather than me, uh, not
signing the paychecks for the
commissioners or the cheapest
staff, not, not approving that
pay, which I don't actually
approve.
Um
The com the commission would
just be referred for
disciplinary or investigation or
whatever the ethics commission.
Besides is appropriate.
The next change on page 8.
Line 23.
Strikes a commissioner or
employee and inserts in lie
thereof commissioners and
employees.
On page 94.
Strike $5 and insert in lieu
thereof, $20.
And on page 13, line 17 before
the period insert and on the
agency's website, again
reflecting an update of.
Nobody uses phone books anymore.
Great. Thank you for walking us
through that. Uh, discussion,
Senator Stewart.
Oh thank you, ma'am.
So the First Amendment, does
that take care of what uh
commissioner Neber told me
during his confirmation, which
is there's hours and hours, 32
hours of ethics training, they
have to take, and he's shaking
his head no. I mean, where in
this bill does it say, and it's
perhaps it's not in this pill. I
mean, I, I just can't understand
why we have put that high.
Amount, number on ethics
trainings for the PRC
commissioners, so I was hoping
you were gonna fix that,
commissioner.
Uh, Madam Chair, and Madam
President, I would have loved to
fix that, but that was a lift
that I felt just coming into the
office. I wasn't going to.
Try to make that change, the
changes that.
I wanted was at the.
Commissioners who have to get a
professional license myself with
a law degree, uh, commissioner
O'Connell with the engineering
degree. We have to take ethics
courses each and every year and
under the existing statute,
those ethic forces would not
count for the commission ethics
and I just thought it was silly
to take ethics for the state law
and take ethics for
uh commission separately because
the only provider in the
existing statute is an
institution of higher learning
in the state of New Mexico
That does not include the state
bar Mexico, the Supreme Court,
or
Uh, engineering licensing
organizations
So that's the small change I
made.
I think ultimately I would like
this to consider the change of
the total hour because I can
tell you I'm not able to do the
work that I'm supposed to be
doing because I'm in class I'm
now 4 days um 2030 days that
I've been on the job, 4 days in
classes
ethics courses on how 5 more
days to go so
uh it, it is a burden, but it
was not a, it was not a.
Issue that I wanted to.
Uh,
You want to take it on?
Well, ma'am.
was willing to
My I'm sure I appreciate you so
much, not wanting to do too
much, but I want to change that.
So between here and the next
committee, I'm gonna look for
that offer an amendment. Thank
you.
Thank you. Madam Chair, um, you
know, if, if that's an amendment
either that could be done easily
here or between the next one,
we'd certainly be open to that.
We didn't want to make this
overly complicated, but
certainly if that's the, the
will of this committee, that
sounds like it makes sense that
that's a bit burdensome to have
close to a.
full work week of ethics
training.
And Madam Chair, you know, uh,
Sara Neibert help Commissioner
Neibert helped us write our
ethics commission statutes are
anti-harassment policy. I mean,
this just seems absurd, so I'll,
I'll look at it. I'll work on
it. I don't know where it is or
what to do now. So I'm not, I'm
not suggesting we do it in this
committee. Thank you. Thank you.
Additional discussion on the
amendment.
OK, anyone else on the
amendment?
Center block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm,
I'm kind of in the same boat as
um
Senator Stewart, because when I,
when I look at the amendment,
I'm, I'm trying to understand
what is it, what does it buy
you? What's the added value to
the to the state from going from
Um, an ethics certificate course
provided in person or online by
New Mexico Public.
Post-secondary educational
institution in the 1st 12 month
period after taking office.
And at least one to our ethics
course.
In each subsequent 12 month
period that the commissioner
serves in, and then, like
Senator Stewart was talking in
in subsection 2, you got the 32
hours of ethics training. What,
what is this amendment bias? Are
you gonna be
Commissioner Nyberg and the
other, are you going to be more
ethically aware of issues going
on by this. I, I'm just trying
to understand.
Why, why we needed this change,
did we have issues before or is
it because of statute we had to
we had to change it and is there
any additional cost into this
because we were already doing it
through a public.
Post-secondary educational
institution.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, uh.
There were tremendous ethical
challenges in the agency in the
past and that issue was debated.
Um, very long, about 3 years
ago.
And the commission
Has changed as a result of those
discussions.
Uh, the, the, the amendment
itself is really just to
recognize that professional
licensing organizations, those
hours will be given credit to
that commissioner, and he
doesn't have to.
take a special course.
That was required under the
existing law. That, that's all
the amendment does. The 32 hours
is a separate, separate deal,
but all it does is allow.
In my case, me to go to the
state bar.
And take an ethics course there
that will count for both my
licensing as a lawyer and as my
ethics for service on the
commission and ethics, frankly
is ethic.
Uh, it's not any different for
the er versus
ethics that you all have to take
versus
or any other uh professional,
uh,
Organization who by statute has
to take some.
So that was the purpose that.
Thank, thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I mean, you
talked about challenges. Um, I
would imagine in the 32 hours of
ethics training that you're
going through and you look very
tired after taking it, by the
way.
Um
I would imagine the, the class
that you're taking the training
based on the challenges that you
just said, which I don't know
what they are, that were
modifying this training to fill
in those gaps, uh, where we
might have uh had gaps where it
caused some of those challenges.
And that's why I'm just having a
hard time. I, I, I mean, I, I'll
support, I support the bill.
But I'm just trying to
understand, I, I still don't see
the value in this because.
Just because you have a
certificate in one area versus a
certificate in another 2 hour
class.
Uh, I, I just, I, I don't
understand that and so can you
just tell me real quick the 32
hour class, maybe you don't know
cause you're going through it.
Is this a class that changes
periodically based on real world
issues that have come up in the
PRC.
Um, Madam Sharon, Senator, uh,
The ethics class that is taught
by New Mexico State University,
and they had classes last Monday
and Tuesday here in Santa Fe,
uh, it was not specific for
commissioner. I was not the only
person in the room.
Uh, it, it's
Or
Essentially, stay employees and
county government, and it's for
Employees of the state and the
counties and the municipalities
who want to achieve certain
certificates and be recognized
as having a particular area of,
of their administration. uh.
So a lot of county and state
employees are in these courses
as well.
Commissioners have to go through
32 hours, so we're sitting in
the class and it'd be quite
honest with you.
of the classes last week, um.
The word ethics may have
appeared on the chalkboard or on
the whiteboard one time with the
discussion really had nothing to
do with ethics, but I'm getting
ethics credit for it because
Apparently it applied it.
applied to uh our core
structure, um, so I'm having to
spend a lot of time learning
about uh
Uh county and
Municipal government and, and
how to treat, treat people and,
and things that uh hopefully I
already knew, but, uh, it's just
a requirement, requirements
there because Senator Keller
years ago got mad at the
commission and put the
requirement in the statute. And,
and I can't argue that it wasn't
needed at the time, but, but,
uh.
Hopefully, uh, those issues are,
are behind this agency, and I
can tell you the men I serve
with are, are honorable men.
It appear to me to me to be
outstanding in their ethics and
their character.
And I'm proud to join them and
most of the people up here know
me and I hope they feel the same
way.
So, I can't disagree with you.
It's not a
I hate to say a waste of time,
but it, it, it's not going to
change the character of the
people who are going to the
class.
Thank you Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I yield.
Uh, Senator Townsend on the
amendment.
Madam Chair.
I'm having trouble keeping a
wise crack down about reducing
ethics training on lawyers, but
I'm gonna, I'm gonna
I reserve myself because of my
good friends sitting there as a
commissioner, but
Um, I couldn't agree more. 32
hours of
Of ethics training on top of
professional training that we've
all had to take.
is ridiculous, and I would hope
that there is
Much better things that you
could use your time on to
benefit the people in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Additional discussion on the
amendment.
Yes
Senator Stewart, adoption of the
amendment. All right, we have a
motion for adoption of the
amendment. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
See on the amendment is adopted.
All right. Stewart. So, Madam
Chair, I have another amendment
to suggest, but only if it's
very, very, very friendly.
So on page 6,
Line 5.
We would change 12 month period.
To 36.
Ma.
hearing.
No, I have that right? Yes, sir.
Or something
So that you would do 32 hours of
continuing education relevant to
the work of the commission and
each 3-year period that the
commissioner serves.
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
that would be friendly. My only
concern is I look through that
and this is my first blush
thinking about it is if you have
a commissioner that comes in and
could go almost 3 years and then
go get the training to work on
things if it said that because
they will have gotten it within
3 years, but not had it through
the first two years.
Madam, and I do think that this
is uh run by Miss Cory or others
setting it up, um, if they had
32 hours in a 3 year period, I'm
assuming that she would do, you
know, 12 hours a year or
something like that. I mean, I
don't want to be prescriptive. I
just think this is ridiculous
and we have a chance to change
it and we should do so.
But
Madam Chair, Madam President,
that is.
So Section 2 on page 6 starting
at line 3 is about subject
matter training, um, that has at
least in the last two years has
not been a challenge for the
commissioners because that is
part of keeping up with this
changing dynamic world of
energy, uh, the, the struggle
that Commissioner Neiber is
referencing is on page 5
starting at line 22 regarding
the ethics certification and uh
that, that having to be done in
the 1st 12 month period.
In which he is in office.
That's a specific ethics
Right,
I see. I, I'm in the wrong place
and mucking around with the
wrong words, so I'll give it up.
Uh, Senator Slacks that I think
that the proposed amendment has
been withdrawn. Do you still
want to comment on it? I would
like to ask a question of the
chief of staff manager. Um, Ms.
Corey does uh that professional.
Uh, or continuing education
include a conferences.
Madam Chair, Senator, it depends
on the conference. If it's
certified by NAU or if it's
certified by a a licensing
organization, for example, the
PRC for 2 years in a row has uh
run a conference that is sort
of.
For credit for the state bar, so
that would be included
non-certified conferences would
not be included.
So, Madam Chair, Miss Curry,
the, um, if some, if your
commissioners wanted to go up to
uh the national renewable Energy
Laboratory.
In Colorado to learn about a
particular topic, and it was a
half day or 2 a day or 2 days,
whatever, that would not count
as a as continuing education.
Madam Chair, Senator, it could,
if it was endorsed by this
national association of
regulatory utility commissioners
for Nehru, um, or if it was also
endorsed by a state bar or the
professional engineers, um, but
just.
Generally without any of that
endorsement, no, it would not
count.
So, Madam Chair, Ms. Curry, I'm
specifically asking about Ere.
Do those experiences.
Matter
Madam Chair, Senator.
Yes, yes, they matter, uh, but I
don't think that they would
count. I'm not familiar with
whether or not that is endorsed
by Nehru. I, I apologize.
Well, Madam Chair, that's very
relevant to the future.
Of renewable energy and it's uh
National Laboratory, and I think
that needs to be investigated
because they offer free uh
Training, free advice, free
mediation, free everything to
different states, because we are
the recipient of those services.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all.
Thank you. Other members of the
committee on the bill.
On our block. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I kind of want to hit
on what Senator Stefani just
said on this 32 hours, are these
broken down into specific
classes.
And you don't have to take them
all 32 hours at once, you can
peanut butter uh spread it right
across the year, is that, can I
assume that's correct? Madam
Chair, Senator, yes, that's
correct. And how do you document
your training, where is it
documented so we know if you're
ever audited that uh you've
completed that training, Madam
Chair, Senator, that is a task.
Pass to the chief of staff to
make sure that the commissioners
do their training. You do it on
paper, you have it on a
database, how do you do that?
When Madam Chair, Senator, when
the commissioners attend and
receive a certificate of
attendance that lists the number
of hours that the commissioners
have achieved for whatever the
conference or class is, and then
we make sure that we meet the
30.
To our, yeah, the 32 hours of
training time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
Panel, it, the word.
The word relevant in here I'm
trying to understand what that
is because when Senator
Stefaniks.
Brought up a, you know, a
potential continuing education
opportunity, you said, well,
that's
That hasn't been blessed. So
what type of relevant.
Continuing education has has
been blessed and, and before you
answer that,
Is, is that like way more than
32 hours, so the commissioners
can kind of pick and choose and
Chinese menu which, which
classes they want that hits
their 32 hours.
And Madam Chair, if I might, and
I think you're on, on page 6
here in that section 2, you
know, this bill isn't going into
all the details. It really is
just making the couple of
changes to upgrade in some
particular areas. Uh, certainly
another bill might come to, or
somebody could carry that would
go into whether what's relevant
training and all of those other
areas. The real scope of this
bill is really those cleanup
areas uh where there's
strikeouts and additions, you
know, not
the entire section of this now,
you know, that certainly this
committee could go in as far as
making amendments or other
changes, but the real meat of
this bill is, is those technical
cleanups and changes. But, but
Madam chair, you know, certainly
wherever you wanna, wanna go
with this. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, I, I understand that, but
I'm just trying to, for my own
education here, maybe the public
would like to know as well.
What, what type of
Again, what type of continuing
education that is relevant to
this, does the state endorse to
get those 32 hours and is it,
and do they have options to pick
different classes to fill up
that 32 hours.
No, and and so I, I'll know we
have plenty of time, so, so if
this is a discussion we wanna, I
wanna this has nothing to do
with, I think, the bill that
we're talking about. We have,
we're fine on time so we can
have this discussion. But I just
want to flag that on other
hearings when
Well, not, no, it's not.
As existing language that is in
the bill, but it's not what the
bill is trying to, is
addressing.
But we're good on time so we can
have the discussion.
Thank you,
Madam Chair, my only thing is
I'm supposed to be chairing
another committee right now
that's got bills, and so that's
part of, you know, so I don't
have all that time, but it's
your, your committee and it your
will. And in that case, let's,
let's wrap up this discussion
and get back to the actual
substance of, of you. So Madam
Chair. Lastly, if, if maybe the
chief of staff could just kind
of give me a list of what those
continuing relevant education
courses are, I, I'd be
interested to just see that.
Ah, madam chair, senator.
First, let me offer, we can come
in and I can tell you all of the
details of how we go about
making sure the commissioners
get there, continue education,
but off the top of my head to
answer your questions quickly,
yes, there are far more than 32
hours available to the
commissioners. They are uh
Naruk, the National Association
offers many courses, many
different places, some with
scholarships to get the
commissioners those those hours
we have not struggled with
finding relevant and certified.
approved courses, so there it's
everything from uh advancing
grid technologies to uh
integrating renewable resources
to making sure, uh,
interconnections are
appropriate, so it really is a
panoply of options that the
commissioners have, and I'm
happy to have a further
conversation.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Char.
Thank you. Other members of the
committee on the bill, Senator
Stewart.
Madam Charlie would do pass on
Senate Bill 109 as heed.
And we will get to that motion.
I, I do have one question. Um,
On page 19.
Line 8.
You are changing a shell to a
may.
About what the
telecommunications Bureau does.
Why, why?
Madam Chair, this is in vain
with several other changes in
the uh bill that is to allow
flexibility for the agency to
structure itself under the
direction of the commission in a
way that makes sense for the
changing technologies, the
changing regulation world, so
it's not just telecoms, we've
changed every division, uh, to a
May.
My best example is right now our
IT division has to be housed
under our administrative
services division, the future of
our agency is in IT and
technology and so having her
statute to house it in that very
specific.
Division, uh,
Doesn't make a whole lot of
sense with where we're going
with, with the agency. So this,
the telecom bureau, it's the
same as any other division
that's in the statue. It's
changes from a shell to a maze
so we can make sure it's
flexible.
And, and Senator, uh,
So changing that to have
flexibility in your structure
makes sense to me, but in making
those changes, aren't you also
Making the
The obligations of the bureau's
discretionary rather than
mandatory. So now it will be
discretionary whether the
telecommunications bureau
reviews disputes between
telecommunications providers,
investigates complaints on an
expedited basis, etc. etc. all
of these obligations now are
discretionary. It's, it's not
just achieving that structural
change that, that you're going
for.
Madam Chair, uh, I absolutely
see what you're saying.
Several thoughts first, uh,
we've lost much jurisdiction
over telecommunications, so that
is a dwindling area of
responsibility for the
commission. The other, uh, what
we were attempting to do here
was make sure that if I, as
chief of staff under the
direction of the commission
wanted to make sure that
complaints were handled by, say,
our consumer relations bureau,
which actually handles most of
our complaints. It doesn't have
to be the telecom staff who does
that, it could.
be our, our consumer relations,
are mediators who do it.
And that that makes sense to me
is there is there somewhere
else?
And I, I think Senator Stefaniks
is going to sit in for Senator
Sos so he can get back to his
committee.
to continue presentation of this
bill. Thank you.
Um
Oh, what was I saying? So is, is
there?
Right, there's the other one on
16 for the consumer relations.
one. is there?
To the extent that that though
that these obligations
Are something we want to be
mandatory within the PRC
somewhere in that structure.
Is there something else that is
saying somewhere.
Someone still has to do these
things, because that's, that's
what I'm not seeing. I'm seeing
it be made discretionary,
period.
Or whoever's doing it within the
PRC.
Madam Chair, I'm gonna have the
chief of staff, um, respond to
that.
Madam Chair, this is one of the
struggles that we have had as
we've pro this, and that is this
statue is so incredibly
prescriptive.
That, I mean, just to share an
anecdote of what we struggled
with when we, when we, myself
and the the three commissioners
got it in 2023, uh.
It had gotten to the point where
some staff members were telling
us we don't have to follow
commission orders. So we've had
instances where commission
orders were ignored by staff.
Uh, not anymore. That's changed,
but it was based on this, the,
the absolute prescriptions in
the rules, the, the legal that
gone on in the agency.
So our attempt was very much to
provide flexibility to make it
clear that uh we can.
make that assigned duties within
stuff.
In any way that made sense for
the agency, so, um.
Very honestly,
Commissioner, do you have a
solution?
For the chairs question,
I would respond in this fashion.
The
The authority that uh
Statute provides to the public
regulation commission is set
forth elsewhere.
This is an organizational within
the agency.
Where things should be addressed
and what, what I believe the
chief of staff is saying is that
we need more flexibility because
when it was
They shall
telecommunications is a minor
part of a major.
And so we moved most of the
complaints to another area.
And so it gives us that
flexibility to deal with the
staff.
You know.
Uh, permiss
fashion instead of a mandatory
we were wanting, but the duties
and obligations of the agency
are not set forth in this
and other acts that uh.
Provide instruction to the
agency
to decide which part of the
organization.
And Senator commissioner, that
absolutely makes sense to me.
I'm, I'm not gonna offer an
amendment here today. This is
going to judiciary next, but
between now and then, if you can
can send me a copy of the
statute.
That would otherwise make clear
cause cause telecommunications
is one thing but it's also
dealing with the consumer
relations division, changing
that Xiaodu Mai, and I wanna
make sure that there, there is
still mandatory language in
there that says someone has to,
you know, work with the consumer
protection division of our AG,
um, to ensure air and timely
resolution can place. All these
things that I, I think it isn't
that are important standards to
make sure our our continuing to
happen.
But no matter who's doing it
within the PRC. I just want to
make sure that
This is not the only place where
we are laying those out and now
making it discretionary.
I'm sure I understand you want
us to, to.
Make sure that the
Statutory authority is imposed
on the.
Right.
Thank you very much. Um, we are
on a motion for a due pass.
Is there any opposition to that
motion, uh, as, as amended. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
See none. You have a Du pass,
uh, as needed. Thank you.
Senator Padilla.
And this is, we're gonna be.
hearing now, SJM1.
mean
What
Oh, I know, it was me. Yeah.
Um, and on this one, members,
we, we don't have an analysis
on, on the memorial. We often
will not have analysis on
memorials, um, I'll tell you
all, uh, I am generally not a
fan of memorials, um, I'm going
to try to hear more of them this
year because I, I did not, I
heard barely any last year and,
and there are definitely some
that, that need to be heard. Uh,
the ones that are most likely to
get hurt, cause old memorials go
through rules.
The ones that are most likely to
get hurt are ones that are, are
doing something rather than
making a statement. And that
said, I have one. I have signed
on to that is making a
statement you can all uh
absolutely roast me when that
comes around. Um, but one that
is, is actually asking someone
to do something and one of the
things I'm going to be very
curious about with all those is
Whoever you are asking to do
something, have you talked to
them about it and have they
agreed to do it. Because
otherwise, memorials are a
strongly worded suggestion that
can be absolutely ignored and do
not have the force of law. So,
go ahead, said her thank you,
madam, and I really appreciate
you setting the tone on that,
and I completely agree with you.
So I brought the person who I'm
asking to do the work on this,
and we jointly collaborated to
put this together, but thank you
very much, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, good
morning. um, so sendate Joint
Memorial One, it's not a mem
it's a joint memorial, so we
know this does need to go
through the entire body, the
entire legislature in order to
get this work done. Uh, but I do
have with me today Laura
McCarthy, and she is our 11th
state forester and the first
woman to take on the role since
joining the New Mexico forestry
division in 2019, uh, Ms.
McCarthy holds a master's degree
from Yale School of Forestry and
the environment. Uh she started
her career as a wildland
firefighter for the USDA Forest
Service and later transitioned
through the forestry related
roles that she's had along the
way. She is now our state
forest.
That's sort of the more fun
title to give her, but as a
result, she's the director of
our forestry division. So thank
her for being here. I'm gonna
ask her to say a few words,
Madam Chair, here momentarily.
But again, this uh joint
memorial asks both the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department and the Economic
Development department to
actually do something, Madam
Chair, just like you said, to
come together to commission a
group, to come together by
September of this year, and as
we all know, um, from northern
New Mexico to southern New
Mexico, everywhere in the
middle, including the the the
devastation.
that we saw in Rioso as an
example, in northern New Mexico
22, 2.5 years ago, um, all the
way down into the Sierra County
area. We absolutely need to find
a more um um organized way of of
forestry and forest management,
um, this memorial actually
purports to enhance ecosystem
health, uh, reduce wildfire risk
which we've been dealing with,
improved water quality, and then
overall environmental
sustainability, other benefits
are going to be resource
optimization, community
engagement, you know, alignment
with the state.
Priorities and really bringing
the economic development
department into this because it
seems to me like we have this
conversation, Madam Chair, every
couple of years. I have brought
a similar memorial to this,
probably 5 years ago, and, uh,
myself, and this actually brings
business and industry into the
discussion to to find a way to
make this an economy also, to to
to make an additional part of
our economy here. So again,
there's 4 major things that this
legislation does, it's really at
the bottom of page 2 in the
actual joint memorial. One is it
asks, uh, you know, what
business opportunities are.
missing in New Mexico that are
needed to develop a fully
functioning wood products, um,
economy. Second, what
incentives, legal actions,
financial mechanisms and
partnerships are needed to
reduce logistical costs for
making this happen for us.
Third, what programs, policies,
laws and practices exist in
other states. Why would we go
reinvent the wheel when we have
something else somewhere in the
country that's working very
well. And 4th, um, what new or
existing state programs and
incentives can be leveraged to
make this work happen. So I'm
gonna ask our state forester to
say a couple of
words and then we'll take some
questions from the committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
We've been nibbling around the
edges of this issue since I've
been state forester and when,
uh, Senator Padilla suggested
that we really ought to be
taking a closer look at the
forest-based economy, I jumped
on the opportunity.
To bring the experts together to
figure out some that set of
incentives policies and
financial mechanisms that will
help New Mexico, the, the
current state of affairs is that
we have.
Over 100 small wood using
industries, but mostly what they
are producing is firewood and.
Vegas and Latias, and while
that's super important.
From a traditional point of
view, the volume isn't there.
To help us address
The overgrown condition of
forests and the need to
economically remove
The overgrown Russian trees that
act as fuel for future fires.
Uh, with that
Thank you.
Thank you. We did have one
person sign up to speak and
support Camilla Romero, the New
Mexico State Land Office. Come
on up to the, the microphone.
tell us who you are. You have up
to 5 minutes.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members Camila Romero
with the New Mexico State Land
Office. The Land Office supports
this memorial since it would
Would increase wood production,
utilization directly affect the
pace and scale of forest
restoration builds reduction on
state trust lands and the
potential to generate revenue
for the SLO beneficiaries. Thank
you. Thank you very much. All
right, members of the committee.
Uh, Gallegos, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator again.
I didn't get the name of our
Expert witness. Thank you, Laura
McCarthy, State Forester.
I appreciate that. I missed
that.
Um, course, I, I guess I just
want to start. I've got family
that does, uh, firewood.
Between here and Colorado, they
actually go into Colorado to do
it because of uh
Problems we have in our own
state. So I like you guys doing
this. I did have a couple of
questions, so I know that um
In other states, they have
access problems. I know we've
got some roads and some.
Entraance places if we are we
designating areas where they can
go in, for instance, some use
the trackco to grab them, some
used cables to get in, but
there's a lot of disturbance
with that. I need, I, I know we
need to clean, but I'm just
wondering what we're looking at
long term as we go, is it an
actual logging area? Was it just
uh individual drop, uh, brush
that's already trees that have
fallen, brush that's dead. Uh,
how are we looking at the
implementation.
Madam Chair and Senator, this
memorial is not going to address
for practices, uh, which I would
say that that's what your
question is addressing the how
of material, how material is
removed. We do have foresters
across the state, uh state
employees who are, uh, the
technical professionals who make
those determinations about the
appropriate.
Equipment and technique.
For each project that they make.
Well, thank you for that, Madam
Chair, Senator, uh, I just
remember we put a lot of people
out of business. They're in Las
Vegas. We used to have a plant
that took the wood made wood
board for sale and so I see a
lot of opportunists for bringing
people back, croft used to have
a wood mill there's uh all
across state. Paul Rado has
really capitalized on that in
the Alamosa area, uh, the, uh,
Amish did a great job.
I see a lot of opportunity for
us to do it in our state and
help us wildfire. So I thank you
all of you. Thank you.
Senator Spanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator and uh Miss
uh McCarthy.
The, um, on the other bill that
I'm carrying for you, several
entities have come to me and
said, can we be included in this
task force.
So you might consider some of
these people who aren't in the
one test force to be included in
this one. For example, the
contractors, the home builders,
etc. Um, but just an idea. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for being here for
both of you. We know that most
forested lands in New Mexico are
actually on federal
designations. Does this research
consider all land management
status of BLM and US Forest
Service or just specifically
state lands.
Madam Chair and Senator.
Mm
We will be looking at the wood
supply from all lands and we
will be realistic.
About what we can expect from
federal plans.
There
Are considerable state lands as
Ms. Romero described in her, uh,
testimony a minute ago and
A lot of private lands and we
really want to be able to help
the private landowners.
With forest and, you know, if
you think about who lost land in
the or who lost Forrest in the
Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon fire.
It was far greater loss on
private land than on.
National forest, even though
they started the fire.
So that is one of our objectives
is to provide.
Private landowners with viable
economic uses that
Draw from both traditional.
Products and the emerging
markets for products such as
biochar.
Mass timber, etc. and we've
never had the resources to look
into that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
would say it would be, it would
be beneficial to take whatever
results findings you have and
share those findings with the
federal government because I
could argue that at least within
southern New Mexico, most of our
most damaging, if not all, I
can't even think of a single
example. It was not started on
a, on, on federal lands, BLM or
US Forest Service and then crept
over and encroached on.
Public, I mean, uh uh private
lands at that point, but, but
the heart of where this, the
problem is is is originating is
often on.
Federal lands and without their
cooperation, and that's why it's
important to get with our
federal designation. It's the
reality is is that you were
doing a fantastic job, as are
tribal lands, but those
management practices have got to
be uh encouraged by those who
are, who are managing our, our
national lands. I also noticed
on here that there seems to be a
large focus on thinning and how
that pertains to economic
development, and I don't
disagree. Well, the research of
this also
consider
Grazing
As, as ways of mitigating.
Fire
Potentials and um the benefits
of prescribed burns or is it
just specific to the business
opportunities of thinning
forests.
Madam Chair and senator, we will
not be looking at grazing.
And I forgot. I'm sorry, I
forgot the second part. Uh, you,
uh, prescribed burns, for
example. There's not correct,
uh, Madam Chair and Senator, we
will also not be looking at
prescribers. This will be really
about developing the markets for
And the policies and incentives
to go along with that for
utilization of the wood, and I
think.
You know, it does have an
intersection, I suppose, with
prescribed burn because if we're
not removing it and using it,
then we will have fewer options
for how to dispose of it so that
we don't find ourselves in a
situation where we have simply
rearranged the fuels from
vertical to horizontal and Madam
Chair, I'm guessing that most of
the work that comes out of the
joint memorial will be more
proactive measures so that,
yeah, those are very important.
I, I love everything.
The senator just said, but
you're going to see a lot of
proactive steps being taken, so
we're not dealing with that on
the back end when the feds come
in.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
would only stress to probably
something that the forester
already knows is the benefits of
having ranchers on the ground
and having grazing, there has
been uh unlimited data. You
could see that in the the uh the
onset of the uh black fire that
where there were cows, where
there was grazing, there was not
fire and it created fire lines
and stopped the expansion of
that. So I just think that that
tool is always something that we
need to consider when we talk
about how to mitigate fire
damage. Thank you.
OK
Thank you, Senator Bergman.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, sponsors for bringing
this. Um, I'm just looking at
the FIR online. I don't think we
have copies. Um,
And M nerd and EDD are both
concerned about the cost and the
time frame, so I just wanted to
give you the opportunity to
address that.
Thank you, Madam Senator and,
and, and, you know, it's hit and
miss in terms of joint memorials
having uh caring appropriations
on the actual document, uh, when
we first started this work, um,
The Forrester and I talked about
it in the number of times and
she felt that the uh M nerd
could actually absorb the cost
of doing this work, and that has
changed slightly, but I'm gonna
let her, we, we had a very
detailed discussion about this
this morning before we came in
here and I'm gonna ask her to
respond.
Madam Senator will figure it
out. We know the work needs to
get done.
Thank you. That's what I was
assuming the department would
do. I just wanted to let you
explain. Thanks.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you both for bringing this
forward, you and I talked about
this on more than one occasion.
This is paramount that we
address.
We have burned almost 1.1
million acres of New Mexico.
Almost 1800 square miles.
We have, we have burned.
And it's absolutely ludicrous
what we have allowed.
To happen.
We have allowed our forests to
be overgrown. We have too many
straws in the ground.
We're complicating our problems
by uh
By reducing water flows in many
of our tributaries.
this problem has to be solved.
And, and your, your issue is
going to be more than just
Uh, getting a policy out of
Friends
That will help you divide the
decide and
and, and
And of define.
processes.
Because what we have done by
letting our forest get so
overgrown, we have devalued the
value of the timber because it's
all much smaller and, and, and
it has limited uses.
And you can't get it out, number
one, because it's, it's too
thick and, and then we have all
sorts of other issues out there.
Getting the US Force Service to
the table is absolutely, I'll
help you drag him up there if
you need. I mean, we gotta get
them in the in the room, and we
have to address the issue
because there
Ignorance to the process of what
they're doing and what they're
causing has cost lives and
property in New Mexico.
And, and it's just that simple.
I mean, most don't want to talk
about it like that, but
I have a home in the Rio Dosa
area. I mean, it got within.
The back of the room from my
house.
Um, and, and I was the lucky
guy.
There's many friends that have
nothing left.
And you go up in the hermit.
Uh peaked area and
I mean, it's heartbreaking. So,
I wish this was a bill. I'd
like, I'd like to support it. I
cannot think of a reason when we
are a state with a plenty that
we're not addressing critical
problems that have affected so
many in New Mexico. So I totally
support the bill. I totally
support the effort and
Um
I think you have another bill
that's a hardening bill to to
help. I look forward to doing
that because we need to, we need
to help people harden their
properties, but at the same
time, when you allow an inferno
to be designed next to you.
You're just costing yourself
more money and more effort
trying to harden it from that
heat sink. So, I'm all about
helping you, you need to do this
and uh
Gosh, I wish it was a bill. I'd
like to help you with this, so
thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you, Senator Patilla.
Thank you for this. I, I, I want
to really thank you as well,
because this, this touched me,
everything that Senator Townsend
said regarding the fires that we
had in the north here, um, that
were set by the feds.
Um, I have a, uh, very, very
good friend, uh, Mr. Ray
Herrera. He lost everything.
He was an older gentleman, I
don't know if you know that name
or not.
He was an older gentleman, the
the feds did absolutely nothing
to help him and so many others
are still waiting for federal
help after almost.
2.5 years.
And um when Senator Townsend
just said, I'll help you drive
the US Forest Department uh up
there with you. I.
I mean, what they did was
criminal. Ray Herrera died.
He was so stressed out, he was a
broken man. He died of a heart
attack in front of his wife
Cathy.
And
I really support this. I wish it
was a bill, and I only have one
question, uh, regarding the
recommendations.
And it just says um,
On page 2.
Line 3, whereas recommendations
are needed.
When, and I, I might have missed
it, and I apologize if I did,
but when are those
recommendations going to be uh
submitted.
Um, so we can take a look at
those recommendations, maybe get
them in a bill.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and senator. So if you go to
page 3, it calls out, you know,
to, to, um,
That the M nerd and uh economic
development department will
report their findings by
September 1st, and I, and I will
say since I've heard it, Madam
Chair from two of your members
here, um.
I was all about ringing a bell,
but, uh, but we also didn't want
to jump to any conclusions, we
thought it's very important that
these two departments put their
heads together and pull in all
the different groups that have
been mentioned here today to put
all of this work together and
then we come forward, probably
not just a bill, probably a
package of things to to address
this. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
kind of like Senator Stefanik's
idea of bringing in some other
people if you kind of think
about that as well because
they're quite frankly, they're
stakeholders, uh, as well with
the state. Um, when you, when
you, when you finally get all
the recommendations and you're
sending people out to study,
talk to people and things like
that.
Um, when are you gonna take
those and, and what's the plan
for those? Do you plan to craft
those into a bill to do the next
60 day session? What do you
think the timeline is? Uh, yes.
But then that's, but, but, but I
don't, we can't, we won't know
what that is, we don't know if
it's one, if it's, you know, 9
or but, but yes, to answer your
question. And then, thank you,
Senator, Madam Chair. Last
question is, when you get all
these recommendations in and
these ideas.
Um
Where, where are you, what's
your, what's your plan to kind
of develop a charter to bring
the required or appropriate
stakeholders in to go through
those recommendations and then
start crafting legislation. So
the reason that the timeline was
set, I'm sorry, Madam Chair and
Senator, the reason the timeline
was set for September 1st of
this year is the work with all
of the various stakeholding
groups and all that will occur
as the as the work of the joint
memorial happens, then we'll
have really from September 1
through whatever would be
permissible in a 30 day session,
which we
Although constitutionally we
have a couple of guardrails
there. Ideally, we have the same
governor from this year to next
year, and ideally, uh, you know,
that'll be a package that we can
lobby that governor on to put on
a call if there are viable
options that are recommended out
of this joint memorial, or we'll
have to keep some of them I'm
assuming for the next 60 days.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair again. Thank you so much
for bringing this forward. This,
this is something we should be
talking about it and working
every single day, uh, especially
in the north where I'm more
familiar with than than the
South, so I want to thank you
both of your staffs for working
this. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Before we're gonna go
to Senator Harmier next, but
before we do, uh, Senator
Berman, you're absolutely right,
we did not include that FIR for
this. I apologize for that. We
added this at the last minute to
our agenda, uh, but we do have
copies now back there if anyone
wants.
coffee and we'll make sure that
the FIRs are included for
everything we hear in the
future.
Senator Harman.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. I did have a
question on grazing as well, so
I'm happy that Senator Brantley
brought that up. I was thinking
of our communities and
Canillora Maria, and
Transpiernas where they've asked
that question about grazing
because that does help prevent
uh fire spreading with fire
line, so thank you, senator for
bringing that up. Um, no
questions, but I have a few
comments. You know, I serve as
the interim chair for the land
grant Committee. And so
recently, in the past few years,
the New Mexico
Land grant Council and the State
land Office that Camila Romero
is familiar with. We partnered
together to ensure that
Pacientes or members of the land
grant the Merceds could go in
and and get firewood and
firewood what was then delivered
to our Ananos to the elderly in
our communities. Now I'm hopeful
with this memorial, although we
talk about it being business
driven, um, that we consider
land grants continuing to go
into our forests to continue to
get
I would, because so many rural
northern New Mexicans rely on
firewood as their primary source
of heat in the winter. So
although they're not making
money off of this, it's not a
business. It's parentes who were
caring for Anianos to ensure
that they keep warm and so my
last thing is um Pavia, this is
really good for northern New
Mexico, I had a number of
constituents who called and said
they were thankful for this,
because they were considering
how do we join as land grants to
continue to come in.
And I want to just give a quick
shout out to 3 land grants that
have gone in to get that
firewood with that partnership,
Santa Varvara las trampas and
San Joaquin the Rio de Chama.
they continue to get firewood
for Ananos yearly, and I'm
thankful for what they're doing,
not for any profit, just for
Cadencia for the care of
community. Thank you, Madam
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend for a 2nd time. Yes,
thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Kind of a crazy idea, but
Senator Worth had uh SB 2122
that were primacy bills bringing
the circle back into New Mexico.
Maybe you should think about um
Taking control, we certainly
have.
We certainly have the expertise,
if you look at what tribal
communities and in my district
have done and their force, we
certainly have the
Unique ability to manage
forests.
And we can do it better than the
federal government does, and
maybe we should talk about it
because, I mean, if you're gonna
create jobs in New Mexico.
Bring, bring expertise that we
have within our own ranks and
friends. We can do that and we
can do it better than the
federal government, and Lord
knows it's time. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Now that's everyone I
had on my list. Um, I'll just
ask some, uh, you want just the
motion for do pass when you're
ready.
Thank you. Uh, I just have one
question, Senator. So clearly
Ebner is
Is ready to go on this because
State Forester is under Ener,
correct?
Um, um, other than kind of some
of the.
concerns the Senator Bergman
mentioned from economic
development.
Have, you've heard from them
that they are willing to do
this? Yes, they are, they are
more than happy to participate.
Wonderful.
They're chomping at the bit.
Great. All right, we are on a
motion for a due pass from
Senator Harramio. Is there any
uh opposition to that motion?
See none, you have a do pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Thank you. And
now we're going to go to, we're
gonna do kind of another uh
confirmation training now, but
before that, I think we're gonna
go to Madamerote.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
just wanna weigh in a little bit
on our discussion of the
memorials, but to tell people a
little bit of history. When I
first got here.
In the mid-nineties, the
legislative council.
would approve a memorials to
move forward because they don't
come with money. Sometimes they
do, but they do cost. So the
legislative council for my 1st
20 years would not allow simple
memorials. It required any
memorials to go forward to be
joint memorials, having passed
both chambers. So that's sort of
dropped off now and although
we're doing less, uh.
is doing more simple memorials.
There is no stop to that, and
they are driving a lot of our
interim work through those
simple memorials, um, I've seen
it for the last 4 years. Uh, I
work in a C, but a lot of it
came from simple memorials in
the house, so.
To me, it's
Gotten a little out of kilter
and a little problematic, um,
when I was in the house, I used
the memorials and I couldn't get
a bill passed, and get this bill
passed OK OK, let's at least
study the issue, um, but it had
to be a joint memorial and some
of them passed and worked on it,
some of them didn't, but.
It's, I believe, sort of that
it's a little out of control by
us not looking at memorials more
thoroughly and just, uh, that's
what we do in the Senate, not
what they do in the house, so I
think there's a real difference
now and hopefully the ledge
council may weigh in on it.
Um, can I have new people on
that ledge council, so perhaps
we will look at it in the
interim.
It's all I wanted to say. Thank
you, ma'am.
Thank you, madam for time. Um,
all right, Natalie, you wanna
come on up?
Uh, and so for members, we're
gonna be hearing today about the
uh the state board of fighting
or the state Finance Authority
and the state Board of Finance,
and I think a little bit about
the New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology, uh, the,
uh, confirmations we're gonna be
doing on Monday is a regent for
the Institute for Mining
Technology. Uh, that'll be our
first regent confirmation. Um,
and then some folks from the New
Mex
Finance Authority and State
Board of Finance.
And I think that's it, right,
Jessie?
OK.
No.
Oh, sorry, Senators.
I don't, I don't have all my
notes here who the sponsors are,
but, but we'll, we'll let you
all know this.
Who sponsoring
And if, if you are definitely.
Go ahead, Natalie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
we'll have Jesse, um, pass out
the, we're gonna start with the
New Mexico Finance Authority,
um, and.
Which is pretty large, um,
And so what Jesse's passing out
right now is the strategic plan
for the New Mexico Finance
Authorities strategic plan for
um 2025 to 2027. Um, this is
also available online, um, well,
a lot of the information I'll be
going over comes from this, um,
particular, uh, strategic plan,
um, but some of it also does
come from statute. So, um, just
to begin, the New Mexico Finance
Authority was created in 1992 in
Um, in the New Mexico Finance
Authority Act to provide
financing to public entities and
then it was later expanded by
the statewide economic
development Finance Act to
provide financing to private
entities also. Um, today the New
Mexico Finance Authority
oversees 25 programs, um, each
of which is designed to deliver
capital to meet the needs of
various entities and achieve
specific goals for the state.
Um, so the statute there is in
chapter 6,
Was it Title 21, I think that's
it. Um, and, um,
That goes over the governing
structure and the powers. So for
the governing structure, this,
um, authority, sorry to
interrupt you.
Have the, have the microphone
aimed like at your throat
instead of your mouth. All
right, sorry.
All right, thanks.
Um, is that better?
back.
And then
OK, we're good?
All right, well, I'm just
sending.
OK, so is this fine or OK, thank
you. OK, so this is actually,
um, the authority is actually
quite large. It has 11 members
on it, um, only, uh, the.
Uh, 5 of the members are
actually appointed by the
governor. One of them is the uh
is a is a chief financial
officer of a state higher
educational institution, and
then 4 members who are residents
of the state, um, those have
staggered four-year terms. Um,
the other members are the
secretary of finance and
Administration, the Secretary of
Economic Development, the
Secretary of Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources, the
Secretary of Environment, um,
and the executive director of
the New Mex
Mexico, or sorry, yeah, the
executive director of the New
Mexico Municipal League and the
executive director of the New
Mexico Association of Counties
and then of course all their
designees. Um, so quite a large
board, um, the, uh, the
secretaries and the executive
directors are ex officio
members, um, with voting
privileges.
For governance powers, um, they
can, ah, sue or be sued.
Uh, they can make appropriate
rules for operation, appoint
officers, agents, and employees
and enter into contracts for
operation purposes. Um, they can
accept administer, hold and use
all funds made available to the
authority from any sources and
borrow more money and to issue
bonds and provide for the rights
of holders of the bonds. Um,
they can also apply for and
accept gifts of grants or grants
of property funds, services, or
aid in any form from the United
States, and the unit of
government or any person and to
comply.
um, subject to, to the
provisions of the New Mexico
Finance Authority Act, the terms
and conditions of the gifts or
grants.
Um, the major activities of the
agency.
Um, is to acquire, hold, improve
lease, construct, and manage
real estate and real property.
Um, they make loans, leases, and
purchase securities and
contracts to make, um, they, uh,
make grants to to qualified
entities to uh finance public
projects, um, as long as the
grants are not made from the the
public project revolving fund.
Um, they also set loan fees,
they establish and maintain
reserve and sinking fund
accounts, um, to ensure against
and have funds available for
maintenance and other debt
service accounts. And, um, they
invest and reinvest.
funds and uh and take or to
take, to take and hold property
as security for the investment
of such funds as provided by the
New Mexico Finance Authority
Act.
Um, you are probably familiar
with many of these funds, um,
there is a, uh, list of all of
the funds in the strategic plan
for uh the New Mexico Finance
Authority on page 4.
you'd like to turn to that to
see all of the different funds,
um, but as you can, so as you
can see, um, many of them are
about, um, infrastructure and,
um, providing uh funding for
different entities or for
different public entities, um,
such as water and um
And waste um also for local
governments to make
improvements, um, like I said,
they also provide private
lending for businesses, um, some
of those programs include the
new markets tax credit program,
the opportunity and um
enterprise, a venture capital
program, smart money, business
loan participation program, the
state's small Business Credit
initiative, um, primary care
capital fund, um, slash
behavioral health capital fund,
small business recovery and
stimulus programs, and then the
cannabi.
microbusiness program.
Um, they also, uh, are very
critical in providing funding to
disadvantaged communities so
that they can, um, improve their
uh infrastructure and, um, and
offer programming to, to their
um to their residents. Um, they
also provide um funding for us
for charter schools and have a
program for that.
So Commery beats of the uh of
these particular funds, um, and
the other activities are
obviously public entities such
as municipalities and school
districts, um, businesses, and
of course commercial real estate
owners and others, um.
Current partners in um
In the, right now they are, they
actually part of their goals is
establishing more partners in
New Mexico. So, of course, the
major stakeholders are kind of
what you would think are, which
would be like municipalities,
business groups, and property
owners who are also commercial
landlords. Um,
So there's actually quite a bit
of uh of legislation that is
being proposed this year. Um,
this is some of it, um, there is
SB 29, which is the water
project fund appropriation, uh,
SB 115, the public project
revolving Fund projects, uh, SB
170 actually is directly related
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority, um, it's the to goes
over the definitions, funds and
rates, um, SB 197 is for EMS
system improvement projects
funding.
HB 41 is uh the public project
fund appropriations, HB 137 is
strategic waters is the
strategic water supply Act and
HB 206 is the New Mexico Finance
Authority water project fund
projects, um, and all of these
are currently in um.
Subject area committees.
Um, so those will be coming up,
um, this session.
Um, so for, in terms of the um
the major issues, um, if you
would turn to, I guess, uh, 7.
It's this, of the strategic
plan. It goes over their goals.
It has this really nice chart,
um, and then the following, I
believe 2 pages, um, have much,
have a lot more information
about the goals, um.
The first goal is to advance
community and economic
development. If you look on, if
you look on the, um, the right
hand side, it shows, um, what
the, um, what the finance
authority has achieved with
respect to each part of the
goal. So for the first part, the
to um goal 1 to effectively
deploy funds from the state
small business credit
initiative. Um, this is a new
goal, so they'll probably be
working on that and
establishing, um, programs and,
um, policy for that. Um,
the following one, is in
obtaining funding for behavioral
health capital fund, primary
care capital fund, and the
childcare revolving fund, um, it
says it's been, it's been
amended, it has policy and it
also has funding, and as we all
know, getting funding is a very
critical uh part of trying to um
make policy work.
Um, goal too is strengthening
New Mexico's infrastructure to
promote healthy communities,
both of these objectives under
gold 2 are brand new, um, goal 3
is maximizing community impact
by leveraging strategic
partnerships. So they are trying
one of the first things that
they're trying to do is, is to
establish a system of
determining needs and priorities
of a strategic partners. And
then, um, the following
objectives are to uh just get
more information about that and
assist those partners.
Goal for is, uh, it says
optimizing organizational
effectiveness and efficiency.
That's basically operational, so
there's trying to um improve the
operations of the finance
authority.
Um
Like I said, there are more,
there's a lot of information.
About um the goals on pages 8
and 9.
Um, one thing that is important
about the finance authority is
that it is not under any
particular state agencies
similar to the small business
Investment Corporation that we
saw last week, um, or not last
week, it's been a long time.
It's just a couple of days ago,
um, and, uh, this is very
similar, so it's got and on page
10 is, um, the internal
structure for the finance
authority. Um, so if you're
interested in, um, asking any
questions about um some of those
internal operations, um.
Goals you can, um, you know, you
can, you can guess, view this
and uh ask those questions
during the confirmation. Um, so,
um, the goals are really are
really important in terms of,
uh, you know, coming up with
questions about very substantive
issues that are facing the
authority, um, for during the
confirmation, um, one of the
biggest issues for many of our
um programs here in New Mexico
and many of our agencies is the
impact of, of new federal
standards on the, uh,
Finance authority's ability to
do what they do, you know,
lending and, um, supporting
municipalities and private
entities.
Um, so you may want to ask
about, um, you know, how funding
affects their ability to to
achieve their goals, um, and to
support their partners, um, and
then there's, and then of course
any um
Any issues that are coming up in
any of the bills that are coming
up this year that I listed. Um,
you may want to go and look at
those bills a little bit more
closely and um ask the um the
folks who were getting confirmed
if they have any, you know, what
their thoughts are on those. Um,
additional questions that you
may want to ask, um, is that,
and I took some of these
basically from the questions you
asked during our last, uh,
confirmation hearing is, um,
what do you think the the
mission of the finance authority
is, you know, just to make sure
that they understand what they.
Getting into
Um, again, you know, with the,
uh, asking them about federal
funding, um.
And then, um, if they see any
trends in New Mexico, um, with
the work that they do, um, that
they think that they can
capitalize on or improve upon or
that need to be maybe the
direction needs to be changed,
um.
Some of you had questions
specifically about the loans, so
some ask about loan interest
rates and if they had loan caps,
um, this entity also makes loans
and so you may want to ask about
that, um, also with the types of
roles and relationships that,
uh, the finance authority has
with tribal partners, that's um
uh tribes that are something
that I've heard in um several
different, um, not just, uh,
committees and, um, obviously
confirmations, but it's just,
you know,
Our communities that um.
That folks are, are really
paying a lot of attention to. So
if they are, they affect your
district, you may wanna
consider, you know, what role
the Finance Authority has with
Tribal Partners. Um, and, uh,
and that's it. Um, do you have
any questions about?
And any of the information I
have.
I don't think so.
And then, um, unfortunately I do
not have um the uh uh a
presentation, a presentation for
the regions.
Um, and, or the regions and then
the um board of uh finance, I
believe.
Um, prepared, and we are, um,
trying to get uh folks, uh,
scheduled and sometimes the
folks that we plan to get
scheduled, um, are not
available. And so we have to,
you know, make some last minute
changes, but I will put, put
together similar information for
you in terms of, um, the, the
statutes and, um, the statutory
authority and all of that, and I
will send that to you over the
weekend so that you have time to
review it before the
confirmation hearing on, um, on
Monday.
Great. Thank you so much,
Natalie.
Again members to.
If you guys have suggestions
about how to kind of do these
learning sessions so that they
are most effective for you. Let
me know. We are, we are trying
stuff out, so we are open to
adjusting if if this is not the
best way to do it. Uh, please
don't hesitate to, to say so.
