But.
Madam chair each year one is a
the rule change for both
chambers the the dress is a
problem we have been getting
Committee service and amendments
to the public so that had what I
see happen over and over is we
have a bill scheduled for
Committee people are concerned
about the bill changes propose
and we have it we have a hearing
and we have public testimony and
the testimony is all on the old
bill the before the amendment or
before the committee so what
this proposes to do is publish a
proposed amendments in committee
serves on the website when
they're sent out to the
committee so in the house you
know we have a we've a twenty
four hour guidelines that we try
to observe we try to get stuff
out to the committee at the time
so the idea is that when they
were sent out to the committee
would also send it to the
council service how the service
would put it on the website much
like they do the.
second part of the bill would
also publish the agency
analyses at the same time the
FIR is published so that fire
relies heavily on HSD analyses
in those we get published on the
website as well.
I think this is a
good fix Fulton efficiency and
transparency and be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you we we did have one
person who last I don't see him
here right asked that to be
noted as being in support
legislation Jason Espinoza for
the New Mexico foundation for
open government is plus we
noticed in support I don't
believe we have anyone signed up
in opposition if anyone here
would like to raise a hand to
indicate support please do so.
Like anyone online and
unemployment anyone wants
indicate their opposition please
raise your hand to do so.
The one on one.
All right so
Or any other discussion with
many.
The nine months I've those do a
roll call vote.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle
Senator Lopez our queue Senator
McKenna.
Yes senator McKinney yes senator
Munoz Senator Moores yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle is
excused Senator.
Yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator how to me yes and
senator do the yes the seven
that you have to pass chair
thank you committee.
Senator.
Here.
so
The.
Yeah.
I believe
On page.
To.
So madam chair.
HM two is it Joint Memorial from
the house requesting the
Legislative Council to install a
plaque in our State Capitol.
Presented by the New Mexico
state organization daughter's
the American revolution to
recognize the significance of
the one hundred year anniversary
of the nineteenth amendment
which gave women most women
directors of.
You know I'll just mention that
when I was a senior in high
school I got the daughters of
the American revolution award
that year that's how I know
about the A. R..
For at just for service I did a
lot of stuff and I school count
like I do here.
I have with me to
representatives of the daughters
of the American revolution
organization I'd like them to
make some calls.
Thank you madam chair Senators
thank you Senator Stewart for
coming in place of
Representative Trujillo my name
is Tina Lusby I am regents of
the Stephen watts Kearny chapter
of DA are that's a Santa Fe
chapter Eleanor teases my cohort
she is a past honorary region of
my chapter and she is the
incoming state region four of
New Mexico D. A. R..
I'd like to thank our house and
Senate Sanchez who brought the
identical bill in the Senate
that's as M. six that was
Senator Stewart and senator
Correa Hemphill who is a
descendant of New Mexico
suffragist
we are asking for no
appropriation D. A. R. pays its
own way we pay for all or
markers and memorials and
we have markers and memorials
you may or may not have seen in
Santa Fe national cemetery the
Navajo code talkers are honored
there with abuse beautiful big
monument and the Viet nam
veterans monument was installed
a couple of years ago we also
did all the Santa Fe Trail
markers that you see all the way
in northeastern New Mexico and
in including the one.
On the Santa Fe plaza which is
called the end of the trail
markers.
Daughters of the American
revolution is a lineage and
service organization we are
nonpartisan and nonpolitical we
are open to any woman who can
prove descent through
revolutionary service services
defined very broadly that could
mean the Continental Army that
fought against the British that
could mean the state malicious
that could mean a farmer who
provided hay and corn for
livestock of courses lead for
bullets or anyone who served in
new positions of government as
well as those little drummer
boys we hear about.
New Mexico has a wonderful
connection to the American
revolution through the presidio
soldiers who were stationed here
in Santa Fe king Carlos of Spain
record the presidio soldiers to
pay him a Dona Devo two pesos
out of their meager little
salaries with those funds banks
supported the American colonials
trying to break the yoke of
England Santa Fe has some of the
best presidio records around and
we are proud that our state
rather than say Iowa or
Wisconsin has an opportunity to
these women joining our
organization.
We are the largest women service
organization in the world
nationally we have already put
up for twenty twenty three
almost four hundred thousand
service hours our local chapter
here in Santa Fe put in over
five thousand hours last year.
We work in our schools our faith
communities serve the homeless
surveillance and other shelters
and food banks handout
constitution booklets at the
county fair we're going to start
preservation projects and public
gardens and so on.
There are was founded in
nineteen ninety in DC when women
asked to join the newly formed
sons of the American revolution
and were turned down watch out
for our ladies we went ahead and
did our own thing our chapter in
Santa Fe was organized in
eighteen ninety eight just eight
years after the national
organization merry
Representative Mary Catherine
prince wife of territorial judge
and later governor Bradford
princes why.
Seven our chapters focus on
historic preservation
patriotism honoring veterans and
active duty military personnel
and education about our founding
documents and government.
Today we simply want to honor
the women and men of New Mexico
who works tirelessly to pass
suffrage in New Mexico and then
when that didn't happen they
work to ratify the nineteenth
amendment after was passed at
the federal level in nineteen
ninety.
Women's suffrage finally gained
enough state ratifications to
become law in August of nineteen
twenty New Mexico did in
February of that year.
New Mexico is not in the
forefront of either of those
efforts we could have followed
the example of state Wyoming
which gave women the right to
vote in eighteen seventy six
when it became a territory and
they wrote the constitution we
could have done that in nineteen
twelve with our own state
constitution but did not.
We also realize native Americans
were still disenfranchised in
New Mexico even with the
nineteenth amendment in fact
they were not given the right to
citizenship until counsel to the
Senate in nineteen twenty four
and then the right to vote came
in nineteen forty eight but some
aspects regarding tribal land
residents in the right to vote
were only result in the New
Mexico Supreme Court these
became New Mexico constitution
and Supreme Court issues.
Perhaps Miguel Trujillo who
brought that nineteen sixty four
Supreme Court lawsuit should be
the next black in this capital.
Our plaque however for the
rotunda simply recognizes and
New Mexicans who work hard here
in our territory and then in the
state to put women on more equal
footing no names will be listed
on this plaque no money will be
asked and we follow the example
of a year two thousand plaque we
already have down in the rotunda
honoring New Mexico's multi
cultural heritage by putting New
Mexico state organization on the
plaque rather than the name of
our Santa Fe chapter although we
are the sponsors for this
plaque.
These names include Andr√©s error
status Jones this man went by a
you can see why he was from Las
Vegas and he was an educator who
came here to New Mexico to work
in the schools but then he was
elected to the Senate and he
shared the U. S. Senate suffrage
Committee in DC for two critical
years nineteen seventeen to
nineteen nineteen he maneuvered
the activities in DC politics to
keep this effort issue alive and
finally got the nineteenth
amendment passed women whose
names you have probably heard
and many of you might be related
to are being honored also Nina
Otero Warren who is on the new
quarter.
And as a relative the Senator
Correa Hemphill and Senator
studio opens the lower us show
this to me health Aurora looks
Cerro Marguerite Baca.
Wanted dead could base of the
Baca I need to Romero and
Arabella Romero and her daughter
Marie as well as Julie brown
Asplund who is the first train
librarian in New Mexico and
served as the first woman on the
New Mexico board of regents
Ellen pay one and I know sizer
Cassidy the widow of Gerald
Cassidy the part artist.
We respectfully ask you to
consider our memorial for this
new plaque you will be hearing
from us again as the two hundred
fiftieth birthday of the United
States approaches and twenty
twenty six our effort is called
the America to fifty commission
and it's called the cemex Simic
when centennial that's a
mouthful thank you for hearing
our memorial and I will take
your questions.
Thank you very much we did not
have anyone signed up in
opposition or and so forth and.
You want to add.
I anyone who would like to raise
their hand in the case for
please do so I support.
A lot of you better.
All right anyone would like
prisons in jail position please
do so.
One.
Our.
Senator Ortiz notes officers.
Thank you madam chairman of.
Try to listen carefully but.
I didn't hear for you gonna put
it and how big it's going to be
given that already worked out
actually the capital recognition
subcommittee which includes
Senator Stewart Senator Wirth of
the Senator Baca I believe just
Senator on the Representative
side I think it's like four on
each side they will decide that
we feel it will probably go in
the west hallway right off the
rotunda because that's where
other to blacks or your we have
a huge two by three bronze
plaque honoring the old call
days who supported statehood and
then the next to it we have a
small eighteen by twenty four
plaque for the Y. two thousand
honoring this is multi cultural
heritage and we feel like it
will be given next to that but
this committee actually tells us
that.
So madam chairman and then the
the dimensions it'll be a plaque
it'll be it'll be a bronze
plaque is installed on those
beautiful walls and it'll be
about eighteen twenty and we're
using in Albuquerque company to
do that you mentioned that
Sherman one other question for
you and I thought I heard you
say Miguel Trujillo filed suit
in nineteen sixty four.
Yes Sir or madam chair Senators
just Sir this is the last
lawsuit was nineteen sixty four
I believe I think it was arson
voting right it had something to
do for my research which is
fairly superficial but I had
something to do with of tribal
residences and
Even though they were granted
sedition ship.
If they lived off the
reservation they have the right
to vote but if they live on
tribal lands they did not have
the right to vote is my
understanding I could be wrong
but that's my reserves of from
the past few weeks and it was
sixty four not forty six because
I'd always heard and the right
to vote was in forty eight I
believe yes madam chair and
senator but this last this was a
Navajo fellow I believe who of
filed suit because he was he had
fought in the war and he was
still not allowed the right to
vote is public.
maybe so maybe so forget the
okay thank yes you are right
this letter thank you and I
think he needs a black.
Know that I have the energy to
put through another plaque
memorial right now.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Senator Sanchez.
That morning thank Senator.
Thank you ladies.
Medicare this passes.
Or.
Is it that.
This committee and.
Madam chair it goes to the
capital recognition so.
The end of the Legislative
Council will call us and set
that up secretary and there the
staffing for that Senate
committee.
Chair Senators.
All the other.
I'm not sure there may there may
be some expenses and it'll just
come up Legislative Council but
they they pay for the plaque and
we we pay for the installation
of sentience.
Here in center city
Hello well
There.
But.
Madam chair Senators I don't
know that I can speak for that
I'm a national representative
for that we do of Martin many
historic sites with monuments
and markers plaques
I don't see another one coming
through from our group for this
capital but we happen to be in
the city and it's an opportunity
for us and I will tell you Santa
Fe is a very difficult city to
get anything installed in the
historic preservation rules on
the city level the parks level
and at the county level make it
very difficult for us to honor
suffrage in any other way we
pursued that a couple of years
ago and Senator A. A. Jones from
Las Vegas has a plaque already
installed in Las Vegas honoring
his efforts for women's suffrage
and we feel like this being the
Center of the government here we
need to have one here in our
capital.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The new year has.
All over the years and I
appreciate your.
Thank you.
The manager service request
request
our service some of the other
members are Mr goes to I was
going to ask of us and watching
but how do we find out what's
and reduces you know as an army
or how do we find out and our
offsprings or the new year or
new act.
Madam chair representative or
religion or religion or that
service or are you just on a
long right here.
In New Mexico Madam chair
Senators thank you we have
trains genealogist there we call
them our registrars in every
chapter Albuquerque has three D.
A. R. tractors we have one in
Los Alamos we have one inTaos we
have our chapter we have to can
carry and then they're all
across the southern part of New
Mexico every chapter has a
trained registrar and if you
contact that chapter if you let
me know all contact that you.
you said
parcel number zero what had to
relatives and this chamber.
Madam chair Senators yes a
senator of.
The deal Lopez and yes.
I just find it fast enough so
those two senators or our
problem is resolved.
Okay
I really appreciate that.
And madam madam chair Senators
thank you my term is region of
this chapter into in about four
months and I've tried for three
years to get this project done
but you were hearing memorial
stream COVID so I'm out of time
in four months and you I will be
bugging you again I tedious for
lack for the Republican I wonder
maybe you will see state
regions.
Thank you madam chair everybody
demand
for
thank you.
Other.
The.
Many years and years and.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
And madam chair Senator she is a
wonderful mentor for me and
knows her way around New Mexico
and politics and has been very
helpful but I was honored to
service senator Ortiz Y. Pino
it's back as of minority
analysts and
New senators a phonics and
Senator Stewart through that
effort and her these other
fellows bring legislation
through and it was honored to
work here in the legislature.
Thank you Senator Hermanson if
you're ready able to do that.
Senator.
Lopez or.
Yes senator McCain is yes and.
Yes.
Speech Ortiz.
Percent yes.
But then again.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes Sir how to get.
Pardon me yes.
Yes.
You have to pass thank you thank
you so much thank you all.
Percent.
The two eighteen March.
Why I'm gonna have to us about
to present a bill and another
committee at that point it will
take over.
Senator you have twenty minutes
to to present your bill
including any public comment and
support that the for native
and then I don't we had we have
everyone sign up and
propositions.
Okay we do not have any
signed up for opposition so the
head of our state thank you for
calling Senate bill two eighteen
is a bill senator Morris and I
are.
Presenting to you today to
increase transparency of
lobbying here again state
governments and about twenty
other states require this what
what this would require is that
of this or employers of
lobbyists.
Would be required to report.
they're a lobbying activity
in terms of which bills they
lobby on in the position they
take on those bills.
The manager of this we have we
do have an amendment to spend
with your committee.
So I think that fits nicely in
this.
We discuss the amendment kind of
wrap into this.
What the what the amendment
would do is actually required
that.
That first of all the bill says
the secretary state would
determine the timing of the
report so I can tell you in
Colorado where they did this
they started with the monthly
reports they ended up evolving
weekly reports this bill says
that awful this works on a bill
they just have to report their
involvement in that bill one
time unless that position
changes it does it does
delegate secretary St on the
timing of that report.
and that was worked out with the
secretary of state what the
amendment does does it says that
for each bill on the Legislative
Council site the collective
lobbying reporter for lobbying
actions on that bill.
Would have a section on the
Legislative Council.
Webpage for that built that way
any of us for any citizen for
the governor's office could go a
little bit Bill Page muscle
Council and actually click on a
document that would show
everybody to.
Who participated in lobbying for
against that bill.
And that's basically what it
does madam chair this is not for
every citizen who just shows up
to the legislature on on a day
to advocate for their favorite
bill.
These are for.
Individuals who actually meet
the legal definition of lobbying
pursue this reporting act for
their consistently logging on
issues such as they are required
to file a report with the
secretary of state.
and so that's the threshold
we're talking about the case or
wondering what would this be the
person shows of the afternoon
no.
These are people are loving on a
consistent basis for an issue
which is half of our law
defining flopping.
were when you were a lobbyist
the other thing I think that's
important.
To know is what is lobbying one
is loving the current lobbying
is not just when someone shows
up in a committee.
The active trying to influence
policies we know can happen in
lots of places it could happen
and an elevator you happen to
the real time make it happen on
a phone call and it does so
when that threshold is been that
that's really the act trying to
affect policy that threshold as
we crossed for someone is
engaged in lobbying on the bill
and that it which is why they
would have to report that so.
That is with that work thank you
madam chair thank you senator
thank you for working on this
for years and thank you I would
have a lot of conversations as
years gone by different lobbying
issues and and this is one issue
but we definitely see I'd I of
mine my as many of us been on
this bill It for so long the
tangled web mobile this is
always surprised me and I would
just want some transparency we
go this to a lobby Republicans
this remote lobby Democrats this
is what we all of us this is
just lobby rejected branches why
this you can just log one
specific number and it just's
it's always fascinated me how
that works and I just would like
some the years have gone on to
that little more transparency
what what is happening and I'm
always kind of surprised by some
of the different people or
LogMeIn different issues
bouncing back and forth and so
on that's that was my interest
on this on a course that are
somehow has another bill which
would have our conversations are
really appreciate working with
me is the bifurcate the the
issue and really just driving in
on this transparency issue on
this part of the bill so I'm
sure the Senators.
That we stand I.
All right we have signed up for
that we don't have a set of
opposition.
Right so what are the kids the
Senators.
Thank you madam chair thank.
first of all I am very.
Along with
my question the new with
Or.
Hey
we have several organizations.
Around the state as long as
required.
The.
The elevator Association.
And I.
Senator volunteer members.
This bill.
Yeah.
Date of the organization red is
in your.
They are long.
L. I think madam right.
More on that in.
Hello.
Yeah absolutely madam chair
Senator yes I believe they are
included if there is an
organization that is is up here
with a frequency that they are
logging on it such that they
filed with secretary state as a
lobbyist the more included at
having to file this report I
don't view it as an owners
report I mean it's a one time
report they filed the secretary
of state and Colorado they've
got a very easy online click a
few buttons and you do it.
I think generally those because
a lobbyist embrace good
government transparency and they
probably would even appreciate
it budget but yet they would
give now if it's somebody who's
just up here for the day they
would not.
If for much of Madam chair
Senator in our group to the
group so you just mentioned but
we're we're all aware of groups
on both sides of the aisle that
are cortical nonprofits are more
political in nature
and not more political or
political nature and that would
be who of us to have them fall
under this over preacher the
organization she said but the
other organizations that we all
know about I think they should
be included in this.
Many families.
The Senator Ortiz is a no fault
Center harming.
Madam chairman we never dealt
with the amendment and the
amendment is.
Part of my.
I just find the whole thing very
unworkable particularly with the
and then.
I mean a lot of times a day and
I I assume other legislators
asked lobbyists for their input
on some.
I need to know what's going on
is in regard to a piece of thank
you but I'm not a banker I'll go
to the lobbyist for the bank
should they have to report that
if I approach them this is the
lobbying activity report for
each specific piece of
legislation.
Shell be included or linked on
the legislature's website for
that specific piece of
legislation.
So I mean each specific piece of
legislation goes through at
least two committees goes to the
floor goes over to the house.
We're.
On the website for where we
leaflet of list legislation
you're gonna start listing all
the lobbyists that were
contacted in connection with
that legislation.
but it just seems totally
unworkable Madam chair Senator
note that not necessarily if you
contact somebody without trying
to lobby you want to build you
say Hey what do you think about
the if they're working on the
bill and they're contracted to
work on the bill or they're
trying to persuade you want to
build a work with an industry or
their affiliated with somebody
is affiliated they know what
they're doing they know when the
threshold is being crossed
and so it's it's real clear I
mean if they're lobbying you
wanted then yes they would have
to add that to their spreadsheet
of items that would have to with
every provided they contacted so
I think it is workable.
And with all due respect you
know for all the times when
maybe you may reach out to
someone.
There is more times when
obviously it's the other way
around they wanting and school
with you and you today show up
or they don't show up and that's
really what this bill.
But even then hello once we use
your example you spoke to right
can you serve on a committee and
then until goes to a different
committee that person may never
be seen from again you knew they
existed you know industry
connection we've had this happen
this session everybody deserves
to have this information
everybody deserves to know the
players in the mechanics of
who's working to pass a bill and
and I think having that Piedmont
page as acceptable.
On the bill rate would be the
most important part.
That chairman not sure what we
came sizes if we have a list of
lobbyists and it says banking
association the.
Think of Albuquerque levy is to
all the different banking we
know they're the ones that are
influencing I mean.
I'm not sure what the fact that
they talked to that they they
showed up at a committee and
testified that I could see.
But for them to keep track of
every single conversation they
have in the whole where in the
men's room or on the of the of
the fund the floor of the Senate
before we we meet that just it
just seems totally unworkable
and unnecessary we already know
that the banking law this is
going to be influencing us about
thank you the PNM lobbyists are
going to be influencing us about
the why would it why would we
need to put additional
information does it give us to
know that they talked to us
about the seventeen bills it I
I'm not sure you gain anything
and it just I think it creates a
and are a of of of and you know
just being so picky about things
that that every conversation is
going to be recorded every every
the exchange of information I'm
not sure that this is needed and
I think it's just really
unworkable.
Mr chair first of all they don't
have to report madam chair that
they don't have report every
time they have to report one one
time if they talk to a hundred
people.
They have if they lobbied on a
bill they have the they have to
report the case that after
report every conversation to
sedate try to influence the
single legislator on that policy
that is our intention to they
lobbied on that bill that's the
legal definition of farming.
And that the budget is is it's
really for what you don't know
and I know some people think we
know everything about who's
behind every bill but that's
just not the case there there's
almost a day that goes by out of
the bill in front of me that I
wonder where this bill really
come from and that's super
important contacts and I have to
ask and I know.
Sure I had a conversation about
a bill and certain information
was disclosed about a certain
stakeholders certain company
they won Committee that wasn't
available on the floor I even
asked the question did not get a
direct answer.
We should allow our system to be
games like that where we get the
bills presented to the scene
very innocuous.
Use generic terms and yet in
fact there's some.
There's an objective this kind
of.
Not hidden obscured.
Part of what tells that story is
who stands to benefit from it
it's equal opportunity whether
that's an environmental
organization for whether that
tax on but that I think the
value to all this is huge
because it would bring all that
in a life help us make better
decisions can help the public be
able to real time understand.
is pushing policy up here
fighting policy to help no.
If they think it's not so I
think there's a tremendous
public benefits everybody
involved really.
In that today I have center
Hermio center put on the list
I'm gonna have to run up to
percent of bill moments I'm
gonna take the prerogative of
the chair and.
Make my comments before I have
to run out.
I'll be honest I.
I have some of the same concerns
that Senator to the Pino does
and and and and overall are
lobbyist regulation is bad in
New Mexico it is it is not
meaningful we don't get
meaningful information I I
really appreciate the.
The intent of this bill I don't
think this is a workable bills
so one with the timing issue you
have to only report once.
Prior to the adjournment of the
legislative session that you
sent secretary of state would
figure out when that is but
that's not what this bill says
it just says once prior to
treatment and so everyone will
just follow everything on the
last day and it will be
meaningless and no one will get
information during the session
that went at the time when when
we would most want that
information
it requires the if you change
your position on a bill you have
to know that but you only have
to file once and so so I have to
consider is there one I I don't
think changes well actually get
reported because people will
just wait to the last day to
file these reports in the first
place but to I worry about.
You know so much of what we do
in this building is compromise
and and shifting positions to to
find a middle ground that we can
agree on and I worry that if
someone has to do file to
publicly show every time they
are changing their position on
something that they are going to
be less willing to do so and
we're gonna have a harder time
reaching compromise on bills
and and talking about kind of
the informal systems that that
senator Ortiz Pino assignment
where yeah we're just we just
kind of have a passing
conversation with someone.
You say well no that's that's
not necessarily going to count
or or only would count if.
You said at one point it's it's
very clear but it's it's not
very clear
because so and I'll give an
example of.
A situation where I I have no
idea how this would into play
with it so so when I was an
annual will know in our in our
office there's a whole lot of
people who are excluded from the
definition of this as well so
when I was up here as the city
clerk for the city of
Albuquerque I was out here
working on the local action and
and that was that was part of my
I I was not a lobbyist under our
definition of this because I was
an employee of of
of the city
But I then just because I was
interested in and the the the
ethics commission legislation
was being done at the same time
and so that wasn't part of my
job for the City of Albuquerque
but I ask them permission can I
work on this too because I just
have an interest as I was given
permission from my employer but
it's not something City of
Albuquerque actually cared about
that wasn't really just doing it
on my own behalf either because
I was up here as an employee of
the city
So would my the work I did on
the state ethics commission was
that the lobbyists lobbying
under this that it is.
I want to say and the intent of
this bill is good and the more
transparency and clarity we can
have around who is seeking to
influence legislation in New
Mexico the better but it does
need to be done in a way that we
make sure that we actually get
that information in a meaningful
way that we're covering all of
the potential loopholes that
that exist for this and I don't
see this bill as as doing that
now so I I hope that we see
another version of it soon and
I'm getting the look that means
I need to go run house elections
but I will hand it over to the
yeah.
I headed over to the vice chair
thank you users to answer just
in the address where funding the
comment that was made by the
chair if you go to page two
subsection the.
When the comment was made just
filed on the last day the
secretary state specific but
loving act report shall be filed
at a time in a format has
prescribed by rule of the
secretary of state so these
these items will be reported
regularly fashion as confirmed
by rule.
And if you were retained as a
lobbyist thank you on behalf of
that organization choose to this
on another rule another thing
that would benefit the employer.
Such that you would make a
statement on doing it on their
behalf.
Because you discover it well
then you have chosen to engage
on another issue and.
You would report that.
You're doing it as an individual
it's not something you're
compensated to do thank you do
not meet the definition of this
you're operating your own
personal capacity as you're not
loving it on a substantial basis
which is what the law a lot of
phones a lot of.
Senator Pirtle.
Chair thank you senators.
Does this also include any
lobbying of the governor.
Yes.
So so share
this report would come out.
After the deadline.
Legislation.
Well Mr chair Senator know the
goal is though is that it would
follow after the session up
until the signing of the bill
including when they will this
come on get higher sometimes
after bill's been you know
passed so it would include up to
that period of time of signing
in center and Mr chair Senator
as soon as you know there are
certain lobbyist towards a
higher just to lobby the
executive depending on the
administration that goes back
and forth and so I think that's
something the government needs
to be included on the you know
the the flexibility the
secretary state house of this
bill cycle but once in awhile.
The employee captured after that
is something that I've always
found interesting here that how
the or higher sometimes just a
lobby one person in this
building on the that is of some
of the transparency we're
looking at getting.
Chair thank you senator for that
I think that's probably the most
important part of it is a
hundred and thirteen.
Matters.
Nothing else really does up to
that point so.
Appreciate that part is this in
any way include Ortiz of
nonprofits.
If the required to fall under
the rocks lobbyist Mr chair
Senator if they are required to
fall under the law this
reporting act as currently they
would also fall under this Mr
chair Senator.
Chair and senators I think
there's some that operate that
somehow screwed the rules of.
I see them here almost daily.
Talking to us about legislation
hello is there any way that we
could.
In this to include them because
I think the transparency that's
part of this building and what
organizations are lobbying what
there's been a lot of advocates
like to consider themselves to
operate as lobbyist look like
and the walk in the but now
they.
Check it so I'm not really sure
how we include them even though
they are essentially lobbyist by
anyone within a reasonable
reading of what lobbyist is
what's on how they scored the
rules or is there some way to
get them included now Mr chair
Senator so they are they are
included under law they they may
not be following the law I think
part of what we have here is a
culture of being very lax on our
our transparency lobbying
reporting regimes because we as
a body take a very liberally but
the definition of lobbyists when
they have to file as a
registered as a lobbyist needs
any individuals concept for the
specific purpose of lobbying is
designated by the interest group
of organizations represented on
a substantial regular basis for
the purpose of lobbying for in
the course of his employment is
engaged in lobbying on a
substantial basis.
it does not include in
individuals operating on their
own behalf employee of a
political subdivisions.
board elected official who's
operating for that so the fact
is if your which ever and
nonprofit in your up here all
the time you should be
registered as a lobbyist I think
with this bill would do frankly
is it would make things much
more serious because now we have
a regime the disclosure that
would make you very important on
who was reporting and when
they're reporting their
activity.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for that I think we need
to amend that to include elected
officials when they're lobbying
for a pay raise.
Then they should have to
register as a lobbyist that's
just my home.
Sure.
Thank you senator I just have
one question from the FIR I
signed on to this the FIR the
Attorney General did raise the
question which is a lobbyist
really lobbies four yield the
bill is never introduced do they
still introduced.
That's a good question
that that I don't think they
would Mr chair.
Because the bill talks about
their role in legislation that I
believe in introduced.
By phone eight eight plus for
the bill see if that's a great
question Mr chair I I think of
the bills you know it's like go
and not to make light of the the
the the tree falls in the woods
as it does to make a sound of a
bill I introduced it's not it's
not a bill.
The.
The committee.
It is.
I move the amendment thank you
for try that out Senator seven
the opposition to the amendment.
While in opposition.
All.
Senator Ortiz.
The opposite.
To propose one excuse.
And I'll move the sort of
improved.
Forget it I can do that.
Read out for those.
Four of those.
With six point two opposing
wanted to.
About amended.
So let me see Mr chairman if I
understand before we take a
vote.
They don't have to report each
instance lobby.
They just have to report if they
lobbied on a given piece of
legislation even if one guy I
talked to.
Forty one members of the Senate
another guy I talked to one
member of the Senate they each
indicate on the report that they
lobbied on that bill.
correct one what does that tell
us.
Hello this is involved in that
legislation doesn't one lobbyist
talk to one Senator they would
all.
Then another one talk to all of
them.
But but it I mean it it really
is there's no new wants to this
information whatsoever this is
this is almost useless
information of course a lobbyist
working for the banking industry
or the realtors is going to talk
to as many Lujan legislators as
they can about every piece of
legislation dealing with their
industry so what does that tell
us if we then see a report
saying they talked to us about
every piece of legislation
dealing or they talk to at least
one member but every piece of
legislation dealing with their
industry this is not helpful
information of any issues I
guess Mr chair Senator chair
there are lobbyist to probably
never talk to you or talk to me
or higher specifically because
you're Democrat I'm a Republican
there are and then you're not
aware that the work this
legislation.
There are in the past some of
you and I have you know you've
been service body longer I've
been in the building almost as
long as you do for my my
executive experience there are
lobbyists are hired just because
their relationship with a single
member state our floor leader or
the speaker and you and I never
know about that but they're
being paid a lot of money to
lobby a single person and I
think that is what we're trying
to get that that that
transparency that if you're
hired just to lobby the speaker
did you have a personal
relationship when we've seen
that in this building not that
we're aware of that or the floor
leader because we've seen that
that that should be disclosed in
that the year right there are
the the your move this around
here lobbying all forty forty
one of us and it's someone who
specifically hired to lobby just
one person that that's what
that's what I think is very on.
Experience in.
With all due respect Mr chairman
we won't know that we won't know
who they love Pete from what
this bill calls for of for the I
mean this is this is like one of
those.
Very superficial attempts at
looking like we're very
progressive in really open
transparent it's not going to
tell us anything that we don't
already know Mr and will require
an awful lot of extra work from
the staff basically.
The take you know to me and
who's going to enforce it I I I
this just does not seem to have
much in the running part of it
you call it be progressive.
Health I mean this is the kind
of thing to come in because
loves fund looks but it doesn't
tell us a darn thing with the
chair with all due respect would
just agree to disagree with this
and develop all right from my
very first session serving here
there's not a session that goes
by almost a day doesn't go by
that I'm questioning really
what's behind it to piece of
legislation who's involved
that's crucial information it
may be this sometimes four or we
may assume obviously this budget
disorganization now I will tell
you we're in the all due respect
we're in the room what about the
public is not in the room please
try to follow what we're doing
is trying to assess the value of
peace legislation they certainly
don't know who's involved in the
bill so if I would argue it is
helpful we try to make it
reasonable so that it wasn't
onerous but I frankly there's an
archive and share with you later
about Colorado where they did
this it was a lobbyist
themselves he said this is no
big deal and there they have to
report the money that they're
also pay which is really mind
blowing in this building that we
would require actual that
disclosure but they do all this
in Colorado and and and they
create a very standardized
format.
Six and five minutes.
We'll just have to keep track of
what they do it is super
beneficial to know.
Who's involved in the full
County so we just may not agree
on government sectors nine point
we won't know.
The secretary of state will set
a date by which time they have
to tell us that maybe two weeks
after we voted on.
We will know at the time that we
have to take action on that and
the key action is in these
committees and we're not going
to do it then this is not going
to achieve anything as far as I
can see but well if we can agree
to disagree but what all the
reasons you've given for doing
this.
Don't pan out as far as I'm
concerned.
Mr chair Colorado they require
these reports weekly.
So I mean.
I'm not saying ours of the
weekly ours are one time but
let's say the secretary of state
says within just for example
seventy two hours of that
initial lobbying effort you must
put this on a report Senator
Neville no I'm just saying what
we say the secretary of state
would determine the format
social work this out with well
this elite open process where
they get to determine what makes
sense but I'm just saying I
think it will be useful is it
useful on day one that we arrive
here maybe maybe not but is it
before it's been signed into law
absolutely.
Deficit that we do have further
questions Senator Ortiz have
another question.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank Senator
as you can see my signature
years right on this bill it
appeals.
And
Find for.
Moments ago.
That would be really appeals.
Not not too long ago I was a
system this and I would wonder
how did this bill come about how
did this language and then you
just set the public.
So that's what really appeals to
me is that the public will have
access to.
No bill is perfect right you may
see.
We get a little bit because
we're living with your.
But I'll tell you I lost track
of how many conversations I have
with lobbyists in this session.
We lost track of it.
And if I've lost track can you
imagine what our public parking.
So that's why I.
Thank you for everything thank
you what's the will the
committee we had a two times
which invites and of course.
Senator.
Kind of the second World Health.
Welcome.
Right yes Senator Ingle.
That.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes Senator McKenna yes
yes Senator more yes.
Yes.
Those.
Senator for yes.
Yes Senator.
Senator Stewart.
Senator yes.
Part of the of the year.
Three
Wonder and native Hawaiian day
well we have more more a very
large Asian community in New
Mexico actually Senator Moores
district has the most and mine
is second in the international
this yes you did minus second in
the international district so
say I print active community
that they have done more with
language access of than anyone
else in the state and the.
I I do have listening here who
was probably for you the experts
on the other okay so you could
set up with.
so that's essentially it Mr
chairman I'll let lance Center
up make a few comments that's
alright with you being the
expert on this one morning thank
you Mr chair and to thank you
Senator Stewart for having
committee I do want to just
recognize the importance of this
bill and the long time coming of
this for many many years our
community has been present here
in just recognizing the the rich
history as Senator Stewart had
mentioned this bill again as
long time coming our communities
has built through New Mexico
we've lived here we've enjoyed
the rich cultures here having my
own family arrived here in
seventy four and eighty one
creating real history here and
community and we were really
grateful for this bill.
Thank you for that now if we do
have one person who signed up as
organized support that is that
Or at the very least a pop pop
up from the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
So I don't know if you're your
yes vote if you are the morning.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is that
Brittany said you know qualify
from the New Mexico Center
online poverty we sent a strong
support of this bill we have a
vibrant API community New Mexico
that is part of our state's
cultural and linguistic identity
and is one of our greatest
strengths we know that the type
cultural myth in New Mexico
causes harm and overlooks the
AT and community and the many
contributions to our state
establishing this holiday will
celebrate the richness of our
many cultures and make sure that
we honor the API community as an
integral part of the fabric of
our state we are did you pass on
the still for AT&T which is long
overdue thank you thank you for
that nobody outside up in order
by support but I want to go to
the committee room is there
anybody here in support of this
please raise your hand.
Big one.
Anybody on the line in support.
Right now all I ask is there any
opposition to the committee.
What about online.
Questions or comments from
committee.
Senator Lopez.
Chair
For heating.
Coming yeah I did and I really
appreciate the center thank you
senator for that motion I've
made this a more fully them
strong support of I think part
of the process is as a
legislators education and those
of us are strong Mexico history
we always do talk about is the
expert witness several tribal
tourism over as I've learned
through once that a lot of years
is the incredible history of
Asian population has provided to
New Mexico literally built the
state from the rural roads the
mining industry and everything
else back going back to the
eighteen hundreds that was part
of my education process and as
of Senator
store mentioned hard to have R.
two districts have a very robust
population of Asian Americans in
our districts and it's just part
of fire raging process large
number here so I think Sanchez
from bringing this border I
now stand and support strongly.
Before we go for a roll call
vote I just wanted to echo what
you just said Senator one thing
I learned is for American Asian
Pacific Islander Hawaiian date
is we're not try cultural were
multi.
So it was so nice to celebrate
in the house without all the
with the rules of of.
Yes.
This is
yes and yes Lopez yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
With the account of ninety S. to
excuse you get a do pass.
So I'm not seeing that
Representative Romero or
Figueroa in the rule book right
now so I did that in a move on
to Senate memorial thirty eight
the study abroad canyon ranch
state parks understand one.
Thank you Mr chair so this is
you know by law when we were
required to do a feasibility
study for any piece of property
that.
State parks is to consider
making a state park so this is
kind of half that effort Mr
chair committee this is a
feasibility study for a piece of
property for just fees property
along the Rio Grande.
All brought canyon that the
state parks actually owns a
hundred acres but there's a
little DOT land there there some
access issues
but
You know the your one the
conservation groups million
account of friends of the organ
mountains of peace asked
Representative small and I
represent that area to advances
as a feasibility study there
working with state parks so this
is a memorial that kind of
spells out the opportunity
there's funding in the junior
bill to do the feasibility
studies state parks is in
support of it so.
That's all this does.
No one signed up in support or
opposition Senator but I want to
go to the committee room is
anybody here in support of the
state of California.
The not what about online.
But anybody in opposition in the
committee room.
What about online.
The latter is there any
questions or comments.
Senator Paypen Kerry.
For more over education.
Our to remember and and a
committee we talked about
something down there and
person it was controversial
timer two
I don't not this particular
property Mr chair Senator there
is another of Rio Grande bosquet
park state park that got created
that she may or may not have
been involved with back with
merry Jane was here long time
ago Mary Jane was involved in
really helping to create that.
But that is a state park it was
first one created in thirty
years and down the Rio Grande
but this is a different property
kind of in the northern part of
the county it's very CENIC
alright thank you.
Some.
Ground zero one of this party
forms.
This is actually a hundred acres
of state land or state park when
they were young.
That are more.
So we're.
There must walk and use.
Sections were there yeah it's it
is near the slot canyon and it's
it's an area called brought can
you know some of the canyons up
there with all the petroglyphs
and whatnot so it's of but it
also is riverfront property
includes some really some of the
most spectacular riverfront
landed there and Dona Ana
County.
To log.
Maybe Mr Stewart over there
right now.
Yeah I could be wrong I mean the
**** you may be included in this
this particular proposal so yes
it's right there.
Any other in order to do.
Thank you Mr chairman senators
so we own the land already what
are we using it for now.
It's just it's just being held
by them I think the university
also has a piece of property
there were there doing some
research DOT have some Lancelot
really trying to do is kind of
create a workable proposal
together to look at increasing
access but they own it but
they're not using it as.
Anything other than.
It was something they don't
for trying to kind of leverage
it into something more and it
and it has roof is right on the
Rio Grande right on the river
and.
Thank thank.
Any other questions or comments.
With the will of the committee.
Passed by the there's.
Thank you I also think that if I
can get a roll call.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative is yes.
Yes
yes yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes Senator kind of you yes.
Yes.
Nine yes.
I yes excuse you have a do pass
thank you I want to hand over
the gavel to Senator Stewart has
ridden next move on to set up a
memorial forty four Hispanics
enjoyed camping but in the
coming up for this.
Is.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you so much for at hearing our
memorial to date and so what
this is is that that show was
important today in the twenty
thirteen now and chose it is
that Hispanics enjoyed camping
hunting and the outdoors and it
was created to help fulfill our
duty to conserve and protect
public lands for future
generations that show provides a
platform for it for Hispanics
and Latinos to contribute
knowledge and perspectives about
public land conservation right
here in New Mexico and across
this country we have a strong
connection to our water and land
he spot of customs for carrying
for cultivating their land and
for taking care of our waters if
you think about a secular as
means so much to us has
Hispanics we connect to our land
and it's part of our culture and
our events yeah no actual verges
elected officials and appointed
leaders to safeguard our
precious public lands so that
our children can enjoy fishing
hiking camping and other outdoor
activities for generations to
come in powering Hispanic
leaders to engage their
communities in the conversation
of our public lands is what we
try to do it now and it does a
few main things they want to be
equitable balanced of
nonpartisan connected to
communities get NC a and M. C.
a which is being connected to a
lab and I have to expert
witnesses with me briefly I'm
gonna let them introduce
themselves and then we'll go to
questions.
Good morning good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Max
Trujillo I am the senior field
coordinator for New Mexico with
federal I'm also county
commissioner in San Miguel
County and having having been
associative that you for a few
years
we've we've created it
A presence in conservation in
not only New Mexico northern New
Mexico but across the southwest
region
we we created the first of its
kind in any.
conservation organization the
Hispanic conservation leadership
council and that consists mainly
of elected officials attacks
elected officials water board
members a second question is in
my room was in people like that
who care deeply about about
conservation and and and
our land and water and and we're
thirty thirty members strong in
New Mexico we are thirty member
strong Arizona we are growing
our membership in Colorado
Nevada and Utah
so having you know having that
with us or the the mission and
the vision of of the Hispanic
conservation leadership council
was to
be able to assist each other
across state boundaries with
conservation issues that affect
all of us in our individual
states but collectively as out
as a region
and
The other mission of any Jewish
to elevate Hispanic voices in
conservation
you know for centuries we've
been on the on the land
conserving and caring for our
land and water
we didn't college conservation
we we just lived on the land we
took what we needed never more
never less
and we shared it's it's just
part of the culture and and now
that we're elevating actuals
profile with our our lawmakers
in both local state and federal
we understand now how important
it is for even in our land
management agencies to recognize
actual for for the Hispanic
conservation partnership and and
contribution to conservation
thank you so much.
Thank you very much Senator.
Of.
Committee chair members of the
committee it was fully the the
the the special of the twenty
year member of the of testing
for the city council and
My I've been involved with Vigil
for almost two years now and my
responsibilities have been to
identify membership of community
leaders maybe for for
organization and I think that
the commission for your pretty
much identified our purpose in
the game thank you for allowing
us to be here before you today
thank you with that madam chair
will go to any questions.
Thank thank you both for being
here we need.
For online more of.
Any support in the room
generation hand.
More opposition.
Right people outlook enough.
It is.
All right.
Any first to have senators to
fund.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator and gentleman or not
when I was a county
commissioners of all in the
middle and on the national level
and I know that there is a
growing
Individuals working on.
The committee.
All yeah.
From the civil.
Thank you madam chair energy
center.
Hi.
The options on.
Follow.
Right.
I know that this last year.
There.
Family and also his Celestine.
Working in
harmony make sure that they're
literature shares also.
Are the hours for.
Our.
Yes.
I.
That.
The work.
More than
other comments.
That.
Yes.
Will all the.
Voting on some of the Morial
forty four.
Back in the sixties.
Yeah.
Yes
yes yes yes yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes thirteen yeah.
Use that.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes I'm here yes.
Have to do it again.
You have eight yes.
Right eight to nothing you have
thank you so much thank you for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee which is the most
prestigious but the players
thank you for your support.
Yes.
Following around thirty seven.
Representative Romero.
But.
All right.
Perfect the board center PO for
going to Senate memorial thirty
seven compliance with federal
prison rape elimination.
Welcome thank you thank you Mr
chair committee members Senate
memorial thirty seven is request
at the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs can be a
task force and provide
recommendations on policy and
legislative changes in order to
improve local county and state
and federal jails attention the
correctional facilities
compliance with the federal
prison rape elimination act two
thousand three.
this.
Task force would consist of
representatives from the New
Mexico National sexual assault
programs the corrections
department CYFD the New Mexico
association of counties ACLU the
county jail County just a county
jail for rural area County Joe
from urban area.
formerly incarcerated community
representatives I'd like to also
introduce my expert here
Alexandria Taylor who was
executive director of the New
Mexico wishin of sexual assault
the sole purpose and I want to
give her a on time to comment as
well that's okay Mister.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you senator
Poe as senator posted my name's
Alexandria Taylor and the
executive director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs the prison rape
elimination act of two thousand
and three is the first federal
legislation implemented to deter
sexual assault against people
who are currently incarcerated
and to support the prevention
reduction and elimination of
sexual assault I want to note
that in two thousand and twenty
one The New Mexico corrections
department hearing in New Mexico
reported that were there were
one hundred and nine prison rape
investigations within the state
corrections department we do not
have that level of data for our
county facilities and so part of
why we want to have a task force
to study this issue is to
determine if there are any state
protections that needed to be
that need to be added at the
state level to better understand
and prevent sexual assault
within our our county jails are
detention facilities and our
state facilities
the department of justice bureau
of justice statistics just
released a report last month
that that highlighted how few
consequences correction officer
space but when there are
incidents of sexual violence
reported against them in
facilities of incarceration and
that thirty percent of victims
in incarcerated facilities
receive counseling and nearly
forty percent do not receive
medical treatment which is what
pre also seeks is to ensure that
when someone is harmed in inside
a facility of incarceration they
have the same access to services
as someone who is in the
community thank you.
You know what signed up in the
Reporter opposition prior seven
go to the committee will cause
anybody here in support of the
Senate memorial.
The number what about online.
Anyone in opposition in the
committee room of the Senate
memorial.
The number what about online.
Hello to questions or comments
from the committee.
That are more.
Service center.
I noticed that correction is
that where you're not in your
business
or ask your.
They are asking morals.
I also don't have.
Where we.
Mr chair Senator column with
yeah Mr chair Senator thank you
for that question I will know
that both CYFD and the
corrections department in the
FIR stated that they welcome
this task force and would
participate all also know that
the the coalition ourselves we
facilitate a quarterly meeting
with all corrections facilities
so each state facility the
corrections department itself in
each county facility and then
CYFD is juvenile detention
facilities all have a designated
pre of coordinator and it is our
office that coordinates all of
those coordinators that's a lot
of coordinating quarterly so we
are meeting with everyone
quarterly already and this is
been ask of of of that quarterly
council that needs I will say
that this memorial comes out of
some outside I did not it is our
proactive response to there
being some outside interest
mainly private auditing firms
that have to get business from
this who were trying to
introduce the state pre a bill
that we actually built cost more
harm it actually did not it
deterred our work that we've
been doing over the past ten
years to move our corrections
facilities forward in being in
compliance with prea and so this
is our proactive way of really
studying the issue to determine
if there state legislation
that's actually needed because
we don't need to bring that
forward and less it's going to
enhance the federal legislation.
Those are.
I just want to insure the.
Around here counties also.
Senator Steinborn what about
that bill as well zoom on so.
So which of those.
Our.
Senator Senator Lopez followed
by Senator seven.
Your Mr chair Senator and.
Forward.
We have any issues seven years.
Proper tension here.
News that we're on our first.
I have
good service they're they're
raised by your attention.
Hi I hope also to yeah.
Seventy years.
Also
Harper.
And as.
That is a very.
This.
Another.
Level of their.
Other.
Yeah.
So I think this is a good rest.
Act.
Are you also.
Really.
That.
Yes level that we have.
and again.
And also.
There.
You have.
Two thousand.
Last year's.
There are always.
Starts here.
Sure to grow.
Right direction.
Senator Bennett followed by
Senator Ortiz.
Thank you your things and.
Or
really sort of this.
the
Also.
I know that the.
In addition.
And have at
is in our our.
Mr chair Senator.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you for that question they have
so we we bring in we have
brought in over the past ten
years significant resources to
bring in national training
related to the implementation of
pre a the county facilities are
the hardest ones because they
are individually governed by
their county governments and so
the association counties I'm
saying that wrong right now but
they they have an interest
because
Each county is responsible right
now for their pre implementation
and it creates a patchwork
across the state of what each
county facility is doing and so
as we have worked with them to
bring trainings we've trained at
their their annual conference of
what with all the facilities
there with all the county
governments there they have an
interest in seeing that not be a
patchwork across the state were
each county is doing things
differently.
Thank you in center line.
This is the.
Mr chair Senator the corrections
department has agreed to
participate and they do they do
continue to participate in are
already ongoing quarterly
meeting thank you very much.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino thank you Mr chairman
and.
Thank you for bringing this
forward to.
This.
You the number you gave a
hundred nine rapes reported in
twenty twenty one in the state
correctional facilities does
that report also include what
was done about that did was
there any prosecution involved
or do you do we know.
Yes I just a flat number the.
Could have been handled any
number of ways.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that question that is a report
that comes out of the New Mexico
corrections department's annual
report will no that I've been
doing this advocacy for a really
long time that is a very under
reported number
X. sexual assault is already a
really under reported number and
then you add it occurring within
a facility where there's a power
dynamic and that's a really
under reported number that same
annual report does report the
number of substantiated cases
the number of it outcomes in the
dispositions of those cases it's
less than three percent that any
of those were substantiated.
Work for cases.
Very low okay thank you Mr.
Thank you any other questions or
comments.
What's the will the committee.
Budget for the past seven years.
Representative followed by
Senator panics roll call of the.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Lopez
yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah Ortiz
says.
Really is that.
Yes.
Yes.
Nine yes.
With ninety two you have a two
passed Senator thank you thank
you.
Without them to move on to the
house bill one twenty five as
amended rule credit task force
good morning Representative
Romero.
Of the two let me just clarify
the vote was nine two zero of
the last memorial we have to
read.
Good morning Representative
Ferrary thank you Mr chairman
good morning committee for the
second time in two days that you
all are convening happy to bring
house bill one twenty five
And this is a temporary
provision that's calling for a
task force for dual credit
education and so they're going
to be various members appointed
by the educated the higher
education department the change
that we did make on the floor at
the request of the branch
colleges was decreasing the
number of independent community
colleges to to including the
branch is it into the other
position as well that was at the
request of the branch colleges
obviously and it was amenable to
the independent community
colleges so that was a good
change but there are various
issues as far as the credit
that's something we hope to have
explained that's the reason why
this is a temporary provision is
to express the urgency of this
as opposed to a memorial but
with that Mr chairman I'll stand
for questions perfect and so we
did have somebody sign up in
organized supporters joining us
online there are Fritz generals
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and secretary on
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we're pleased to offer
support on this bill this bill
presents a great opportunity for
education leaders to take a step
back and make sure state system
is working for students bill
credit courses are excellent
options there safe trial run
really colleges of course work
and they are most motivated
students to sometimes enough
college credits to enroll in
college full time as sophomores
or even graduate high school
with an associates degree but if
our system is working as it
should we need to make sure K.
twelve and higher education
leaders are working together to
make sure our students credits
transfer when they should ensure
students have access these
opportunities no matter where
they live this will help
accomplish this and we urge your
support thank you.
So much in the committee is
there anybody here in favor of
the bill.
Online in favor of the bill.
And in the committee room
anybody in opposition of the
bill.
Do not know what about online.
The metal the that it questions
and comments from committee.
Both of the two passed by other
more second based Senator
Stewart if I could have a roll
call of the folks that are just
people the the the entire we got
for Canadian that and that if I
ever needed analysis.
Indicates are there may be some
duplication with credit.
Council.
With the difference being here
task force.
that's a good question Mr
chairman and and senator TCP now
in the PED analysis as well
they said that.
There are various issues within
the task force that are not
addressed by the council itself
and it also reports that the
report of the task force the use
of the PED to ensure the
students master academic and
professional skills needed to be
prepared for colleges and
careers so I think we're looking
at a much broader scope of why
the dual credit council is
currently looking at and again
it's it's expedited so that we
can have that information and
and make use of the information
more quickly Mr chairman and
Representative Romero the.
The.
Think of the council this would
all be included on this task
force.
In the council would be on this
yes.
So Mister chairman Senator Ortiz
Pino here just potentially at
the request of obviously the
higher education department is
going to be picking those from
the available lists to from the
independent colleges from the
branch colleges as well as the
Public Education Department
picking Sarah school principals
things like that to be a part of
this so it'll be up to the
departments to pick those.
This thank you Mr thank you.
We have a motion and a second I
have a roll call vote.
Senator Ingle are interlopers
yes.
Okay yes Senator McKenna yeah.
Yes yes.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank yeah.
Yes and.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes Senator Ortiz.
Yes.
Seven yes for its use of data do
past chairman.
In our last bill on the agenda
is Senate bill five seventeen
public peace health health
safety and welfare Senator
Campos is joining us this
morning senator Ortiz the B. to
B. Pino will be carrying this
bill on his behalf thank you Mr
chairman and members Senator
compasses Bill would create a
highway sixty six route sixty
six centennial commission.
And I I I was hesitating to put
it on because I do not know what
the centennial of route sixty
six one it is I don't know if
it's the.
But what what what date is it I
I don't know if it's a twenty
six the twenty fifth.
That's what it is that's in this
test for students so maybe that
is the day.
Yeah I I I just did not know
however that should not affect
the outcome of this this bill
the fact that the person putting
in is ignorant.
So it creates a commission
there's no appropriate creates
commission and a fund.
There's no appropriation is
going to be into the tourism
department the fund would accept
gifts donations of the
foundation grants whatever but
at this point no I know of no
state appropriation is included
and whenever this is the
centennial is we will be
celebrating it festively with
this commission leading the way.
Thank you seven there is a
committee substitute for Senate
bill five seventeen.
So we have to say with the.
With the.
Do not pass by in the purposes
of.
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
Ignited the any questions or
comments in regards to the.
Senator Lopez.
Also.
At all.
Also recognize.
Senator and there's been a
motion for it to pass Senator
Moores.
Take a roll call vote.
Senator Baca and Senator Ingle
arcs choose to open yes Senator
Lopez yes Senator McKenna yes.
Committee as senator for just.
More CS in New York yes.
Yes Senator Pirtle is six.
Thank you for that I yeah
Senator yes Senator Stewart yes.
