Senator Campos.
Senator want this.
Senator Diamond.
Etcetera do heck.
Integrates.
Center how much more Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Center my SS.
Here Senator McKenna here center
Morris.
The gentleman yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Etcetera pulp right.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator also.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Etcetera Thoman.
You need to Mr Kirk at to get a
car Mr president.
Senator is we are lacking a
All Senator chamber we are
lacking a quorum.
Senator is we're still lacking a
quorum.
All senators to the chamber.
Senator is we are lacking to for
quorum.
All Senators please report to
the chamber.
for the indication to be lead
today.
By host of cane you and K. U. N.
M. Sunday were shut program to
train to glory president of the
National Council of Negro women
for the pledge of allegiance to
be led today by Senator Herald
pope the PED's of legions in
this no to be led today by
Senator Ivey Soto and the salute
to New Mexico flag to be led
U. S. some relief as we know how
to ask that you rain down wisdom
strength and blessings upon our
daily lives be still up on the
M. S. sound money and a loving
spirit to work together for the
betterment of New Mexico give
to the voices of people from the
communities in which they serve
but for most maybe they hear
your voice and be inspired to go
their families and loved ones
allow them to come and go in the
end to always return home safely
we ask that you ordered their
legislative session.
All this we ask in the name of
Christ Jesus in.
From at the level hello and that
The flag of the state of New
Mexico.
business thank you Mr president
good morning to you and to all
the members unanimous consent we
got at our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection or on that
someone who every Sunday morning
is on K. U. N. M. on the train
to glory program and so we've
seen you there and it's
temple church in Albuquerque and
I just appreciated your words
and your blessings and again
just make sure father rex gets a
filing with secretary of state.
today we are having lunch
provided from one of Santa fe's
best restaurants we have lots of
good restaurants Jambo
a chance to sample some super
good food today
United health care professionals
in New Mexico are doing blood
right now but a little later
things will go up
today's New Mexico library day
at the capitol Mr president I
ask unanimous consent.
See no objection will remove the
Senate memorial for off the
president's table and will be
placed in today's calendar
senator Wirth and Mr president
that'll be Senator Campos and
what we'll do that in just a
minutes in terms of the Vance
the NMSU alumni foundation is
hosting its legislative
reception tonight at the
chamber of commerce has several
events scheduled on Saturday
there's a reception to Eldorado
hotel from four thirty to seven
by invitation on Sunday there's
a brunch at the Eldorado hotel
six again by invitation on
Monday the greater Los crucis
chamber of commerce is hosting a
legislative breakfast at the
Eldorado hotel from seven thirty
then other members to make
announcements up front.
Senator Padilla thank you very
much Mr president thank you Mr
Majority Leader good morning
everybody just have some excusal
Senator share.
Senator Burt Senator Campos
Senator Diamond.
Senator Hemphill Correa Hemphill
Senator but there thank you very
much Mr president college I
Senator Campos was actually
writing with me and so I just a
we were a visiting an elementary
school this morning Mr president
probably hear more about that
from our finance committee chair
when he when he gets in but the
thank you very much Mr president
all in the U. S. consent to
allow cameras in the gallery
Senator Brandt the US present I
would like to add to the excuse
lists Senator Ingle.
Seeing no objection Mister
president senator Wirth I'm just
curious a center Padilla what
years at different times that
they were we were trying to
figure out they were bread
sticks but they were stuffed Mr
president with all sorts of
things which is really nice
but I will say that I was very
cool and there was several
groups that were sort of brought
in and taken out the you know to
have their lunches the lunch
room is only a certain size but
I was really impressed with the
kiddos they were very out going
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent to be able to introduce
my guest for the day hearing no
objection proceed Senator.
interest in what's going on at
the legislature and so I invited
him to come by some time and he
did he took me up on it and here
is his name is Morgan o'connor
originally from the Tucson area
where he worked in behavioral
health field in it with a number
of agencies and providers there
in that community so with the
Thank you senator Ortiz Pino we
do have further announcements
center how to meal followed by
Senator souls center how to meal
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to introduce my guest
first major of Chama and he's
living out the family legacy my
other good friend Matthew guy
goes the mayor pro tem who's
also a member of the Rio Arriba
kept secrets in New Mexico and I
will let you all know about it
is the intending village of
Chama Chama is nestled high in
the southern Rockies at just a
to mid October fishing is a
major and trauma but the best
kept secret of time are the
north tenuous are the people who
live in the area and I'm proud
and clerk of the village and
trauma to the chamber.
Hume Andy is the airport manager
in Los crucis and has a very
interesting story on how we got
here today Los crucis through it
in these leadership and the
Albuquerque caught the bus down
to the train rode the train up
here the total trip took just
over five hours and he arrived
without being tired and stressed
that way where you can read
along the way you can enjoy the
beautiful scenery of New Mexico
from the air he's got a great
story about it he will be
airport but also the economic
growth and development of Los
crucis is built around the
airport lots of that is due to
end these leadership and
foresight and future looking
recognizing my friend and shadow
guest today in the Human.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator souls.
of business thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business third
reading of legislation and I
would you'll Senator Campos you
ready for Senate memorial for.
Senator Padilla and and Mr
president this is the one
memorial we're doing today so
we'll have the reader read that
at the appropriate time and
we're just.
So thank you very much Mr
president I move that.
explain similar for.
I thank you very much Mr
president
Every now and then you meet a
Senate memorial for a memorial
recognizing vocalist and
musician Roberto Griego in New
Mexico local legend whereas
casino he is a hometown
celebrity and whereas Roberto
also for finally known as the
Billy the kid of run Jetta's
holds court on the casino
Tamayo twenty eighteen Roberto
rocked the packed sold out crowd
with towering trumpets and
galloping guitars end or as
Representative the was born
after World War two in the whole
High School during an era of
fantastic music with rock N.
rollers such as Chuck Berry
Freddie king and Roy Orbison
training and whereas Roberto's
grandmother and aunt discourage
Roberto's musical career and
encouraged him at least fill out
lifeblood and a positive outlet
and whereas in nineteen sixty
eight Roberto and listed in New
Mexico Air National Guard
serving thirteen months in Korea
his first rock band playing the
lead and rhythm we get to.
R. and whereas returning to
Albuquerque afters military
deployment prevent the was
employed by yellow freight and
enrolled at the Albuquerque
technical vocational institute
throughout his career.
And whereas on August first
nineteen seventy one Roberto
huge successes with no comment
on the Moss reaching number one
on the charts New Mexico City
and whereas the album was so
popular that it was reproduced
and bootlegged into eight tracks
man if music had not is his
music had not been pirated and
whereas Robert though enjoyed
the adulation of large crowds
performing at Albuquerque sting
Utah Arizona California and
Wyoming but his largest markets
are in Colorado in New Mexico
with thirty thousand fans of it
rock band Water and whereas in
two thousand one in grade just
and inspired by the tragic
events of supports it September
fellow soldiers in nineteen
ninety one during the Gulf War
when he wrote the US been the
gotten wrestle so the those or
god bless our soldiers and
late father and sister.
And whereas after more than
fifty years in the music
industry provider has created
ten studio albums and two
mex and whereas Roberto has won
various awards for his many
musical contributions including
Best Original Song mighty Judy
and during legacy of music from
the heart now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that
director Gradel a consummate
Roberto but signed and sealed
that the kid capital in the city
of Santa Fe Senator Michael by
the senator Pete Campos how we
that Senator for the.
Thank you very much Mr president
I have to say that just
listening to that.
In addition from our reader on
some of the work of about the
times he rolled up his sleeves
didn't get paid a penny to
delight the community we should
all be very grateful for New
Mexican like this Mr president.
two point one million people
here in New Mexico and I'm
guessing that all two point one
million have have heard his
voice at some point and then you
also heard about his work around
to listen to it that way I can
tell you that anyone that's ever
interacted with him specifically
I'll talk about my family for a
little bit.
he has.
open he always wants to sit you
down and talk about New Mexico
history the love of music here
in New Mexico it's a it's a
beautiful and humble home and
all of the the world work that
Center for the.
I will say that it different
times
Mr Diego actually had the
performances were he didn't even
charge for them and after all of
but I will tell you Mr president
that there's many many times
with the music that he crafted
and and and labored over writing
and for imperfect producing and
performing he can even get paid
scratches the surface of who
this New Mexican is really just
scratches the surface your bike
in here a little bit more today
by my our colleagues here but
I'm gonna yield at the moment
before I start wrapping up with
Senator Campos thank you thank
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president and I want to
speak a little bit and then
hopefully it'll there though
you're not going to be getting
those fifty years since nineteen
seventy one when you went ahead
and course you had your first
album that are if you will you
first got the came out we
started to listen to not only
that Goldenvoice but as you
years ago and to those people
who would see this one facility
in our community there was a
swimming pool in the middle and
whatever's aware that would show
why was that because of his to
the invoice his ability to
continue with not only his
instruments but along with that
the way he treated all of his
inspire so many not only in our
generation but a lot of the
generations that are coming up.
He's in.
Who did they want to be like it
was Robert today or.
And with that I really wish just
to go ahead and hear his voice
and you'd hear House losing it
is you would know that
about came from the heart came
from his own experiences and the
experiences that other people
shared with him and with us.
because there are in Las Vegas
in our opinion that's your home
that's where you begin and we
continue to go ahead and share
as he closes up his remarks but
again Las Vegas considers to be
the home of Robert to let it go
yes yes it.
Si no further debate Senator by
and I want to think and we have
a few people I'd like to
recognize that came after we're
done with that Mr Diego today
but I can Mr president I think
it's it's very important to note
history the stories the the
beauty of New Mexico through the
music created by rebuttal to
Diego and I want also one more
time say which always you know
when I learned about this it
produces music and saying it
many times and produced and gave
away his music and a lot of ways
and and work for free for all of
us all two point one million of
us and I just want to thank him
right now so with that Mr
president with your permission I
move it Senator Morial for do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that all
forty two members and the
lieutenant governor be shown as
for has passed the New Mexico
state Senate Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr president can we
please give a hand to see Mr
Roboto could be echo a New
Mexico treasure.
And thank you Mr president if
you'll deliver the certificate
we would really appreciate that
thank you so much.
And Mr a president and I don't
know if she knows this or not
but we all know that we're gonna
going to sing this for you madam
president and I don't know if
you knew that we were going to
do that but I hope that's
alright.
Mr president.
Mr president before we do that
thank you very much Mr
presentation Mr leader and thank
you madam president we didn't
mean to surprise you but we all
love you to death and we wanted
you to have this very special
day for yourself and a New
unfortunately I don't know all
the lyrics to the song that you
quoted you cut you caught me off
guard on that one.
Excuse me unexpected.
Senator Morris going goals
Dawson you own is yes thirty on
here and going to school and the
the the the for these animal and
all seem to get enough
People and animals and love in
an office.
please.
Just kidding anyway before I
sign off here I want to take
this opportunity this the first
time I come here and I really
appreciate I'm very grateful to
all of you and we're not talking
about all of you I'm talking
about the Democrats and
Republicans independents all of
To the gem in my family and this
is for the soul of our pause for
them please.
I don't know what I would do
thank you we almost didn't make
it with the that we had a there
was a problem there on the high
heel I guess is construction
going on but she knew how to get
here so we got our time once
I know you one and and very
proud of you and then of course
the governor.
Thank you so much once again the
this.
Thank you very much Mr
president.
I'm.
reported worth thank you Mr
president's unanimous consent we
go that our business committee
reports run that order of
business committee reports.
The reader to read the committee
reports.
that it do pass a met as amended
and that's referred to the
conservation committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman
saying aye.
Those same those opposed to may.
The eyes have the committee port
has been adopted.
as amended and that's referred
to the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman.
were acted upon individually
seeing no objection.
The reader to read the committee
reports Senate bill fifty six do
Senate bill seventy do pass and
that's referred to finance
committee Senate bill seventy
four do pass and thence referred
to tax business and
transportation committee
revolution to about twelve point
all those in favor signify by.
Those opposed.
The eyes haven't.
Georgia Florida were to take us
to the next order of business
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
introduction of legislation or
on that order business
introduction legislation.
construction and acting the
right to repair act Senate bill
fifty.
Senate bill fifty having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
and act relating to trade
practices prohibiting the
circumvention of control
measures using electronic ticket
sellers to ensure equitable
Senate transportation business
and tax committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
one hundred.
That is Senate bill one hundred.
The reader to read Senate bill
two sixty two introduced by
senator Correa Hemphill and act
bill two sixty two Senate bill
two sixty two having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate finance
providing year round staff to
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee requiring
compliance with the Legislative
Health and Human Services
committees and its subcommittees
Senate bill two sixty three
Senate bill two sixty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate finance committee
aggregation of incidents of
investment to determine penalty
Senate bill two sixty four.
finance committee Senate bill
two sixty four.
Senate bill two sixty five
introduced by Senator Sedillo
Lopez and act relating to
peace officer uses force against
the person providing for an
independent investigation
requiring a quarterly
investigation report requiring a
the Senate health Public Affairs
Committee events Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two sixty five Senate bill two
sixty six introduced by Senator
definitions establishing minimum
portfolio standards for for
distributed energy resources
Senate bill two sixty six Senate
bill two sixty six having been
bill two sixty six.
Senate joint resolution nine
introduced by senator or
senators or Deasy Pino and would
you also and representative
commonly known as the anti
donation clause to allow the
state via implementing
legislation to provide
assistance to to private
organizations including Indian
obligations from promoting
community well being and
establishing scholarship and
loan programs for post secondary
students while providing you
requirements for implementing
in New Mexico which prohibits
certain appropriations for
charitable educational or other
benevolent purposes.
Senate joint resolution nine.
The Senate memorial twelve
introduced by senators for Ortiz
Pino and mortars a memorial
service on behalf of the
residents of New Mexico Senate
memorial twelve Center memorial
twelve having been read twice by
title is ordered printed refer
is ordered not printed number
and Maestas a memorial
proclaiming January thirty first
twenty twenty three A. L. S.
where to stay in the Senate
Senate memorial thirteen Senator
The reader to read.
Senate memorial fourteen
introduced by senators said the
Mexico day in the Senate Senate
memorial fourteen Senator Mario
fourteen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
not refer to committee to be
Ortiz the Pino and act relating
to public assistance changing
provisions of the New Mexico
works act allowing homeless this
to be a work requirement
sanctions to adult members of a
benefit group specified pro rata
shares for different benefit
groups clarifying the sanctions
Committee vents Senate finance
committees Senate bill two six
seven.
Major thirty to worth to take us
to the next order of business
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
thank you Mr president ashes
Senator Montes want to hear this
because it's important water
issue that it's a it's a
different compact we're hearing
a lot about the compact
since nineteen twenty two and
given all the issues with
droughts and.
Population growth send water use
thirty first to try and figure
out a solution we are lucky
we've had a stab on Lopez who
was our former Interstate Stream
commissioners also federal head
agreement by Tuesday the federal
government's gonna come in and
they are going to apportion
water involving a huge piece
that comes in New Mexico this is
part of the water sense of this
diversion it goes to a sixteen
mile pipe into here and damn and
that's allowed our cities to
have a diversified water source
so I just want to flag this
are really at a tipping point
here
In an article in The New York
Times I'll just I'll just read
quickly the quote from someone
who's an advocate environmental
have to be proactive we're going
to do that certainly with Texas
V. New Mexico and our Rio Grande
compact but this is another one
that has huge implications are
state I just want to fly that
eleven o'clock on Monday so
now's the time for committee
chairs to make their
announcements and then Senator
Baca is gonna gonna wrap us up
with an important announcement
but if committee chairs for
the Senate health and public
affairs committee meeting will
start at one thirty this
afternoon and we have a fairly
long list of bills but of four
Hemphill Ortiz you Pino manos
Lopez Stefanics and Rodriguez so
that will we'll have that
meeting in room three eleven at
Thank thank you Mr president
Senate education will be meeting
Monday morning at nine o'clock
in room three eleven we will
hear us Senate bill for the Ted
some changes will be first up
but then we have built from more
Senator so Senator Vontaze
followed by Senator menulis
Center souls.
Senator Ivey Soto and senator
Morris.
encourage members to maybe have
some free time this afternoon to
join us or at least two in and
we're going to discuss nothing
but the Arnold pool this
afternoon you all have heard
some of that already we brought
five speakers some of them at a
national level to talk about how
the tools to utilize or perhaps
how I can be better utilized and
there are countless other
examples of some of the more
public and infamous crimes
Committee New Mexico where the
Arnold will once again
recommended individuals be
Thank you Senator about this
Senator.
Thank you Mr president not
Senate financing go what one in
at one thirty we're going to do
Medicaid one a one so we can
give the cooperation
going away pretty quick and that
will raise our costs on Medicaid
so we're gonna go in there learn
how to handle Medicaid and
what's going to cost us in the
future the other thing we did
a lot about nutritional meals
and values and and what the kids
eat what the kids don't eat so
and expression we got tried
there so it was a great data to
learn about early childhood
education and nutritional meals
thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Munoz.
first of multiple election bills
that are coming through rules
will be here in SB one eighty.
Thank you senator any further
announcements.
know pick up pace and and get
rather hectic around here so I
just wanted to thank those
people that are really the one
to make it happen around here
that's the staff a Legislative
our chief clerks office and all
of her staff sergeant at arms
office and all of her staff
committees including the
secretaries I want to thank all
physicists including their
secretaries analysts and
communications we want to
especially thank Lorraine
Centers more and Vince stories
Any further announcements
Senators.
CNN Senator Wirth.
delivered up to our offices it's
Jambo restaurant here in Santa
Fe it's good Senator Moores is
getting a positive not it's
super good food so just keep an
lead our chamber and good week
in the state Senate with that
unanimous consent we stand
recessed until eleven o'clock
Monday morning see no objections
