heck.
Center guy our.
Senator Gonzales present.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey here Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Center our meal.
Senator Kernan.
Centerman yes.
Senator Neville.
Etcetera now.
Senator pulp.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator also.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given this morning by
reference father Richard John
Nucci our New Mexico state
The pledge in Spanish to be led
by Senator Campos and the salute
to New Mexico flag to be led by
Senator Hamblen.
Good afternoon everyone.
We've had a number of.
Pastors chaplains from all over
the clerical people from all
over the state to be a total of
almost.
Senator so I reminded me that we
had press for everyone here but
we hadn't remembered.
We just came off a three year
pandemic and hadn't really
We'll do that this morning in
this prayer during this three
year Corona virus pandemic all
of us experience a gamut of
emotions.
Fear anxiety and even despair.
were lost and all of us without
exception I'm sure of lost those
we've loved.
Some of us have suffered through
the debilitating effects of this
illness ourselves.
And everyone is surely in Canada
disruption to the normal land of
enchantment flow of their lives.
Every crisis in life is also an
opportunity.
To rest in the hands of god
means we are secured despite the
uncertainty of life but also it
means we're free to love god and
others as we love ourselves a
Lauren this is finally over may
we never again take for granted
the simplest of things.
The firm handshake from a friend
a hug from a neighbor.
A routine checkup.
The crowd to checkout line
conversation with a stranger.
A packed gym cheering on our
team.
Each deep breath.
The dreaded Monday.
may have talked to you was when
we needed a favor.
And only pre do when we didn't
have a prayer.
May we find that we have become
more like the people we wanted
to be.
Looking out to take a moment.
And whoever you may have lost.
By their first name or nickname
the name that you love them by.
Senator how many of these say
guests at the moment that and
not get a good one in Seattle
not also in western part of the
kind of the for the nonetheless
recipients just go with them in
no so throw support anomalous
positive comments.
They met.
I pledge allegiance.
symbol of perfect friendship
among United cultures.
Good morning everyone hopes good
in the chamber a unanimous
consent or that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection more
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you madam
president thank you father Rick
I'm a random this is.
Is one way to describe it I mean
it just was something that was
unbelievable none of us had ever
Things that we now again do take
for for granted kind of hunger
back normal and realizing what
we went went through but it's
I don't have any announcements I
will just let the members know
the plan today we're not gonna
come back in the evening so
we're just going to work through
and Senator Moores really wants
visit with Senator Baca center
branch about but that's the plan
we get to the third reading side
you'll to any other members for
announcements.
announcements Senator Moores.
and of what I like to call or
have health care heroes in New
Mexico that have joined us today
in the in the building it's so
nice to see them here and see
give yourselves a round of
applause you deserve.
across my desk implement some of
you may have seen it says Dr did
you know that the seven hundred
fifty thousand dollar cap was
offered as a compromise and the
hundreds of clinics and doctors
who are outside of the act get
the facts want to give you the
facts right now I've been
involved with this negotiation
since the beginning so that hand
that's a point font.
Not this.
Well just read one portion of it
the patient compensation fund so
limit the cap no one else gets
to enter the fund that's another
part of it so I hope.
The person that is handing that
no doubt.
little statement there this
being made and passed around you
know bye bye some advocates that
so really just doesn't know what
know what's going on I guess but
and we welcome your input as
this is a Democratic Republic
thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator Senator Wirth
thank you madam president and I
extraordinary I'm not going to
debate the specifics of where
where the parties are in the
negotiation but I do think it's
important to say that and I
have said publicly there is a
recognition that we need to get
this resolved and so again I
just the parties are working and
are you having been here for
to go there's still plenty of
time to make this happen I know
everyone's getting anxious but I
just want to sure everyone
that's I'm committed to
faith and we're going to
continue to do that in my
message to both sides is you
know region a time when you guys
got to figure it out and and
again going back and forth and
that's where we are and that's
your words today and and a
knowledge in what we've been
through COVID while we have all
of our medical professionals
here and I want to thank you all
so much on behalf of the whole
professionals have been through
madam president through this
pandemic.
She was there from the very
beginning putting ventilators
gathers that building people up
in body bags literally
what goes on behind the closed
doors in this medical
professionals this medical
facilities and what we've been
through.
Please you know take precautions
because our medical
professionals were there for all
of us and.
I just want to thank you because
it we're lucky that you're here
today and it's a rare
president and thank you for
calling on me I need to address
a little bit of what happened in
the science tech tax committee
of the matter is we got through
our first bill.
Intacs Committee and I asked for
a moment for personal privilege
and I made a statement
addressing our doctors and
not disrupt the committee they
didn't break the committee they
didn't make the committee stop.
What made the committee stop.
All four of us as Republicans
were there.
We heard end up hearing three
license plate bills which as
senator Wirth those I love
So that's what happened we
waited for about thirty minutes.
As the acting chair of the time
committee to be cancelled I
really like the rumor mill to
stop.
I got my first standing ovation
in my lifetime.
Can dad gum it I liked it.
up and if the sword arms would
like to talk to me about it I
would be glad to talk to her
about it so let's stop the rumor
let's stop treating the doctor's
rudely.
Times when the committee has
cheered.
Times when we've introduce
children we've all tier.
Is nothing different about what
to clear that up thank you madam
president thank you senator next
will go to Senator Hickey and
then Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair I also
I've known many of them years
and years and and the young ones
who are there and
The thing that I really want to
doctors who just love this state
in a railing to go through
incredible difficulties and so
point out to while they're here
learning about the political
process and I've been learning
it over the last three years and
I appreciate all my colleagues
patients with me as I as I learn
practicing and they want to help
people get healthier so I again
I want to salute them for the
love of New Mexico as well as
the love of their career thank
take time also to thank the
medical professionals are here
in the gallery I do want to talk
about one and it's incredible
family man present I've got a
in schools in more it's
incredible family in their kids
of all been really really
productive for our state but in
talking to him the other day it
have to leave the state and I'm
thinking through to me his
family's been here since the for
New Mexico state and to see that
their families put so much
also we can recognize and I know
they're in the gallery somewhere
but I'd like to the body to
welcome them to the Senate I
think it's important for us to
Then present just in closing I
just want to remind you that
he's one of us what we do to
them we to to our state and I
Spanien appreciation for all of
we'll hear from senator Correa
Hemphill thank you thank you
madam president
and I just wanted to rise and
it's really because of the
doctors that necklace made it to
twenty eight and there's.
so when he was two he was we
started having to need to feed
him.
And daily growth hormone
amputation and eighteen courses
of chemotherapy and many many
other surgeries including
neurosurgery when he was six he
want to thank the doctors for
their kind compassion and I
can't tell you how many times I
had doctors and nurses come and
just go to a restaurant and get
out of the hospital and they
just showed such incredible
kindness he had an oncologist
roughly the same age as Nicholas
and she'd just show the most
compassion that I've ever known
and it was because of the
doctors thank you madam
president.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator font this.
Thank you madam president I'm so
medical school I am and what
this of body this legislation
the state has done to support
that night I have a selfish
interest many of you all know my
my middle daughter of the three
as a graduate of you medical
them to hook up and among among
other among other things but you
know we we we find to be a in
the program we provide for loan
of things here to really try and
and and encouraging the the
doctors to be part of New Mexico
to grow here to succeed here in
we have to keep in mind that
there is an obstetrician we've
got to do a lot more than just
focus on one thing to whether
she comes back or not I gotta
tell you it's going to depend to
a large degree on what we do
this session we're talking about
raising taxes on higher income
New Mexicans were talking a
significant state increase
income tax increase that's gonna
matter to doctors to of our tax
New Mexico or not it's going to
depend on a great many things we
need to be looking at that
entire picture tax policies our
crime problems many of the
things that that are about that
quality of life but I I I did
on the faculty as graduates that
program and and hopefully people
that will be with us for the
remainder of their careers thank
you madam president.
Thank you are still on and now
granddaughter started medical
school you last summer and she's
already talking about leaving
the state.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Morris thank
audience have them stand up in
and there's a ripple effect so
would you do in your town halls
everything else of treatment the
only way I've been able to
Senate additions in my life but
that having health care in the
state is so critical specially
during the pandemic and I
personally think everyone here
on behalf of my whole team and
there are families everything
agreement we it worked out
bipartisanship offer number of
months now with our we had
agreement the governor's office
that was several sabotage and
and you know it was
integrity after everything we do
in this building you only have
your integrity and I always try
to preserve this I've always
fought with you guys you too
madam president but I think at
fight on this issue consenus of
offices right now practice is a
critical part of it but it's so
much more C. anti business
policies it's a factor were
charging gross receipts tax it's
of the provider networks that
that all Christian environment
that is so detrimental to print
that's mental.
continue to fight for on your
behalf so thank you madam
president thank you still on
announcements miscellaneous
anyone else Senator Wirth.
working on a large tax bill
that's coming across and and one
of the one of the pieces senator
Moores has and Senators metes
involves the gross receipts tax
did just get some news about the
high school basketball
tournament that for for those of
us in Santa Fe is good news
Senator Campos then I think this
is good news but the St
Senator Wirth and then present
SMS is also in keeping everyone
up to date on the high school
we're going to go two items one
through thirteen and then I'm
gonna visit with senator Bach
and Brandt about another item so
at this point unanimous consent
Madam president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bills nineteen
and two fifty two has had it
under consideration report same
of recommendation that it do not
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chairman Senator serve
on this madam president ask
unanimous consent the Senate the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
two do not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill four eighty two
do pass.
House bill one seventy nine as
that the committee report all
those who favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed navy Is haven't
committee part is adopted reader
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Benny Shendo junior chairman.
Senator Shendo thank you madam
chair yes unanimous consent of
the Senate agree to be allowed
all the committee reports House
Bill three sixty as amended do
pass.
House Bill three sixty three as
amended do pass respectfully
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed naming the eyes
have a committee report is
adopted.
Madam president your health and
public affairs committee
committee substitute for Senate
bill five hundred do pass and
that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and if
the journal reflected they were
acted upon individually seeing
no objection the reader shall
Senate memorial thirty seven two
passed.
Senate memorial fifty to do
pass.
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Senator to the
panel I move the adoption of the
committee report madam
president.
Adoption of a committee report
Adam present your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate memorial three
has had it under consideration
reports that same has been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
to signing by the officers of
I move the adoption of the
committee report production of
the committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Those pose nee the committee
And I will notify the Senate
that Judiciary Committee Senate
memorial three has been signed
in open session by officers of
the Senate.
lower back on no Spence
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president in
just the December one knows
we're going to do items one
through thirteen Senate bills
we're not gonna do any house
working on it so in a guy had
some big bills and we're all
working together on this but
today we're gonna try and knock
out the Senate bills with that
madam president Ms that we go
that our visit third reading of
to that order business third
reading of legislation Senator
do head start us off.
Thank you madam president and
bill four forty two as three
times amended is now on final
passage are on final passage has
now been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
salaries for our statewide
constitutional officers hi to to
account for the for inflation
this taken place in the twenty
one years that is passed since
we last adjusted those salaries
than at her when the next term
starts so I I will move but will
it wait to stop we do have an
amendment through reader to
sponsored by senator Katy M. do
here Senator do have to move
them in.
Then present I move Senate floor
amendment I think number two not
number one because we had one
last night.
Senator Duhigg to explain the
amendment thank you madam
president with this amendment
does is it make sure that the
first twenty twenty seven this
means that the salary increase
for the governor starts after
the current term of this
governor where is the salary
increases for the rest of that
constitutional officers would go
my good friend from Bernalillo
county yield to you center to
have yes ma'am president she
thank you madam president just
wanna make sure I think this is
June then Brianna Senator one
what's the effective date of
this.
Madam president center yeah it's
this not this and change what we
do with lieutenant governor
right what what the first
amendment.
Madam presence Senator each yes
No this doesn't change anything
about the lieutenant governor
it was just fixing that repeal
language thank you members I
think this is an artful way to
do it and it solves the issues
that I had with the original
bill and and members I think
address the issues that we've
been talking about for number
years so I think I think sponsor
for bringing us thank you
Senator Pirtle did you want to
debate the amendment and and
it's still swollen and it hurts
but it's still totally worth it
every time madam president I've
I've put a button on my shirt
and it hurts I just think back
to that free throw that we have
that trophy in it just reminds
Thank you madam president
present I just rise to support
the amendment I appreciate the
sponsor and others taking into
account the debate discussion Mr
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino had this
felony liability into the
government conduct that if she
was to sign this bill without
being exempted herself and so I
I raise the number of sections
from the government conduct
prohibited any official action
which would include signing a
bill any official action that
benefits the elected official
financially and I rise again to
recognize we have a we have some
sponsor and senator Ortiz Pino
for raising the issue in his
amendment doing the same thing
last night.
Thank you any other debate on
the amendment Senator Brandt
Seeing no objection the
gentleman can remove their
jackets so could the women I
suppose.
cumulative so you are correct in
the beginning so if you will
close on the amendment yes madam
president and I also just want
to know I I want to thank the
body for the discussion last
two of two Senate bill four
forty two.
At that and ask for voice vote
thank you the Senators we are on
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill four forty
two is stress amended all those
Madam president
I don't think so hi.
All right debate on the bill
Senator share and then Senator
Brandt thank you madam president
shields so thank you madam
president.
just looking around the the
states around us do you have any
idea what the governor makes in
say Arizona Colorado Texas.
governor in the area two hundred
and three thousand dollars.
With five point eight million
people in the state.
Arizona has seven point one
million people in the governor
gets paid ninety five thousand
dollars so.
For one point or two point one
million people if we're going by
just population.
Our governor should be by far
the lowest rate if we're going
by land mass.
And I know that one of the
things that was said before is
what we just need to have
parity.
Well.
Now are governor's going to be
huge land mass and almost thirty
million people does that sound
right.
President.
the the per capita assessment is
the right one I think that the
assessment is how hard the job
is overall which which I don't
think that's necessarily based
those three state per capita has
more state employees then the
other three states
so we've got a significantly
less population but more per
capita per ten thousand people
ten thousand people so maybe
maybe we ought to have a higher
rate the governor because well
we obviously have a dramatically
here I think they deserve a
raise.
Maybe even the governor I'm just
not sure that this is the right
race this is a fifty four
percent range for the governor.
Last year it was a seven percent
range but not fifty four.
That seems pretty significant to
me when when when the.
to throw that out there just
because well just because I just
wanted to talk to Senator Duhigg
for awhile about this the the
nuances of this bill thank you
It's always amazed me our our
salaries in the state of.
For the type of of
responsibility people have here
state government the type of
presidents can read drawing two
hundred and fifty to three
hundred thousand more than that
and their governors is over the
governorship is over maybe five
thousand eight thousand maybe as
president thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator
I still think that the.
Amendment that was put on
injured back.
Was correct.
thing but it says nor shall the
compensation of any officer be
increased or diminished during
his term of office.
Then later in the FIR it talks
about in nineteen ninety eight
up yesterday that the allowing
mid term pay raises for county
commissioner citing article four
section twenty seven in that
case spring court noted a
constitutional provision for
However it may be possible to
court could provide the specific
tests of article I section
twelve differs.
So I think there's this is very
unsettled.
I'm not sure that we need to
increase them.
But if we're going to we should
be doing in a way that's that's
actually.
For sure constitutional.
But according to the US
according to the rulings and
what's the constitution says is
none of us can receive a pay
wanted to increase our pay let's
say the constitution was ever
change to allow us to we would
be able to come in here and vote
ourselves a pay raise.
Not that would go into effect
election and since that
amendment was removed I think
that that Senator Ortiz Pinos
Committee had correct.
And since that was removed I
cannot support this.
I think there's enough question
on that that everyone can vote
their conscience.
But for me personally I think
it's unconstitutional therefore
I can't support thank you madam
populations as a justification
for salary and it's sitting at
missing are yet but I I wanted
to rise with the sponsor to
really have him think about
something a little bit more than
really our last three governors.
They're all coming out of
political office setting a
political latter.
They're not coming out of the
private sector.
office to political officer
rising a political letters such
as the governor that that
describes the current secretary
of state land commissioner.
Attorney General the positions
sector to these positions.
And I think that explains a
little bit about what New Mexico
could use a little bit more of
is that perspective.
back to the governor Gary
Johnson and Bruce came to
recognize that those individuals
brought.
Not a better perspective but a
different perspective of people
it possible for somebody outside
of government to hold these high
positions in government for a
period of time because otherwise
we're just creating government
job upon government position
something that that ultimately
benefits New Mexico thank you
ma'am present thank you Senator
Baca.
Thank you madam president and I
I just a.
when I debated bringing up the
effective date that that we and
I'm gonna get back to the bill a
second of bringing up that
effective date what it did was
government conduct act and I
think others felt it was more
appropriate to to move the date
back on that but what I really
it's steered into whether the
salaries were appropriate but I
was proud of the body madam
president that we stayed on the
and so getting to that madam
president I think that there
probably is a consensus within
the room that a lot of these
positions are underpaid and I
in the other side is going no
this is the right rate I don't
think that's what was happening
at all I think what was
happening was we had a
should be and and so I think
madam president that this body
is going to be a little bit
surprised with the vote today
brought up one of the points
that has been brought to me by
some some people considering
hiring statewide office it's
like well what do you do after
the office and so anyway I just
wanted to bring up those points
I do and I don't know where I'm
gonna vote on this bill but I
wanted to kind of recognize what
the bill Senator Pirtle thank
you madam president and I just
wanted to say you know I I think
sometimes we get lost in the
discussion as you know that
the public isn't supposed to
serve your bank account serving
the public is something that you
do because you have a passion
for people and so I think that
sometimes gets lost in the
it work and I I think if we
really want to.
Have the discussion that I don't
think pays the problem I think
we have a people problem in this
country right now we're so
whenever they became governor or
service because they wanted to
serve the people and serve their
state and serve their country so
I I don't think money is the
I see none Senator Duhigg to
close.
Thank you madam president I'm
move that the Senate bill for
those voting in the negative by
show of hands senators we are
voting on Senate bill for forty
two as amended four times two
years states if you wish to vote
Senator Pirtle voting no Senator
share.
Voting no.
Senator Schmedes voting no
Senator Baca voting no Senator
diet goes voting no.
assuming that was not an of I
don't think I said your name
devices name I apologize so
Senator shared an office hand up
sitting we don't even have the
same here caller.
No no.
Thirty five of thirty two in the
affirmative nine and the
negative Senate bill for forty
two as amended four times has
duly passed the Senate Senator
much Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the rules be spent at the record
show that all action replacing
Senate bill three oh five on
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
plate commemorating route sixty
six in New Mexico and of course
we're gonna celebrate our
hundreds or if you will our
centennial celebration and
twenty twenty six there was a
hopefully the body will consider
that that's what this does madam
president.
Debate on the bill Senator Ingle
plate
Over the years from my
experience with you and the many
years we've been here you do a
lot of stuff on highways and
things like that and invariably
plate is going to have that to.
Madam president senator Ingle
one of the things that happens
whenever our
members of the DOT get out there
the license plate I'm sure that
I will be one of the little
components of the of route sixty
six centennial license plate
thank you madam president.
images on my little sticker.
Right further debate Senate bill
three oh five Senator Brandt.
Thank you.
Gels again you said there
already is a route sixty six
license plate.
Madam president Center yes there
was one created and adopted in
years with route sixty six from
Gallup all the way to can Kerry
going to New Mexico so yes this
is going to go ahead and be a
different license plate thank
you madam president Senator
know that the average
revenue coming from a special
license plates to somewhere in
the neighborhood of eighteen to
nineteen thousand dollars and so
for that because this is a very
very famous project thank you
madam president.
Senator Brandt
Madam presence Senator delay
here correct to say that they
raised eighteen thousand dollars
that the average raised is
somewhere in the neighborhood of
eighteen to nineteen thousand
dollars per year thank you.
Senator from.
madam president center is that
focusing on the centennial
celebration and this would be a
different one thank you madam
president.
Thank you madam presence and so
good question because with this
centennial it will go ahead and
be if you will a commemorative
one that people take a lot of
pride in and of course it is
going to go ahead and landmark
Sir how much does it cost.
To design the plate.
working very closely with
individuals with the department
of takes about six weeks and the
total cost is about thirteen
thousand three hundred thirty
dollars.
twenty six thousand dollars so
have you got half price.
President that's that again
Senator Brandt not half price
but we've been very creative
require much redesign thank you
very much madam president
Senator Brandt.
Madam presence Senator I
appreciate that and and
It costs the state.
Around twenty six thousand
dollars average for these.
And they're sitting in a
warehouse.
it's it's a bad use of taxpayer
money.
I think we really need to yes
one of the few things that
Center sapien got right.
Was the license plate issue.
solution than having I think at
least seven license plate bills
are going to go through here
this year.
And then Senator counting the
storage cost of those all being
stored somewhere house
somewhere.
Because people don't buy them.
And so this one might be a
in you know to our stores
instead of being an official
license plate.
Is it also makes it more
difficult for our police to do
their job.
Because if you can look at the
you know that's New Mexico.
But otherwise you're trying to
you're we're in the world to
display come from and it really
helps law enforcement to what
state that vehicles from.
We have further debate Senator
wonderful
Tourist attraction along route
sixty six in my district.
All the musical highway.
are you familiar with musical
is is that room you know a as
you may know unfortunately.
The musical highway has fallen
And it it's it's kind of a about
maybe two thirds of it is left
that that plays the song America
the beautiful there's no longer
is this is that projects
something that maybe some of the
funds for this bill could go
toward center thank you very
much madam president Senators
meaty so you bring up a very
could be that possibility where
there could be if you will
either grants available or
organizations that would work
very closely to ensure that we
route sixty six and as you know
so many of our communities where
by past back in the seventies
and unfortunately whether it be
too can carry Santa Rosa going
communities are making every
effort to find where the
projects using their own
resources at the local level so
that we can attract tourists we
but something like this
definitely would be I believe
tourist attraction and
destination point for people to
be able to ride that portion of
the highway and listen to
the bill thank you thank you Sir
further debate on Senate bill
through I Senator marks thank
you madam president I Mr I'm
just going to rise in opposition
of this I heard Law Center
eight point bill we've had
except one for some good friends
of all of ours that's one thing
one or voted for I think we need
to come up with a better
solution offering Senator sapien
three oh five.
Seeing none Senator Campos to
close thank you very much madam
president members of the Senate
where voting on Senate bill
three oh five to your seats
please if you wish to vote no
raise your hand.
negative Senate bill three oh
five has duly passed Senator
Campos thank you very much madam
president members of the Senate
thank you we will March right
action for placing Senate bill
two eight four on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution Senator Lopez to
Mexico Special Olympics and
madam chair simple explanation I
would like to yield to my co
sponsor if you like to say a few
words Senator share.
Senator share to explain the
watching on on TV so madam
president.
The Special Olympics is is a big
deal really there's about thirty
seven hundred special Olympic
And what this does is it keeps
people engagement helps them and
helps them develop a both
physically and mentally as they
And I there's no doubt my mind
madam president that of the
thirty seven hundred special
Olympians will probably sell
thirty five hundred ninety two
All right Is there debate.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you madam president would
yield yes all you vote for the
ills.
Madam president Senator.
As much as I love the Special
Olympics and ideal I've actually
yes I used to snow ski before I
hurt myself and
I really enjoyed is actually one
of the things that was a
highlight for my life.
Doing these license plates.
So I think that's the better
solution.
and so I I just I just want to
you Senator Moores to debate the
bill thank you Representative I
love license plate bills this is
a great opportunity to our
recognize Special Olympics I
think it's a fantastic
Representative thank you Senator
Padilla to debate the bill.
Thank you very much madam
president I I strongly support
this this license plate I mean
literally seen it myself being
in a vehicle whenever we've run
into anything related to Special
Olympics it just brings a sense
of joy and pride and even beyond
the actual license plate even
beyond the car might be right
Lopez in this very powerful do
here Senator share and the hard
work that they that they've done
on this and I'm a co sponsor on
it as well somewhere down the
line but I'm fully fully
Seeing none of who who's gonna
close.
Senator Lopez this page one
madam president if I may I'd I'd
ten thousand dollars or ten
dollars per each license plate
madam president.
I now move the Senate bill two
eighty four do now pass and ask
Right senators were voting on
Senate bill two eighty four to
your seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
Thirty five in the affirmative
one of the negative Senate bill
two eighty four has duly passed
the Senate senators Lopez thank
unanimous consent Senate that
the record show that all action
for placing Senate bill two
seven six on final passage has
been taken and that the is now
subs.
license plate bill the day of
this has to do with make a wish
foundation they've asked
repeatedly that the body allow
them to have a license plate
Report to the make a wish
foundation in the wish
experience gives their children.
In increased feeling of
happiness and ninety six percent
said their wishes prince.
you madam president I want to
thank my co sponsor senator guy
a ghosts for allowing me to be
on this bill with him my son
looking forward to that amazing
trap it was a trip to Disney
world and we stayed at give kids
amusement park where we were
staying we had our own little
house they came in and filled
the refrigerator every single
day made sure that there were
sure that we didn't have to
worry about a single thing so I
know the incredible work that
they do for children across New
Mexico and most most health
child's battle for their health
and it also improves the
compliance with children who are
going through very difficult
treatments that are not pleasant
Thank you.
so Sir Kay because how we ready
for debate in prison we are okay
Senator guide goes to close on
Senate bill two seventy six
madam president I move that the
Senate bill two seven six do now
pulled in the negative a show of
hands of senators were voting on
Senate bill two seventy six to
your seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hands.
Thank.
guy it goes thank you madam
president Michael sponsoring
centers created thank you I will
move on to item number five that
that is Senator when meals for
two is now subject debate
amendment or substitution
senator Munoz to explain the
bill members that you thought
the right hand lane built along
with that then present this what
this bill does it now stand for
questions.
Right we do have a Senate floor
substitute.
bill one forty two and act
relating to license plates
creating a standardized
registration plate for public
purposes creating special
registration details for New
Mexico miners make a wish New
I'm sorry Senate for substitute
for Senate bill one forty two
sponsored by senator part.
And forced a move for substitute
everyone be put on final passage
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
more of these license plate
bills than than anyone Senator
Ingle scene the most and I I
think as a body we we see these
from who they are and so what
this would essentially do is
just make a nice generic
standardized plate with a four
by four inch square where
anybody at any given time any
want to do miners in the next
year they want to do something
else it just be a sticker they
could put on there that
registration they could pick
that sticker and do and that way
we get away from this need for
so many different plates we have
floor substitute will go first
to senator Munoz thank you madam
president I was just about
double check you know talking to
the sponsor we talked about
Call it neutral for right now
until I hear COVID.
Thank you debate on the
substitutes Senator to hit.
Madam president I I want to rise
license plates than any other
state in the nation and boy has
that just continued Science
Center parent Lee so I think
this is a great idea madam
president.
support of past affected this
body has.
past of this idea before so hope
we do this again I think it
takes care of a lot of our
yield the gentleman who's
offered the separatists of madam
president the gentleman
presenting the substitute early
and Mr president
the all the license plates that
are on the books now when I was
blessed to this bill Bennett
president of Senator I I was
And Mister president once the
webcast okay I don't president
it's Saturday the winds blowing
my allergies are all out of
whack give me no excuse give me
a.
to of this style of plate madam
president.
Madam president Senator at.
And the concept of being used up
warehouses full of random plates
so they'll issue those and then
once those are used then that
special purpose plate will then
sticker concept should kick in
immediately but I but I think
this is a is a good step in the
right direction is tough for
constituent comes to you with a
license plate bill.
You know step say no
Thank you madam president and I
I don't think I need well maybe
I will have the sponsor yield if
you would Senator Pirtle to
yield madam president I do heels
question is what would happen so
if if we adopt this
what would it so that so we
talked to some of the New Mexico
tell Hey that's New Mexico
license plate and then if you're
tailgating close enough madam
president Senator as as people
like to do in Santa Fe you'll be
question is what would happen to
New Mexico miners license plate
if we adopt this up Senator
Pirtle so madam president
Senator the way I understand it
we'll transition to to the
standardized plate and then over
time because of our beautiful
son in the UV rays that we get
here they all fade away madam
it doesn't make it through the
house what happens in New Mexico
miners license plate Senator
Pirtle.
And madam president and senator
New Mexico miners license plate
and that one if it doesn't pass
if it does pass and the stickers
all going place I get that madam
president want to make sure.
the Special Olympics the the
make a wish
I think those are the only two
you have in here the other two
or if this passes of those
plates go away as well.
In in madam president Senator
there's a few a few ways that
can go I didn't want to leave
amount because if the license
being appropriation bill I'm not
sure exactly what the governor
can line item out of here but I
I I think that would be an
option there as well but as a
but to answer your question if
the house passes the three that
we just did and then not this
one then obviously the miners
play would go away and then
depending on when the governor
handles it and then how the
governor within handles in what
order she signed signed bills.
Thank you madam president I
do it as a separate bill I just
think we need to put it through
the process so we understand
what we're doing and and I just
think this body needs to kind of
send a signal that once we're
to unscramble and do this
through the floor sub I mean
it's made the point but again I
decided after listening to this
that I'm gonna stick with the
we get to that point as a
standalone bill and again I
think we need it's good to have
this discussion on the floor
thank you madam president thank
you a further debate center
somebody on the other side that
you know sits in the big chair
in front
and could probably talk to him
about this I'm sure the governor
staff is listening right now
lot less than it would take to
do house bill two of.
We can make this work and we can
we can put this to bed once and
for all because madam president.
long anyway but we see a lot of
these and we have the same
discussion every year and we
voted bunch of them down and
then the next year we vote them
in.
If not now when.
Further debate on the proposed
substitute Senator Moores thank
you madam president I do believe
I think senator Wirth a point in
honor to minors is valid I would
plate was passed by the
legislature and the governor
vetoed it and then
administratively quickly got
implemented and so the I hope
the governor's listening so if
honored Senator Wirth are
indicated he with his is ours is
often prevent that because we
quite frankly do not need to
pass license plate laws for DMV
The end result that issue no but
I don't want to jeopardize the
miners license plate in any
difficult license plates are
sometimes if they're not really
for a Special Olympics are
certain thing and so they they
seem to just get passed over.
and I think this is the best way
to do it
you know for on your own to
support LFC ordered the game and
fish I can do that the next year
the United States for the number
license plates we have but I
also think the chili license
plate is is the favorite played
across the United States to an
and I don't want to lose that
I'll remain neutral on the
substitute.
Is there further debate on the
substitution Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam president I I
Sponsor please you.
Senator Pirtle to yield madam
president I yield eagles thank
you madam president center which
And have the governor signed an
intact or.
To make a game winning free
throw with a broken hand.
Is there further debate on the
substitute.
I see none Senator Pirtle close
let me first tell the body that
substitute if we approve of it
or the bill regional bill if we
fail to approve the substitute
provided clear you're not voting
Alright so.
Senator Pirtle to close on the
substitute.
And and madam president do I
passage of the substitute so
that we can then vote on the
substitute madam president
Senator Stefanics on this point
Lorraine made the call and came
up with a different language so
I just would caution us about
Through something on my desk
about tabling.
All right so Senator Pirtle to
stake out the cabling and just
move the Senate floor sept.
For what.
Madam president just at the
rules be suspended in the
records show the rules been
called all those present voting
the from accepting those voting
If you wish to vote no if you
raise your hands.
Senator Neville folks know.
Senator o'neill folks now
Ortiz Y. Pino folks know Senator
McKenna folks now.
Senator Gonzales folks know
Senator Padilla folks know.
Senator Stefanics folks now
meel photo no.
Senator Stewart folks now
Senator my nose votes no.
listening we are now on a floor
substitute for Senate bill one
forty two.
just trying to figure out who's
going to be talking about the
steps to I think it Senator
Pirtle.
Yes pirtle to explain the
substitute and thank you madam
clarification of the body sapien
was good at a lot of things
hogging the basketball and also
hogging credit and just so the
body knows in those in the
think this is something really
important and I did introduce
this as a bill in twenty
nineteen is still waiting for
its first committee hearing and
Senate tax so if we could hear
Center for substitute for one
forty two any debate.
Senator said about this madam
president I won't take a lot of
time but I it's incumbent upon
you know madam president Senator
where I come from it's pretty
cowardly to take on an adversary
when they're not even in the
room I remember yesterday you
all invited people up to a
specific room I think for a
thing for you buddy thank you
members.
Is there any actual debate on
the Senate first Senator curry
one of the first miners for the
copper mine there and Grant
County it was kind of caught at
the time it's Freeport Mack
brown now and they moved to
miners have done and the women
who were successful holding
empires Inc money line the
strike when they were striking
and better living conditions for
their families and so I just
wanted to to recognize our
history there with the New
Mexico miners and thank both
the Senate floor substitute.
Senator Munoz no matter present
you you really got to respect
the miners and what they did
especially in our early years
their family you look at the
coal mines and in center have
built district you look at the
coal mines around Gallup you
look at the Iranian mines look
at what it took in the
have a miner's hospital in
respect to some of that and so
we have to take care of this in
its is respect issue to the
minors I know there's everybody
see what's happening but to go
back to Senator good center from
Los crucis point I think the the
other third amigo was main dusty
sticker with that then present
thank you.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president I guess today is my
day to talk about the miners and
also I think members may be
surprised to know I've got a
population of eight thousand
people back in the day my dad
was born in Dawson New Mexico so
again I think it's important to
Seeing none Senator Pirtle to
close and thank you madam
president in the comments made
about senator safe if you're
listening I hope you're not I
hope you've moved on with your
sets and and this is something
we talked about frequently in
was important us moving New
Mexico forward and something as
simple as as license plates and
and making government more
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting the
negative by show of hands thank
you centers we are on the Senate
floor substitute percent though
McKenna votes no Senator Hickey
folks know Senator had a meal
Shendo votes now Senator Wirth
folks know Senator the.
Folks know Senator Steinborn
folks know.
Senator Stewart it's not.
madam president members of the
body you have my word I will
work as hard as I can to ensure
that the miners don't lose their
license plate.
Thank you madam president
police may want to be there for
protection this time not for
defense but knows in all
seriousness this this is
direction needed they're all tax
just as a backup just in case so
thank you madam president thank
you centerman yes Senator Wirth
thank you madam president
unanimous and we go about our
business announcements and
to move your particular bill out
of Senate finance I think and we
visit with a finance five
thirteen I believe is the
number.
Senator Brandt miss madam
So Senator were this this is
been worked out that presents
and then once you just tell us
what the bills about but yes
that took place a few weeks ago
at all of our schools madam
president and I talked about it
and we really want to address
that issue and so we brought
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president just a quick
announcement to the body it's
pretty important then present we
have a lot of food left in my
going for in the chamber madam
president no fund yeah thank you
so very much hungry go by
Philip.
Thank you Senator Wirth thank
you madam president so we're
gonna just for the members of
center party and I will roll the
clock here in just a moment also
ahead up what we're gonna do
just before we continue on to
item number six we do have a
consent calendar number one
taken off so we'll just do items
one one and three and we'll
figure out whether Saturn
Senator Diamond center Pirtle
someone can run that we're going
we'll figure that out madam
president nabbing eleven fifty
nine am I move we adjourn until
twelve OO one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Madam president asking is
consent that the rules we
Madam president I us is consent
of the Senate the the rules but
the rules P. suspend that the
record show that the drones been
read in full in approve subject
to revision approval of the
Judiciary Committee if there's
Members we're gonna go to the
consent calendar number one and
I believe Center diamond are you
going to run that unanimous that
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill three twenty
eight as amended on final
passage has been taken in and
that is now open to debate
fostering connections a couple
of years ago it is actually
successfully held two hundred
and fifty New Mexico youth that
were aging out of foster care at
age eighteen think about a madam
with SB two thirty eight does is
it expands the eligibility
because we inadvertently
excluded children that had not
been a educated yet or maybe
so whenever the use to come out
of foster care down the road
about seventy percent of them
have their own children get into
foster care at some point states
that have enacted this for the
fourteen state that did this a
we do make ten or fifteen
additional children eligible
every year they're turning adult
is just a remarkable program for
New Mexico and I urge the body
to support it Mr debate on
ordered Mr debate Senate bill
three twenty eight.
Seeing none the closest Senator
Diamond to close thank you madam
voting in the negative by show
of hands centers we're voting on
Senate bill three twenty eight
as amended to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate
memorial forty four on final
passage has been taken and it is
now open for debate amendment or
substitution.
the Hispanics enjoying camping
hunting and outdoors but I'm a
references at show which was
created to fulfill our duty to
conserve and protect our public
lands for future generations
elector officials and appointed
leaders at the ability to
connect with their communities
and elevate the voices when it
comes to conservation so that
our public lands can be
and equitable balance did not
buy part and bipartisan
connected to communities with
economic sentence yet which is
being connected to the land.
Absolutely madam president for
some reason he else what is it.
Thank you madam president do you
enjoy camping.
this memorial you you too can
enjoy camping.
Because apparently this memorial
is necessary madam president for
us to enjoy camping.
Thank you madam president.
sponsor yield Senator had a mail
to you you are you.
Senator Brandt Senator writing
madam president senator does
Senator Brandt.
camping and I appreciate the
memorial because I'm really much
more in through is now but can
you tell me just give me some
tips what is your favorite maybe
one or two places here in New
Mexico we like to go camping
colleague and really trying yes
whether you knew it was talking
about sounds like it does.
Any other debate.
Seeing none Senator Diamond
in the negative by show of hands
of sinners to your seats for
voting on Senate memorial forty
Ferrary fjuhsd bills no please
raise your hand.
I vote of thirty five in the
affirmative here in the negative
side of a moral forty four has
duly passed the Senate center
go back to that order was
announcements miscellaneous
seeing no objection more
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you madam
presents the plan was to go to
business third reading of
legislation and I yield center
Padilla for item number seven
Senate bill one twenty four is
amended Senator Padilla thank
you madam president I infants
consent of the Senate that the
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator Padilla to explain the
bill thank you madam president
so we do have a history here in
New Mexico with returning to
work employees we have come up
with a plan that actually
we've never done before so what
happens to in those twelve
twelve months you have your
birthday F. four five the four
seasons five six major holidays
once you're retired maybe have
some grand babies or something
the the state employment in some
department or what have you
what we do here is to go out for
twelve months to come back for a
maximum lifetime of thirty six
months during that time you
everything that you do has to
happen before you retire the
first time one change that we do
making the legislation is your
high three years average of your
high three can work up to one
hundred percent of that now with
of the one of the committees
along the way we put a six year
sunset on it madam president and
so I do have an amendment that
I'll talk about here just
momentarily but I just want to
say that
want to move amendment number
one to Senate bill one twenty
four as amended.
The reader to read the on the
floor and then.
amendment thank you madam
president this into what we do
is we strike the amendment that
occurred in the Senate health
and public affairs committee
which I'd added a six year
sunset repeal I know several of
put a four year sunset or repeal
on the legislation the reason
that this is important as if
this isn't working for us after
about four years we know we
really should scrap it and move
back to where we are today and
at twelve months as the
legislation is enacted it will
will allow them to come back you
know when we start this things
we have plenty of of of
experience with this after about
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam president.
thank you Mr then president with
the senator yield due to yield I
will madam president keel's.
Thank you
R. as you know with the madam
Thank you madam president I
think what it does is it
provides a quicker review and
whether we're going down the
right road or not.
Madam president as I recall this
sunset period then only four
years of people will be able to
four years of people will be
able to do it and this will give
an incentive to people to retire
that Senator Padilla thank you
madam president know that I
heard a question there but I'll
try to do my best what what I do
but I do want to say is that
once the legislation is enacted
you know I I do take aim and and
at the term double dipping in
the meantime the reason I do
when I heard that from the the
the Senator I think we need to
remember is that folks that are
retired they did everything they
is it allows that reactivation
to start and really about two or
three years and for us to get an
evaluation on whether this is
working for us you know that
work up to one hundred percent
of your high three you know
that's a decision that a
personal individuals going to
have to make if they choose to
retire the first time in a.
Any other debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none center Padilla to
close thank you madam president
move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill one
amended all those in favor of
the amendment signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed nay.
The eyes have it the amendment
We have another amendment.
Then when I see it you'll see it
too.
I
think they're handing them out
right now.
the bottom are rhesus we looking
at but will tell you that in
just a minute thank you.
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill one twenty
So that the two two number is
scratched out we'll we'll hear
from the sponsor about that
Senator Ivey Soto to move the
floor amendment thank you very
president madam president first
all the only difference.
Between what they have at the
table when everybody has his
number one.
I just simply added and writing
afterwards and said a four
time frame was different.
In terms of what senator
Clemente wanted.
And resolutely yield to senator
get rights if you're gonna cross
it out and do things and we need
to have that handed out because
we don't have that in front of
us I just don't think we can or
early start changing amendments
without having in front of us
here comes.
So so everyone have the
amendment.
Senator Sanchez but that
amendment.
All right.
a presidency that works in the
Senate.
Thanks for with this chart Bundy
from asked me.
A fourteen because of fourteen
the live gentleman on the floor.
I see no objections we're gonna
have started honestly this
border expert witness into the
chamber.
And the the problem with the
proposal that was brought.
by the majority floor leader.
And so what this does is it
actually makes it a two year
period of time.
consecutive.
Paying people correctly.
If we are under paying people.
For jobs.
I get paid.
To go back to work.
Really we need to make sure that
we're paying people correctly
first.
Because we gave all our Senate
place a six percent raise.
Inflation for last year was a
percent.
The level of inflation.
And then we can have a
conversation about whether we
truly have a concern rates or
not.
Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr president
and with all due respect to my
colleague I I do have to say
this isn't on from the amendment
for number reasons one I I hear
you loud and clear have a great
individuals probably fifteen
times over the past twenty four
hours alone some really
surprised and shocked to see
this significant
give the program near enough
time just determined because the
actual length of time that you
can return to work is actually
thirty six months or three years
so to here is is very
problematic.
necessarily be affected by this
legislation number one we had a
presentation and Senate finance
the other day that was from the
federal reserve we do see a a
months so I think we're we're
probably in good shape that way
with the raise that we did find
this year I want to to say that
I'm fully supportive of a salary
study in determining where
problem I have with the the
legislation or the amendment
excuse me is just you know the
appropriation here just a set up
and and Senate finance this
morning member that committee
million dollar on page I think
what's it's yet page three
levels handed to me here and
there's no two oh two number
there's like a twenty from the
right place so page three there.
reasons I I have to stand
opposed to this
Mr president I'm really
surprised and get a hold of this
ahead of time and and have more
opportunity more time to look at
Anyone wishing to be on the
floor amendment.
And we're going to engage in a
policy of return to work.
We need to make sure first of
It also is.
Making sure that we get the
data.
To the LFC.
Of each person.
This is.
I get to this is substantial.
But the problem is return to
work is substantial.
I move that center for women
number two.
Senate bill one twenty force
tries amended do now pass and I
ask for voice vote.
I object.
I move that set of Harmon number
two does Senate bill one twenty
four has transcended do not pass
as you that is because it is set
up for the record reflect the
This presidential hands.
Senator just for the Ms consent
excuse centerman you'll simply
returns to chamber hearing
objects and so ordered so
We have senator Neville voting
no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator sirventes voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Gonzales voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
affirmative twenty for the
negative senator member number
two has failed to pass the
Senate centers of.
This president colleagues.
Thank you very much I do hope
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill one twenty
four as two times amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
Mark Moores.
twenty four as twice amended
saying no objection center more
service manager amendment as Mr
president I for could have us
have of my good friend Carter
us restored our expert witness
into the chamber.
Senator Moores thank you very
much present this this amendment
cards has said they brought
these issues up with the good
senator but he might not seeing
the actual language of the so if
you had as I apologize to
and what it does is two things
on this bill which makes a lot
of sense to us the first part of
it would say that their employer
shall have a vacancy rate of
What's in over nomenclature once
a double dip all return to work
that's probably better occur on
the second one is
that they shall not one of the
problems we have with this issue
cops on the streets with the
people on the streets during
this what we don't want is the
management to be re retiring
coming back and then just coming
back right into management we
want to make sure that this is
because we really need to focus
on the public safety aspect to
get those cops on the street so
that's a much simpler bill or
amendment and the one we just
saw I think your dresses to
centers we're debating senator
member number two to Senate bill
one twenty four IST twice
amended all you'll to the
sponsor senator Michael Padilla
thank you very much Mr president
nothing wrong with that
appreciate that well the second
time within about three minutes
so Mister president thank you I
have to strongly oppose this
amendment as well and and let me
rates are just under if you look
at all the departments are just
under twenty percent that's not
the only reason why this is is
being looked at but this would
The second is it was very
important to me that we didn't
do this the way that we've
previously done it in New Mexico
which is you could basically had
to work it out you could retire
on a Friday and very quickly
come back to work with and you
grand babies like I said if you
take a part time job
there there's five holidays
major six major holidays the
other thing is you'd be asking
season if you will and so I just
don't think they're going to do
that I think they're going to
want to keep their their their
department running being managed
supervised etcetera so for those
reasons that's why I strongly
followed by Senator Brandt
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president will the
the senator and my neighbor you
center more detailed this
the Roswell office wanted to go
back to work and become say the
chief of police and Rossell
would this prevent him from
doing that.
Mr president actually would I
might my concern with this is
having if if this individual
retired as a captain from the
state police but yet can't
return for all an entire year
Where the tax structures better
and just do the entire structure
for for a lot of people making
money is better
Is it they're gonna believe the
state of New Mexico because
who have reached a level within
say one department and then
municipality needs a qualified
individual because the newly
elected mayor in our police
chief out of town and we would
Mr present with the very kind in
the no.
New father Senator it cement to
Center mass and I believe that's
hear us to yield was down on the
Google Mr president he is kind
of a big lovable cuddly teddy
bear sunset Senator Senator
at this present Senator.
So.
I'd like one of my biggest
concerns is always been.
The I. retires the.
appreciate a little bit longer
time.
Then I come back in and take the
job of a detective again instead
of that young officer who's been
protect that with those younger
officers are getting that
chance.
is that what why you I set this
up this way senator Morris
agency present for that's
exactly what we're trying to
laterally moving into another
leadership role it's just that
you can't return to work and get
the retirement benefit so
there's still that operate
mobility that Senator Pirtle was
concerned about what the
is that you can't retire go back
into a leadership position
because we do want to have that
ability for the younger on
generally use long all law
enforcement to be able to move
up and have that ability as
positions for many many years
providing new opportunities for
minority and women moving up on
so having the same leadership
there so it is important we get
careers.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president what about you're one
of the situation's been brought
to me again in the law
enforcement community probably
because I'm I'm very close that
reaches twenty years and retires
and then he wants to go and be
come the police chief in.
I don't know one of the small
Yes.
Thank you Mr present with the
sponsor of the bill yield
Sentifi the yield.
in after here and take that same
level position keeping younger
officers from being moved up.
that the vacancy rates are up
and down the line within
departments this isn't just
about rank and file this isn't
just about management the the
vacancy rates of about nineteen
and a half percent our cost
original bill would actually
help with that as well just like
it would help at the rank and
file level Senator Brandt thank
you Mr president thank you
senator and yeah that's I've
I've considered a little bit
more this year than I normally
do quite frankly because of the
shortage that we have
however I still think there need
by the officers working a few
extra years.
You don't have to retire.
they chose to retire yet the
retirement
for various reasons.
could have gone thirty three
before that a forced me out
depending on my rank but I
couldn't have gotten out.
Retired.
It is very important to within a
structure.
Yes you with our public
employees that when you're lower
that you can see a ladder moving
up.
where my concern is COVID what
my second scenario Senator
Padilla where the officer would
retire from Bernalillo county
sheriff's department would he be
themselves in a situation where
they just you know couldn't find
someone to take that role we
have a ton of movement all over
the state in all different
departments Mr president simply
worked for them I I think they
should be able to do that and
and then I just want to
reiterate something I said
originally and and also in the
debate with the previous
amendment is
different about what the way
we've ever done this before
twelve months later and they
were a tape to be able to get a
job I think that's fantastic
because they've done everything
they said they were going to do
maximum of thirty six months.
Thank you Mr president thank you
center for sheet the answered
all continue to look to listen
amendment etcetera more so close
on the amendment thank you Mr
president I'm proud to stand
hear you loud and you proud all
right now with the solidarity
with my brothers and sisters
is where voting tier C. explains
where voting on Senate floor
member number two.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting no.
Senator Maestas voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Gonzales voting no.
Senator Stewart Senators souls
voting no.
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
senator Morris I thank god I
really do appreciate that the
bait and I think we might have
wanted to buy for Kate that is
the question so I think senator
smitteez is going to do that
because I think we can probably
think Senators music are tear
from here thank you Mr president
thank you Sir more centers we're
back on the bill.
Since there is no more debate on
Thank you Mr president and and
etcetera I I appreciate you
working on this issue because I
know it is a an issue that we
This is a couple of things and
and I I I actually like you
shortening the time frame that
you did on your first amendment
which is why supported it I
think that that does help I
Well like I say I I actually met
with the the.
Chief police association about a
month ago during session me in
Senator Ivey Soto and cinder.
of the smaller communities and
because of not being able to
return to work that becomes a
problem because a lot of times
you want someone with that kind
And and that's kind of where
have a concern I like the fact
that you're doing that for for
three years for the other areas
but when they're not coming back
let's say they retire from APD I
think we want APD bringing that
person back into a PED.
at least not at the upper level
but if they're coming from APD
there a way to kind of
differentiate between matters.
I'm just trying to figure that
out.
For the thank you Mr president I
thought about that also and I
of the support on this was Hey
you know we want to be able to
help individuals grow into these
roles I think this does exactly
that you might want to bring
somebody back for thirty six
month period and in that time
department so I think that is a
great way to utilize this
program to your benefit as an
agency of any kind here in New
Mexico.
Senator Brandt.
maybe there's a small amendment
that would allow if you're going
from a not from one department
to another department you know
with you know you're leaving APD
you're right I mean it's it's a
mentoring thing right we want
those officers who have that
experience to be able to come
back in you know maybe the
person they were mentoring to
take their position decided to
a mentor someone else I can see
that situation but I don't see
it when it comes to and I think
we got to be careful not to pay
too big of a brush with with too
I I think they should be able to
do that without those
restrictions anyway thank you Mr
president thank you center
thanks Center brand we do have a
floor amendment.
The reader to read the amendment
the amendment theme is present
like to move Senate foreman
number two to Senate bill one
twenty fourth amended.
Say no objection to feel
extremity meminta Senator thank
anybody because I think this
issue that's in the a man in
front of us is really the the
biggest issue here and just in
case from the Google info to me
vacancy requirements up on to
the original bill.
Thanks committee senators are
debating senator member number
two and I yield to the bill
sponsor senator Michael Padilla
strongly oppose this amendment
as well really at the end of the
day Sliq goes to the one I as I
mentioned before the first
argument which is you're gonna
bring some folks back possibly
months knowing this you know
you're hiring for that purpose
and that reason for thirty six
months they are then able to
help you to the interview select
an individual that's going to be
through the ranks and and it's a
great way to to to hire mentor
the person is going to come into
that role when they when they're
jettison.
Senator debate incentive for
is it you know we've got all
sorts of communities across the
state who knew have different
employee needs and to.
somebody or somebody retire
somebody has that opportunity.
And they can't hire room because
they're going into a supervisory
it in the in the loss I I
propose the amendment.
Further debate on the amendment.
pass to Senate bill one twenty
four as amended and ask the
record reflect that the roll
then called and all those
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
With Senator Kernan voting no.
Senate Bill voting no.
Senator my SS voting no Senator
o'neill voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator Wirth moaning now.
Senator Gonzales some sorry
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
By a vote of eighteen the
minutes which is sadly better
than my free throw percentage.
We're back on the bill Senate
bill one twenty endorsed by
you Senator Ingalls thank you Mr
president I'm very conflicted on
this bill and I suspect I could
vote either way and sleep just
fine tonight why was it changed
from ninety percent of the
thank you Mr president Davis you
know for a number of reasons
we've been moving in this
direction over time this also
keeps folks in their rules for a
little bit longer it's gonna
Senator Senator souls.
Mr president and senator I'm not
sure that the you answer
understood my question in the
past on the return to work type
of things or retirees coming
earn up to a hundred percent
what is the rationale for
changing it up to a hundred
percent for this particular bill
instead of leaving that.
incentive to work that longer
again it is thirty three years
on average before you will
actually get to one hundred
percent Senator souls but Mr
substantially more pay than
other people.
Etcetera with them Mr president
the other thing that this yes
and I hear you loud and clear Mr
Senator souls so Mister
president senator by putting it
at a hundred percent because
they're paying full para into it
but getting nothing back that
that actually supports the pair
told me before Senator there is
present yes it does actually
that additional it eight years
or additional what is it that
would be six point
of our most of the job openings
in these fields are the
frontline or administrative
jobs.
Mr president they are primarily
rank and file entry level so
to be a decision that a
particular individuals going to
have to make we're thinking that
about two thirds eighty percent
of these the in some department
it's going to be as much as
positions that are retiring.
By the Mr president I do have an
expert I want to make sure I
give the Senator the right
answer I do want to ask my
retirement association and he'll
International free ask the
question S. any objections see
no objections sergeant ours are
present escort our expert
witness into the chamber.
question Mr president senator
certainly of our most of the.
The jobs you'd indicated are
mostly rank and file where the
Thank you Mr president so
Would they don't get the
specific data on exactly
see the vast majority are entry
level and rank and file.
Senator souls.
Mr president because my concern
is if we have administrative
coming back into the the level
of which the job would be for
their salary.
Thank you Mr president you are
that just as I thought my expert
to be the not not the retirement
amount that they're receiving
it's going to be whatever job
they obtain whatever that salary
level is in a coming into that
role.
Senator souls so Mister
retire retire towards the top
end of either the rank and file
or the administrative but the
place we have the most openings
and and that concern we're
trying to fill are at the lower
employees working in public
safety that a supervisor a
sergeant of someone who is is
doing the upper level whether
they're going to come back to
where the majority of the
file to move up into
administrative openings if those
are being filled by retirees.
Center for the thank you Mr
president I guess I'd have to
upper level management you know
again there's a whole year in
the middle there there's a
possibility they could move into
these ranking dems are these
management positions but this is
always looking at how do they
move up into management how do
they move to a higher salary and
if these openings that are
filled by people who retired out
of those and then see it as for
are fewer opportunities to do so
and where it tends to be that
are openings are gonna be more
at the lower levels where we
don't have people retiring I
still I'm very conflicted I
thank you senator souls we do
have further debate we'll have
Senator Ingle followed by
Senator Pirtle Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president president
To open this up to folks that
are retired to come in and take
jobs or in a few years we'll
take it think that back and they
won't be able to do that.
This is part of what happens
And we have a problem with that
all over the state depending on
I don't know what the year is
and things like that we're short
of employees in lots of areas
that are out there but I can
assure you within three or four
years it'll come back the other
way and this this will this
particular bill will be
basically change back the other
here we nearly had a fist fight
on the floor over whether a
state policeman that was retired
could go and run for sheriff.
Because N. retainers retirement.
down here and we had calls of
the Senate and people not coming
back for two days and things
like that it was just amazing
how emotional it this issue
already got retirement.
So it's an issue that I think
we're who we need to have to
take this look at the water
or county Department out we
probably need to do that but I
can assure you of one thing
within a few years it'll be
changed back the other way thank
bad policy to I know he doesn't
like the the I I know the.
I know the sponsor the bill
doesn't like the term double
dipping.
Is the reason I call it double
job and from talking to.
People in the various agencies
younger people who want to move
into those positions they're
just out and I believe that
having having the difficulty of
not being able to move through
and move people up into these
These higher level positions
when we talked about it
and I've seen it in so many
different state agencies.
Particularly
you know I I you know I've seen
it education I've seen it
Senator Lopez Senator Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president the
sponsor of Senate bill one
twenty fours twice amended
please yield center for the
twelve consecutive months I'm
curious Mister president senator
how did we come up with that
number before somebody could
return to work.
My experts and I agree I mean so
twelve months is something that
is a again it's a full calendar
year you're fully into
retirement that point it didn't
work for us previously when we
opportunity to retool having
that vacancy there so they can
refill it with either promoting
folks is up through the ranks
into these other roles and then
also from an iris standpoint
president.
Senator Pirtle and Mister
president senator met maybe your
expert knows but I was under the
understanding that the shortest
is some case law to that effect
but that there's there's as
short a period of sixty days
with the return to work Mr
president senator.
much Mr presents on my experts
gave me some some interesting
information here so this is out
of the misery retirement state
employees retirement system a
bonafide separation of services
pre arranged future employment
with employers covered under the
new and the Missouri peace and
so most states adhere to that
and it really made a lot of
sense to us when we set up the
twelve month separation or
enough time to get a U. haul and
get the heck out of Dodge and
moved to Texas where they have
lower taxes and and a better
system and so my my concern is
good friend of mine just moved
from Rossell took in fifteen
minutes to find a a sheriff's
opening vacancy put in for it
the to the east and and our
neighbor to the west with their
economy booming in Colorado
doing so well that people would
even have to move that far they
could get a good deal on a U.
haul and and move out of the
think of a shorter period would
work.
Center for the thank you very
much Mr president Preciado that
and again I do have a tremendous
amount of respect my colleague
and I was trying to me I think
a legitimate break in service
and that's why twelve months
works and then also you know I
think that you definitely see
some
probably sends us into this
ammendment respectfully sends us
into a worse situation than we
did before we we we did the risk
stopping over the returning to
work.
The research through the
amendment Senator Senate floor
amendment number two to Senate
bill one twenty for us twice
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president and and this amendment
simply takes the twelve month
break down to a thirty day break
it's a bona fide stop in service
position that's needed
especially out in our rural
communities where somebody
retires from state police and we
need a sheriff's deputy we can't
wait a year to to fill that
family and and have those close
ties to New Mexico but working
in a different state so I think
this just ensures that we can
adequately fix this issue or put
abating Senate floor member
number two and I yield to the
Senate sponsor center Michael
Padilla thank you very much Mr
president and like I said before
I think of this is I really do
respect Senator Pirtle as
surface and so I think that we
that we that's issue number one
with this amendment and issue
number two is I just think that
while the sponsor of the
amendments words were actually
very good nice I hear them loud
and clear and we do need to find
amendment thank you Sir but just
as we're debating senator member
number two.
Anyone wishing to bank on the
amendment.
I
have people return to work so
that we can fill positions we we
don't want to give them so much
time that they leave we were
saying enough people leaving the
state as it is especially as as
public sector employees and so
in our rural communities where
we were hurting the most with
with vacancies with needing
qualified people and so I think
more money and so this one sure
that we keep them employed keep
them in New Mexico and so I move
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill one twenty
for us twice amended I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
voting on the amendment all
Senators your seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator Maestas voting no
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator could Hemphill voting
no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
Senator Kernan voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator Padilla voting no.
Senator Ingle enough not to
provide a vote.
By a vote of seventeen in the
affirmative twenty form the
no vote in the majority in case
we need to reconsider this.
Thank you Senator Ingle.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president I had to
Sierra.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield center for the day
of.
Thank you very much Mr president
with the amendment that we
adopted it will begin July first
two thousand twenty three.
Senator thank you Mr president
Well they have to have return
tired before July of this year.
Center for the.
July first of two thousand
twenty three Mr present they do
have to have twelve months or
more a retirement to be eligible
for the program.
Senate president senator that's
correct.
Senator I have thank you senator
thank you Mr president thank you
senator Clemente.
Thank you very much Mr president
and I do appreciate all of the
very excellent and helpful
debate I think this is how we
craft really good legislation
this is something that we're
more a lot happens to in that
twelve months Mister president
you do come back for a maximum
of thirty six months for life
that's it no more after that
however prior to retiring the
first time we did implement a
one hundred percent to average
of your high three years and
it's going to take a about
state is going to positively
impact the vacancy rates we have
here in almost every state
government agency Mr president
and I do believe it that's
I do
I move that Senate bill one
twenty force twice amended do
now pass and pass is consent of
the Senate that the record show
We are voting.
Senator request for a call.
The clerk to call the roll
Campos Senator Campos votes yes
interest about this.
Senator Vontaze votes yes
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
both CS Center do heck Center do
Senator Griggs votes yes Center
Hamlin.
Senator Hamblen both snow Center
Hemphill Senator Hemphill votes
no center Hickey.
Center meal Senator me of votes
yes center Kernan center Kernan
both CS Center Lopes's Center
Lopez votes no center my Estes
Center more snow snow Center
then yes.
Centamin test passes Senator
Neville.
Senator Neville both CS Center
o'neill Center o'neill votes no
Center pandemic about snow
Center Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle passes Senator po
Center pope both snow Center
centricity elephas no Senator
deal Lopez both snow Center
share.
Yeah Center share both CS
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn passes Senator
Stewart.
Senator about snow Center Thoman
noted my my vote Senator Tallman
both snow Center worth.
Centerman yes both CS Center
pearl yes Senator Pirtle both CS
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn both snow Center worth
I.
Of twenty three in the
affirmative nineteen the
negative Senate bill one twenty
four as twice amended has passed
reasons why voted no.
Here at three minutes to explain
your top six reasons Senator
okay are trying talk fast phone
down the road for nine years
when we simply should be doing
something else which is number
four what we should be doing is
increasing the wages and
number I I contacted the NCSL
and just there what other states
do in a similar situation and
they said the.
They have a very targeted
and Minnesota targets health
care workers.
And number six.
It's it's terrible public policy
thank you Mr president that's
all I have center for the.
Thank you Mr president members
of the body.
We're gonna go on the calendar
that Senate bill four ninety two
do now pass and ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the sorry I ask
unanimous consent.
explain the bill thank you Mr
president what this bill does is
it allows the retired educators
to return to work in higher ed
and K. to twelve and returning
Thank you sent me a Senators
very debate incentive a bill for
ninety to anyone wishing to
debate.
Although we're we're just doing
it for a few months.
don't worry it's not forever.
Thirty six months twelve months
Thank you Mr president would
sponsor yield Senator had a more
detailed Mr president I yield.
Thank you Mr president sponsor
back to work during during that
time.
Mister president senator
unanimous consent to have my
expert witness join me that's Mr
Senator may I apologize that you
identify here expert witness us
Mr president I did David
Archuleta of the education
retirement board.
can restate the question please.
Thank you Mr president
we pass this last.
We allowed the.
Mr president center how many
retired teachers did we have
actually take advantage of this
seventy five in this program did
we see a large number of of
individuals.
Senator mail Mister president
senator since that bill just
took effect several months ago
we don't have that number yet
but we're expecting to see our
numbers increase because of
that.
More qualified teachers ideas
into the into the classroom
because we're it's banned in our
our education system is we've
And.
What is present in New center
I'm I'm hopeful that that
there's a lounge or this program
because if we isn't going to do
that.
We're gonna be challenged with
determining and other way to
popular one but I think we need
to look into ways we might be
able to utilize adjunct teachers
in some of these classroom.
very it's very important for I
think for you and and PED to
have those numbers at least for
too critical it's too critical
we've done the things that we
hope will.
Bring people in.
some of that and and I'm I'm
certainly glad to work on the
the add junk teacher
opportunity if that if that
something the body or others are
think I need to sponsor to yield
this bill I think is very
different than the last one the
majority of teachers and
educators to retire retire out
of the teaching ranks and would
be going in back into the
and so I think this is very
different than the prior one
because teachers retire as
teachers not as administrators
in the majority of the time so
I'm very much in support of this
Send me a detailed I yield.
Senator Brandt just for that one
of the other sponsor.
is been since we put into place
how many teachers have actually
come back.
To work Mister president senator
that number seventy five.
classroom but we don't have a
whole lot of shortage anymore do
we orders are shortage like
right now.
Sentiment Mr president we're
we don't have enough to fill
every position with them the
public schools that I represent
in Escalante agency of Houston
Espanola valley high school.
on this where it's going to end
at some point in the future
we're going to come back and re
look at it.
You Mr president Senator no.
Mr president I move that Senate
bill four ninety two do now pass
and ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
Senator smitteez voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
By a vote of thirty four in the
formative six the name is Senate
bill four ninety two has duly
suspend the record show all
action replacing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill seventeen on
final passage have been taken
it's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
for dental plans that will help
patients understand their
coverage and receive the care
that they need it's a bill that
was brought initially by the
dental associate was brought by
requirements that will help
patients understand their
coverage it's got a section on
assignment of benefits allowing
patients to designate their
Dennis to submit claims and
denial to create a time limit
for companies to reclaim
mistaken payments and finally
it's got a virtual credit card
requirement that would require
companies to provide fee free
build us thank you senator
Senator as we're debating Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill seventeen and I
yield to senator Morris he was
present was senator Wirth you'll
Senator Wirth to yield Mister
Senator Wirth Mr president for
those of us who've been around
here a while.
This bill has nothing to do with
that but I appreciate the
question Senator Moores this
program glad you could make up
with your dentist for that
many of you know that don't also
shares responsible for the
largest terrible event in the
state every year of course but
this university wasn't available
during the COVID but session so
little bit so Mister president
students standing strong support
of this despite its lacking in
Melbourne Malcolm separator
provisions thank you thank you
senator Morris we do have for
Senator Wirth yield Mister
president do Senator Mr
president we talked about a no
fee for using a credit card that
I did I catch that properly Mr
president.
Mr president Mr president
Senator you did.
on how much how much you have
but it could be three percent of
of the bill so if you're paying
a hundred dollars just three
more for the credit card so if
to bring in an expert witness
Tom such Chris mom who is the
executive director the dental
association so we get the answer
correct I don't want to take a
test out of let's get it right
Senator Wirth Ginny the question
process the credit card so
everywhere whatever credit card
use with the usage by
guests or new teeth it's going
to be a charge for that.
So who is that that's going to
pay for that credit card fee so
Mister president
I got the question and if it's
on page six line eight
subparagraph B. here's the key
restrictions on a provider
regarding acceptable methods of
payment including designated
credit card payments is the only
acceptable form of payment so
what's happening Mr president
like a credit card being used
and you're right the fees would
be the same the same deal so you
pay the fee this now states that
earlier and now I understand
thank you Mr president thanks
and any further debate on the
bill.
Si no further debate senator
record show the rules been
called in all those present
voting the affirmative except
those voting on negative by show
of hands Senator is here suits
please we're voting.
I of forty in the affirmative
zero on the negative Senate
Judiciary Committee sub two
percent of all seventeen has
that Senate Judiciary Committee
subs two percent a bill for
twenty eight and I yield to
senator Sir mantas thank you Mr
president as president ask
unanimous consent the Senate the
or substitution hearing
objections Senator want us to
explain the bill the Suazo
present agency present this
committee substitute updates the
unfair trade practices act in
New Mexico to specifically
limitations and restrictions on
when a lawsuit can be brought
against a manufacturer
distributor of a gun but within
those exceptions there is an
allowance for violation of a
penalties which have been
modified since the nineteen
fifties to present all stand for
questions thank you senator
debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute percent of
Just help me understand Mr
president senator unfair trade
practices I'm not familiar with
all the details what types of
things besides firearms and and
those things would be.
practices act it prohibits it
precludes a number of things
that are regarded to be
deceptive or unfair trade
practices the act includes a an
that there are countless
examples of the laws I
understand at the history and
it's a long standing statute of
my my understanding anecdotally
is that it was originally
we're earliest examples it was
intended to be captured by this
act.
Senator Neville thank you Mr
president the and senator if I
might.
of does this change in the the
fees and fines that would be
directed toward auto sales for
example Senator want us no
Senator so the answers that
question is yes it does in the
guns and that that's accurate
but let's let's be more clear it
would do so only in the case of
a knowing violation of the words
the manufactured sure would have
practice and then what it does
this would also update some of
the of of fines and penalties
that have been should have not
been changed since the as I said
earlier but we believe nineteen
other retail type things.
Senator Hernandez Senator and
yes potentially yes in other
words if you look at the section
seven of the bill this has the
the private remedies again these
higher penalty for cases where
there's a deliberate deliberate
knowing of violation and then as
you point out in the third
category here for the those
of very large increases maybe
they're appropriate I don't
don't know I don't I'm not
familiar with act House supplied
but the very very large
time I buy fish and stuff
whatever but they just a lot of
guns.
Are these fines and so forth
gonna potentially.
Put them in a position where
depend on what the assets
available to that business would
be as to what would put them or
not put them out of business but
but I would say submit to you
that the only way they would see
a sizeable increase or penalty
is intended to capture is very
directly a machine gun or
automatic automatic weapons and
so federal law prohibits and
automatic or that allow for
modification of a fire arm to
become automatic and so to use
your the business that you're
Thank you Mr president senator
I think it's that shop has a
fifty caliber of great big gone
up on the shelf I think it's a
shop which is it's not illegal
This presents the issue here
again is knowing a knowing
violation of federal law so
you're right it's not unlawful
to own a machine gun although it
is unlawful as I understand how
then are no longer lawful to be
manufactured there there those
machine guns that are in
existence automatic weapons can
still be bought and sold so
there's nothing unlawful about
online sales so in this act
you'll see new definitions for
seller third party marketing and
and things of that kind
electronic sales.
Senator Neville thank you Mr
this bill in the slaughter read
that somewhere how does this
change or what is change their
relatives of that particular
action.
Senator so much for the center
of sections of that law a
pullout apply to actions taken
by the Attorney General on
behalf of the state but there
are also sections that apply to
private right of action so use
sold you the car so that would
be your private right of action
we're not changing that and I
was we're not we're not changing
or creating a new private right
of action the does not already
levels I'll note that the the
nineteen fifty three levels a
hundred dollars per violation
and I would submit to you that
that's not much of a deterrent
no that's the goal of the of
would suffer as a hundred
dollars I think you would
probably I would hope you would
agree that that's not very much
of a deterrent.
friends gunshot.
Mr.
Senator I thank you Mr president
sorry about that so the the
example you gave of a bump stock
debate about what constitutes a
bump stock or not because that
example I'm sorry but we but you
and I would agree there there's
a lot of disagreement about what
a bump stock means and there are
today that was fascinated by the
modified a Glock pistol very
common firearm probably carried
by many the law enforcement
of thirty rounds so thirty plus
round magazine on a clock and
was fired in less than one
second so imagine that imagine
thirty plus rounds in in
But in the in my example Mister
president I'm just trying to
find out if we're going to treat
the chart here that's cheating
me or the our agency
representing me something to
make the same as we are of the
that there is a larger statutory
potential penalty on a gun
manufacturer distributor when
they knowingly misrepresent
something in of federal law that
should be a very significant
fine and penalty on that in this
bill has that.
Mr president I understand you're
saying I'm just I'm and I'm not
pulling examples that are as
extreme on a car as they are
One act I want to make sure that
were being fair there of foreign
leading or what I'm coming up to
is you know there's a lot of
things in New York state or they
Glock company that was sued
Glock and I did want to I want
to make sure we were trying to
do an end run or some tricky
maneuver to essentially put in
some of the people that are
calling me and sending me notes
that we're not doing in and
around and trying to do
something that's comparable to
that bill there to to that law
that was found to be
fact pattern you just describe
Center I would agree with that
kind of a law would never pass
constitutional muster in other
if there is a federal law the P.
L. C. A. A. the protection I've
of firearms from precisely the
scenario you just came in other
words a gun is used to commit a
crime somebody's injured
somebody's kids and that the
federal law protects the
exception is the federal law
does not immunize a manufacturer
or distributor of firearms when
there is a knowing of
We're Senator
Silvis followed by Senator share
than Senator Brandt Senator
Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I stand
in strong support of this bill I
the widespread effect we want
but I believe that this bill
will save lives most
manufacturers I mean most
distributors I'm sorry most
distributors comply with federal
support thank you thank you
center city office.
Senator share.
Senator sure not in the.
Chamber I yield to Senator
This presents are Ingle you used
to have a that the failed
engine.
happened to you with your
firearms license if you had
misrepresented the law when you
sold someone a fire or would not
substantial fine and possibly a
felony charge depending on what
happened to that for our.
I did have one it was us are
sold through a pistol to a
And I told him no I sold it to
an had still had the paperwork
but other than that but it
anytime you had a violation
there it was certainly something
that to you had to reckon with
attention to.
Senator Representative presence
in Ringle thank you I I knew I I
I thought I have remember the
you told me that see I was
paying attention and the I
thirty years so I appreciate you
answering that else male this
presents in Rushville have the
records to and I'm I am bound
for those rest of my life.
Senator Ingle Senator Brandt you
still have the for almost
Senator want to steal yes are
you Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president center I I guess I'm
trying to figure out why we need
to do this when.
doing what you're suggesting a
of of hell would do Senator
Hernandez.
Mr presence in you know I I
don't know that I don't know
whether you can get more trouble
or not what you're describing I
position to police our own state
and not rely entirely on the
federal government and Senator
you've heard me say this I think
many times I think the bodies
heard me say many times I'm a
gun owner and I think it's
lead in a responsible gun
ownership and ensuring that
people that are not responsible
and not acting in accordance
with federal law are not the
people that we deal with so for
Mexico the ones we don't want to
have selling firearms are the
people that you can go online
and by modifying devices or by
pap rattus or assessors to guns
I understand your gun owner and
I appreciate that
you know maybe one of these days
we get together and compare you
know what we have and you know I
has everything to do with
selling the firearms I mean
they're not talking about you
and me we're not going to get
in trouble for this in less we
that are is this applying to you
and me.
Senator artist agency presidents
the this is unfair and deceptive
trade practices so this doesn't
as you pointed out really relate
discussion and have a meaningful
intelligent discussion with that
knowledge and experience on what
we should be doing to assure gun
safety in New Mexico Senator
Brandt.
as well what will happen with
their liability insurance of
this was to go into effect.
Senate Senator Hernandez mistras
we've heard in a the two
committees where I've present
is that sense some of those
early hearing suggested they
could not obtain insurance that
they've a change that and and
indicated they can get insurance
and like not to get ourselves
the session and the we we would
really have to get into a long
discussion of what kind of
insurance we're talking about
so businesses of such as a
all have that perhaps and they
may have comprehensive liability
insurance emit property
insurance if we have any number
of different insurances are I'm
not I'm not aware of any
insurance that would assure
somebody who knowingly violates
the law or somebody commits a
crime and then and then tenders
that for insurance coverage I I
I've got to believe any
insurance coverage policy is
three hundred dollars per
violation and this increases it
to two hundred fifty thousand
that's what I've.
received
Senator about this was present
Senator you you think refer to
punitive damages so the the act
does not identify the damage is
referred to as punitive damages
damages and I think you're the
second part your question was
whether this with the this
changes that in some way and
you're right it does increase
can be actual damages in some
cases or in other cases can be
three times the actual damages
or can then be this prescribes
all I can tell you there Senator
is that that those numbers have
not been changed since nineteen
fifty three.
Senator Brandt so Mister
president Senator we're not
raising.
bill which would prescribe a two
and a fifty thousand dollar
penalty for a knowing violation
of state or federal law in
connection with the Saylor
market so the the we would that
we would have to prove that the
people that have appeared in our
committees and spoke on the bill
people that own retail shops
people that you and I may buy
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president center at you know
I've I've never actually bought
the gun from an individual
always brought from a shop and I
don't think any of those shops
would violated the law.
not following those laws so I'm
not sure why we need to do this
when it's already something
that's covered.
I don't think it's going to
the law than the and and the as
I continue to look at this bill.
Thank you center Brandt we are
on debate percentages sherry
Committee sub surface Senate
Mr president I'm gonna start on
page two were talks about
destructive device it means.
any explosive incendiary poison
gas poison gas pretty
that will or that may be readily
converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive or
other propellant.
some new weapons here distracted
by I will tell you that that
definition comes right out of
federal law so we've cut pasted
that and you'll note also that
and then you'll see that a
weapon that's designed a
redesign of for the other uses
such as signaling pyrotechnic
include any advice that is
either that is neither designed
nor redesigned.
For use as a weapon or any
device although originally
designed for use as a weapon
redesigned for signaling
paintball guns paintball gun.
It expels a projectile.
And I don't think that the.
About a potato gun there's
another part in here that says
if it's larger than a one inch
diameter barrel have you ever
made a potato gun Mister
president.
They're pretty cool.
You put some kind of propellant
in the inside like WD forty some
like that hit with a matching
bow which is paid out the really
And a paintball gun expel a
projectile by the action of an
explosive or other propellant
will a paintball gun is in other
propellant potato gun is an
explosion.
Because I gave my friend a
potato gun because they're cool.
So Mister president are you as a
describing a potato gun I think
I'm told it's illegal under
federal law the fact that you've
now admitted having made one and
use one I think with exposure to
Mr president I wish I knew very
good lawyer to send.
Senator.
Mr president let me get Page ten
confused by this where we using
this particular section of law.
When what we've eliminated is
bakery rack which means a metal
fact creature a dairy eggs or
dairy case which means plastic
receptacle that holds sixteen
point or more of beverage
Senator about us I'm is present
as well as senator regrettably
here we're looking at the wrong
version of the bill you're
looking at an earlier version
the bill where some of that
language was struck we
ultimately made the decision not
would put the stealing of
shopping carts in milk crates
and such into the category of
unfair and deceptive trade trade
practice I don't know who did it
I don't know why and when an
that struck through but the the
proper version the bill should
be the forty six point six
version in the footer and we
alternately just decided leave
all that alone there are all
are we are attacking some other
issues but I'll just tell you
generally for example if you
look throughout the existing
acting you'll see the changes
we're making refers to the
agenda Attorney General
unfair trade practices act we've
done other things we're trying
to update the act in addition to
just.
Dealing with the the goal here
which is the knowing
To address firearms that would
make sense to me Mr president if
the unfair portion of this was.
firearm to did not do that if if
the action of it did not happen
properly or the whatever the
stock fell off
in they knew they were selling
To the higher if I buy a car in
its and lemon then we get to sue
if I buy a bakery rack and it
doesn't function right that's
unfair.
Mr president you're right this
is not intended to address a
defective product so do use your
example that this bill is not to
give you a remedy from buying
and bring you to the same place
I'm at if you look at the
section three of the bill we
deal with definitions I think
it's a limitation directing you
correctly.
What the language that we're
adding is on page seven of the
current version the bill all
trying to the sections you can
maybe find it on your is it
Under the definitions existing
statute defines what is an
unfair or deceptive trade
practices then as I said there's
a long list of examples of
enumerated examples of what may
as legal to purchase under the
laws of New Mexico United States
when the goods or services are
not legal to purchase under the
laws of New Mexico or United
States so Senator you know the
is selling online modifications
in assessors contra federal law
this bill is intended to address
that conduct people that are
knowingly representing a
misrepresenting things contrary
practice.
Senator okay so.
I think related to that now
O. okay section section eight.
No no section six I'm sorry
section six.
A yes Mr president you'll find
that on page fourteen of the
point six version page fourteen.
Mr president as I try to figure
out who's where here.
It may or may not be this spot
but.
regrettably no we're not center
at I believe you refer to
section six section six modifies
statutory section fifty seven
dash twelve dash nine which
discuss the changes to the
existing act but section six
should be a heading related to
settlements.
and I will read it and then you
can tell me if I'm if I'm in the
right spot or not.
So Mister president in any
action brought pursuant to the
tax information that may assist
in identifying the third party
seller any email addresses phone
numbers and or copy of the
government issued identification
that the third party seller
party seller if I'm buying
something in my I'm the buyer.
Who's the third party seller.
And why do they need all that
if I can find out where you're
at unless you can directly but I
believe it's here looking and
you're gonna be looking at.
I think the private remedies
section.
that relates online marketplace
seller
the concern here is that you
Senator I others probably buy
something from time to time
directly another exam is on may
send you the good that you
purchase for they may
effectively broker the sale
through a third party what what
oftentimes happens is when
the ultimate seller so the goal
of this legislation if you look
at the preceding section seven
subsection on relates to the
failure or refusal to provide
information about who the
subsection G..
This relates to an online
marketplace that offers for sale
a firearm or destructive device
for a part or accessory which
would violate the look at that
our turn on the prohibition of
violating state federal law that
was the goal here is to go after
people that are selling guns and
easy to hide behind a website or
a fictitious name or no address
or an unknown location so the
goal of this language is to
require that anyone selling such
this straight my mind if I'm
buying something that is.
That I believe is legal.
The seller has to provide me all
action brought for these unfair
trade practices in other words
in such case yeah you're you're
gonna need to know who it was
that sell sold to that product
and as I said in the times we
So I is the buyer.
Thinking I'm doing something
legal I'm by no which it.
Have I done something unfair to
somebody else or have they done
an unfair to me.
It could it could be the latter
but that would depend so for
example you've done nothing
in your example did the person
selling you that device do
something wrong if they
knowingly did so in other words
if they Representative to you
that's that something was legal
Thank you Mr president
so it was mentioning here that
we have the private right of
action for most things of.
I do understand that if if I buy
something anything that's not of
that is not as it was
represented to me that I can
then take action against and
private private things.
This bill that is not directed
at the buyer of anything.
Whether it's a car or a bakery
Okay so Mister president.
So the seller now is Senator
Brandt's work Senator Neville so
so I bought that which it.
The seller of the way to the top
of the page it was legal I
thought the which was legal can
another third party coming to go
So Mister presence enter I don't
want to sound snarky but the
answer your question is yes
somebody can sue anybody can sue
it costs about a hundred twenty
There's no third party
involvement here it's only if I
I is the buyer eventually figure
out that this was.
conceivably you could if you
purchase something and you later
learned that the seller
knowingly misrepresented to you
then yes you could conceivably
bring a right of action under
able to prove that but it's it's
not gonna be easy.
Okay so Mister president.
What is this do that if.
Senator want to how do I know
what what's the what's the
result of this I mean how do we.
Where is the justice.
firearms from or the people here
in Santa Fe well going to the
gun shop and talk with the some
of the folks there from time to
time which I do
be legal when in reality what
they're doing is they're
converting semi automatic
weapons to automatic weapons
that's really what this all
comes down to there are there
are those there's a quite a
to automatic weapons and and
that defies the letter the word
and the spirit of federal law U.
S. for justice the federal
lawsuits we're not going to
manufacture anymore machine guns
Senator do you wish to yield to
Senator Ingle.
Mr president absolutely.
Senator Ingle.
anything but a semi automatic
rifle or pistol or shotgun and
that license that you have.
Of the first one I bought cost
of ATF agencies basically live
with you I have a cousin that
has one and he is checked at
least two or three times yearly
on what he is doing with his
You have things that you have to
fill that out fill out this
things where you're telling the
truth for I can show you a
firearm.
truth unless I knew something
different if I know something
different I can't sell it to you
but if I do I don't then I can
sell it to you and it's it's a
than you did it he didn't.
Senator Senator you Mr president
I understand I'm just trying to
figure out who's.
and I understand the bakery rack
if I'm buying a bakery rack and
it doesn't performance then
that's unfair.
I understand that if I buy a car
unfair it appears to me what
we're doing is we're trying to
say a criminal who's doing
criminal action for criminal
purposes is also unfair.
Senator that I heard wants to
talk about duplicative law and
we needed it and and my missing
something again center Mr
president Senator about us.
the chair of maybe Judiciary
Committee.
So there's about this I'm not
sure the years of treated me
with any greater wisdom Center
but you know to your to your
The federal government Congress
has said we do not want to make
any more machine guns and so the
machine guns that are available
are those that are in the market
their legal and they're very
and convert it from a semi
automatic a lawful economic that
sold by Senator Ingle or by
Senator novella the shop for the
people they do business with
weapons but they're competing
with people who are selling
automatic weapons by modify it
but by modifications which is
and devices that allow me to
which I'm looking at right now
be happy to give you the website
probably announce it right here
in public if it wouldn't get me
student probably wouldn't bother
me all that much first time I've
been sued but but I can give you
respectable people in New Mexico
and convert these to automatic
weapons.
That's what this bill is
intended to attack they should
be able to do that if we if we
we are banning automatic weapons
Mr president but what third.
What they're doing is already
illegal is it not misprint.
gets me back to the same same
thing that we're now calling.
Someone who's intentionally
breaking the law for
intentionally.
we need a law to tell somebody
that's doing something illegal
that it's also unfair to do
something that's illegal.
because it's already illegal can
you dot yes you buy anything
online.
Hey.
something that's illegal it's
also unfair because it's still
illegal.
So.
That's the that gets to the root
of where I'm I'm going the
I know what I'm buying their.
If I if I were to go to that
website.
I know what it is.
It would be unfair for didn't
The way it was supposed to.
It's illegal to use it already.
So that's that's why I'm.
really what a seller does to a
buyer.
And in this case we're going
after seller that's already
doing something illegal.
So.
private right of action involved
in this at all.
Because I'm probably not going
to be able to go after the guy
in China.
So so again we've got a a law
that's unenforceable debts
duplicative of a law that we're
a half and that's that's what
responsible looks like
absolutely.
We ought to have.
We also need to do the right
thing with firearms.
There's certainly lots of things
that.
That were common in the past
Today there are problem because
somebody's going to break into
your car and thank you.
Okay I don't think that it's
necessarily a problem to have
it.
but that's the but that's not
unfair.
That's something different.
What they are where you use when
you don't use them.
Where you store them how you
carry them.
How to clean it how to load and
Well letters to my to my
grandmother from the time he
left high school until I was
born I read those letters
recently at least those that
didn't fall apart.
hold this other guy Dillon read
newsletters.
But if he traveled around
various places including around
the world.
through U. S. mail from Roswell
New Mexico to Bangkok Thailand
and nobody cared.
Later just before he got married
the the the number for it.
He said but you can only send
fifty rounds because Washington
DC has some crazy gun control
laws.
And then a look today.
We're half of the nation.
and I understand that we have to
we have to do the right thing
with farms absolutely.
Absolutely.
If you want to ride a
motorcycle.
You don't do it by passing a law
it you know mandating training
wheels how you get on the
safety equipment like a helmet
all in New Mexico we don't have
a law for that.
But but that's how you you
figure out how things are as you
train with them.
The reality is you get on you
get on the interstate you're
going.
Seventy five miles an hour which
we manage to do it two people
get killed absolutely.
But most of us manage to do it
most of the time.
And I think that we're we're
looking at the wrong thing here
But I also think that we get
ourselves all wound up over
firearms where we don't get
ourselves all wound up over
motorcycles.
defined in here but certainly
you get hit by one of my you
still think the destructive
economic.
So.
So there's two things that I
that's duplicative.
The other thing is this.
This I hate to use the word
hatred but there's another
firearms and what we ought to do
is take people to the range they
understand firearms they can be
a huge safety device.
Thank you with the sponsor yield
Senator about the state of you.
Senator yes.
The presence Center have you
received anything of the mail
from a lan cables this presents
are Senator about us Mr
mean all candor don't look too
carefully at all all of the
names of the million I try to
read the content but I I don't
recognize the name Senator goes
thank you Mr president center if
you don't mind Mr president
international the fifth largest
brokerage firm in the US largest
in New Mexico have forty five
years experience handling
insurance for businesses
He goes on to say that it was
sent
Senate bill four twenty eight in
related to date is March first
twenty twenty three.
property damage and personal
injury defined in insurance
contract is labeled or slander
he says I reviewed Senate bill
for twenty eight and have
general liability loss hence any
and all claims involving unfair
trade practices would be denied.
is his opinion individually I do
not speak nor am I.
Authorize speak on behalf of in
nationals insurance services my
opinion is based upon my own
center my question to that is if
we've had someone and I know
agency presence there you're a
very good attorney you've looked
into a lot of my bills and
does it bother you Mr president
center you have you had any
discussions of what it will do
to the lawful gun owners because
understand the question very
well and I think in address
identically so Senator I've been
practicing law for thirty years
in in all the cases I do whether
they're tracking cases medical
malpractice personal injury
debate and litigate in in all
cases.
The email the just read
indicates that this individual
with hub.
Is of the opinion that a claim
would not be covered so we have
an existing law Sanford trade
practices act and what he's
saying is that no claim brought
pursuant to that act would be
of all tell you most insurance
companies start with the of the
the beginning spot B. B. they
always begin with the
position that it's in on cover
insurance companies are just not
a covered loss and you know I'm
shouldn't paint them all with a
broad brush there's various
different types of coverage and
agents but but it's not
surprising to me that they're
saying this would not be a
any payment on coverage based on
a statutory violation they are
they almost always include that
language and they almost always
include language that precludes
the face of that's an
intentional criminal act and so
the these exclusions are put
that years governor COVID and
the fact that this coverage
Senator goes Mr president center
I appreciate that yes these
pieces stood out is that they
would have to self insurance
these claims will go on to my
it's easy to understand that
it's online marketplace whether
directly or indirectly by third
party sellers and to me that
course got to put in context so
if you look at the preceding
section.
You'll see hello again the
enumerated list of examples that
me take a moment as an aside to
the debate from Senator share
earlier he was very focused on
the unfair unfair unfair part of
the statute but the the the
something to be legal and it's
not legal that's deceptive is
that unconscionable well the
word icons was gonna be subject
to send interpretation but the
language that you're looking at
nine and and what we have
already defined in the existing
statute is.
An unconscionable trade practice
means an actor practice in
connection with the sale lease
online online marketplace
whether directly or indirectly
by third parties are that's the
language that you're referring
to Senator and.
As we've talked about previously
the the goal here is to capture
capture as an unconscionable
practice the offering for sale
by an online market market place
if I go online to buy these that
should be on on constant
unconscionable trade practice.
Senator yes Mr president center
thank you for that and that
actually that's were I was going
with this so in the way I look
standalone shops in Albuquerque
New I think throughout the state
of and I understand Mr president
center the you had conversations
for through I I Mr president
center when I buy from them it's
usually something there Stewart
I have purchased a specialty
president center I don't know
that they typically do this
online information our sales so
Mister presents and I'm
wondering what they told you on
would like to have that
opportunity with them given the
volume of work we have here
that's not always possible but I
I didn't ask any of them in the
course of the discussion debate
and it did not come up whether
ask any of them whether they
have an online market place so I
I I don't know how to answer
questions and I I don't know
which of them to do or do not.
president center is my my last
question has to do with the
pain of course about violations
which started out at three
to your proposed amount this
presents center.
Sir Senator so Mister president
Senator you're looking at
section six of the bill this
could relates to private
remedies which we've discussed
essentially a specified damage
would be under the existing law
right now in the case of an
unfair deceptive trade practice
hundred dollars and then there's
another category where the
violation is willful on unfair
or deceptive trade practices
when you're doing it
deliberately you could show they
did a lot of deliberately and in
engaging in unfair and deceptive
trade practices.
If you're not knowingly engage
in unfair deceptive on
concentrate prices you have
nothing to fear by this law.
seems to be very much on the two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
statutory penalty and and
realize that that if you look at
the preceding language right
Have to knowingly have engaged
in a violation of state or
federal on Senator made the
point early what we already got
lost to criminalize that is
right it is a crime.
call is intended to maybe take a
different tack which is to make
it an economic hardship or
penalty for anybody to engage in
place in New Mexico that that
should be a good thing and and
because as a gun owner
I like to believe that I'm gonna
follow federal law.
Senator Gallegos thank you for
that Mr president center a I
just want to make just a brief
statement as I closed so
Senator Lopez and I asked her to
staff and safety of this bill
was safety of elected officials
never received a hearing but now
I look at this non I was
gun dealers or in the room this
presents center and I feel
important because their option
if this according to their
and all of yield with that thank
you Mr president.
Thank you Sir Ganga saying no
further debate Senator Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciated the debate I think
were least answer
of my my concern one of them is
is really in section seven
that's a private remedies that
someone the really screams out
to me Mr president
be some damage to a person but
here on the bottom of page
fifteen we broadly excuse expand
the parties that can file suit
damaged under the unfair
deceptive trade practices by
impossible trade practices
they're the ones that really
could bring the lawsuit now you
is what it could be in that
section and and what makes a
fishing expedition attractive I
tell you what makes a truck
tractor Mr president section B.
makes it attractive section be
ten thousand dollars or adding
another penalty of two hundred
fifty thousand dollars these are
these are huge civil remedies
that were not in law before so
we have is we brought in the
suits so the rest of this bill
that I've read it essentially
we're you know we say it all the
time especially Judiciary
Committee we don't want to just
remedies where some attorneys
and some parties could come and
file suit and gain massive
damages and it's not gonna be
hard to find somebody to sue
aware of it if you know of it if
you think you know of it you can
be a party to this lawsuit
rather than likely damaged by it
damages than what was in this
statue before.
That is a fishing expedition
that is of an attorney's play
know possibly satisfy some group
of people who who will who will
walk away from this thinking
that we're going to control gun
violence by again doing
retailers if you leave read the
language Mr president and yet
knowingly is a component in
there but to again we have
increased our trend our chances
was read by Senator Gallegos you
know.
Even if you're not covered and
it isn't to cover provision
under the insurance policy a
business owner still has to
weigh their risks they still
have to weigh the risk if
knowing and they know I I know
what I know what attorneys do
and what the number one rule in
law school is it's to everybody
and now we're up to two hundred
those items they really you know
we don't need to add in our
statue we want to we want to be
curbing crime in real real ways
an eliminating got gun violence
Baucus Senator for the thank you
Mr president units consented to
Centers one you'll see quite a
Hemphill into the return to the
chamber seeing no objection.
brokers or are small farm stores
especially in our rural
communities that
long the border what happens if
you know they assess the risk
and they decide not to be open
we we should take seriously I
don't know that it's going to do
that but just from some of the
debate I've heard it should be a
concern on everybody's mind that
what we gonna do to the people
that are genuinely trying to do
doing it legally and are
providing a service that's
needed in in rural communities
thank you Mr president thank
Senator Pirtle saying no further
debate Senator want us to close
things to to help me better
understand Senator want this
deal of course thank you Mr
president sponsor on on page on
serves a market in New Mexico
for the Shamar Senator or
similar goods or services at
shall be deemed to the maximum
extent permitted under the
doctrine of interstate
federalism.
To create specific jurisdiction
It's an excellent question
surveys in as no lawyer I
appreciate you asking it so the
goal here is to to assure that
the state of New Mexico can
we were never in New Mexico New
Mexico has no jurisdiction over
us that's that's the way that a
lot of these black market
activities are taking place and
make the are you here today this
does the opposite of that in the
words this is to shut down the
black market this is to shut
down the people that are making
parts and accessories to modify
that language means with that
language means is that if you're
placing an order online you are
and and by placing that order
and shipping a good into New
jurisdiction on that basis.
Thank you Mr president centered
and show Interstate federalism
measurements term vision a term
of art or is that
probably warrants a spending
just a minute more time with
your attic a critical part of
this bill which is that and that
any trade or commerce that
in Denver but we place an online
order for it to be shipped to
your home in Alamogordo
somebody might argue well you
place the purchase in Colorado
and service were purchased in
New Mexico the the the quick
question there would be if
you're you're placing the order
in Denver you with somebody are
you you didn't make that
purchase in New Mexico and
argument is that that is an
agreement to subject yourself to
New Mexico live your shipping a
good into New Mexico and
delivering it here.
Senator Griggs thank you Mr
president center just it it
page sixteen which is I think
somewhere around words center
Baca which was making some of
his point of.
Eighteen twenty one we we we
talk in this way we talk about
that it first of all a person
aware of it I think it was
Senator Baca which was talking
Then we've got a a Trier of
fact.
Finds the party charge with
unfair deceptive trade practices
Mr president Senator is the
answer that is kind of depends
depending on the type of case
elect not to have a jury and
that in that case the judge the
trial judge becomes the Trier of
fact.
Thank you Mr president center I
guess.
certainly take your word for
because I don't do that very
often but at you know it is
just.
And we've we talk about in this
and and and it's not something
that I've seen like I've seen
often or shell in in.
it's kind of challenge to many
of our people are local people
and potentially harm them in
ways you can't you can actually
these new laws with the intent
of doing certain things that I
certainly hope that the they do
center Greg just left off I'm
hoping that when we look back on
this law in a year or two.
We're gonna find that this law
actually protected.
they're doing it right they're
following the law they're
complying with the law that they
protect their license they
protect their livelihood they
protect their with their way of
living and they live in our
you know what this bill helps
them because the people that are
selling online and selling
things that are illegal.
And and I'm trusting that on
some reflection they're gonna
realize having modifying semi
automatic weapons automatic
weapons.
Is not ultimately good for their
top top law enforcement officers
in New Mexico are warning
people.
With an increasing number of
guns modified to act as machine
guns.
The story continues online
smaller than a penny the clocks
which has become a growing
concern across the country the
A. T. F. describes the switch as
fully automatic firearm or
machine gun.
This bill is intended to deal
with manufacturers of devices
that are represented by them to
earlier today thank you for that
did a good job of that there's
some massive increase here this
is a lawyer's field day let's be
clear we're to we're taking a
penalty that is now a hundred
Mexico we consider things below
ten thousand are to be small
claims and that seem like a good
place to be and I'll just submit
to the body the most of you all
know most folks know in common
is not some field a and money
making opportunity for most
lawyers that I know certainly
not something that I could ever
or would want to take advantage
of.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill for twenty eight
do now pass.
And ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the records show the
rules been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
has been a request for roll
call.
The clerk to call the roll.
Center Campos Senator Campos
votes yes Senator bunt this
Senator via this votes yes
Senator Diamond.
Gonzales votes yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs both snow Center
Hamlin yes Center Hamlin both CS
Center have pale.
Senator Ivey Soto votes yes
intermedia Center army of both
CS Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan both snow Center
Lopes's.
Senator Moores votes no
centerman yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville both snow Center
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope
Center Popo CS Center Rodriguez.
Yes Senator D. L. Lopez votes
yes center share center share
votes no center Shendo.
Senator Steinborn both CS Center
Stewart Senators Stewart both CS
Center Thoman.
Santo Tom in both CS Center
president we're going to item
number ten on today's calendar
that's going to be Senate health
of public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill four
eighty five and I yield to
substitute for Senate bill forty
five has been completed it is
now subject debate amendment or
substation hearing no objections
Centerville to explain the bill
companies and it would allow
them to do non emergency
transport of Medicaid patients
to doctor's appointments and
that kind of thing nothing
so there should be no issues
with that we have some serious
issues around the state in some
communities and this would allow
us to provide some transport for
percent of the forty five anyone
wishing to debate.
I see no debate senator bill to
close on the bill thank you Mr
president Mr president I move
that Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senators tier seats please we're
voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Center my SS voting no.
By a vote of thirty the
affirmative two in the negative
Senate health of public affairs
committee substance percent of
the forty five has duly passed
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one thirteen.
Actually it's a committee seven.
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection senator
rand texting the bill.
ladies and gentleman this bill
changes a couple of things we've
crime which is swatting.
So you all remember a couple
weeks ago where several of our
schools in our state
scared a heck of a lot of people
that didn't only happen in New
Mexico happen all around the
country that's swatting
swatting is knowingly making a
immediate response from law
enforcement other first
responders swatting hasn't just
been sitting in schools it's
also cost the life of some of
our citizens where we have
police have responded broken
down the door and shut the
person who's trying to defend
their home.
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this swatting is a known issue
that is becoming more more
popular with with the youth to
police use the force that they
think is necessary and it
results in an innocent person
being harmed a lot of times some
of the time it doesn't but I
think if you get a chance
appreciate the the Senator
bringing this thank you.
Thank you Senator Pirtle any
further debate.
Si no further debate center
Senate the records show the
rules when called in all present
voting in the affirmative except
those working in the negative by
show of hands centers we're
voting all senators tier seats.
You want to.
of the Senate I appreciate your
support on this important issue
thank you only have to Senate
majority floor leader rate or to
take us to the next order of
business thank you Mr president
Ms consent we go about our
has passed house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five oh five as
amended by the house without
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our business
committee reports and that order
of business committee reports Mr
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do passed
respectfully submitted senator
George we know us chairman.
Senator Rodriguez.
Representative the Senate at the
rec the right to be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect that they were
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three fifty seven
do pass respectfully submitted
senator George we also chairman
those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted as journal reflect their
acted upon individually.
Senate senator Peter Wirth take
us to the next order of business
House taxation taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five oh five and act
relating to capital expenditures
appropriation of severance tax
bond proceeds for certain
projects previously authorized
by law and to certain funds as
provided by sections seven dash
eight being laws two thousand
three chapter one thirty four
section one and lost two
thousand ten chapter ten section
dash twenty seven point two NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
laws two thousand one chapter
three thirty eight section two
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill five oh five.
House taxation revenue committee
substitute.
substitute for House Bill five
oh five.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our business
tomorrow will come into the
floor at two o'clock again
Senate finance is going to meet
in the morning and I visited
with.
about the budget issue in the
plan is to bring the budget down
to the floor.
He later tomorrow afternoon and
Center Braniff if I got anything
wrong on that just want to
to be a couple small tweaks
tomorrow morning but just if
anyone would like to see a copy
of the budget as it passed
please let us know and we can
get that the members Senator
via Senator Shendo followed by
Senator pope then Senator Duhigg
centers of the was president you
Senator X. business
transportation committee will
larger merely following please
get in there soon as possible so
we can get it here thank you Mr
president you Senator pope
Senator.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate rules committee will meet
tomorrow at eleven AM in room
Representative yes I do.
suppressor provides awesome food
being taken in there was
wondering what's for dinner I
might want to your reserves you
know re register for about ten
minutes.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Sir appreciate that
If anyone is bored tonight
I'm going back to Rio Rancho
tonight to all go over to my
house will do just that down
But it's it's pretty short so
and and I did promise that as
long as all the rules are
followed I won't make the reader
read that so.
things I've been looking for in
their and then
I haven't really had a chance to
talk to senator Morris yet.
About coccus.
Moores I'm gonna jump in his
will house I usually don't do
that but after talking to
senator Wirth we're going to
need on the floor for a little
while do a few bills that we're
gonna break when we that was so
Senator about this Senator Pinto
thank you thank you Mr president
M. Senator Indian rural culture
affairs will meet at call of the
chair to be determined a place
president would it's good
chairman from McKinley County
yield.
Senator Pinto do you yield the
been dealing with some issues up
stairs and so back.
Senator Moores agency present
when you present the budget
tomorrow not withstanding any
other language in there how many
Our agency president so Senator
as any other words that mean not
withstanding going to be in that
budget other clauses phrases
conjunction junction is that
might and be in there.
that and we want to make sure
that the budget is correct and
right we know that's been an
issue of for people to do stuff
with not withstanding and and we
don't think that's right so
really appreciate your efforts
over the last number of years to
make sure we and that practice
thank you thank you center more
center to do here.
Thank you Mr president I just
don't show up an hour early
sleep at.
A senator Senator about this.
I think this was a mistress and
given the our the caucus plans
the Senate Judiciary Committee
college chair please be aware
that
Is present you know I know I
know what about the budget
tomorrow I'm a big film buff
tomorrow night's Academy Awards
people in this chamber you all
are beautiful lovely people any
any could have known that when
he said it and it's a privilege
to share the evening with all of
sitting on my clocks ahead to
spring forward in in the in the
night so thank you for Senator
for thinking of us thank you
senator want to send them just
this.
Moore scandal takes the title
and then in the five A. Hobbs
Hobbs defeated our website
brother in Hobbs defeated
volcano list of fifty two forty
forty nine but earlier in the
morning Mr president Pecos
defeated ATC fifty to forty nine
and I pickles be both say Mike's
and Roberson earlier in the year
thirty nine and then in an hour
or so of all cannabis to place
Sandia for the boys five A.
title thank you Mr president
thank you for the update.
stuff on house bill two we got a
quite a few bills there so if
you see the list is posted on
the door it's electronic make
sure you're there on time or
will roll right through them
Thank you for having us.
I see no further announcements.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you members
Senate stand in recess until two
o'clock tomorrow afternoon.
Seeing no objection the Senate
to stand in recess until two PM
tomorrow.
