Senator.
Senator Soto,
OK.
our agenda today we just have
the audience first and then
we'll go around to our staff and
our senators, so, um. Yes.
sir and thank you all around
here.
Good morning, everyone, yeah.
A Benidor
But he has
Us with our uh within this
committee, uh, my name is Anita
Sinnogenni, secretary for this
committee, and I appreciate the
opportunity to do this. I'll be
senator Pinto senator sole
senator.
Uh, good morning, everyone. Um,
Senator Joshua Sanchez, I
represent this Valencia County
and Socorro County, and it's
always a pleasure to be here on.
This committee I love coming.
Good to see you again, Madam
Chair.
Uh
Which for those of you that
actually speak Navajo and didn't
understand me, I'm Bill Senate
District one. Thank you.
senator from the Losachusetts
area. It's my first time serving
Down in the Las Cruces area,
there aren't a whole lot of
people around, but Fort Sill is
in that area. I'm a pilot. I get
to fly over that area and whichs
and cultures are to our state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's a
thrill and a privilege to be on
this committee. My name is
Antonio Maestas, state senator
from District 26, which is in
Albuquerque west of the river,
hugs the bus up and down the
course corridor. I, uh, my folks
are from Vegas, so, so long time
northern New Mexico family. I um
had the opportunity, Madam
Chair, I think I've mentioned uh
to move to Seattle, Washington
in my twenties and I worked for
an organization called El Centro
de la Raza.
Which was founded by my uncle,
uh, and it was the premier civil
rights organization there in the
Northwest. So I learned about
Native American struggles in in
Northwestern United States.
So I learned about the fishing
rights struggles at Fri Nation,
the muckleho Nation, David's so
happy and all these fantastic
leaders, um, Bernie White Bear,
was it dear dear friend of mine,
Theo's and uh.
So anyway, that was my
introduction to like Native
American struggles. It was
fishing rights. It was fishing
rights because believe it or
not, the um the natives in
Washington or the uh.
Only
Non-agricultural non-nomadic
tribe.
They didn't have to move. They
didn't have to.
They were non-nomadic because
the, the salmon were so
plentiful.
And the attorney general at the
time uh tried ks with nets and
stuff, so that was a struggle.
Uh, as to whether they can fish
traditionally and of course they
were able to finally. But
anyway, so I came back home, I'm
a lawyer by trade. I've been a
lawyer for 26 years.
was in the house for a
For 16 years and we've been in
this committee a handful of
times and it's my 3rd year in
the Senate. So I'm thrilled to
be here and learn more about
what's going on and to learn
from your leadership, Madam
Chair, I appreciate you. Thank
you.
Would you like to introduce
yourself or?
Being with
It what happens.
really exciting.
Yeah, little brothers and that
extent, but
We won't meet Thursday. Got a
lot going on. Tuesday we will
have a full meeting with all the
bills, um, on uh with that.
So
You just go day by day, so I'm
very excited to share once again
this committee glad to see you
back and good to have you here.
are
