And forty three once we get a
couple more members will start
off as a subcommittee I just
wanted to make that announcement
thank you.
HM capital Slevin was three
legislative you can use your
indoor
voice.
This.
And I just got word from one of
the sponsors about the Senate
memorial fifty to the sponsor
has asked me to hold that back.
Is that a Mario fifty two will
also be there.
Yeah.
For for.
Good morning you to tell it like
Slevin double double.
Thank you for joining us today
we're gonna start off as a
subcommittee start off with the
point on the agenda of the rules
that we have within the rules
committee.
I'm gonna give ten minutes for
both the Senate sponsor and the
conferees to present all that go
to members who are here in
support or in opposition and all
do I I need to or in the
committee room for a minute each
and then I'll go on to those run
still I might do one or two
depending on time and we'll do
that both were opposition and
support that we can make things
a little easier and a little
quicker follow because I know
there's a lot of you in here I
want to make sure that I'm
respectful of your time as well
we're gonna start off with the
appointment of Mr David died for
the department of homeland
security and emergency
management is that sponsor
Senator Campos good morning
gentlemen.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee it's great to go
ahead and be here with you this
morning
I'll make my comments very short
and direct and after that of
course that the individual with
the Mr David C. di will make his
his remarks as well Mr chairman
members of the Center rules
subcommittee and of course as we
grow into the full committee
it's a pleasure to be here with
you today I'm going to indicate
a few things when it comes to Mr
di as he has moved forward we
have worked very closely when it
comes to issues dealing directly
with emergency and in that he
has been direct he is been
passionate he has been there
every step of the way as we have
dealt with our wildfires in our
flights in New Mexico not only
in one area but in others along
with that he continues to bring
together a team that addresses
if you will the structural
issues that are continuing to
devastate our state he had a
strong discipline I as a man of
organization is very analytical
very experienced he anticipates
the needs to respond to the
emergencies and he does so very
quickly so that the team as he
brings them together they not
only have clarity and direction
but they also have the
resurgence if you will to
respond and to address the
issues that are before them.
The understands of the threats
to our cyber systems to the
environment and most importantly
to our population so with that
Mister chair members of the
Senate committee Senate rules
committee I present to you Mr
David C. di for appointment and
I hope that is you all consider
this but you keep in mind this
individual not only has the
array of experience but he has
definitely the discipline to
service cabinet secretary of the
homeland security and emergency
department so with that of
Mister chair I present to you
David C. di.
Mr chairman and distinguished
senators my name is David Din√©
and I'm the secretary designate
of emergency the department of
homeland security and emergency
management.
It's quite a long title so all
three the department for your
forties DH SCO.
Thank you for your time today
and all the time we've spent
together getting to know each
other and your guidance through
this my first legislative
session I thank the governor for
her trust and confidence and I'm
incredibly honored to been
appointed last year.
I also think Senator Campos for
sponsoring my confirmation his
mentorship and is tireless
efforts to improve New Mexico.
I want to thank all my co
workers the DHS CM for the
continuous efforts to help all
those in need and our state some
of them are in the room today
and likely watching online.
Thank you team DHS CM and know
that I'm honored to work with
some of the finest people I've
ever known.
I also want to thank all those
who played a part in the
response and recovery last year
the thousands of people from
across the country that came
here to help we're critical to
extinguishing the fires
evacuating those in danger in
saving lives and property.
Finally I want to thank my
family for allowing me to live
the life I have in the life that
I continue to lead.
My parents gave me the greatest
gift in life and I was a good
start.
To this day my mother Joe is my
biggest fan and the source of my
love of life.
My father fortunate passed away
almost twenty five years ago and
he was the man who I wanted to
be when I grew up and I think
about him every day and he's
still one of my guides.
My two adult daughters live in
Florida and I'm so proud of them
and grateful for their support
over their entire lives.
I specifically and individually
thank my wife Kathleen of who is
watching today hopefully she's
my partner in the most complete
sense I know it's a cliche but I
truly would not be here today
without her love and support and
to be happy to share that story
with you another time.
Many my family around the
country washing this hearing
today and I hope I can continue
to make them proud.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you about my fitness
for the position of cabinet
secretary for DHS yes.
I accepted this position after
retiring as a twenty year navy
commander in may of twenty
twenty two during the height of
last year's wildfires.
My focus since that day and
every day since is the safety
and welfare of every person and
their property in the state
providing assistance to those
who need it in the face of
disasters.
It is my solemn vow to leave my
apartment in preparing for
mitigating responding to and
recovering from man made and
natural disasters monitoring and
protecting our state from
security threats and providing
firefighting policy
investigation and oversight to
our local communities.
One question I routinely get is
how did you get here how did
enable officer grew up on the
high seas and up in New Mexico.
And my answer short and it is
this I was not done serving.
I've been steeped in homeland
security for the bulk of my
adult life at the national and
international level.
Additionally I chose to focus on
Emergency Management in the
final seven years of my naval
career and I'm very excited to
be continuing those efforts here
in New Mexico.
While serving in the navy I had
the opportunity to lead the
security fire and emergency
management operations of seven
different naval bases
simultaneously across Europe
Africa and southwest Asia.
In that position we responded
earthquakes volcanic eruptions
civil disturbances terrorist
attacks and floods all
supporting combat operations
into theaters.
Additionally I was the one for
director for the entirety of the
U. S. sixth fleet based in
Naples Italy and in that role I
oversaw the coordination and
rescue and salvage efforts
following the crash of EgyptAir
flight data for the crashed into
the eastern Mediterranean and
may of twenty sixteen.
However I knew that military
Emergency Management.
Was not similar to civilian
Emergency Management.
And I began my journey to
understand another side of the
emergency management profession.
I was fortunate enough to have
been offered an internship with
the office of emergency
management of Santa Fe County.
And I work for four months at
the beginning of twenty twenty
two with an amazing team of
chief Vigil exhaustive Dominguez
that began my education on New
Mexico.
From there I was noticed in my
resume found its way to the
governor's office which led to
my point of last year.
I fell in love with New Mexico
and I'm extremely pleased to
live in Santa Fe and make this
state my home.
The US navy has three core
values at adopted them as my
personal ethos.
These values are honor courage
and commitment.
Under means living a positive
and truthful life and always
conducting myself in the highest
ethical manner.
Courage is doing what is
difficult or frightening.
And doing it for the best
interest of our state and our
country and standing up for what
is right even when it's not the
popular choice.
Finally commitment is my
personal result to get the job
done to stay until the work is
complete to never give up in the
face of adversity.
And these core values describe
me into the anchor the keeps me
focused and keeps me grounded.
Being a new secretary to New
Mexico I realize the trust is
something yet to be earned and I
will strive to earn that trust.
The navy great to be a top
secret clearance for the bulk of
my career and I was recently
granted a top secret clearance
from the U. S. department of
homeland security.
And all clearances are not
directly indicative of a
person's character both the navy
and the department of homeland
security have demonstrated their
trust in me.
Since arriving in DHS CM I've
had three priorities.
Recovering from the fires and
floods of twenty twenty two.
Improving the department's
ability to provide assistance
and improving communication
between the department and our
local emergency managers and
local leaders.
The amazing team and DHS the in
continues the long battle
against the damage we sustained
a twenty twenty two and it will
be a journey of years to fully
recover.
Our ability to effectively
assist those in need was
hampered by high vacancy rate
when I took office but a focused
effort on hiring and retention
has reduced that from forty four
percent to twenty eight percent
in the last nine months.
We continue to trend in the
right direction with seven
additional hires that are in
progress today.
Finally improving the
communication between my
department and locally and has
not been as effective as plant.
There are several reasons for
this but I'm steadfast in my
resolve to improve the
communications and I'll be
working closely with the New
Mexico association of emergency
managers and local leaders.
This engagement will include
media campaigns printed
materials holding listening
sessions and cabinet in the
community events think it's
annually verify communications
between are emergency operations
center and local emergency
managers.
Many of you may remember have
seen this panel last year when
we were there significant need
for information and point of
contact for residents the
updated version of this is in
draft now anticipate getting
this out on the streets this
month in advance of fire season.
I want to close my remarks with
stating my vision for DHS CM in
New Mexico.
My vision is the state is
prepared for natural and man
made disasters and is safe from
action by bad actors.
That's my vision.
The HSD able fulfill this vision
with the diligent and thoughtful
approach to our mission of
coordinating state responses to
disasters and security threats
and monitoring for any threats
to our homeland.
I'm beyond honored to be
addressing you today's the
secretary designate and
regardless of today's outcome I
remain dedicated to serving the
people of New Mexico thank you
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee were available for
questions thank you senator and
thank you Mr died before we go
to questions you did have
organized supporters signed up
in advance to speak on her
behalf before I go into us about
those who support oppose you I'm
gonna ask for Mrs Carlo Walton
the deputy secretary of D. H.
passing them to speak and I'm
gonna give you two but we can
come up to the desk and then
once again the state your date
you can stand behind them and
get the money.
Make sure you state your first
and last name for the.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I am
Carl Walton W. secretary of
department of homeland security
and emergency management what is
tier today is to advocate on
behalf of secretary designate
David di.
As a retired naval officer to
David died personifies the need
for coal need these core values
of honor courage and commitment
he is responsible professional
and his personal behavior is
beyond reproach these values
intertwined with our agencies
guiding values of trust honesty
reliability consistency
efficiency professionalism
storeship and accountability
it's worth noting as he
mentioned earlier that he does
have a circuit clearance which
is critical in his role to lead
the agency.
Secretary does not die was
appointed to the agency this
past summer in the midst of the
wildfires flooding mudflows and
straight line winds events that
took place throughout the state.
He is a master communicator and
has experience you'll leadership
skills.
This communication skills
include transparency he is
empathetic toward communities
needs and he drops in his
audience and builds their trust
under his leadership agency has
reduced the number of audit
findings by sixty three percent
the state fire marshal's office
has distributed approximately
twenty nine million dollars for
fire apparatus equipment
stipends to individual fire
departments and country what
county wide projects throughout
New Mexico would be a mess I
would not speak about his
leadership for the past but
related to the past emergency
operation centers efforts as
well as ongoing recovery
mitigation efforts that our
communities are really from the
weather related disasters his
commitment and dedication to our
communities is fundamental as he
is a strong proponent Senate
bill six which unanimously
passed both chambers and was
just recently signed a good
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham.
Lastly I asked Mr chair and
members of the committee to be
more full of Secretary dis
approach of continually looking
for opportunities to strengthen
our support for communities
under his leadership the agency
is currently reviewing and
revamping its eligibility rules
and requirements to bolster the
equitable process for New Mexico
sub grant recipients to recently
obtained available for the most
funding grant funding.
Thank you so much for your thank
you for joining us this morning
W. as there might have the U. S.
navy commander and Donna hauling
ship would like to the because
we have so I'll also be giving
the navy commander two minutes
if you can you to please.
Good morning.
Good morning can you all hear me
all right we can hear.
good morning ladies and
gentleman armed commander Dan
Hollings that a U. S. navy and I
thank you all for allowing me
the time to talk about Mr David
died this morning.
David and I were.
At the end of may fourth quarter
were he was my emergency manager
for my command and he is one of
the most passionate professional
and skilled individuals that I
have the pleasure of working
with over the last twenty plus
years in the navy is exceptional
planners us men and skills will
serve the state of New Mexico
very well now and well into the
future you could provide no one
with a higher level of ethics to
lead the department that he is
he is currently going into I
know that he is a path that is
asking about emergency
management and protecting the
livelihood and the safety of the
individuals that live in the
state of New Mexico he's an
exceptional player and his
communication skills are poor
non and with those skills that
he has I would for C. nothing
else than a smooth operation for
that are meant for the entirety
of his time there and without
that's most of what I have to
say
If there are any questions for
me.
Thank you for your time we're
also gonna hear from retired U.
S. navy and master chief and
through Rep Tara who's also
joining we assume if you can and
you don't good morning.
The morning I chair members of
the committee on oil gas Mr di.
My name is Andrew wraparound
formally known as the program.
Required it's on a privilege to
be here with you remotely on
behalf of Mr don.
As a character witness of the
already hurting as a long.
The history of success I started
then medical training group
Mayport Florida from two
thousand nineteen just one one
our job was to lead and then
there are over sixty five.
Senior leaders and sent off the
ships the make sure the sailors
already in engineering and in
the medical field.
During the time he also has a
vast experience in disaster
preparedness and relief and he
took that role on at ABC Mayport
and make sure that we were
always prepared and ready as we
all know Florida has a high
chances of having.
Hurricane so we're always out on
it and repaired as always his
mother found in the air and
mentor with the highest degree
of professionalism integrity and
dedication and he'll be a
valuable asset and a good fit
the department of homeland
security because he loves his
job and I would see that thank
you they have any questions
thank you so much for your
comment certain I'm gonna go to
members in the committee room if
you can just raise your hand if
you're in support of this
property.
Yes so if you can raise your
hand in support of the country.
Now I'm afraid.
And I'm advocating for those of
you in opposition of the room if
you can raise your hand.
Those online to raise your hand
in opposition.
Need more and we'll go to
questions and comments from the
committee about service center
semantics.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you Mr di I
appreciated our visit of that we
had the
More to this meeting and I have
a question in terms of your
department but first I'd like to
say that I appreciate
the formal training and skills
that you have are bringing from
the armed services I have a
nephew who's in training and
reconnaissance in a different
requests and I know that there's
a lot of discipline that goes
along with being in the armed
services.
So my question has to do with
the bill I'm caring.
That's related to to the the
department of health and it was
brought to my attention that
perhaps homeland security could
be interested in this Mr chair
Senator Mr di
You have been very involved in
helping communities recover.
And my bill was directed to a
bureau in the department of
health that dealt with an
environmental.
I don't know if it was
emergencies but environmental
matters could your department
assist communities in evaluating
and preparing for emergencies.
Mr chair and Senator products
the short answer is yes we do
have a preparedness bureau that
does that exact thing we reach
out to communities and help them
prepare for emergencies before
they come that's one of the
pillars of emergency management
that is certainly something that
we do within within our
organization.
Mr chair and Mr di the the
focus of this other bill was
actually helping raise
communities and evaluating out
for those emergencies because
often times
Communities don't even think
about how the fires might come
down from the force into homes
and how it might affect sewer
lines in the water and and even
livelihoods and places to live
and.
Contaminated water but the idea
is that many communities thank
that the it's not even on their
radar and it they think maybe
they're immune or maybe we'll
additional with that when it
gets there and is there anything
Mr chair so Mister di that your
department could do to help
them.
Not just be prepared but bring
it to the forefront.
Mr chairman and senator phonics
again the short answer is yes
the threat assessments or
something that my department can
assist with absolutely so we can
identify what these hazards are
and that should be done on a
regular basis every two years
within each one of our counties
and we use that assessment as
the basis for how we allocate
our resources for the most.
Dangerous threats for the most
likely threats it's a it's a
matrix of likelihood versus
severity and so when we do that
process but we look at how
severe and how impactful and how
likely those those disasters
could be into the for
assessments or something the my
department certainly can assist
any local community with all so
Mr chair when I had the
conversation with Mr di I also
brought to the attention that in
the Emergency Management.
Through there are some older
persons who really bring a lot
of experience to the job and
Hopefully will be respected in
utilize and not
Moved aside as a new
administration takes over thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
the people followed by Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos for sponsoring Mr
Diane thank you Secretary die
of.
I think I'm just astounded that
that the situation you're faced
upon being hired a true baptism
by fire
And I wonder if that experience
you know because you had been
part of state government before
in your thrust into it and you
you probably would I'm hoping
you can give us some insights
as legislators about things you
ran into that you would like to
bring to our attention that may
be made functioned as barriers
in some way to doing the kind of
job you would like to have been
able to do that whether there is
a legal barriers or things that
we could address we're
organizational or structural
issues that they got in the way
of being able to really do a
good job there is anything like
that I'd love to hear about
that.
Mister chairman Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino thank you for the question
there there certainly were
barriers that we encountered the
most significant barrier that we
found was that the team as an
organization is designed for a
certain role and is designed
around a a model of community
and what we found is that that
model doesn't fit our state and
we've been working with FEMA
continually to educate them on
what our needs are in the state
so that we can hopefully change
the scene the processes to make
reimbursements he's here for any
of those who experience as
actors in our state that was one
of the most significant barriers
that we discovered that is not a
very good we've yet to overcome
but that's a barrier that we're
working on overcoming with FEMA.
Another very that this is our
follow up on that so it's like
because we don't have town
system any Townsend and the
villages we have.
Land grants Santa sake is to the
pueblos is that is that what
you're getting at that kind of
structural Mr chairman and
senator that is correct a the
the notional model is typically
a suburban neighborhood that
gets wiped out from fire or
floods or hurricane or tornado
that infrastructure is in place
so you can simply rebuild and
then re inhabit the that home
and we don't have that same sort
of structure in many of our
communities in the state we do
in some urban areas but in many
rural areas we don't have that
and it takes a the cross linkage
between organizations like USDA
for U. S. forestry and mining in
my department our goal is to
coordinate those responses at
not only the state level and
growing all of our fantastic
state departments that we have
that work together for for these
incidents specifically the the
recent weather that we've seen
and we expect to see tonight
department transportation
department public safety even
even environment the is a plays
a key role in and how we respond
but the federal level bringing
together that USDA and U. S.
forestry and FEMA and homeland
security bringing all those
partners to the table is one of
the key functions of the
department and that is what's
going to continue into the
future and going to improve as
we move forward.
And yet I interrupted you just
Mr Chairman just as he was about
to mention a second barrier I
thought that you were going to
bring up so Mr chairman Senator
the the other very or really was
time and when I came in it was
like you said at the height of
the wildfires I wasn't involved
in a lot of the appropriation
for that and we're taking those
lessons learned from the fires
of last year and getting ahead
of things this year and that's
one of my focuses and that's why
this this piece of information
needs to come out in March and
not in may and so we're going to
improve that this year.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you senator
Senator McKenna.
Thank thank you chairman thank
you Senator Campos and Mr died I
was a pleasure to meet with you
a few days ago actually so
impressed with your expertise
and now we all get it here in
New Mexico so we're quite the
benefactors here I'm really
impressed with.
Discussion about communications
in the state to the emergency
response and I have.
Wondering if you've thought
about this working in Washington
to experience power grid
attacks last year.
Could you share the reaction you
had when you learned about them
and.
What do you think New Mexico
needs to do to to protect itself
if we have a similar attack
thank you.
Mr chairman and senator Kennedy
thank you for the question.
The the first thing that we do
at homeland security's we
maintain the fusion center
intelligence fusion center and
so if there is any tippers that
we have from homeland security
or any of our network of
intelligence providers if we
learn about any that we get that
to law enforcement as soon as
possible and that distribution
network is already in place as
well.
Many times these attacks though
there is not any intelligence
that precedes the tax and so as
soon as we learn about them
gathering information and
passing this to law enforcement
is the most effective way to
deal with with these particular
tax.
chairman and senator Mr Dino
and.
Could you share a little bit
more about.
What you thought.
What your reaction was when
those two states experienced it.
Your reaction if you if you up
you will Mr chairman and senator
can thank you again my first
reaction was this can happen
here.
that even occurred with the
train derailment that happened
in Ohio that could happen here
and so all of those events while
we don't have to learn those
hard lessons we can reach out to
those organizations to say how
did you handle this and actually
working with the bureau to
manager of Jackson Mississippi
because they lost their possible
water drinkable water for the
capital of their state when that
happened I thought that could
happen here what do we do should
that happen here and while I
can't give you a clear answer
right now on what that would be
those are the things that we are
going through now to make sure
that we can address these and
not play catch up when they do
happen but my initial reaction
was that could happen here.
Chairman Senate Mr di thank you
Work to be done it's great
security thinking about that
about the what ifs so thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Moores.
Thank you Mr Senator Campos
thank you Sir.
We appreciate our conversation
also.
Approach your resume and our
conversation in the issues that
we talked about it I'm really
look forward to working with
your.
On top of I will Act over based
off of what Senator McKenna
assisting with your New York
state a famous saying in the
state according to a famous also
for general that all
calculations based on experience
elsewhere bail in New Mexico
as we have heard that closer to
some another famous military
person and that's official
it I think it's important to say
that because we do have need
agency here and the you are
coming in from out of state and
I think you're gonna have to get
up to speed and a number of our
issues in New Mexico and I think
you did with the fires on to do
great job of that I appreciate
the literally the wheels
baptism under fire etcetera to
see punitive said
but we have a lot more dangerous
than just the fire one of the
things that concerns us this
before.
What are what is this
administration what do you guys
plan to do we have a fourth
quarter we had threatened people
on.
Terrorists the boxers boxing was
for the fennel Crisis come
across the border what is
ministration doing to protect us
from that threat on the southern
border.
Mr chair and senator thank you
for the question
Attorney get into our
intelligence fusion center
that's a place where we get the
bulk of the information that
comes into a lotus of these
federal shipments and large
illegal border crossings in and
those sort of things that's the
the first step that we do it at
homeland security of the the
national border is problematic
because it's multi
jurisdictional.
How we see issues with
communications particularly on
the border because we're
competing with other departments
other federal departments
whether the CBP or ice we're
competing with the Mexican
nation and making those
communications work we've seen
they're taking some of our
communications blocking some of
our communications so there are
significant issues down at the
border and one of our challenges
is that the border security
itself.
Is well technically federal
issue certainly affects our
state when we have the visitors
coming into the state that may
or may not be documented we do
have some they're documented the
go through the the ports of
entry and some that come across
the don't go through this point
of entry and when we find those
that typically turned over to
local law enforcement are turned
over to CBP when we ended with
provide those kind of folks but
we are very keen on improving
the communications in the south
so that the law enforcement can
work with CBP and ice and we can
be one team down in the south
and that's one of the efforts
that my department is taking on
this year and Mr chair Senator
secretary you just set your
communications being blocked the
server was blocking that
communication or communication
building block of what we're
doing about that Mister chairman
Senator Moores that's probably
something we should discuss all.
Thank you I appreciate the
conversation
Another a conversation we were
concerned about and you and I
talked about also is a money of
our membership management or the
I have a long history of fires
in New Mexico also all Senator
the list goes on and that
something that we talk about is
the terrorism issue.
Representative the federal
government has done a better job
will last twenty odd years of
our partner their facilities
what what plans do we have to
make sure going like this our
assets total tempted as that the
rate is still very significant
after.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
that is true there is constantly
the threat of terrorism it may
be a great threat but certainly
it could happen you're fits
happen other places to center
Candace point it could happen
here as well we talked about the
this bill specifically when we
met and in going back and
researching that the state
police have the jurisdiction
over this physical security of
this building now monitoring for
intelligence of any threats is
for rural my department with the
intelligence fusion center but
the physical security does
belong with state police when it
comes to this building now that
being said we can assist with
assessments for critical
infrastructure in front
assessments that is something
that my department can do and we
can certainly work with any of
our local communities to do that
very thing.
Mr Sir committees are reference
I was in this building I'm
working with you more than also
Senator Stewart so and so we're
here for special.
And that that day is always
struck me
because of the governor's office
and the tower collapsed in the
city governments are governor
and his chief of staff and all
that we get that moment to and
but I've always thought that
that we need to do their job as
a state and I think we're you
know.
We were we don't pay enough
attention to those issues here
like that you and your grow area
of the bigger states are we need
to as a body and as a state
speaking of Feds Mr chair
Senator as we mentioned most of
the natural disasters have have
a large special aspect to it
either created by the federal
government which part of Los
Alamos caused by mismanagement.
What what do you plan to do to
hold the Feds accountable for
that mismanagement of that a
positive impact the center
proposes district centers depart
Services Los Alamos Senator read
also the list goes on and on
what are we doing a state the
whole that federal government
accountable for the disasters of
the created in our state.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
out of speaking the tourney
General Fund exactly where we
stand on holding the federal
government helps.
Thank you Mr Senator really hope
you do that so fifty percent of
our land as well by the feds and
the mismanagement so we need to
hold accountable for for what
they've done Mr chair Senator
thank you I really appreciate
your conversation to your
diligence and and your openness
to have those conversations to
talk about solutions are really
appreciate it thank you for very
good appointment for this
position so thank you Secretary.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I to appreciate our
conversation that we had
One thing I just wanted to ask
Mr chair.
What is your departments
outreach with the tribal
communities here in the state of
New Mexico.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
thank you for the question I
have a tribal liaison and Daniel
Boyle who is my main linkage
with the tribe's he's a tribal
member and has very close
connections with all the tribes
he is my main linkage I have
been able to go out and visit
three of the Publicis far in my
tenure and plan to visit more to
make sure that we understand the
issues that they're facing and
and I'm excited to do that and
learn more about our native
populations of what we can do to
assist because they have some
some then use of assistance that
are available to some
communities and I need to make
sure that they know what those
are the emergency managers at
times it's some of the pueblos
are not experienced as we would
find other places we find that
in other counties it's not
simply resident within the
tribal communities but making
sure that we can educate them on
what's available yeah that's
been the biggest benefit that we
can have when I can sit down
with a a tribal leader in state
these are how this is how we can
help you and we want to help you
and it doesn't require a lot of
work on their part but it
requires education and so that
outreach is critical and that
will be continuing in twenty
twenty three.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that just making sure
because of where the fires of
course have been does touch on
tribal community also just
making sure that
we continue to work with are all
of our communities in the state
thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman the.
And my voice to thanking you for
coming here if we don't see
resumes like yours very offices
were all impressed with that
many of my questions have
already been asked but
the one I want to ask you is.
You know you're you know you've
been trying but there so
There there are certain things
that you do that other people
don't.
My question is you know we
sometimes get frustrated that
our state agencies do not even
talk to each other less work
with.
it's it's a.
So I guess my question is to you
what's been your experience so
far working with other state
agencies you've talked about
that a little bit but.
And what is your idea hello you
can bridge those you know those
ivory towers of everybody just
doing their own thing and not
working with actors if you could
comment on
that
Mr but your do I dress madam
chair it is yes
Mr chair and senator Stewart
thank you for that question
I've had nothing but positive
interactions with the department
that I work with in the last
nine months.
What we do when we organize our
emergency operations center
which is always in a in a
standby mode is we have
emergency support functions and
what that is is a person that we
have that represents that
department within our emergency
operations center so if ever
there's a question about to
match shelter I can reach out to
my emergency support function
six and I know that I was going
to route with HSD will reach out
to the American red cross find
out about sheltering she's the
point of contact within HSD we
have the same things with the
department of public safety do
you T. is been one of my key
linkages with secretary srna
there's been nothing but
positive interactions of these
departments and all it takes is
me picking up the phone talking
to the secretary and we can
bridge any problem that we have
but below that level we do have
linkages because within my
department the coordination and
communication is how we do
business within the agency and
we don't have people that can
scrape roads that can go arrest
people they can go and fly a
helicopter rescue people off the
top of the house we don't have
any of those people were not
first responders were
coordinators and communicators
to align efforts of the state in
the same direction and in that I
have had nothing but positive
interactions with all the
departments that I've worked
with within the state.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chairman you mentioned a little
with the emergency managers in
your opening statement can you
talk about that a little bit
more.
Mr chair Senator Stewart
certainly the the main issue we
have is that my department needs
to do a better job communicating
with them that's the main
problem that we have there are
some of the problems out there
with some communities that
simply don't have the resources
to hire an experienced emergency
manager
Oftentimes someone simply picked
maybe they're within a fire
department or within a police
department it's just like I'm
kind of interested in emergency
management and okay your new
emergency manager and they have
a lot of training to do and the
turnover happens more frequently
than we realize we don't always
know when there's a new
emergency manager in in every
county or in every Pueblo for
every city.
And so reaching out and being
being the ones that do reach to
these places is what we need to
really improve upon that's I I
want to take that on it's really
my responsibility to make sure
that we can do that with our
local emergency managers to make
them better there is another
initiative that I'm taking on
working with you NM to see if we
can improve their public
administration school and add
some additional emergency
management and homeland security
courses working our way towards
a degree program because there's
very very few degree programs
within our state that align with
homeland security and emergency
management and if we can grow
those emergency managers in
state and keep them in state
then Senator Moores point will
have people that no New Mexico
that have grown up here that are
also emergency managers and I
think that is going to be one of
the biggest benefits that we can
have at the local emergency
management level if we can have
some some degree programs with
our local schools.
Mr chairman thank you so much
for the answers I.
I just think you're the perfect
person to run this department
and if you've had positive
interactions so far I'm pretty
sure it's because you've been in
the driver's seat for that and
you've reached out so I just
want to thank you for that thank
you for coming to New Mexico
thank you for putting up with us
actually heard from senator
Morris were a little different
than the others we like to do
things our way there it's not
the best way.
Please continue to work with us
and educate us in really
appreciate your answers thank
you Mr chair thank you for that
Senator so I just want to make a
few comments I really appreciate
the conversation you and I had
when he came to visit me at my
office and so I myself full to
security clearance I don't know
what it means to obtain one but
most importantly what it means
to keep it and what we do to
ensure protecting our clearance
speaks a lot to your character I
think one of the words that you
said you do you don't only
prepared mitigate and respond
but you stick with us recovery
Senator Campos will know that
once those plumes of smoke were
seen in northern New Mexico we
were in immediate contact with
one another to see what could
get done and I'm thankful for
the department on what you and
your staff to to health and I'm
more thankful to Noida just stay
with us for the recovery now
all those Center compasses
district is not mine we're not
Henderson connected and we're
neighboring Senate districts and
I want to thank you for the work
that you did on behalf of every
northern New Mexico and what
that what's the will of the
committee comment on
developments move and there's
several bills so I'll take that
and I'll take Senator to the
second by Senator warm if I can
help with.
Senator.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator Moores yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator how did you yes.
Yes we have you.
Nine.
So I don't go to nine two zero
congratulations will be seeing
you later on the Senate floor
congratulations thank you madam
chair thank you Mr thank you
members of the committee.
Negative I can come in the
secretary of the scent of wages
that on to the desk here Senate
sponsors.
I'm sorry you up let the
audience know what is not going
to be very clear that this.
you have an.
All of your getting ready I'll
go ahead and read out the bills
that are going to be held back
and heard at a later date Senate
bill four thirty eight Senate
joint resolution thirteen house
bill two sixteen.
Senate memorials sixteen forty
three and fifty two and with
that we'll move on to our next
agenda items and just as a
reminder Senator cabinet
secretary ten minutes for your.
Posted introduction in your
presentation and then you have
four members who have signed up
in support of you will have each
of those people two minutes to
come up and speak on their
behalf good morning and thank
you for joining us.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am honored to
sit here once again
next to
secretary Alicia to for us to
settle.
When I first started here four
years ago in front of the rules
committee.
It was an honor then and still
an honor to be here.
Mr Stewart of course has worked
in state government she's worked
her way up as we call the system
through the system with the
system into the the work that
she's currently doing as a
secretary the department of
corrections.
madam chair I will I always have
many many more comments to offer
but I think I'll let secretary
to Fauria zero mentioned and
speaker of the house this
morning thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez madam
chair members of the committee I
am Alisha Tafoya Lucero I
currently serve as the cabinet
secretary for the corrections
department I was initially
appointed in June of twenty
nineteen and I had served in an
acting capacity between April
and June of twenty nineteen
while I was serving as deputy
secretary and then interim
secretary during that time
period and so I first want to
say how very honored I have been
to have the opportunity to serve
in this role it's really an
incredible us seeing and and for
me I think it felt surreal for
about the first two three years
and once in awhile it still does
I had I started out in the
corrections department in two
thousand one I started as a
classification officer case
worker at the penitentiary of
New Mexico I worked in the
deployment and I had a large
caseload of of inmates and I was
so I served as their advocate
and I sort of landed in that
role in a bit of an accidental
way in that at the time I was
living in Santa Fe and just back
to Santa Fe from Albuquerque
after finishing my undergraduate
degree in sociology and my
husband and I rented an
apartment in Santa Fe and it
burned down within the first
month that we were there and at
the time I mean this is like
free cell phones being regular
and we had a land line and I had
applied to a whole bunch of
different jobs back back here in
town so I could get acclimated
back to us says to Santa Fe and
being here and it turned out
that in that time period when
our house burnt down and we were
sort of living in a hotel and
then for a while we're living in
my my mom and dad's garage
we I called around the state and
I called all the places that I
had applied for jobs and they
said oh sorry we already filled
that job sorry we already filled
that job.
And then my last call like rule
when I guess maybe I should call
the corrections department but I
called them and they said we
held interviews for that job
yesterday but if you can come in
tomorrow will interview you so
that was my first entrance into
the the the corrections
department back in two thousand
one and you at first it felt a
little frightening and I was
uncertain of the rules but I
walked into that facility the
first day that I was in in in
the position of case worker and
I was so proud to be there and I
just knew and I felt it I just
felt like that that was exactly
exactly the spot that I was
supposed to be at and and I I
ended up staying there of course
and I I went from classification
officer to a position in the
reentry division which was newly
created at the time but it was
really not a full division it
was simply a grant that the
department had received at the
time it was called the serious
violent offender reentry
initiative and so I ended up
taking I I left the stability of
a classified position to go to a
temporary grant funded role
under probation and parole to be
the first reentry coordinator in
the state and to start reentry
processes for inmate populations
in the facility I stayed in that
role a couple of years and and
have the opportunity to complete
the corrections training academy
where I was I went through all
of the processes that our field
officers to and I work in the
field was minimal the majority
of my time in probation and
parole was spent at the facility
and then from there I continue
to work in in the in the
facility I also worked at
central office developing
policies in classification in
may special management and
really trying to figure out
innovative and creative ways
where we could desegregate our
populations and back in those
days we had long term
segregation for our in the
populations of people sometimes
would stay in that situation for
ten years and that really became
one of my a strong goals while I
was in the agency.
Working in those in the ranking
areas and I was fortunate to be
given the opportunity to
participate in the policy
development and in doing that
while I was a deputy warden we
were able to create several what
we call special management units
populations one of them was to
take a group of inmates who had
lived in long term restricted
housing segregation because of
protection needs and some of
them were at their own request
some of the protection needs
were because a person perhaps
had an issue in in population
with their and other inmates due
to gang affiliation or what have
you and so I remember being in
the housing unit working with my
team it was correctional
officers unit managers people in
all ranks and I sat down with
everybody in said alright this
is what we need to do how are we
going to do this the
administration is giving us the
opportunity to develop this
process ourselves and it was
such a beautiful awesome thing
to sit with these correctional
officers who of course there in
that world every day on the
floor you know putting
themselves at risk but also
serving as mentors and modeling
behavior for the inmate
populations that they worked
with and it really was those
folks that taught me about how
to make these innovative changes
happen and so when I talk about
how surreal this role is it
really has a lot to do with that
type of an experience I couldn't
believe that I suddenly had the
opportunity to make these larger
policy decisions that at the
time I was just contributing
member to and I have the honor
of being able to sit with people
who had worked in these jobs for
many years and they taught me so
many things I learned from them
and in in developing plans with
them we were able to
successfully desegregate
everybody who was in long term
population and find a way that
they could what we call in
corrections walk the line
meaning that they don't have to
be in a locked up situation and
that they can be out in
population with other people
receiving programming and.
Having access to the services
that all of the rest of the
general population had access to
and so when I when I was placed
into this role the first thing I
thought was what are all of the
things that these awesome people
I've been working with for so
many years have brought to me
and what ideas have they had
because now I have this
incredible once in a lifetime
opportunity to make the changes
that they.
Have brought to me over the
years and so some of the things
I've done while I've been in the
role and particularly I I really
stressed the importance of the
correctional officers in the
probation and parole staff that
we have because I have seen
resilience icing creativity and
brilliance as I've worked in not
only along side them in the
facilities but in this role to
be able to serve in in this
leadership role and and take
them to the places they need to
be and to have them receive the
recognition the rate and the
equity that they needed and that
they did not have so when I
first entered into this role our
correctional officers were
making seventeen dollars and
forty something cents an hour
we've been able to bring them up
to twenty one fifty and we're
continuing to work on pay
incentives for them in fact I'm
not sure if she's still here but
the asked me director Mr she has
been a huge advocate for making
sure that the employees in our
department have had access to
longevity pay and it was her
leadership that brought that to
me and said is there a way that
we can make this happen and so
we were able to create a stir up
a process for longevity pay
we've had a couple of little
hick ups but we're in the
process right now of completing
our memorandum of understanding
which will ensure that people
who have worked and dedicated
themselves to these positions
will be recognized for their
years of service at specific
interval times of service and so
I mean that's one of the things
that we've done also another
thing I experienced in my time
I'm working on the line level in
the department was there was
just a ton of inequity across
job positions it was it was just
arbitrary that one person would
be making five and ten dollars
more than another person and so
we've been able to get together
with our group working with the
department of finance
administration the governor's
office and of course that the
legislature and we thank you
very much for your
appropriations and helping us
fix the compaction issues that
we have had but we now have been
able to create equity a.
Among pay bands in all areas
where we know that there are not
people being paid to spare it
amounts for equal work I'm very
proud of that accomplishment at
some of the some of the other
things that that that I'd done
that.
Is is it was brought to me by my
correctional officers and they
said you know what do we do with
training and and is there a way
that we ourselves can be
involved in the recruitment
process and I I I was so excited
because I'm like yes of course
you can be and he who better who
better to be involved in the
process than those of you that
do this job every day and so
with their suggestions we moved
our recruitment to the
facilities everything is taking
place screening and bringing
people in as mentees even before
a training academy starts all of
that was at the suggestion and
and with the advice and
direction of our correctional
officers and and other folks in
the correctional ranks and we
have been able to increase the
enrollment in our academies and
they in all of their own
communities are their best
champions and they're able to go
out to those high schools and
the colleges a talk with their
friends and family and recruit
people to to join our team and
I'm just eternally grateful for
the opportunity so before I
conclude here I would like to
thank Senator Lopez for sitting
with me again she was with me
yeah the first time in twenty
twenty when I went to this
process Senator how to me thank
you so much for being a mentor
to me and working with me
through this process as well and
I will be happy to stand for
questions and see if there's
anything else that I can share
with the body thank you thank
you cabinet secretary and we do
have for people who signed up to
speak in support they're all in
person in the room with us and I
would ask that you come up with
I call you out and you have two
minutes I'm gonna start off with
lead up to a point.
And although I said your name of
the fugitive repeat your first
and last name for the record.
Good morning my name is Li at
for a chance.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee.
So I only have two minutes I'm
just keep talking about my early
life with Alicia she's my sister
because I'd be here all day
telling you about our.
Someone said I'm gonna tell you
a little story about myself.
after college I became a bit of
a hoarder I have no idea why
this happened a lot of people
here can attest to that
Anyway.
Alisha saw that I was having
issues I'm gonna put this here.
Issues after moving from
apartment to apartment and
noticed that I just kept
accumulating more and more stuff
I knew was becoming a problem.
Instead of shaming me or being
annoyed that she was moving a
box titled Santo that I was
never gonna vote for the eighty
of time she guided me with
patience compassion care.
Some tough love it took a lot of
work mostly on her part but I
can now say I'm not a place
where I can toss anything
without worry.
I thank her for that but these
are the qualities of a leader
and these are the qualities that
she show me my entire life.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for your
comments Dr Carla for and.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Carla Thornton I'm in
infectious diseases physician at
the university of New Mexico in
a faculty member there I also
serve as the senior associate
director project echo with Dr
Sanjiv Arora and I am here to
stand in support of the
reconfirmation of senator
of the center of the secretaries
of the looser I was here for her
confirmation and I have a now I
know I have more to say about
her but I I've been involved
with the corrections department
for close to eighteen or
nineteen years with proctor my
roller project echo first in the
treatment and management of
hepatitis C. we were very
involved for three four years
and then we got involved with
the peer education project that
we started to train inmates and
prison mainly about hepatitis C.
at that time because that seems
to be a huge it's a huge issue
in the present system so I've
been involved in those programs
for a long time and she's been
very supportive even before she
was secretary she was very
supportive of all of those
programs in the last three years
and her role as in the
leadership the secretary she's
also started been really
involved in helping us start to
new programs one called the
community parent education
project where we train people
who are coming out of it already
have previously been
incarcerated to be to help
others coming out of
incarceration and in the reentry
process she also was involved
along with the very generous
support of the legislature we
got as you know for several
years ago a lot of money to
treat hepatitis C. and we've
really done an amazing the
amazing job of increasing the
number of people who receive
help C. treatment in the prison
system we treated sixteen
hundred people in the last two
years first is about a hundred
for every year prior to that so
she has been really that big a
leader for us and and very very
supportive of all of our
programs so I just want to stand
in support of a reconfirmation
and
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your comments
purportedly.
Good morning Mr chairman theme
members of the committee my name
is Corey Lee I'm the executive
director of crossroads for women
if you're not familiar with
crossroads we provide housing
and support services this last
year we served over seven
hundred justice involved women.
I want to speak about the work
that's happening under this
amazing woman because in two
thousand thirteen a group of New
Mexico corrections staff met
with women in our programs and
they advocated for more housing
and since then crossroads has
ballooned from serving fifty
women a year to that seven
hundred number
but other things have to change
also which the probation
officers growth as probation
officers and as community
support workers has shifted over
the past five years and we've
seen growth and just the
collaboration between New Mexico
corrections and crossroads
eight years ago when we started
our partnership with New Mexico
corrections I can tell you
honestly that many of our staff
we're concerned about having
this relationship but are
concerns for likely unfounded
and under this amazing woman we
have had such a collaborative
relationship and we all believe
in the same things as that with
support and services women can
have successful reentry that
recidivism recidivism can
decrease and that all women can
make change in their lives thank
you so much.
Madam Cristofori.
Madam chair members of the
committee I happen to be at
Elise's dad so I know the inside
story to everything.
four years ago she came to me
and she said that I've been
offered the position of cabinet
secretary for corrections and my
first reaction was why would you
want to take those Hargest most
demanding job in New Mexico and
be part of it and she said and I
said I know that you can do it
number one and second of all she
said I really know that I can do
because I've been here for
seventeen years so here we are
four years later and we hope it
continues my only concern is
that she can get back to helping
groom the horses
bale hay and her favorite is
branding or calves.
You can still do that thank you.
Thank you so much for your
comments that statement certify
and a little jealous that my mom
did it call in I
The ask you to raise your hands
for members of the committee
room part of this country or the
re appointment.
In support.
Yeah.
So it looks like the majority of
the room and if you online can
raise your hands in support of a
conferee reappointment.
No one is raising their have
okay and I would ask those in
opposition to raise your hand in
the.
State not a what about yes the.
Members right in support okay
one of the support.
What about in opposition
statement alluded to questions
and comments started with
senator Ortiz the people
followed by Senator defect.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Lopez for for sponsoring
as secretary to for that I I I I
just.
I just have to share this with
you all when you were when we
confirm to the first time four
years ago.
I was really kind of
disappointed because my
impression was we need to bring
somebody from the outside
somebody who could bring a
different perspective to a
department which it seems to me
to just be stagnating for years.
And I have to say you you have
been absolutely wonderful in and
just kind of changed my thinking
about how you do change
institution like that because
you knew it so well because you
knew the people and because
you're willing to listen to them
you've really made a much bigger
change I think than anybody from
outside could have so I just I
want to thank you for that but I
wanted to ask a couple of other
questions I was really
impressed.
In your
Resume here which you mentioned
about the recidivism rate not
the recidivism rate the the the
reliance on for profit a private
prisons having dropped from
fifty percent over fifty percent
Note under twenty five percent
do you see that continuing Mr
chairman and and and secretary
is that going to continue until
we're.
That no longer using private for
profit prisons.
Madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino thank you for your kind
words and on the question you
know everyone of the facilities
that we took over it was sort of
done for a different reason I
mean clay and what we had come
upon a twenty nineteen was is
very dangerous conditions Mr
they didn't have enough staff
they had too large of an inmate
population and we went in there
and said you know we need to see
some change and it ended up sort
of thing at an impasse where we
we finally said okay well we
don't we don't need this
relationship anymore and we
entered into a lease with the
town of clay in we took over of
course and then in twenty twenty
one when we took over the grant
facility and merged it with our
other requests facility and we
also took over operations in
Santa Rosa you know honestly in
Santa Rosa the geo group said we
don't want to be here and we are
not able to staff this facility
and we're done and we're leaving
and we were very concerned about
that so I I worked with the
governor and the governor staff
and we were very concerned about
the town of of Santa Rosa and
what would happen there and
whether there was a way that we
would be able to utilize that
space and be able to offer folks
in that community job positions
and see if there was anything
that we could do to help with
the continuity there and you
know fortunately we were able to
and we are leasing that building
right now from the geo group and
then in the requests facility of
CoreCivic was the operator there
we did not have operational
concerns at the time but we
found that it was a money saving
it actually save the taxpayers
dollars for us to take over that
facility and then we were able
to cut us some of that
administrative those
administrative dollars by
merging the two campuses so we
have one word and that oversees
the entire area both facilities
like how in Los Lunas it's
multiple facilities and and
deputy wardens that oversee
those areas so I I mean it was a
big it was a big deal that has
been a big deal for us to
minimize.
Private prisons utilization and
in the state and that was it's a
huge accomplishment for for
myself and for us I don't think
it's ever been done and in
talking with the people from
around the country it was a new
concept to them to convert the
facility as opposed to just
simply closing a facility but I
will say for the remaining
facilities that we do have one
of them is a the company called
M. D. C. it's and chaparral we
utilize one third of their
building and what they otherwise
house is United States marshals
inmates and right now that
contract is working for us but
it specifically because that
facility only houses sex
offenders and that company has a
very incredible proprietary
treatment program for sex
offenders and so as of right now
that's an area that we're we're
we're hanging on to they've been
doing very good work with the
the sex offender treatment and
then in the Hobbs facility you
know at this point we're not
looking at converting that
facility but that is certainly
something that could change in
the future but at this point in
time the the facility is able to
maintain their staffing at a
level that they're up partners
at in Santa Rosa and Klay in
we're not ever able to maintain
thank you for the question
Senator and and Mr chairman then
I I I did bring up recidivism
and and to secretary of to for a
the if that seems to me to be
the most significant statistic
in determining the effectiveness
of our correctional system how
are we doing on our recidivism
rate are we trending in the
right direction.
Madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino we actually are we are
starting to see a downtick of
course to calculate recidivism
properly you need three years
worth of data and I I've I've
said this many committee
hearings but we have had some
very serious data issues in that
the what we reporting in the
past to our LFC analysts was
just incorrect and so when when
we first took over we started to
really come through our I. T.
systems and through the
processes that we were gathering
the data to figure out where the
information was coming from and
then we work with our LFC
analysts to make sure that we're
able to fix that data we can
only go back so far but I I will
say that I have just so very
much appreciate the work of the
probation and parole did
specifically because it took us
pulling files every physical
file for thousands and thousands
of people in order to get data
to go back to two thousand and
six but what we what we see is
that we were actually reporting
incorrectly first off and we
were just sitting at about forty
seven percent and we do think
that our number at this point
has reduced to about forty four
percent and I think a lot of
that has to do with the program
offerings that we have now but
but also very much has to do
with the the changes we've made
in reentry and the work that the
field officers in probation and
parole are doing to make sure
that they are not taking that
action to to move for a
revocation in the early stages
and we're really trying hard to
get people into treatment we've
expanded our treatment services
with the support of course of
the legislature we've been able
to almost double the amount of
service providers and
contractors out in the community
that serves the people on
supervision with us.
And final question we're not
really a question they just come
and Mr chairman and secretary
we work very closely with you on
this proposal to have met
medication assisted treatment
available and and I appreciate
the the the flexibility you
you've you've shown being
willing to consider that and and
to vent to move forward with it
but I also want to congratulate
you for the project echo
partnership that you've
developed that's been super and
and and then also for the
comment your your comment in
immunization rate that that too
was a needed as you indicated
it's one of the nation's leaders
and and that of right right and
so I think you know all together
you've done a really good job
and and we've got a corrections
department it's getting better
all the time and that's exactly
what we should be expecting so
thank you for that thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Stefanics followed by Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Mr chair Senator and
madam secretary I appreciate our
conversation together
but there was one thing I forgot
to ask you about many years ago
I was involved in a mental
health worker job that I did
correctional facility and at
that time we still were focused
on three have.
Versus just maintaining
prisoners could you talk about
the role of re have in your
current administration.
That besides the medical side.
Mr chair madam chair Senators
phonics re have meeting physical
re have are we talking substance
use.
Now and that's what I'm talking
about Mr chair and senator mess
secretaries I understand about
the work with tipsy I understand
of about the peer support I'm
talking about
Life skills reading preparing
for a job learning how to of.
Workforce re entry
some of the things that we used
to focus on that were put aside
we should provide education and
allowing people to move ahead
and we had a high much higher
participation rate at that time
so everything changed we didn't
put as much money into
corrections and we just pull
back from supporting this
program so Mister chair madam
secretary I'd like to know what
we're doing now.
Mr chair Senator thank you very
much for the clarification yes I
I actually saw that I mean
working in the facilities we had
a very robust programs in our
level two and three and and four
facilities which is primarily
where I I was I was working at
and we did see a a star could
drop off in the availability of
services and there were a lot of
things that I mean you know as
of course working in the
facility as a unit manager or
deputy ward and I wasn't really
aware of our privy to
understanding what was happening
with the budget but we always
were told that we were very a
sparse and that we just needed
to figure out how to be creative
and we just don't have the
resources we would hear a lot of
that kind of thing and we could
still of course had teachers and
educators and and treatment
providers on site but the
numbers definitely weren't being
replenished when people were
leaving and so I did I
experience that myself working
in the system and so you know
that was one of the the things
that I consider to be a blessing
to be able to come in and say I
want to change that I don't like
the way that that's working
because when I was a deputy
warden I I mean we had like zero
money right in my facility was a
maximum security men level four
close custody these guys can't
move in groups larger than
twelve and we had no money and a
handful of teachers trying their
hardest to get as much
programming out to as many
people as they could and so I
pulled in my unit managers and
my team and I said alright you
guys we have to be creative we
don't have money what can we do
to get some things happening for
our our people and at the time
everybody had agreed that they'd
all go to a different place so
one person went to an any
meeting and one person went to a
as in meditation place that what
they was doing some some
meditation work on the weekends
one of the people what's the
college and talked with some art
students and we were able to
bring volunteers into our
maximum security level for men's
institution and we had inmates
doing yoga and meditation with
the.
You pious Center we had the ADA
and the and the folks on site
doing group in our facilities
with our populations and then we
had some art students come and
work with our inmates and then
what we did was say we learned
from the inmates if you're
really good at a thing are you
willing to teach it and so we
started to do inmate peer led
art classes that I mean anything
that we could do with zero
dollars right so coming into
this role I said well now I can
figure out how to get more
dollars to be able to do those
types of things so we have been
able to expand a lot of
vocational training we do some
basic work and I do think
there's still a ways to go we
definitely need to be hiring
people who are not just
educators specifically or
treatment providers but people
who are there specifically for
life skills we do some work
right now with community
organizations on like financial
literacy but and and definitely
like a lot of parenting groups
that we work with a lot of
organizations still very much a
volunteer based but I do think
we could probably take it
further and focusing on just
teaching people how to live in
society but part of what we're
doing in the reentry division is
to start working with people
well before they get out and
start trying to address what
their anxieties are about
getting out and then figuring
out how to help them eliminate
some of those barriers to what
they might you know the things
that might prevent them from
being successful in the
community.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary thank you
senator Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Lopez and this to for
Serra was really good to talk to
you on the floor the other day
really enjoyed our conversation
I could tell.
That
You do have a challenging job
and.
the reason why some folks are
inmates because is because of.
Some very serious crimes that
they've committed.
Have been convicted of but yet I
could really see how
compassionate you are because we
know that they are human beings
they need compassion so that
they can write their waves so I
I thank you for that I'm I do
have a question about substance
abuse could you share with us
what happens when inmates come
into the facility and are
directed to substances.
Mr chair Senator McKenna.
I yes so we actually that's one
of the things Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino just mentioned in the
medicated assisted treatment
bill that he was discussing I
was actually just in the court
or the other day talking with
miss grace Phillips from New
Mexico counties association
because we share the same
concern I mean of course people
when they're arrested is when
you will primarily see people
coming in when they're actively
using substances and so what
we're looking at doing in that
bill was providing of various
medicated assisted treatment to
help those people as they were
coming in from jails.
Or if I'm sorry from communities
into jails but then of course
that begs the question what
happens when they leave the jail
after having been can convicted
and then ending up into our
system and so one of the things
that we we are doing now and
we've been doing for many years
is we do therapeutic communities
and our dapp which is the
residential drug abuse program
now that is an abstinence
program it is available at all
of our facilities and it is
something that we will continue
to work on it's it's something
that we're we're very proud of
in the inmates that participated
it often become peer mentors and
they share their experience in
in addiction recovery with other
inmates throughout the
population what we'll be doing
now and what we what we started
just late last year in December
for the first time is a pilot
project with medicated assisted
treatment which is taking place
in the grants facility we're
we're using specifically
Vivitrol to treat people right
now and what we'll do in that
pilot is gather data figure out
what our real basis of of need
is and then continue to work
with the counties and of course
with you all to see what we can
do a bit about increasing those
treatment options so what we
what we intend to do here is to
work through our pilot gather
data produce report share that
information with you and then
move on to expand that service
and I'm not sure that looks like
it could be expand to more
people it could be expanded more
medications more locations but
what we'll be able to do is is
have a more detail oriented
approach after we complete the
pilot.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator and Mr for those Serrato
what is Vivitrol.
used to address which substance
on madam chair Mr chair and
Senator McKenna the troll it's
it's specifically for opioid use
disorder as are the other areas
in other medication options that
we're discussing with respect to
Medicaid assisted treatment.
Chairman and senator and Mr
Perot circuit so thank you for
that and and the reason I'm
asking is because I've I've been
so upset and many my
constituents have been upset
because of that though it's not
in your facility we've had
inmates who passed away because
they have gone into withdrawal.
and to me that's really alarming
because we know many folks are
on substance our addicted to
substances because it's a
disease but many folks have been
traumatized have been abused
have grown up seeing adults
around them using substances and
so if anything we need to help
them when they're probably in
one of their most.
Rice's.
situation in their lives and so
it's just been really upsetting
for me to see patients pass away
while they're incarcerated but
I'm really looking forward to
the pro the
Pilot program data.
so that we can
really get ahead of this.
So thank you thank you chairman
thank you senator thank you Mr
zero thank you Senator Stewart.
That thank you so much Secretary
Stewart Mr for wanting to keep
funds with this war I am so
impressed by your supporters
what they said that the increase
of crossroads for women is just
standing
but the thing I'm the most happy
about this what you've done with
Pepsi I have been angry for many
years about our lack of treating
inmates with hepatitis C.
not my brother's a veteran he
moved here twenty sixteen with a
full case of hepatitis C. I
panicked I thought it was going
to die fathers take care of them
he went to the VA a month later
he's fine they kept him on the
medications and other.
He was proud to say long cost me
eighty Bucks a month but those
pills or thousand dollars a day.
That that made me realize what
we think that really worked that
hard in the present I don't
think it's right about a
thousand dollars a day but I
think they're more like five or
six hundred so this is a twenty
so how have you managed to treat
of that many people in the
presence.
Mr chair and senator madam
president thank you for the
question it was one of the
things that we wanted to tackle
from day one it was a something
that we knew and I've been
watching it in in the facility
of that again just as a worker
level percent and we we were
hearing numbers like eighty
something thousand dollars a
year to treat one person and I
think that probably was the
situation in the early days of
the medication and one I first
entered into the role we had
been struggling and I spoke with
our doctors and Dr price is
actually at a site a
psychologist but she had been
working on a work on a three
forty pricing for ever and ever
and ever and just wasn't getting
any attention nobody was paying
any attention to it but that
made it so much more complicated
to serve people and so years ago
the department used to only
select people that they thought
were low risk people which of
course isn't equitable access to
service and very very few people
were being treated and and then
we said well let's just see what
happens if we ask for a whole
lot of money and I mean what
what what can they tell us but
no okay and so let's just give
it a shot and we did we ask for
a lot of money with our first
request was a twenty million
dollar request and we actually
did receive the requested so
once we had the the funding we
said alright let's do this and
we really were able to put
ourselves in gear and start
reaching out to vendors price
out medication and make sure
that we would be able to treat
as many people as had it we
already were testing people who
were coming into our facilities
and we were not testing people
that we're leaving our
facilities but as a community
health issue it's very important
to know that the people that
we're releasing have been
treated of course if they've
accepted the treatment and then
I was very very fortunate to
bring on board Mr when's also
gone he he's my medical services
administrator and he's just
incredible he comes with a
wealth of experience and
knowledge you done this.
Type of scaling up treatment
when he was working in Canada
and so he came in and he was
able to work he and Dr price and
some other folks with us helping
us out to the department of
health we were able to get
approved for three forty be
pricing it was a huge game
changer and that we were able to
treat a lot more people and and
and in that time period we
scaled up more than three
hundred percent and of course we
made and ask for that this year
as well and we were granted the
funding to continue on with
those and those numbers and I
mean our goal is full
accreditation so thank you for
for that.
Chairman thank you so much for
that answer just you have your
attitude is so refreshing you
know you're just a can do person
to work with others if that in
that system for twenty years I I
agree with the pain of that you
know I mean it's just it's just
been amazing what we've done so
thank you so much for want to
continue thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for bringing for the
secretary and and secretary
thank you for being here today
to answer all of our questions
we appreciate that
I wanted to ask you a little bit
about staffing in particular of
the guards I as you know in the
county I reside we have central
central New Mexico and we have
also the honor farm of which is
a minimum security facility one
of the things that has been
passed along to me and we talked
about a little bit of this we
then thank you for that as well
stopping by and having a
conversation with before this
confirmation but one of the
things has been brought to my
attention there is the lack of
staffing and the inability to
get enough essentially guards
there and so there's an
inordinate amount of over time
that that is
mandatory all state and and I
know this isn't a problem that
has started on your watch I
think this is been that way for
years and years had several
friends and and family members
that have worked at those
facilities so can you tell us a
little bit about the status of
that and whether it's improved
or whatnot.
Mr chair Senator Baca yes
absolutely thank you for that so
there's a there's a few factors
here but the first of all start
off by saying is as everybody
knows of course our population
is incredibly low right now so
we're at about seventy nine
sixty eight seventy nine percent
of of capacity with inmates
right so we have a thirty
percent vacancy in inmates and
that also equals we also at this
point have a thirty percent
vacancy among staff members in
Los Lunas specifically what we
did there and we did this.
We did this actually a couple of
years back but we decided that
we needed to closed up on a farm
and the reason that we did that
was because we had very few
inmates that were living there
and an awful lot of officers
that were being pulled from the
main facility to work that
facility and we had bunches of
vacancies at one location I just
big gaps in where inmates were
being house which meant it just
by the officers out further and
so when we close the farm we
close those positions shifted
them over to the main and that
did help to alleviate some of
those overtime issues there have
also been a lot of back and
forth negotiations on rosters
and posts and some real us you
know sort of the detail level
things that have happened there
and I do believe that we're in a
much better spot in that
facility than what we were went
we are working with the union
during COVID we went from what
were eight hour shifts into
twelve hour shifts which made a
huge and significant impact on
people with the eight hour
shifts and a high population
those people it was it was rough
they were working probably
almost every day of their work
week was two eight hour shifts
in a row so sixteen hours a day
that's just a tough day to go
home and you're exhausted and so
shifting to those twelve hour
shifts means fewer over time
sometimes they do still have to
work that additional four hours
and and do a sixteen hour day
but for the most part when the
over time comes up it's their
choice to take it so the way it
works is that you get three days
on four days off and then the
following week the opposite so
you always have an alternating
day in the middle of the week
typically Wednesdays what they
call their money and their
Friday but that means on the
days that they're off they can
choose to work to make
additional money and it means
that there are fewer people that
are having to be mandated to
work it certainly does still
happen I won't say that does not
but then also in that location
and actually everywhere because
of the inmates a the lacked the
where the the inmate population
rather we've been able to make
sure that we maintain.
Low levels of inmate population
in facilities where we know
we're having some staffing
issues so in that facility
specifically we hover at about
forty five percent of capacity
it is is what's residing there
the inmate population.
Thank you for for that
information and answers a lot
and into your credit Mr chair
and secretary I have heard
reports of the of the shift
changes and it has alleviated
for for at least the people that
I've spoken to a lot of
stressors they had with that job
and so you know implementing
that I think was very
beneficial I I will say that a
as to the levels in your
facilities if it were up to me
you'd probably have a lot more
people in there rather than out
on the street so I guess I would
be for in that regard to the
this is to believe that I have
but the next question I want to
ask you since you touched on it
the closure of the honor farm
the minimum security key tell me
what's being done with that
facility right now and the the
the many acres of farmland that
surround it.
Mr chair and senator Baca yes so
we need to make sure that we
maintain the facility so that we
don't have a major
infrastructure issue so we still
go on make sure that the he
works and we check on the wells
and and things like that to make
sure that the facility itself
can be functional and what we're
doing right now is exploring
possible uses we're not entirely
sure what we're look what what
the possibilities are but given
that we do have some
issues out there and not having
enough housing providers for
people that are leaving our
facilities we're exploring the
possibility of working with an
organization to possibly turn
that into some sort of a
treatment program or halfway
house or something along the
lines of the work that the folks
over at crossroads crossroads
are doing we haven't moved into
a contract babies or anything
like that yet but there are I
mean it's a beautiful campus
there's so many options out
there for programming and I
think there's there's something
more that we can do to it and it
might not be quite to present
budget as far as those inmates
the level one inmates that were
living there we just shifted
them over the live at the level
two building now and actually
several of them service
caretakers to the geriatric
inmates that that lived at that
facility as well.
Thank you Mr chair madam
secretary in that regard is I I
understand that at the minimum
security well to minimum
security so it's more of a a lax
Environment that will what
central was for those inmates
that are placed from minimum
security into central what are
their conditions like are they
equivalent to what they were at
minimum just because the
facility itself is more secure
and more guarded sort of at a
higher level of scrutiny or the
maintained at some lower level
what what what is their status
Mr chair Senator Baca so they
are definitely not in the same
type of open building that you
know where you can just walk out
of here here House thank the
call their house right the few
inmates in the same area and be
outside it is definitely a
different building than that but
they still do have the same
freedom of movement that they
had in the levels in the level
one facility so they have access
to the recreation areas and they
do their offsite work and and
and different jobs and they
still have access to all those
same programming opportunities
that they have there the only
difference is they just they
can't walk outside physically
outside any time they want to.
Thank you Mr chair through
through the questioning I think
you've outlined and answer the
questions I've asked too many
successes you've had in your
tenure there so far could you
tell us a little bit about what
is your most challenging issue
right now as secretary of what
corrections faces and and what
you what you're doing to a to
alleviate that.
Mr chair Senator Baca that's an
excellent question and I you
know I think that the we are
facing actually quite a few
challenges
just if you can make sure with
your responses to if you can
keep it brief because we do need
to be up for eleven that thank
you.
Mr chair and senator
when.
I'm looking at successes and or
I'm sorry a challenges I'm
thinking about the recidivism
issue and how can we.
Do more to get people skilled
vocational training I would say
is probably our biggest area the
biggest challenge right now
because I mean it doesn't just
take technology it takes people
you know instructors and people
out in the community to work
with our inmate populations so
you know we've been able to do
something like heavy equipment
operation and some CDL simulator
machines but my goal really and
and what I hope to be able to do
and what is very challenging
right now is to figure out
vocations that will make money
outside you can even make a
minimum wage job and and you're
really not going to be deterred
from going back to the types of
behaviors I've got to a prison
in the first place and so I
really would like to be able to
focus all of my energy and and
put it on that challenge of
creating more vocation
opportunity that will lead to
real high paying jobs that kids
can sustain a person's life and
and help them support their
family outside.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary again for appearing
here thank you for the service
The New Mexico given us so far
continued service I would expect
thank you.
Thank you madam chairwoman great
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you Secretary.
And you came in
Had with me
that last week for tough times
lost all meaning
and I really appreciated that
that discussion hand and when
we're talking I had told you
that I I have concerns really a
lot about medical care in our
prisons and and I gave you the
slip big long list of questions
and you said you're gonna get
back to me on all those I I
really appreciate that ends and
I'm not going to take a lot of
time going through these issues
here today because I know it's a
contact continuing discussion
that we're gonna be having but I
will I will just know is that I
hate and I'm really glad that
we're getting away from folks
like geo group and CoreCivic
I I've spent a lot of time suing
because they.
They did not treat me Tommy
didn't to staff well
and so but but I'm concerned
because still even in the the
state run facilities we still
have private private medical
contractors providing that
medical care
and have concerns about the
medical grievance process I have
concerns about some of the
reporting
I understand I just found this
out today that for two thousand
are for for twenty twenty two
central reported zero medical
graft even says for the entire
year.
There's no way that's accurate
so and and and and and I gotta
say I I agree with your dad.
This is a hard job ID once part
job thank you for doing that and
because I I I I really
appreciate everything I've heard
here today and I appreciate the
discussions that we've had
but I do think there is
significant work to be done
specifically around
Operate medical care for inmates
and the grievance process when
when that appropriate medical
care that is is not provided so
I look forward to continuing to
to to talk to about that that I
thank you for your service and I
look forward to supporting
reconfirmation thank you senator
part of.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Secretary
You know I think some of us are
on the could be the last time
you were confirm those quite the
special appropriations
fortunately we didn't quite the
sequel didn't quite live up to
the original but
that will stick in my memory for
quite awhile I do have a a
question with regard to the
opportunity scholarship at the
end of inmates able to apply for
a ten universities online and
qualify for the opportunity
scholarship.
Mr chair and Senator Pirtle you
know what we work with inmates
on the things like you know
applying for Pell grant and
things of that nature we have
not moved into opportunity
scholarship expansion we do some
work with colleges and there's a
few colleges that work with the
city of correspondence but it
hasn't expanded to that degree
and so at this time our inmates
are not receiving opportunities
caller ship dollars.
And the Mr chair secretary how
does that work with universities
I know it's kind of a weird
contracting issue that has to
happen and and not all the
universities participate within
all of the regions so can you go
into a little bit on on how that
works with regard to
universities and an inmate's
attending the university's.
Mr chair and senator pirtle yes
you're actually right it is a
complicated process and when we
have when we set it up in a
formalized way we've tried to
get it so that we will first
engage in a contract with the
university that's interested in
working with us and then either
we develop a class or we try to
figure out a way that are
inmates can participate in the
class in an online way so we we
recently invested in a but a
hundred and fifty education
specific tablets where they're
able to attend college courses
and we have facilitated by one
of our educators but inmates at
different locations can
participate in the class online
in real time but if we're not at
this point integrating them with
other students that are in the
classes it's just a close a
close unit all inmates
participating and and
corresponding with each other
and there's some colleges that
will do correspondents were but
not not many of them and so well
I mean obviously we're always
looking to partner with more
schools and bringing more
schools online but at this point
most of it is being done in an
online setting and in closed
circuit areas we don't allow our
inmates to have access to open
internet source.
It's all intra.
Mr chair Senator what would it
take to really expand that is a
funding issue is it changes
state statute because for me
that was one of the reasons I
support options colors I really
saw the opportunity
for inmates to see really bring
recidivism rates down is if you
know they're locked up for six
eight years I mean they come out
with a master's degree in
something if they really wanted
to and so I think that so some
some of the people that I really
would be well served by the
opportunity scholarship how do
we get that accomplished.
Mr chair and Senator Pirtle
liberty keep your comments brief
Mr chair.
Been around eleven years the
floors waited for us the floors
gone on without us we have a
secretary in front of us and and
I mean I I understand there's
this desire that we have to be
there on time like it's the
military but
Way back when the floor can do
the memorials with us sitting up
here and we can hear from the
secretary on very important
issues
and so I I would just
respectfully ask that the the
committee here that's really
tough questions we don't have an
opportunity at the secretaries
but once every four years unless
there.
Replaced so just I would just
that we we get all the answer
that I can get Mr thank you for
your company.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle I
anything I think that's a great
question and you know to be
Frank I have not directly
reached out to secretary
Stephanie over at the higher
education to talk specifically
about that but she has worked
with us to get us the contracts
that we do have with the
colleges that we do but I I
think that would be a great
thing and and that's my
responsibility to reach out to
her and and make sure that she
and I are partnering that she's
helping me Bridge those
relationships and that I think
probably is really what it comes
down to when you're working with
the college to matter of
developing a relationship in
order to enter into a contract
with them together but if it
does take legislation I would be
happy if you wouldn't mind
helping us out with that next
year.
Mr chair and secretary I mean I
hope we don't need to run a
memorial hi I.
The spice morals percent my
favorite thing in the whole wide
world I have run a memorial of
about memorials.
Active on on how I feel but if
we have to do that to maybe get
people at the table but I I
think yourself of the secretary
of higher ed or very competent
people with the with the passion
and the desire for New Mexicans
that if if you all can work it
out before next session come up
with.
whatever we need to do either
statutorily or just support you
either in the fiduciary way and
just come back to us and and we
all work it out on your own
without us directing you I think
would be a fantastic thing if to
me it's a project that if if
we're able to accomplish that
the those guys the limit was the
whole point of the opportunity
scholarship and in my opinion
this is for the underserved
populations of of New Mexico so
if this is something that we can
do someone comes out of out of
prison with a college degree I
mean I know they were going to
have that box that they're gonna
have to fill in it's going to be
an issue and and there's going
to be a thing surrounding as
everybody has a past but you
know the hard to say no to a
felon that has a master's degree
it's it's just I don't think
that would be an issue so if we
can do that and you'll just take
care of it on your own I mean
that would be really impressive
and I think many of the
Legislature seven around haven't
seen that very often so the
really great field could come on
the report back to the site and
any help that I can give once
you come up with findings I'll
be the first one to introduce
the legislation if I'm still
here thank you Mr chair thank
you senator Senator Moores.
Sure thank you senator thank you
madam secretary are really
appreciate our conversations
over the years and the your
forthrightness I really
appreciate that and I apologize
I was presented the bill over
education so there's a couple
issues that you know I'm I'm I'm
interested and I think Mr chair
you know all the young
legislators of some of these
kind of aha moments in mind on
this issue was sitting in front
of a chairman or to see Pinos
Committee one problem Senator
Karen bill dealing with
restitution period of a couple
times and Senator Ortiz you know
we've got all the committee one
time you go to Ford and he said
well you can't get blood from a
town of.
And I really got me thinking
about a lot of these issues are
institutions to make sure that
the control whole and you know
if it will work with Center Neal
and some others on legislation
since that time some of the
criminal justice issues and and
I'm I think it's very important
to make sure that all these guys
have the opportunity to come
also have careers after they do
their time and pay back
restitution and they can't do
that and one of things we did is
Legislature forgot project was a
licensure reform.
That folder to a much bigger
issue passed the governor vetoed
it to allow these boards and
commissions that regulate
everything in the state to stop
unilaterally denying people with
felonies of criminal convictions
licensure so that these folks
have the ability to the times
come out get a job to give back
to society MFA the restitution
eventually so talk to me about
where we are on that
I know that we just passed a
bill on that the what is going
on our commissions or what can
we do more to stop these boards
corrosion building off of oil
from these guys who need to get
jobs employment careers
afterwards and alternative
restitution answer Mr Mr chair
Senator Moores thank you and and
I appreciated discussing this
with you the other day but
There there was a then we talked
about it that barber in
cosmetology bill that was one of
the things that was a big
barrier for us it made a huge
change and we're working right
now to bring on board of one of
the prime cosmetology schools
back on site we have a really
awesome our program for inmate
population but we discovered
that they got out and they
couldn't get licensed and I mean
it just was so counterproductive
so what will do and I'll work
with my team and and the folks
in my recidivism division to
figure out where those other
barriers might exist with
respect to licensure
specifically and like I told
Senator Pirtle I would be really
happy to be able to reach out to
you and say Hey can you help me
make these changes here
because I think that at the end
of the day all the training that
we do won't make a difference if
a person can't get licensed.
Teacher interest in that and and
and helping us move through
that.
Mr chair Senator secretary I
will I will work on and again
it's not soft on crime that I'm
looking at it I want the so the
parents of the victims to be
made whole eventually also to
musical for crime bill that the
and I think it helps with the
Measures impacted to side of our
building take care of those
obligations they have we can't
do that for commissions and they
can licensure
area I just don't care for my
dentist had a couple D. W. wise
when he was younger I just don't
they have an opportunity to do
that investment of time and
effort to be able to get a job
and reenter society and to me
that's a tough on crime position
because then they can pay back
restitution and and for what
they've done a tough on
additional terms to so I I will
work with you about the get
together with appurtenant to the
and you guys figure out ways we
can make that happen in the
future Mr chair Senator thank
you.
Before the war.
Thank you Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
center great secretary pass of
the second by Senator to the
piano before you take the role I
just want to thank you for the
job that you do if I meet
regularly with levy enough on
what this is here today she's
our northern chair for probation
and parole talk about your
leadership in the changes that
have happened and I'm proud that
your product of public schools
right here in New Mexico and
with that if we can get the roll
call please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Ingle
yeah Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator Moores yes
Senator Ortiz yes yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator the funding
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator.
Yes Senator yes.
Graduations.
This
it is all right folks could keep
it down as they exit so we can
continue our business.
Hi and I try not so we're we're
going to our we're we're gonna
finish up with confirmations
today we're not gonna get any
bills today
so just keep an eye out for for
those bills to be rolled over on
a future agenda
if we go past eleven we will
stay and and take the time that
we need to complete the
confirmation I I've already let
our floor leader now so please
go ahead and proceed some thank
you madam chair members of the
committee with me today is Ricky
Serna who's working as the
cabinet secretary and the New
Mexico department of
transportation proud of side of
the Espanola valley and the
native northern New Mexico and
Mr set as The New Mexicans who
steps into places would need at
the most most recently prior to
coming to the department of
transportation he worked and
workforce solutions and guided
New Mexicans to the pandemic and
so he attentive New Mexico
highlands university where he
obtained both his bachelors and
masters degrees and as the
cabinet secretary doesn't that
Mr Senate does a number of
things including providing
executive oversight for the
agency which employs more than
two thousand five hundred staff
reporting directly to the
governor no one working first
hand with an M. D. O. T. most
recently the employees even at
the front line we're very
appreciative of his leadership
and how morale has improved in
the past they also commented
about vacancy rates being field
with his leadership about
something really big he
continues to work on and lastly
madam chair Mr sent overseas the
effective management of more
than two billion dollars of road
construction projects both
federally and state funded and
with that I would be able to
madam chair to continue this
process.
Thank you madam chair good
morning committee members and I
just want to start by thanking
center how to meal for me to be
my sponsor I think the governor
for
find a great spot than that the
doesn't come with the title
acting in front of it I want to
thank my colleagues for being
here and I I appreciate you all
reach you know many of you
reaching out and and pass it so
your presence would be valuable
and it's certainly is I really
appreciate your.
just a few pages
perhaps its the educator it
being that motivated a theme for
my remarks this morning the
theme I chose to kind of weave
throughout the entire my remarks
is that the word labels mostly
because I think it's something
we can all relate to like me you
all put yourself out there in a
way that allows others to place
labels on us sure we kind of
have our self identities but
outside of that in this public
servants you know were labeled
in a number of ways especially
when we zoom we've home we
service.
when I was in high school for
example I was given the label
not likely to graduate and that
was probably the case because I
grew up in an extremely low
income environment in the
Espanola valley and I was far
from impressive academically
speaking for that reason I was
never talked with about going to
college or really any plans
after high school.
I took it upon myself to follow
in the footsteps of a good
friend who decided to and attend
eastern New Mexico university
well I didn't make it in that
environment it was something
about five hundred dollars not
being enough to get through an
entire semester of college and I
ultimately transferred to New
Mexico highlands university
where I thrive to and received
the the support that I needed to
be successful and I left there
was a much better label which
was first generation college
graduate.
Shortly after high school I
began working with New Mexico
higher education department and
my new label was eager very
eager and I began working for
the state's bureaucrat which
seem to increase graduation
rates among low performing
schools across the state.
At the age of thirty one I
became a young administrator for
northern New Mexico college in
my hometown and my label was
young and inexperienced I was
provided with an opportunity to
help transform a community
college to do mission
institution also offering
baccalaureate degrees in
reflection as an administrator
we did a number of things too
quickly and sometimes without
ideal input and vetting and
after five years of being there
I love to the Google labels one
of them being the worst
administrator ever.
Shortly after I was asked to
serve as interim president of
Luna community college in Las
Vegas which is like a second
home to me because of my work in
northern I was able to risk.
Even I felt undeserving a few
moments a few months in the
college received notice that the
higher learning commission was
on the brink of removing the
institution's accreditation
which would effectively closed
down the school over the course
of a year and a half I let the
institutions remarkable change
in institutional culture and a
demonstrated ability to meet the
criteria requirements for
accreditation even within this
building and in throughout these
calls there were conversations
about the schools imminent
demise and closure before my
departure the show cause order
was lifted earning me the label
successful.
I joined the governor's
administration in early two
thousand nineteen is deputy
secretary for the department of
workforce solutions not having
met secretary mccamley before I
interviewed I was hired under
the label a good fit at the
request of the governor we
focus on apprenticeships and
workforce pipeline developments
especially in under employed
regions across the state.
The pandemic and subsequent
economic downturn downturn hit
the state.
In early twenty twenty I jumped
head first into supporting the
agency's response to the surge
from six thousand unemployment
insurance claimants to more than
two hundred thousand during this
tumultuous time I was also asked
to serve as co oversight for the
higher education department and
I believe it or me the label
capable.
In early twenty twenty one I was
asked to serve as the acting
director for the state personnel
office just a couple months
later I was asked to also
oversee the WS which I think
would be the title crazy.
And it was crazy.
During the following year I
likely interacted with all of
you as we work to address
critical issues aimed at
addressing unemployment
insurance fraud timely
unemployment insurance payments
getting New Mexicans back to
work and playing our role in
jump starting the state's
economy.
At the state personnel office we
were to address priorities
including compensation working
in a COVID environment telework
enterprises to vacancy rates
across the state and I even
helped open the state's first
day care centers the experience
here I believe me the label a
fixer.
This past summer I was asked by
the governor to take over as a
secretary for the department of
transportation my first thought
was I don't know anything about
roads.
In fact those were my exact
words additionally I quickly
learned that the NMDOT didn't
need any fixing.
My leadership team many of whom
are here I believe labeled me as
a mystery.
Given my experience in formal
training as an educator it
appeared my placement at the NM
duty was not easily understood
to be sure the learning curve
has been steep and I've
developed a tremendous
I believe my earnings by I
believe I may be earning the
label fitting in I'm grateful
that my team is opened up to me
leading them in my twelve years
as a public servant either in
the apartment with the
importance of orchestrating as a
leader this concept read rests
in the need to surround myself
with individuals who know their
job better than I ever will I
believe that my responsibility
as a manager is to ensure that
these experts have the resources
and tools that they need to be
successful and that the work
that they do exist within a
culture that facilitates the
more in my six month said NMDOT
it's clear that I'm surrounded
with the talent.
With the talent needed to
address the state's road
infrastructure gaps now the
cheesy plug we just need your
help getting the money to do it.
So the question is what value do
I bring to the agency I truly
understand the necessity in
measuring progress or lack there
of I believe in being very
intentional about demonstrating
progress making changes to what
we do to affect change from my
experience as a fourth grade
teacher to calculating how to
answer every unemployment
insurance claim and phone call
to understanding how to reduce
fatalities on our roads.
To understand how we three
thousand roads there is a right
wing and in an effective way to
improve organizational
performance I also believe
myself to be a doer and a
problem solver the bureaucracies
upon which the government is
built certainly can promote
fairness equity transparency and
even ensure conformance to law.
I also know that these
bureaucracies and as a public
officials we can use them as an
excuse for not being to for
maintaining the status quo.
And telling our constituents
that we cannot be the resource
that we should be to serve them.
Whether it's working across
agencies making policy alongside
you all and challenging the
unwillingness of others
including my colleagues I
believe in making the extra
effort to find and implement
solutions that serve our
stakeholders I've had a lot of
opportunities to learn what not
to do and a lot of opportunities
to learn how to do I carry the
confidence needed to be
corrected to ask for help and be
the first to get better at
something if it strengthens our
team and in duty is a very
special place with the
tremendous amount of talent and
capacity to do great things
we're responsible for so much
more than maintaining twelve
thousand plus the miles of road
we carry responsibilities
related to changing behaviors as
it relates to distracted and
impaired drivers we promote New
Mexico through economic
development based projects
litter pick up weed control
beautification projects we met
multiple solutions in the
planning and design of roads we
are out feeding New Mexico for
the electrification of vehicles
we support more than forty years
strips sixteen rest areas and
employed more than twenty four
hundred workers and spend more
than a hundred million dollars a
month doing that and so much
more I'm humbled to be part of
this team to trust my colleagues
and to learn about or join
Norma's and complicated industry
and I truly believe that
together we can achieve great
things.
In closing I've been serving you
and your constituents under the
label of acting cabinet
secretary for nearly two years
for more than a year of that
time I've been serving you as an
acting cabinet secretaries for
two agencies at the same time I
ask for your support to continue
serving our state without
acting.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Secretary and yet
fifteen seconds to spare the
time.
madam chair that thirty when I
practiced thank you.
We we have a a number of folks
who are signed up as your
organized support
we can have a musical for women
or we could do I for two minutes
each it is your choice
we we can I I appreciate the
many of them drove three lanes
and so they could be very very
brief the more I I would I think
I'd appreciate that Madam all
right Harold Garcia's first
actually was anyone who it knows
is a Harry Garcia Paula Garcia
Jim Garcia comment or west
Cooper Anthony do miss Franks
Sanchez for on a concern a
boulder Adams any of you all are
here the headline up and please
although I'll be timing you for
one minute.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Harold Garcia and the Seminole
county chairman of the board and
I'm honored to be here to speak
on behalf of Mr stern on
you know I I met Mr Serrano when
he was the acting president of
the community college he was
very instrumental in bringing
the college back together and
keeping it solvent within our
community which is very big for
a small town of thirteen
thousand people.
Mr Sarnoff as many of you know
we face to the issue with the
hermit's peak calf cannon fire
this past summer and San Miguel
County has not had on normal
operation for the last four
years first because of COVID and
then second because of the fires
Mr Sir not and the department of
transportation has been very
instrumental.
Thanks for all that.
That was my
it was the time of side okay
I'll keep it short canoeing Mr
chair not has been your your
your advertiser but we if we
appreciate if your comment okay
thank you.
Good morning Mrs chairman
committee members my name is
that the machine on the county
manager for McKinley County
McKinley County has a long
standing relationship with the
New Mexico DOT
and especially since you
secretary Schardin took over in
July of of last year Mr stern
actually cares about rural New
Mexico he cares about the issues
not just a big interface not
just a big at but rural New
Mexico he cares about he's come
visit us we come of it visit
Hamm his doors opened his his
staff is open it's been a a
fresher breath there to actually
be able to call up and say
secretary we need some out he
open sources what do you guys
need how we work this out so we
are here and support the county
commission myself in the
manager's office we all support
his nomination as secretary
thank you very much.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Connie during on the executive
director of asked me Council
eighteen the union that
represents thousands of state
employees across the state of
New Mexico about fourteen
agencies in the state and I'm
here in support of director of
the campus secretary srna you
don't often hear from a labor
union leader when it comes to
the appointment of secretaries
but that's really just the
perspective that you do need to
hear
the state of New Mexico suffers
from significant recruitment and
retention issues and a lot of
that is due to compensation and
benefits but work environment
morale and respect are almost as
important is been asked these
experience in working with Mr
sort of first as deputy director
of DWS then director of CPO and
now cabinet secretariat at DOT
that he truly values rank and
file employees and the services
that they provide Mr Sarna has
demonstrated over the years that
resolving workplace issues in a
positive respectful manner pays
dividends in productivity
retention of staff and workplace
morale.
Really I.
One minute one minute as way.
Good morning everyone morning
madam chair Senators my name is
Frank Sanchez I am the current
president of a CNM agency to
Mexico heavy highway civil and
and part of as a representing
the hundred twenty six members
of our of our organization the
contractors who actually built
the roads we fill a we are here
in support of
artist secretary Sir now he's
been very open to us he's been
very willing to work with this
we have worked tirelessly to
build of prepping
a reputation of working together
as a team with an M. D. O. T.
without them well we can't build
roads without you all.
We can have the money to build
the roads so we appreciate you
guys affording us the the money
to invest in New Mexico keepers
to keep it safe we believe that
are.
Thank you.
I would like to have Mister
sinister fifteen seconds.
Chair Senators Michael Taos New
Mexico of lost illustrate his
city councilman and also twenty
five year veteran to the New
Mexico department transportation
and with great leadership Mr
cigna and of the New Mexico
commission I assure you that the
rural areas have not been
forgotten we have troops on the
ground the rural areas could not
have done it without without
with the order within our small
budgets.
In back of us personnel and
equipment The New Mexico DOT
assisted us with the fire
opening roads debris removal
flood situations rural closures
replacing culverts and on and on
helping out to secure us the
list goes on and on without
hesitation.
Our roadways are safer today
work is being done throughout
the entire state of New Mexico a
team work effort took place and
will continue with the
leadership of Mr sent out are
you sure you thank you thousands
of the most two seconds to yes
I.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
from the concern.
commissioner more County I am I
want to thank you for this
opportunity to advocate on Mr
stern is behalf it was in mid
twenty seventeen when he was
appointed as a president trump
president a little community
college when I was also director
working there that he earned my
utmost respect I retired shortly
after that and twenty nineteen I
became the commissioner more
County our past crossed again
last spring when the devastating
fires have moral and San Miguel
counties as the acting cabinet
secretary the development
work force solutions he stepped
in and brought mobile units to
help our residents with
unemployment benefits then again
he came in afterward multiple
hats he came in as a cabinet
secretary of DOTD and he knew
that we did not have the
capacity to deal with the
devastation that we were dealing
with day after day with the
flooding the debris removal of
road issues he of stepped in to
help us and today DOT's
cabinets.
Contractors are still there.
The patient a reservation I
recommend that you consider him.
Thank you.
Good morning madam secretary
madam chair and senator is my
name is Jim Garcia I'm the
executive executive director of
associated contractors of New
Mexico we Representative the
heavy how we have utility
communities contractors of New
Mexico I am here today with my
chapter president Frank Sanchez
who you met my past president Mr
David Hassey Sanchez to my
right.
I am here today with my chapter
president so that we can stand
in favor of confirmation
secretaries are not Mr stern was
appointed acting secretary was
quick to assist our industry in
maintaining a purse percent
learning and being credible and
efficient work of the NMDOT came
out of a time where our industry
was facing many obstacles
related to the pandemic.
In our industry was authorized
to be essential we were still
doing the several obstacles
including fuel escalation supply
chain interruptions completion
of existing projects to maintain
is strong workforce Mr stern
assisted in helping our
community of contractors by
making himself and his senior
team available to keep our
system working he helped
developed thank you Mr all my
gosh I have so much more.
Really great information we hope
that we can get in confirm today
thank you very much.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Paula Garcia and I'm executive
director The New Mexico sic
Association and a resident of
more a thing here to speak in
support of secretary said in a
as a public servant as a leader
and as a problem solver DOT had
an immediate presence when we
were faced with post fire
flooding in recognition of a
time of need our greatest time
of need as a community in terms
of the just seconds when we were
unable to access resources
through existing state and
federal disaster programs and M.
D. O. T. stepped up to provide a
collaborative process with the
disaster agencies both homeland
security and FEMA to ensure that
a second could access resources
and as we speak there are work
crews in Grant County and want
to County today are working to
clear debris from a second as
because of the leadership of
secretary said in a so he was
instrumental in insuring the
survival of a way of life in New
Mexico and to his care for rural
New Mexico thank you madam chair
Garcia.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Wesley Hooper
on that administrative services
director for Eddy County and
Eddy County fully supports.
The confirmation of secretary
Serna
He's demonstrated the importance
of safe efficient and effective
transportation systems and
understands the importance of
partnerships with local
government entity entities
industry and small business
thank.
Thank you very much and then the
last person we have signed up
with Walter Adams
was that Mr Adams.
Yes.
Hello madam chair.
Members of the committee thank
you for allowing me some time to
come up here in the US press my
express in words first of all I
want to tell you that I want to
thank each and everyone of you
for the work that you do because
without your work we won't have
any money to build anything so
thank you and I just want to say
that growing up my dad used to
tell me don't tell me show me
and so when.
US secretary certain I came over
there was that little question
is he does you know
transportation can you handle
these job well more importantly
he came over and he just
happened to come at the time
that we were with the fires and
we were the floods on chairman
of the state highway component
commission and I'm also the the
commissioner from district four
which encompasses us on we get
in and what area he not only
came in but I was able to give
his number because everybody
whether has my number.
Okay so it and it you can I just
say one one quickly on behalf of
the commission the whole street
transportation commission.
We one hundred percent fully
endorsing thank you Mr Matt
madam treasure know your support
but that is our time limit for
for public comment on this
country actually signed up
online but it kept going off.
Have thirty seconds we've taken
the ten minutes that we give for
for public comment thank you
thank you madam chair will know
your support.
and before the committee at
anyone in the room would like to
raise their hands indicate
support.
Anyone online would like to.
No one is raising their half
anyone who would like to
indicate a resident in the
opposition.
See non as anyone online when
individual late more support of
another opposition Senator fox.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you for not coming
in for us
the department of transportation
is really important in over the
years I've grown to appreciate.
Workers
Very sorry about that yes of the
workers on the highways and
roads but
the impact of the department of
transportation assisting
communities there's also noted
and often times they go off road
to help those communities and I
hope that continues now my
question has to do with
something that came from a
metropolitan planning
organization and they are very
concerned that the department of
transportation madam chair will
do something actively more
pedestrian and biker safety.
The madam chair Senator Mr could
you address that.
Thank you madam chair Senator
the the notion of multimodal
right options when we design
roads is not just the
responsibility that comes to us
from USDOT right but it's a
measure that we're putting in
place for carbon reduction goals
and measures as well.
what what we want to do is a
couple of things one is
obviously a lot of those roads
of bikers and pedestrians use
our city or county owned roads
and we've got to work with them
to develop the right way the
ordinances that they need to put
in place to ensure that when
they're building roads or that
when we come to build roads
within their city limits that
those kinds of considerations
are given we have funding
directly from FHWA USDOT that
will support when we're
designing a road the means
necessary for the right of way
acquisition to put those things
in place to extend the width of
sidewalks if that's what's
necessary and we can issue those
requests when we're not building
those roads to local communities
as well so we've just got to be
I think a bit more intentional
about when we do that about
getting ahead of the design and
plant process with those
communities to talk about what
they need what they want to see
what their communities want to
see and when it isn't our road
make them aware of the grant
opportunities that we have
control of to help them find
those options so madam chair
Senator Mr stern at the I
appreciate your response and
which is practical and looking
to federal subsistence and
working with local communities
but but this MPO was also
going down the road of
the question of pressing
criminal charges against those
who caused bodily harm to but
pedestrians and bikers.
And this group is interested in
replicating some very stringent
laws account of California.
So I'm suggesting chair Mister
sort of that you look at this in
the interim because I know it's
going to continue to raise its
head we've had some bikers who
have died but we've also had
some bikers who've been maimed
for life and become permanently
disabled and lost their entire
livelihood so I think it's
something.
That we should probably look at
over the year and I actually
sent a little email to say
probably don't have your right
email address about this and
madam chair Mr shin Sir now
let's talk off line for their
about this thank you very much.
Thank you senator Senator to the
****.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you senator Adamu and and the
secretary certain of I have a
new label for you based on your
recent career and based on
Senator Moores interest in
sports I would consider you a
utility player or perhaps the
the six men the one who comes in
and and and makes thing makes
things happen when the when the
original starting I don't get it
done.
I have two quick questions for
you what lights on highways in
urban areas is that your
responsibility or your
department's responsibility or
is it up to the city.
Mister chairman Senator depends
on whether they work or not
The the the working ones no kids
so
So Senator though the way that
works obviously we've built
highway and if that highways are
so it starts off is our asset
often times we do is we hand
over the responsibilities of
this maintenance of the roads
and the lighting through
lighting agreements or
maintenance agreements so to
answer your question it depends
on the corridor and whether or
not we have a deficiency or
we've entered into a lighting
maintenance agreement with the
municipality or a county and
that would include streetlights
road lights signaling and it
could include handing over that
maintenance responsibilities for
the entire port.
So madam chairman then just to
follow up if if we check with
you you'll let us know if your
office can let us know if that's
your responsibility or we should
be a pounding on the City stores
to Madam center absolutely give
us that coordinates the mile
post and and we can look to see
who's responsible and if we are
then certainly will local answer
the call.
And final question madam
chairman are you are you
contractors running into labor
shortages during this period for
all the projects getting rolled
out with the should be.
Madam chair Senator that they'll
say yes but they're taking some
of our workers and I give him
grief about from time to time
especially engineers I think
that's a reality Senator across
the board for a number of
contractors for even state
agencies so I think it's just
it's a it's a problem that we
share with our contractors we're
looking at solutions at you know
our agency to better retain and
recruit workers without of
course to do without of course
affecting them and they're doing
the same things so I believe as
an industry we gotta get
together build that pipeline
we've got to start talking about
what six readers want to do when
they graduate high school and
how we really leverage our
resources as a partnership to
get them pointing in our
direction so that when they're
done with high school there
working for us.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator Senator Ingle.
Thank you.
I was just curious of your
district managers and how many
how many districts do we have a
districts do we have in the
state I'm sure Senator six.
I thank those highway district
manager drive those roads once a
month.
Madam chair Senator I I imagine
that they do not and not only
them but that you know those
those districts can have upwards
of three hundred and fifty
employees including a number of
patrols that are are working
those rooms from stealing.
I understand that but by the
same token we're going to have
somebody fiscal fiction and
there's a lot of places that
haven't been tended to.
And I just came up from the
inner on the interstate the
other day and their ships are
some spots in there that are
they're really bad and they if
they have been there awhile so
that's the main complaint I get
about department is you know
these holes and Rozier's not
that they should you know they
just started you know we
yesterday and I get a get a call
today they've been there awhile
we've got to do a better job on
that we really do because you're
going to we I'm sure we've
called some action and so we
don't even know about and
certainly damage to automobiles
that that's the main complaint I
get about your department is it
basically maintenance that we
have and certainly in the winter
it's worse and we we haven't had
much snow this year but when it
snows it really gets bad then.
But anyway I admire you for
taking the job because it's a
thankless job and like to share
with you have six districts I
think you probably ought to have
a few more than that split those
awful little bit some of those
are huge and they're really hard
to make work but you do have a
the gentleman working for that I
work with here in in the house
of representatives George dog
I'm sure is doing a good job and
he didn't pay me say that.
But I do think you you have a
you have a of of a thankless
Department would arrange the
weeds grow too fast and when it
snows the roads go to hell in a
hurry and everything's always
your fault thanks for taking
that job but we do we do have a
good a of a huge system in New
Mexico.
We have lots of money now this
is the time we need to really
get some things fixed well we
can your equipment is you know
it's it's high dollar stuff it
just is and
Very often you're the training
ground for the contractors and
that sh that's a shame too
because it takes skillful people
to operate this equipment
correctly and if you don't pay
you don't get you don't get to
keep the.
Course the thing I always wish
we would emphasize a little more
is how good the retirement is
from state jobs in New Mexico
because it can't be beat by
anybody.
It surely can't be so anyway
thanks for doing your work and
Always call me before you do
anything and Senator Campos is
yes.
Thank.
Senator serve all of us under
Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you for telling us about
your background I have no idea
you start offices teacher but at
now I understand that very
creative focus I thoroughly
enjoyed that a lex center to see
if you know I've got a new label
for you and it's the closer.
I think that the governor has
put you in where she's needed
you and everyone of these
departments so the real
testament to you to have after
only six months your staff and
all these commissioner stand up
for you
I will say that I have been so
impressed with the department
transportation working with game
and fish over the last three
years on wildlife quarters they
did a study it's a seven hundred
page study at Sir Kernan I work
or talking about how much each
of us is red cheese
Representative a lot more
but we have right now we have
five million in the budget we
get to a at four to one match
from the federal government they
have multiple for wildlife
quarters if we could just put
five more in there that a total
of ten we would have enough
money for that first priority on
five fifty so I hope you will
continue to help me in
advocating for that you have a
great staff people that have
worked on this with game and
fish so I'm hoping that you're
going to be on board with that
because over the next no I ten
years if we get enough money
from the federal government we
can really fix what's happening
in the state with killing
wildlife damaging cars damaging
people you know we've got to
preserve some habitat for that
that they came in every other
species that we have so I I'm
very passionate about it I hope
you will help your staff
continue that work and you don't
have to answer on I'm just.
Asked if that so but thank you
Mr closer.
The other part of.
Thank you madam chair Senator
thank you.
Thank you for being here
I just want to make one quick
comment with regard to the New
Mexico treasure.
Hello statewide elected officers
just and I the opportunity given
thirty seconds into.
A sixty days will have thirty
seconds for statewide elected
percent I don't know where this
committee's going I don't know
what's happening FY comes up
side down
But on behalf of myself as a
state senator Wirth of holidays
I see she she left the room but
you know nobody nobody should be
treated like that much less
so I'm just really embarrassed
right now as a committee then
that happened hopefully moving
forward we can do better that.
Anyway not
you know at first madam chair
Senators secretary I was
concerned because you you don't
have the experience of of
building roads.
but then I started thinking
about other things and and I'm
one one of the few that probably
has a belief that a sheriff
doesn't necessarily need to be a
cop.
That sometimes in an
administrative role is not your
job to build the roads it's your
job to get together to build
rooms and so I I think I I'm
still struggling with it I know
it's difference outside of the
box it's a new way of thinking
but maybe it's exactly what the
DOT department transportation
needs is someone to come in and
and get everybody work together
because these are the issues
that I see that and maybe you
can address a little bit as
somebody that's driven up to
eighty five and and gotten a red
hill in the middle of a snow
storm the roads clears could be
all the way up to the bottom of
that hill and then basically
it's Hey your on our own but I
will be a four wheel drive
because you you cross the the U.
T. district line.
And so if you could address some
of those issues I I see it in
and I get calls from the
Mescalero Apache people we're
halfway on the highway between
Cloudcroft and Mescalero same
thing you cruise along roads
clear things great.
Process a district line where
they don't prior to would
prioritize that really as much
as the other district you
basically on your own so can you
address some of those issues and
if those have been brought to
your attention sure Madam chair
Senator I think just generally
speaking we've got to kind of
break down some of the walls
that separate us at the G. O.
with the six districts and with
the six districts with one
another on a number of fronts
whether it's you know HR best
practices in the field whether
it's sharing resources crossing
over those district lines so
that we can get an extra mile in
out of our district to cover
each other we got to do that and
the other the issue is so yes
I've I've heard of those issues
especially in those corridors
where we are changing you know
the responsibility of the road
maintenance and management so
we've got to break down those
lines the other of course is
often times in you pointed out a
couple of areas that are very
very rural and remote which
means that typically we don't
have some challenges with
finding men and women to work in
those patrols and so we're going
to need to be exclude extremely
creative to fill some of those
vacancies so that when we start
to get hit by snow over those
rural areas we're not peaking
just major corridors major
arterials and leaving some of
the secondary roads that will be
talked about I drove million
times my daughter used to live
in Bonn New Mexico right and so
I hear what you're saying those
patrols out in rural New Mexico
sometimes are very difficult for
recruit for we've got to get
creative.
And madam chair.
Very.
yeah are there tribal state you
can use it on that there's such
things teacher hunger or recruit
teachers providing housing at
and state police used to have
stated that if you lived there
used to be an officer stationed
on a fully
side about to be there.
But they took that away and then
now there's there's not officer
bond so that areas now even more
underserved as far as the state
please go that no that wasn't a
decision made by anybody now are
there tools like that that you
can use to to get people in the
more remote areas.
Madam chair Senator I I have
groups of staff working
specifically on anything and
everything that we can do within
state personal rules to recruit
and retain workers we want to be
the creative agency not because
we want to essentially take
workers from other state
agencies to the duty we can be
an incubator because we can come
up with an idea like the one you
discussed played out in just one
district as an incubator to see
if it works and then expand it
wherever it wherever we think it
makes most sense but to answer
your question we should be
looking at those investments or
partnerships with school
districts or DPS are others that
have put you know housing in
certain areas for officers that
they may not have fully staffed
we've got to do that because if
we don't then you know we're
just hoping that you know
because we need those people
there that they're just all of a
sudden gonna come that's not
always going to be the case.
And after secretary of.
Kind of work is being done
partnering with community
colleges to.
People to fill a lot of
positions that you have.
madam chair Senator we've been
relying on primarily as we have
our our training facility in
Roswell has as you likely know
and one of the concerns I have
the training facility in Roswell
is capacity both in terms of how
well we're we're able to
maintain the equipment there
because typically it's where we
send really old equipment just
to be used for training we have
a good partnership with the
airport there they give us a Mr
to really be able to work in to
really teach our staff how to
use equipment and then we do
have some relationships but
we've been I try to build the
bridge the gaps for example
between the department of
workforce solutions for I was
previously in the beauty so we
could be leveraging workforce
innovation opportunity act
funding to get all of our
workers especially at their
entry level wage qualified for
we funding to go into any
institution get their CDL switch
we can even do it almost every
single district as well but
we've got to start leveraging
that not just for our men and
women doing construction out in
the patrols and doing
maintenance we're hurting
especially in technical areas as
well so we've got to be talking
about engineer technicians
project managers and engineers
specialized engineers.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that thank you you are the
right survivors.
Right the these.
Lots of things on there.
your background in education can
help facilitate that we do do
you still do want to do is go to
the rodeo whether any of the
other.
you madam chair senator we we
did the statewide one in
Albuquerque at the state
fairgrounds but the need for the
districts has their own rodeo
and that's the mother ship right
for district two and so I was
able to go to I think three of
the three of the seven of them
but not they didn't get down
there but there are a lot of
funds in the state let me try
back clothes and some of them
and madam chair.
Also does not actually there's
no animals harm.
It's it's an opportunity for
for the DOT employees to come
show their skills and show off
and see who's the best of the
best which I think it's it's
something that's really cool
have that little bit of
competition amongst employees it
really brings up around and
stuff so that we are still doing
that that's
everybody it's not about running
equipment and show that you can
do it faster quicker without
breaking it is always something
up our farmers always a
competition with my brothers
when we were looking for and we
were all of the chopper on who
faster mound of the court so
it's just something about
running equipment I think in
showing off amongst especially
siblings but I I'm I'm glad that
you're doing that now my next
question with in house bill two
there's always the the highway
funding in that list the
projects is there any desire to
move to we're we're actually
earmarking the amount of money
because I know those projects
have specific amounts there's
federal match there's phases and
things like that is there a way
maybe with your leadership that
we can get something because I
know in the past and stuff in
with I was within my own to
where it's supposed to be this
and then after the fact it turns
out to be something different is
that something that that your
department would with the push
for chair Senator that's the way
we approach the development of
section nineteen in house bill
two during the interim and so
what we essentially did was ask
every district to identify the
top to keep priorities
understanding that that would
amount to hundreds of millions
of dollars so are us into the
interim was an eight hundred
million dollar asked that lock
in those amounts to each project
considering any other funding
that was already obligated to
them so that was our preference
going into the session Senator
and at any time our team can
tell you what the project is
what it's going to cost the the
downside on on the last two
fixing that amount to a project
in legislation is
the one if we get a grant that's
that would support that project
the language we give us the
flexibility than to say well now
let's move the state fund this
the state funds to another
project that is in fiscally
constrained get it's a double
edged sword but that's our logic
moving forward so that at least
we can back ourselves into the
number we're putting out for
you.
Your secretaries easy's but
notwithstanding no.
Madam chair center or the word
may the word may is good.
That's fun fun we're that we've
had plenty of talk of the past
published in the state law will
do what it what we want but no I
I do appreciate
I am sure that secretary to
appreciate that I think that's
important it helps your local
engineers really focus on on
their district know what what's
important that they are going to
receive we're should receive
that specific amount and then
they're not the roads not pulled
out from under over stuff's
shuffled around so I do
appreciate that you madam chair
thank you.
Traditional not point out there
is because I think with me
forgetting as this new
construction is very could you
put your name on the side of
the.
I'm still we have a Senator
Stewart Senator Lopez and
Senator.
Look at it but I think senator
Morris was a friend of okay.
The that.
Okay all right thank you senator
have thank you madam chair and
before I make my comments what I
wanted to do is just if I could
also is is read a statement from
behalf of our state treasurer
Lori Montoya
she said that she is here to
support Ricky Serna as the New
Mexico highlands university
alumni.
I'm he is humble kind responsive
professional efficient strategic
it helps everyday New Mexicans
and really was responsive during
the pandemic and the fires when
he was both workforce solutions
and just PO acting secretary.
Mr stern I helped me help a lot
of our elderly with unemployment
fraud his skills and successes
in life for New Mexico making me
quipped to continue with the O.
T..
So wanted to be that about half
of our state treasurer
that madam chair you know.
Working with Mr Sarna secretary
St over these past several years
all of your.
Labels that you've listed I
always as of Senator Stewart
said it's it's looking as though
you are the closer you the
person who comes in and takes
care of business you're always
responsive its photo NM anytime
I had a question to ask I know
he was over it was University
for the issues I'm not
highlights but Lena Committee
college for those issues came up
and conversations with Senator
Campos of the work that you had
we're doing.
From I think this is a
wonderful.
Appointment and I know you said
that your question was crazy
when you have those other two
very unique positions that you
were doing that it's a gift that
you have those gifts I think are
being recognized by many even
within the department what you
bring to the table and I wish
you the best we're here to help
work with you and I look forward
to working with you to thank you
madam chair thank you.
Moores thank after thank you
senator thank you secretary and
I too was going to talk to
treasurer Montoya about comments
which is the same thing is will
presentation and she said you
guys or bother bother and the
close family friend for a long
term.
So researchers are doing that
all in that effort obviously our
actions doctors you know we need
monitor road builder but I want
to be a bridge builder and
that's a lot of what we're
trying to do around here all the
fact that the sign of the moment
to see a game was hear us
talking for your maybe give me
pause so if you guys are the
members of Canadian special new
ones we ever action set down
with Mr Adams in the that's what
the vote is a seventy worth have
members stationed as a hip hop
New Mexico history but I do want
to talk a little bit about that
you know if you know you've been
able to converse years that's
administrative of things are are
problems that you're you're
you're gonna have those kind of
things and I understand that the
majority probably doing the job
right this is what people often
I'm alright with that everyone I
know talks about you so that
you're always trying to do
what's right so you have been on
some pretty parks and things in
the past I want to just get some
resources because there's a lot
of money that flows through this
department and we don't want to
go back to the days of old when
transportation woes about giving
up our contractor person
benefits and help in New Mexico
talk to me about how you've been
able to build those bridges over
the years make sure that your
addressing the needs of the
entire state regardless of your
Republican Democrat rural or
urban sep issues and health
district yes turn by UNM and all
the other issues that we have in
Albuquerque the need to be taken
care of the talking about how
are you going to address the
needs of all the Mexicans I'm
interested great question
because it's often it's off the
off to what I hear is that the
urban areas receive a lot more
of the funding in the rural
areas don't and so I think what
we've got to start thinking
about to kind of neutralize that
concept is we've got to
understand how we can build it
and they will come type of
prioritization for state roads
right and that's difficult
because when we don't have
enough funding to do projects
that are economic.
Element base and projects that
are infrastructure needs
attention a set based then we
start picking and choosing and
we got to start having
discussions about how we can
build the bridge using your
words between projects that help
build communities and projects
that help address road
infrastructure gaps and we and
and that's not easy to do but
we've got to do that to ensure
that our communities are being
served and it doesn't matter
what majority or minority they
are from a political party is
I've got to trust the district
engineers and they're going to
be honest because they're being
held accountable by every single
county commission by every
single meet us municipality
within their districts right and
so what we've got to do is trust
them to do the work to identify
the priorities and help us
ensure that were equally
distributing not necessarily the
money but our attention and I
think that's important to from
my experience in higher
education I think
equality quality was like the
same thing and sometimes that's
not true sometimes communities
and districts need more
resources so that they can level
the playing field between their
counterparts case in point is
down in district two we talked
to a lot of counties down there
about the work they're doing in
oil okay and what we need to do
to support them at greater
length so that they can continue
to support the state with oil
revenues and that's a real
conversation we need to have but
we got to figure out a way to
leverage our relationship so
that it's something that we're
not just doing one year at a
time but it's over time to
partnership so I I trusted the
the team the district engineers
to do their work because they're
being held accountable they can
ignore municipality without that
municipality saying dean dean
court not getting what we need
from so and so but we also got
its start looking at things in
ways that says okay there's
congestion there's friction this
is the priority we got to figure
out to we gotta find a way to
say if we build this drivers
will come and that will result
in community development for
rural parts of the state.
Support the committee chairman
Senator secretary you know that
we have previous restrictions
were have chased after happily
dollars often experience Mexico
next shiniest object really real
runner spaceport built McKenna
magic what we could have done
with that half billion dollars
in infrastructure we have done
that so really encouraging you
to stick with the plan and focus
on the plan I just chase what's
Chinese coming over the hill and
we we have all this money coming
in all right now and this
opportunity once in a lifetime
opportunity to actually make
some improvements matches two
things because once their name
on the side of a.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Senator.
Senator Baca are absent and we
gonna make motions.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Mr stern and I
appreciate you coming by
speaking to me the other day and
talking about some of the issues
regarding our district as a as
you know we have close to three
hundred million dollars in
projects relating to highways in
my district and so so I can't
tell you how important your
position is to us and it really
gave me some comfort to talk to
you the other day I really liked
hearing things like your that
you're you're not going to be in
no agency you know I really
appreciated that that when
you're looking at projects that
you're gonna look at both safety
and economic development you
felt like that there's a balance
that can be reached there and
you know I I was glad to hear
that because many times madam
chair and Mr stern a of what
we're dealing with state
agencies let's be honest it's
just a lot easier to say no
sometimes it's why not if I say
yes and I got to do work if I
say no less work happens a
little bit easier and so so that
was comforting to me can you
tell me some of your plans on
how you want to achieve that
that balance we talked about
between economic development and
safety sure
manager center one of the the
things that you often hear is
that new federal funding is
hitting states like at massive
speeds and massive amounts right
and that's happening by way of a
lot of federal grants right
formula funding for us year over
year is two percent twelve
million dollars it's not coming
that way a lot of it is coming
by way coming to us by way of
competitive grants and we've got
to get in that game at a level
that we've never been before
because the money is there some
of it comes with no match
requirements at all just commit
connecting communities for
tribal communities you name it
and so we've got to do is
really.
Ramp up how successful we are
working with communities to get
these federal awards so we've
been putting in place to
encourage local governments to
go after what they need to grow
is communities is the
opportunity for them to compete
as a local community but to flow
those requests through us so
that those smaller communities
that don't have the capacity
normally to manage a multi
million dollar project are
representing their needs
directly to U. S. T. T. with
assurances that the D. O. T. is
going to be sure that those
projects are being done
correctly and we've actually are
in the process of developing a
mechanism that will help us
recoup some of the expenditures
related to that oversight like
indirect cost for example so
that we're not running too thin
and lean and forgetting about
some of the other priorities
that we have.
Thank you madam chair and and Mr
stern up and and just to dealing
with municipalities
municipalities and and counties
in getting those projects done
do you anticipate changing your
relationship with them anyway
how how do you plan on working
better with them to to achieve
these economic development and
safety goals you have sure madam
chair Senator one of the one of
the things that we're trying to
and this is former
Representative dodges role here
is we have we have staff that
are directly recent responsible
directly working with local
governments and communities
directly and that's paramount
because over the last three
years the legislature has
provided funding through what's
called the transportation
project fund it's essentially it
has been over a hundred million
dollars that's coming to the D.
O. T. that we then go to
communities and say Hey listen
this money is for you propose
your projects send them to us
and then we Fund and then those
districts right that oversee
those municipalities come in and
support those municipalities so
we're direct funding them now
right and so the relationship
we're building with them
currently is did you know that
we have local government fund
transportation projects funds to
support your road project
priorities this is how you apply
for them this is what you need
to do ahead of time we get those
applications in and we start
getting those projects funded
because typically your small
rural communities one they don't
have the bandwidth to do it too
they don't even know where to
begin and three they're not our
roads so we can go in there and
fix them so we're giving them
the resources and the band with
to do those local projects on
their own.
I thank you madam chair and it
you know in the past we've seen
in the budget and this may have
been talked about I didn't hear
the question asked them but if I
if I if it was just please
you're welcome to stop me and
all of catch up but within the
budget we see a lot of
basically big numbers attached
to very broad descriptions do
you plan on on requesting your
marks for some of these projects
will we know exactly where the
money's going in and we can you
know actually follow it to the
project.
Chair Senators I would that was
exactly what other members asked
yeah that was our approach
during the interim is is we want
we want to give you a number
that backs out into the costs
the the engineer estimates for
each of those projects because
we know that we cannot move
forward with the project until
it's fiscally constrained so if
we need a hundred million for a
project and we get sixty then
we've got to find the other
forty otherwise we're not going
to move that project up into the
construction to.
Thank you madam chair and I look
forward to working with you in
these in these categories that
we talked about here today and
achieving those goals I hope I
can be a liaison for you and the
village Los Lunas Bolin of
county of Valencia to tell
complete some of these projects
as you know we have a an
interchange that's on its way
that is
really just of of huge
importance to the area with the
with the the industry we have
there now such as Matt and the
song of you you've seen the
buildings you know the
construction that's going on
there and some of the other
projects like caught on this
bridge over the railroad and
hopefully getting starting on
the lan north interchange so
again thank you thank you for a
serving and I look forward to
supporting with the supporting
you in working with you.
Senator Stewart I'm trying to
the to pass on this committee.
Right before we go to that I
just also want to say I.
The at the that you said one of
your labels was a fixer and I
think that's absolute that's
certainly the one that I have
heard the by
and you also said it at the
beginning that he didn't think
DOT needed fixing if that turns
out to be true I think we're
going to see a movie the
another.
Agencies the food that does
Mr.
Secretary CYFD hi.
Open offer for years I.
but that will will go head to
the the roll call madam chair to
after the roll call I can make a
brief comment of less than
thirty seconds after the roll
call please go ahead please have
to so there's two labels that I
want to bring about of the
cabinet secretaries that were
mentioned today that I'm proud
of he's not only my cousin he's
my god brother and I want to say
cabinet secretary that your
mother is looking down so proud
because you've made our entire
family proud and I'm just so
thankful and to have the
opportunity to sit right next to
to lead with you and I'm
thankful for you thank you madam
chair.
Yes.
That's a two after the vote.
You yes
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator is
the model is yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator yes.
And eleven thousand we will see
you on the floor this afternoon.
With that rules and recess.
