Two parcels of state owned land
essentially would be the General
Services Department transferring
the two parcels as mentioned in
the legislation to the
metropolitan region food
metropolitan metropolitan
redevelopment agencies the
valuations madam chair of the
land were done at the exact same
time and we have determined that
both are of equal value and so
as a result the city can
accomplish the goals that they
have for that land line and as I
mentioned they are equal value
of each piece the to the the
parcels of property to be
exchanged so the city can
accomplish the goals that they
have for that piece of land in
the state can do the same
this so you're you're probably
wondering why is this a joint
resolution joint resolutions can
be used for a couple of purposes
as we all know we had some
history with land transfers land
sales building sales etcetera as
a religious leader we have
determined that we need to have
a little more oversight as
legislature that's exactly what
this does
some joint resolutions go to the
voters because the
constitutional matters some do
not this is one of the an
example of one that does not
have to but it does have to go
through the legislature in this
manner so essentially because
the valuations are the same and
because it helps you at each end
to do it the chief the goals
that they have I feel
comfortable bringing this to you
and I do have the acting the
most recent acting cabinet
secretary for the General
Services Department unassailable
with us today and I do have the
state police chief Mr Johnson
with us to Johnson yeah we're
we're in that landed said taken
to gonna be taken by the state
in in the transfer will have a
facility that will be utilized
by the state police some and ask
Miss us over to speak for a
little bit and then the chief as
well.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Padilla this resolution
is significant if passed this
will solidify and economic
development initiative for the
City of Albuquerque a public
safety initiative can you hear
me now.
I think maybe I turned it off
can you hear me now with the.
At the turn of.
A public safety initiative for
the department of public safety
and homeland security and a
waste transfer station for the
City of Albuquerque the city is
in need of the parcel as part
other out Albuquerque rail trail
a vibrant and artistic urban
trail that will revitalize
downtown Albuquerque the project
project will link downtown core
to nearby neighborhoods mass
transportation options and the
railyards development side
through the public private
partnerships the City of
Albuquerque seeks to
reinvigorate the local economy
by providing unique activities
along the trail that will draw
people to downtown the second
parcel and this land swap is a
state owned state owned property
known as the Maloof building and
surrounding twelve acres.
The city is in need of this
parcel to build the transfer
station for solid waste is a
little different smaller tracks
and loaded into larger tracks
the waste water transfer station
will make solid waste collection
more efficient and reduce
overall transportation costs
more missions energy use truck
traffic New River Road Water
road wear and tear and lastly
the final parcel is the roughly
twelve acre parcel owned by the
city and the state seeks for
consolidation public transfer
initiative The New Mexico DPS
currently occupies roughly
thirty seven thousand gross
square feet on four point two
two acres in the metro area New
Mexico DPS currently occupies
the state police district I
office on Carlisle and I forty
and leases five other facilities
a study was conducted in twenty
fifteen and as a result of the
study.
and a result of the PS is growth
with over two hundred FTEs it is
determined that they need a
facility of roughly fifty
thousand square feet in size and
a larger caretaker parcel so
what this is doing is looking to
consolidate CPS and homeland
security in this GPS
I don't know what you want to
call it metro metro consolidated
project initiative that.
This makes them requests thank
you madam chair at on this the
chief that to say just a few
words about why this is
important madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
hearing this as with most of
your where for the last five or
six years we've been attempting
to consolidate some of the
buildings that we have in
Albuquerque we're currently in
five different ones which
doesn't make much sense of three
or four of which I believe are
least
and so we've been been trying to
look for land for as many years
as I've been the chief and I I
do believe cabinet secretary
Anna Seles finally pulled it off
after five years of I'm excited
excited for this project and
I'll answer any questions that
you may have thank you madam
chair and so as you heard from
myself and then my two experts
here the the what little pieces
of land are not exactly the same
size if you if you put it
together from of appraised value
standpoint we're in great shape
as a state of New Mexico for the
taxpayers thank you.
Thank you very much of we have
an onsite not.
Okay so we didn't have anyone
sign up in in support or
opposition if anyone in the
audience like to raise a hand to
indicate support please do so.
anyone online.
The date that they sign up for
our they want to raise their
hands indicate.
Okay is anyone raising their
hand online indicate support.
Okay it would I would like to
raise a hand in the opposition.
Xenon online would anyone else
like to raise our hands in the
session okay this line that all
right questions from the
committee senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you madam chair that is a.
G. then the acting secretary.
The
The property the stadium's still
roll over that's one of the
pieces are a little better.
More use the.
Of madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino so
Right now the agency that is
currently occupying the Maloof
building is moving to the pantry
facility we have renovated the
last building is that to see
more of the childcare the.
That is correct that is because
the cities and that is correct
they're moving.
I so measurement.
The Senators.
The.
The city has.
All of the plans of their you.
Madam chair Senators easy Pino
at the Maloo facility they're
going to be building a waste
transfer facility in the and
it's going to be them Maloof
building and the surrounding
twelve acre parcel.
The that existed the I transfer.
Yeah he is.
Yeah.
This is a.
The city is the one of the
service where you're gonna wind
up.
Sure.
Is the personal around the guy.
This was part of a.
And.
The.
The new year there in Mason city
all the more vital than the
other.
Madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino I'm not sure that's a
softball question or set up
question
I should be very smart in my
answering of that I was not
aware of the city's plans for
intensity maybe but again only
to have them in the
neighborhood.
Yeah source so I'm not really
I'm not aware of this as I do
know which piece of property is
but I wasn't sure if those were
the City of Albuquerque was
gonna please please that
facility no worry reserve yes
certainly I'm sorry and madam
chair Senator missile was told
me that this occurs almost only
that there are plans for the
city on that have changed and
that's not going to go into that
facility.
And the gentleman that.
City and state right thank you
additional special the
committee.
we all have Senator Moores on.
The Dallas coffee.
The.
All rights of the provider
regions that are under there
it's also raise questions with.
For those
whole year so long as early as
later of all right Graham
provided all of the real estate
dealings are in or out of office
thank you madam chair and
senator Morris no to my
knowledge there is a zero
involvement of any legislative
so much of the
Our service longer and so.
So these General Services
Department for the state of New
Mexico owns the state
interest in in the swap and the
City of Albuquerque metropolitan
redevelopment agency owns the
city's the interest in the swan.
Of wise or sure.
Well I just thought you were
gonna be here so yes yes
madam madam chair and senator
the the folks that will be
utilizing the vast majority of
the newly own state portion of
the transfer will be the state
police to consolidate fives the
wealth begin the consolidation
of five of individual properties
that they operated and in
Albuquerque and to have better
more efficient streamlined
operation at this facility that
this land.
Senator.
This is very this is regarding.
Madam chair center that is
correct and and and because I
just want to catch you up real
quick so I it was important to
me that there be an equal value
and and both recessed at the
same time and they are of equal
value so we're in great shape as
taxpayers just to simply
transfer the land to.
For sure for.
Additional discussion from the
committee.
Senator Ortiz being.
The rules.
Show all short I want to say one
thing before we get to the
motion but feel free to make
movie of a little bit of that.
Thank you and is there I just
wanna say that I really
appreciate the questions and
comments from the more senior
members on this committee
because I'll tell you and I look
at this I have no idea what I
was looking at why why any of
this would go through is that
as as as as J. R. and whether it
had to go to the voters and and
that so this is this is the
first time I'm really seen one
of these land transfers and and
not completely understand I
really appreciate the insights
of those of you who who have
been here in this body for
awhile to to explain what this
means and what we're actually
doing here because of any member
of the public who brought this
up on the website wouldn't spend
understand it either
but I've I've learned a lot
listening to to you all here and
and and I understand the value
of this and look forward to
voting on in just a moment we
have a motion for Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino let's go ahead and do.
Want to recognize what for years
was there all these reforms are
I all all those years ago.
Chair rice along over.
also.
One.
Thank you I appreciate that
centers of so we're on a roll
call vote on and share fourteen.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle and
Senator Lopez are excuse Senator
McKenna.
The McKinney yes it to reward
just yes senator Ortiz funeral
yes.
Thirties you know yes in
referrals excuse Senator Stefano
yeah this funding CS Senator
Stewart yes.
Yes Senator how do you yeah this
instituting yes with seven says
if you have any pets thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
And so just so folks now we're
going to go next to Senator
o'neill first verses as J. R.
thirteen and then his certain
moral fifty two and then
Representative McQueen but we
will get to your that HB one
eighty four.
Right Senator.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members so we're lucky to have
our veterans secretary here to
explain what this bill does you
know for a layman like myself
here's the deal the the ad sound
of all little league is just a
huge part of the north valley
district that I represent and
this bill basically will allow
it to expand into a very
important couple of acres and
and it's you know at this point
I think.
Interim secretary can explain
why we're doing this but it's
just really I want to emphasize
how important this is in my
district thanks.
Thank you so much of Madam the
secretary of.
And senator o'neill so as
senator Neville described this
is the exciting initiative that
I'm
So a proud to be part of I'm
just Senator o'neill described
this is a cell of four point
four zero three acres from of of
Bernalillo county will be
purchasing it from the state we
received a request last year in
October of twenty twenty two the
appraisal came in at a little
over a million dollars we
negotiated with the city and we
settled on a the selling price
of of four hundred seventy nine
thousand the purchase and the
reason for the request is
Bernalillo county wants to
purchase the baseball fields for
a tee ball facility for
physically challenged and
disabled views only one other
failed in Albuquerque allows for
physically challenged youth so
it's a very near to my heart
initiative
so with that right now the state
has no plans for the for the of
property so we had no problems
and selling the property without
a Santa Claus thank you madam
chair ready for questions.
We have anyone to sign up for
our opposition of anyone's has
signed up in support or
opposition would anyone.
Like to make him part of your
present test to see if you can
stand up and say why this is
important of Hey there you are.
And and great.
We still have a ton of time left
okay sure I wanted to yield yeah
yes thank you commissioner of
o'malley former ex commissioner
and current commissioner of our
Baca have graciously chatted up
here just in time as you change
the.
The genders ratter and may and
and we did we were driving here
usually I am I am really
hardcore about our our
procedures here we are we did
change our our the agenda at the
last minute
so these
talks and and I mean I'm sorry
the former condition
commissioner valley and current
commissioner Baca will talk
about just very briefly you know
one minute two minutes of why
this is important for the for
the navy for the north valley
and senator you have twenty
minutes for you we don't need
twenty minutes I'm saying
because you have plenty of time
if if okay the the commissioners
and I'd like.
Is that their party can take a
twenty minute have certain items
in the.
Okay good madam chair and
members of the.
Committee thank you so much
We this is a
and we're really pleased that
it's funny this is a request or
this purchase funding came
before you hello this is
something that about this in the
works for like think five years
of this is part of a.
Phase of the north valley little
league this is the EDD worked us
out of all the complex there and
these particular field circle
challenge feels in there for
folks there's three kids who are
have the issues with physical
and developmental challenges
this is also additional parking
this particular site isn't of
you got a picture of their what.
It's a it's over by the state
obviously but it's very under
utilized as a matter of fact we
were.
we use the parking with Lisa
from the state to use the
parking overflow parking there's
not enough.
this is of course very important
to the families and in the that
area of the north valley
it's a very robust
league.
Lot of folks have been my
grandchildren went there
and so as well this is a also
home that they.
They finally got through
actually forward with one of the
the governor was a commissioner
she identified the side and got
funding for it and since then
we've been putting a lot of
effort and resources into that
site
so it was at one time it was of
what the church and then this is
a they didn't have a whole the
north valley literally didn't
even have a whole so this is
their home and we're expanding
it and this is all good in the
share support for allowing this
for prefer to purchase this item
thank you thank you commissioner
commissioner Baca.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for
Allowing us to come and I've
apologized related to the glass
right on time.
I just wanted to let
commissioner o'malley said that
this is for the use of our
community and it's a true
partnership to get these feels
going and and continuing the
development for
baseball and as you know
baseball and and team sports and
you know this teaches our kids
good cooperative activities and
good positive X. and so this is
for the future of of of those
kids in the north Philly not
just the athleticism but coming
together the understanding and
commitment to the team which is
really important so thank you
all very much for your work on
this and we appreciate being
here we have we have all of
these.
To remind you about.
Point of.
That.
Today.
In the county really thank you
very much in.
Over to moving this project
full.
With that we stand for questions
thank you very much.
We'll see how I have Senator
Steinborn has to say about.
That.
The.
Okay.
we don't have.
I did.
So we don't have anyone signed
up in support or opposition as
anyone in the room which to
raise their hands to do this on
this
bill okay.
To raise their hand to indicate
support.
Anyone anyone want to raise
their hand in the K. office
support.
They want to raise their hand
indicate opposition seen non
anyone online.
Okay members of the committee I
think Senator Moores on the
Senator Ortiz.
Others.
Reserves
The reserve for the year so the
legislature family alleges
Ezzell all the transfer news
page.
Thank you Mr.
Madam chair Senator no
absolutely not no.
Yeah.
Senator just lives there so this
is the most widespread use
across the street on all of our
work looks like there's still a
little cut out for an ongoing
work looks like the forestry
division are are we moving that.
Are there this move from the
secretaries of a can madam chair
senator Morris no they will or
they will stay in there.
They will stay in our area it
will not affect them for folks
Judy that little.
Sources on over one hundred
miles of working longer.
Madam chair senator Munoz
Representative Marshall
businesses are running on their
own so I wasn't aware of the.
They're all in favor of the
madam chair senator Munoz.
Thank you madam chairman and and
thank you senator.
Or
The only other challenger field
I think now is the local of the.
They have a waiting list.
This is right it really for more
cases some dishes and
regular.
The.
We.
Right.
I don't they really don't have
any questions.
There is this there already some
of some of the so so which is it
is just challenger field is
being added to the existing.
So the these sub four yield are
already in place.
Is the challenge.
Part one and part as far.
Thank you madam chair members of
the budget once again.
The legislative what is the
status.
Four hundred.
Dollars.
Four hundred.
madam chair center to the Pino
we're actually getting money
four hundred and seventy nine
thousand five hundred fifteen
dollars and I use that for my
yes.
Medication assisted.
Go go go I guess right now.
Thank you and the marks thank
you ma'am.
Question but a comment that is
device that I had a chance to be
with students with turquoise
trail of the they talked about
the need to ensure that the
playgrounds of bills assessable
from the special.
Because of this initiative is
exactly what those talk about
that everybody should have the
opportunity to ladies and so
what I heard is the for that
to the students I think we're
thinking about students with
special needs deserve a place to
call.
Whether the question just one
thank you thank you senator.
Senator McKenna.
Madam chair.
Adult.
It is so exciting.
Is.
The.
For.
Here Senator Stewart.
That share it does great
processes line doing.
And then also said there's an
issue with.
The doctor patient
Forces we're.
For more madam chair I think we
we still we provided that
documentation documentation as I
understand so madam chair us.
Madam chair Senator Stewart yes
we have a provided that
information and all it's been
cleared up hello that's great.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Senator so this is going to be
specifically mortality or.
At the.
This will be in addition to
existing fields.
So with this will be a challenge
there's these challenger fields
in addition to other fields that
were built not too long ago
hello so parking the bill
specifically yes this this
particular yes and it will be
that level to be used for that
those fields challenger fields
and also additional parking.
The other counter.
Any of the other leaks or.
Senator Senator Ortiz Madam
chair Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
mentioned his little.
I I I appreciate that managers
and originally at the little
league that the I just kills two
lights on the line.
Actually trying to get one
started I'm I'm hoping we can
the Saudis member.
The.
Representative realizes what's
offered.
Presiding over.
The results for the baseball.
Additional discussion Senator
Moores I apologize sure more
like the result is there's one
single house and.
That in middle of doing.
on there or sell you this little
blue herons which really looking
for sounds
worse.
I want to say House.
Or.
On that one also schools
reservation when this article or
one of our users all around the
programs working on our
Madam chair thank you for sure.
Madam chair senator Morris of
there will be no other entities
affected so that should not be
part of this south.
But I'm not I'm not sure Senator
right I see them with the
neighbors one little house that
is around by this.
The residential
rate is
yes.
Is the office that madam chair
said more stairs the state
forestry division.
There's right and then there's
the
The seniors off of fourth street
property.
Office hours.
Into.
I can look into that to see
exactly which of facility that
is but when we talk to all the
stakeholders there was an issue
so.
Our own servers you
representative about your
weather road.
Is some you madam chair senator
you know this you get to see
this the next committee so by
then we'll be able to clarify
that I think it's an office
rather than a than a residents
of
yeah.
I work but our actions but I can
assure you that I do not own it.
Okay.
One of those rural.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
On the system all right we'll
take that motion just a second I
just want to say
two things that I think I think
this is an Senator o'neill's
current district but it as in
twenty four twenty twenty four
it'll be in Senate district ten
I think with the redistricting I
will so the new owners okay well
the residents of Senate district
ten right next to it I'm sure
will very much enjoyed
I also want to give a shout out
to our analyst because the
analysis on this and on the S.
J. R. before on with these
images and all these tax records
I think is just fantastic and he
did this at the last minute last
night what are vendors were
changing very rapidly so as my
knowledge and appreciate that
that we're.
I believe we have we have a
motion for do passed from
Senator so to do a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca yes about the test
Senator Senator Lopez are
excused from Senator McKenna yes
senator McKinney yes Senator
Moores yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle yes
Jennifer L. yes interest
effects.
Yes Senator Stewart yes thank
you Stuart yes and your heart of
your yes the term you yes and
senator do the yes
nine to have a dependence and
thank you.
And stay with us Senator o'neill
we will go to Senate memorial
fifty two.
Okay.
I also want to make should be
here for yes we're going to go
to that one next options for
that site and and Representative
McQueen is here.
Senator thank you madam chair
members center memorial fifty
two requests New Mexico Brandon
behavioural health institute
Department of Health in the
neuro Act insurance students
Santa Fe jointly study the
health effects effectiveness of
acupuncture and neuro
acupuncture which is really the
focus of this bill in the
treatment of a variety of
neurological disorders including
strokes
the Gehrig's disease and Pam
master matter brain injuries
Parkinson's etcetera so I've
we're joined here by suggesting
commissioner Justin green who is
on the board of of the said
neuro acupuncture states to to
and he can explain what you know
what is acupuncture so much part
of our world now but what is it
about Nero acupuncture that
makes that that is separate and
and away and and really
dramatically effective in
certain really high.
Boy to some extreme situations
but I can't walk in and suddenly
they can lock it etcetera
etcetera so yes right on thank
you madam chair thank you to the
committee and thank you to the
sponsor of this bill my name is
Justin green I am the on the
board of the neural acupuncture
institute this is a five oh one
see three foundation that
studies and helps educate
practitioners of neural
acupuncture so many of you know
acupuncture as a modality for
treating as an eastern modality
yeah eastern medicine modality
for treating a variety of
conditions but we're Nero
acupuncture differs from this is
is a a fusion of eastern and
acupuncture with western
neurology so a lot of the
western discoveries of neurology
it are relatively new and the
practitioners of of acupuncture
of have taken this on and
created a new the council
technique that centered here in
New Mexico so doctors Jason and
Linda how are to Chinese trained
acupuncturist that have lived in
Santa Fe and Albuquerque they
have a practice in Albuquerque
and here in Santa Fe and it is
amazing what they can do with
just a few needles to the scalp
and so god forbid you ever
needed knock on wood but if you
do this is an pretty amazing
technique hi at I'm not a doctor
I am just a supporter on the
board but as I've witnessed
folks come into the office in a
wheel chair half their body it's
having to the impact of the
stroke and not looking like
they're even conscious and then
after an hour's treatment to
walking out with assistance but
walking out and with with that a
child's joined gray and of like
they've just learned how to walk
again it's pretty.
It's pretty spectacular I've
I've watched kids with autism
with social disorders be able to
present to a group of thirty
people than they wouldn't of
made I contact with any of you
before the treatment after the
treatment they come they come
out and they will sing Happy
Birthday and eight year old will
sing Happy Birthday to on stage
it's pretty amazing and so the
goal of this memorial is to
start to get some quantitative
research and some impactful our
reserves and a collaboration
between the U. N. M. th grade
science Center this newly
emergent Center and the D. O. H.
so that we can have a little bit
more quantitative research done
on this so that we can bring
this forward and really show
that New Mexico is a leader in
this and that.
This is a great analogy.
I stand for questions if there's
anything I can help you with
thank you commissioner and then
just to add I've been in this
office and people come from all
over the world honestly all over
the country to to get this very
specific treatment from doctor
how and and his and his
colleagues so so it's almost
like people are already coming
to New Mexico to to get this
treatment and I think that for
me the go system to let people
know that this is a viable
option for you know when you're
faced with these very very
catastrophic illnesses that this
is something that might work for
certain people so with that will
stand for questions thank you
senator thank you commissioner
of we have anyone on the phone
from.
See if there is we have that
written comments submitted you
know and that the members of the
committee to see how his other
bodies what will get copies made
for for the committee isn't out
just note that it is from a
leading question DO and
then we didn't have anyone
signed up in opposition would
anyone like to raise their hands
indicate support.
All right anyone online one and
raise our hands and a basis for.
Right now in which to raise our
hands to indicate opposition.
See none anyone.
All right so members of the
committee Senator Hughes
eighteen thank you.
That chairman Senator.
Last year of U. N. M. opened its
new.
The movement disorders center.
I wonder if we had a them and
us Parkinson in your all the
rest yeah absolutely.
We don't need to.
that money with the start to
question.
Sure this is a great idea.
U. N. M. also has a.
They can have been trying to
remember the name.
Their holistic medicine center
and has a new name.
But but but that might be the.
The weather station.
Need to amend.
Okay districts thanks.
Senator Moores thank you madam
chair thank senator thank you
see
As always as always raise my
eyebrows when the agency's one
supposed to be to these for
morals is in here they want to
do this you want to are they
asking for this
Are we telling them they have to
do this.
I think that Madam Simon chair
of Senator I think we are we're
requesting a collaboration we
have the doctor house both of
them have worked with you in
them in the past and it and of
the holistic Center that us
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino was
talking was mentioning has we've
given demonstrations with them
this is just an encouragement to
to really dig into this it's
So
giving them the the the gentle
nudge yeah so those are active.
This well aptly stated ministers
they give an overcapacity morals
and they just ignored I guess
next year this time will no big
actually wanted or not so I Sir
because I I I magistrates about.
And all all that I.
And so and you guys might may
have noticed that we haven't
scheduled for but we haven't
heard a bunch of memorials and
an rules the session and and
while I I think this is a good
idea I I'm gonna vote for this
hi Hodges echo Senator Moores
and that one of the reasons we
haven't had a much more else's
because they don't have the
force of law they are a strongly
worded suggestion thank you.
As a totally ignored and
disregarded
because I I and I know that
there's some folks who of hope
and I'm happy that memorials
have more morals have not been
heard as I want to take the
opportunity to to explain that
since Senator Moores mentioned
that but I also when I want one
of my brothers is a pain
specialist and I don't know
anything about I really don't
know anything back country
general and certainly not neural
acupuncture but I do remember
him saying a couple of years ago
Thanks shoulder pain in
particular can be incredibly
difficult to treat absent
surgery and I remember him
saying that acupuncture was
amazingly like was one of the
only things that that could
potentially treat that pain
short of state that effectively
short of surgery
and so I've always been very
impressed with what what
acupuncture can do and I hope
that this memorials not ignored
industry by the
but with that what is the will
of the committee they were going
to make a motion.
S. all right we have a motion
for day passes to roll call
that.
Senator Baca yes senator Munoz
Senator that.
Are you Senator McKenna yes.
Yes Senator Moores yes senator
Morris yes senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator yes Senator Pirtle yes
Senator Stefanics yes it just
depends yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator how
to meal yes the gentleman here
yess Senator do the yes the
nines that you have to have
thank you.
The services.
I'm in front of you today thank
Representative McQueen.
HB one eighty four.
And Senator Steinborn we're
gonna do here more presentable
Morial thirty eight for this one
we don't have an analysis on
your SB two eighteen and that is
my fault we've changed our
agenda and to get rid
commissions at the last minute
last night but we will get to
that bill hi next time we hear
bills I just wanna make sure the
members have had and.
This
is the plan for the.
Four thirty eight yes I think
we're going to probably go to
that one after.
More of our memorial fifty two
just trying to send Center harm
is going to be presenting that
when I'm trying to get to folks
in the room who are not on the
committee first.
Senator on
German or merece.
They seem chairman Romero here
we will do his after
Representative McQueen this
time.
This okay.
Zero.
And Representative McQueen I
don't know have you been Senate
rules that the session the
session mentor not the session
of so I actually have twenty
minutes to use As You Like that
twenty minutes will include we
have people sign up on this so
would include your your public
comment in support if you wish
to make that part of your your
presentation we have signed up.
Kevin Bixby Mary Catherine right
Dan Roper are that is that
public comments for the you
would like part of your
presentation.
Yes Mr thank and and this is
playing I try to sponsors have
control over who is speaking in
support of their bill and so
that's that's what that's why we
do it this way
so you have twenty minutes to
use as you please including the
time you would like for these
folks to speak please go ahead
and proceed in thank you for
joining us Senator Diamond to
mentor to some of the list there
were some additional names so I
don't know if
If.
And and I'm sorry that was my my
fault because that was handed to
me hope these people or if we're
signed off so Jang dong control
or Jesse do well from New Mexico
you just want I don't need to
read them all these are the
people that you would like to
have city if they're available
the trees that they were.
Right authorize go ahead and
proceed from here.
Education Madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
hearing house bill one eighty
four of for a long time now
I believe the game department
has struggling in the game
department I believe it's been
struggling with the game
commission has been struggling
so the game commission just be
clear is not in by everybody the
the governing board of the game
department they have the ability
set policy and to hire and fire
the directors.
This bill designed to bring
continuity stability and
professionalism to the
commission of the commission
would stay at seven members but
instead of them all being
appointed by the governor and
serving at the at the pleasure
of the governor there would be
three point from the governor
one from each congressional
district or more than one from
any county no more than two from
any party.
Thirty four appointed by the
Legislative Council in the
Legislative Council perimeter
sort of position appointments
each come with full job
description rancher
qualifications a rancher farmer
conservationist a hunter or
angler.
in the scientist and again no
more than one from any county no
more than two from any party.
They would have six year
staggered terms and only be
removed for costs.
mentor members of the committee
that there been a couple
concerns expressed about the
bill that like to dress and
pants one is the geographic
diversity so under the current
statutes the governor selects.
commissioners from I groups of
counties and then to a large.
Under the current statute you
could have six of the members
from basically urban areas in
the recovery of around the
corner.
this bill actually has better
geographic diversity because of
the the requirement to spread.
It's between counties.
Another comment has been that
there's only one.
Lujan for only one
the member of that community in
in the creek again the current
statutes there are no
requirements for any country.
It's simply silent on that point
so we thought it was important
Sir call out of that position
and make sure it was
Representative but it's
certainly a ceiling certainly a
floor not a ceiling and the
expectation would be yeah the
people who are interested in
serving on the commission are
hunters and anglers and outdoors
people so we would expect there
to be more more than one in the
the act position is something
that is reflected in the current
statutes which we carry forward.
So that's a brief summary of the
bill on the turn over the center
line thank you madam chair and
members and and thank you
Representative McQueen you know
for years we've not had a full
game and fish commission and
fact just until two days ago
they didn't even have enough
members to make a quorum and so
they were unable to meet what we
want is consistency we'd like to
leadership in in this commission
and we're trying to to bring
forward proposals and solutions
that would ensure that we have a
leadership over such an
important agency we have here AS
Representative McQueen stated it
would remain a seven man board
seven seat for but we would
require qualifications for for
these people to serve for those
would be let's council
appointments have with specific
qualifications to serve on that
the other three are appointed
directly by the governor
would represent different
geographic regions because we
stated in there they would
Representative a different
congressional district and very
important also is there it
states in that it there's only
removal for costs and not it at
will so that we could finally
see if we can get bring
consistency I think when you
have the rest of wildlife
activists teaming up with the
hunters and anglers and
landowners there is there is
consistent consistency agreement
agreement that the game
commission just lacks leadership
and we're trying to bring that
with this proposed bill.
Thank you the only is for of
your twenty minutes so we will
go to
these folks
and then I have an indication
that you want these ones read
out loud doing these are at
Latin and through these three to
speak or would you like to see
if all these folks are available
to speak and madam chair who's
ever on that list who is
available
let me let me just add John
Crenshaw or Jesse do will come
on out by please use the
microphone and state officials
who you're with.
And that is one two three four
five six seven eight people on
this list I was a tech keep your
comments to no more than three
minutes thank you very much
madam chair and senators The New
Mexico wildlife federation
stands in strong support of this
bill we hear today also with
permission to express support
from Audubon southwest as well
as trout unlimited who are not
in the room.
The New Mexico wildlife
federation was founded in
nineteen fourteen by Aldo
Leopold in nineteen twenty one
was instrumental in the creation
of the state's very first game
commission which consist of
three commissioners.
Later the commission was
expanded to five commissioners
and then in the nineteen
eighties it was expanded to
seven commissioners and has
existed in that structure and
form in till now but it's
Senator Diamond clearly said as
Representative McQueen expressly
communicated the commission is
in shambles we are in desperate
need of commission reform and I
strongly urge this committee to
issue a do pass on this very
important bill thank you so much
madam chair and senator thank
you and thank you for being so
succinct I just could Johnson
animal protection voters she in
person or online fees on all
right.
miss Johnson if you could you
can go ahead for just a couple
minutes thank you madam chair
and committee members Jessica
Johnson with the animal
protection voters and we
strongly support house bill one
eighty four while the game
commissions history is rooted in
promoting hunting and fishing as
was just mentioned by Mr
developed many of today's New
Mexicans enjoy wildlife through
non consumptive in doing like
wildlife watching and
photography so this bill
includes important provisions
that we think will provide
rodder representation on the
commission that may address this
point and also ensure that the
commission will include
scientific expertise which is
really important and has too
often missing on the commission.
Additionally by spreading the
appointment power across the
governor and the legislature we
think that this will increase
the odds of having appointed
senators and qualified
commission and we urge your
support thank you so much.
Thank you very much Mr Johnson
Kevin Bixby wildlife for all.
Your online.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead okay thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Kevin Dixie I am the
executive director of the
nonprofit wildlife for all
speaking to you from yes this is
how we strongly support this
bill I sponsored sport
addressing a serious problem
with wildlife.
In New Mexico to pay in my
capacity with the nonprofit
wildlife for all I have the
opportunity to study the
wildlife management systems in
place in every state.
Most states have some type of
wildlife commission usually
appointed by the governor with a
lot of attended problems eighty
one eighty four would make
Mexico a leader passion lies in
democratizing and stabilizing
wildlife management in the state
of either among all the states
I was there in one position for
sciences the bill would ensure
that there we scientific
expertise to the commission that
is independent of the department
staffed by reserving a seat for
a while life advocated would
take a step towards ensuring
that the ninety five percent of
New Mexicans who do not have.
We'll have a voice well it
enters by transversal I since
the legislature will help to
remove the temptation of
patronage from the selection
process and by protecting
commissioners from being removed
without cost input will provide
much needed stabilization and
promote inform.
This is a great thank you.
Thank you Kerry Romero wildlife
council that figures and
guidance.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Kerry Romero
executive director registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
council about fighters and
guides we also stand in support
of this legislation our
organization attends every
commission meeting and works
closely with the department of
game and fish over my eleven
years with the council I've
watched the commission become
increasingly less efficient I
believe the reason for this is
that the current statute does
not require commissioners to
have any familiarity with game
and fish law or wildlife policy.
This can create a lot of
disruption in meetings because
commissioners don't understand
the importance of timing in
rulemaking and they frequently
unintentionally violate the open
meetings act because they simply
don't understand game and fish
Policy and process additionally
it's been over four years since
we've had a full commission of
seven members for an extended
period of time.
This bill would solve many of
our current issues with the
commission takes away power from
the governor it clearly defines
that commissioners need to have
some knowledge of wildlife
hunting and fishing and it
provides the commission with
stability because it prevents
commissioners from being removed
without costs we urge you to
support the bill thank you
thank.
Chris Smith I want WildEarth
guardians.
Thank you Mr Smith.
Please go ahead and proceed.
Yes yes yes we can hear you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for taking public
comment and hearing this bill
and thank to the sponsors for
bringing it my name is Chris
Smith and the registered
lobbyists for WildEarth
guardians I'm here on behalf of
our thousands of supporters and
members across New Mexico we
strongly support this bill along
with insulating the commission
from political winds and
dynamics we also feel it's
really important to add new
perspectives including
scientific action man and
wildlife conservation
perspectives to the commission
the commission is not
functioning well as it is we
think this bill would go a long
way in fixing it I urge you to
support it thank you very much.
One Mr ever please go ahead for
up to two minutes a good morning
committee members of the record
Dan Roper tried unlimited is an
organization focused primarily
on the health of our cold water
fisheries and representing
anglers from across the state we
also take great interest in our
state's game commission I'd
mostly be report repeating up
points have been made so I just
want to say that we're glad to
see this moving along with
bipartisan support I was also
asked to mention support on
behalf of our partners at the
wildlands network and on behalf
of one of our other recreation
business partners of power
supply shop and house I think
that demonstrates the diversity
of groups supporting this effort
and thank you for your time.
Thank you Brian for defenders of
wildlife.
Someone.
Mr chair please go ahead for up
to two minutes.
Madam chair this is actually
Brandon when I'm back this is
Brian bird I I just.
thank you madam chair I hope
that you can hear me we.
My name is Brian bird in the
southwest program director for
defenders of wildlife we
represent eighty thousand
members and supporters across
the state of New Mexico I
personally have been working
with and front of the state in
commission now for close to
twenty five years and it's
always been a problem because of
its speed so overly politicized
and not representative of the
people of our state so I think
this bill would improve both
those things we depoliticize the
commission and health
representation on the commission
so dividers while exports this
bill and thank sponsors very
much thank you madam chair.
Thank you and last we have Mary
Katharine rain Rio Grande Sierra
Club.
Zero one.
Mary Catherine right.
They're called.
Madam chair she often calls in
if there's a phone number
online.
I.
All right well I I think we've
heard quite a bit of of public
comment on this is already in
use.
Six more minutes left of your
time if you like to use it or we
can can perceive men.
Yeah question the answer
questions we have anyone signed
up in opposition on this.
Hi if anyone in that audience
would like to raise their hand
to indicate support you can do
so.
and aligners in the hand for
support.
Right.
Thank anyone would like to raise
their hand indicate
oppositionparticularly.
All right anyone online.
Okay I'll go to questions from
the committee we have Senator
Stewart Senator Moores and
etcetera thanks Bob by Senator
Ortiz Pena.
Thank you madam chair.
Really liked.
Both much thought and effort.
Michael thing that there is one
issue and that is that no
Legislative Council which is not
require Senate confirmation.
Boards for their point the.
So
I have a little bit of weirdness
on page five with she
I
think that they continue to
serve because I've never seen
this in the bill and I'm I'm
wondering if it is current
practice I understand so it must
be somewhere else have you
scripted out of somewhere have
put it back in I just wondering
about that and and you really
have to say governor appointees
will have sent a confirmation
but not the Legislative Council
so that's a a change that I
think you need.
The madam chair.
Representative Stuart if you
look on them so the language in
need is sort of general language
but if you look on page four at
line twelve one eleven and
twelve we called out that the
the gubernatorial appointees are
concerned with the advice and
consent of the Senate is not the
intent under the bill that the
Legislative Council appointees
would be confirmed by the
Senate.
I think the specificity in that
section F. that makes that
clear.
All right.
Care what I propose that we
need.
Madam chair of the.
Senator Stewart it that is the
practice it's my understanding
that.
It's been a while since sent has
confirmed any of the
appointments so it's sort of a
little bit down in the pecking
order and maybe a lower priority
and it hasn't happened of late
so I think it's important to.
Clarify that the pointed person
does get the service now have to
wait until after Senate
confirmation.
Less.
This
hard to know who to call when.
Okay I think this process.
And and and just for for folks
generally here if you have so if
you want passed up to the
committee please make sure that
that I get a chance to look at
it and approve it before before
given to our tenants to start
surpasses.
and and then Sir or madam
percent I wonder if you might
would be willing to yield for to
me for a minute on the street
question
because I I one thing
Representative to consider so.
And we do this a lot in
Judiciary if something is true
whether we say it or not we
don't say it in a bill because
what we don't want to have
happen is for folks on the line
start looking at that
legislation passed where we
didn't say at and read that
mission to mean that you have to
say at otherwise it is true so
if for these board for for if
this commission if it is already
true that they can they can
continue to serve you know I
regardless of of confirmation I
would urge you not to say it
here because he has otherwise
anytime we don't say that
another commission it's going to
be read as saying they can't
continue to serve with and
without being confirmed because
we didn't say so so I I would
urge if you will intent to
strike that I know you don't
want this probably to have to go
back on for.
concurrence but.
I I I is this going to need the
this goes conservation acts not
Judiciary and this is a and
that's the kind of strikes we
always student judiciary so I
would.
Well mentioned that that was my
question somewhere else if
they're doing it already
Yeah I just don't think it's.
The list.
You take it out somewhere else
in the staff that was.
Madam chair of
Center Stewart I I'm not seeing
it is straight through language
I you know I I am certainly
willing to take it out.
Excuse me madam chair.
I think there is also a similar
comment as to six.
and that the commissioners as a
point officials would be subject
to these acts one one thing that
occurred to me including that.
Is that what the commissioners
to know that they're subject to
those acts.
And so I think there's some
benefit to.
It's a fairly short statute if
you get pointed to the
commission hopefully you read
it.
And you might you know slide the
those issues that they should be
become familiar with those acts
so I do sometimes include
things.
That may be true anyway for the
purpose such as that but
it I I'm.
But I'm certainly open to
revisions and.
I would defer Senator Diamond.
And I understand why to hear
madam chair and Senator Stewart
since that for the last five
years none of our game
commissioners have been
appointed and so to clarify that
you were still serving even
though I'm sorry I have not been
confirmed to clarify that even
though you have not been we
confirmed you are still the
acting and governing bodies is
why was that their tech
clarification I see your point
saying well we don't verify
addition assumed it
One and center is also much that
it's I think is that they they
should should certainly be
educated on it no question and
and it's competing interests of
wanting to make sure that they
have explicit notice verses.
Not wanting to create a
precedent where in the future if
that language is missing it
could be read by a judge as as
not not applying because it's
not state affirmatively I just.
Sorry Marci and of.
For sure for the program I
choose to ocean issues programs
all get too much the first one
which is one of my issues to
because this co chair of the
state after you purchased or
quality of exact for the open
meetings act or do all that we
pastors of the page this bill if
everybody wants to with the
legislature or is that they have
in this
so I agree with the the.
Senator properly.
I think I'm I'm gonna go ahead
and make a motion and a motion.
Members of ocean.
The lawyer also same motions
right now the same reason.
The reason for that record.
Is there discussion on that
motion.
Is there any objections to
adopting that.
In the state of New Hampshire
Senator the motion would be
destroyed on.
A.
I strikes subject to the G. six
subsection.
Read the letter record.
Discussion on that motion.
Is there any objection yes
Sierra.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you yes Senator is
different even okay I thank you
for that I should have gone back
to them first I appreciate that
hi is there any objection to
adopting that amendment.
Seeing please show Senators RTZ
Pino McKenna Stewart Hermio
Duhigg Ingle Baca colonel and
mourners in favor that amendment
is adopted for back on the bill
as amended it and I think next
are you saw the floor Senator
Stewart.
Senator Moores.
I want to talk to.
Would you but also center
Diamond and Representative we
about the.
Information so we have I think
gotten one since I've been here
the game commission which is a
pox on us for not doing.
but I I don't like giving up and
it makes sense that this is a
house bill says is given up our
power as a committee and as a
senator
I only confirming that those who
are appointed by the governor so
we might be on opposite sides
that is a member of them because
we currently have the right to
confirm all appointees and way
and let's The council also those
for like S. I. C. when we to the
US I see we still reserve that
right even though we have done
the last couple years to go
through that thank you for the
Legislative Council so I would
rather to give up that power of
the committee in the Senate and
so I wanted to discuss the fact
of why you're taking this
committee specifically out of
the compound formation process
Madam chair representative
German McQueen what what that
what that logic was because of
my run amendment to.
The strike on page four whites
Levin.
pointed by the governor Lee are
power at as a committee in the
Senate to do those confirmations
because we do reserve that right
for other boards in which we do
Legislative Council pointers.
Madam chair Senator Moores
I think there are two good
reasons of one is that through
the Legislative Council of the
Senate we have a voice in
Legislative Council appointments
and to just an interest at the
time and efficiency I mean if
the my understanding is the
Senate hasn't confirmed any
appointment since the Martinez
administration and some
somewhere in the middle of the
Martinez administration so not
not that they confirmed all the
Martinez appointments
It's it's seems to click it is.
ventures.
It's really not this is and you
know we have the are you would
like to serve that rings.
I remember hearing your.
I just there are always issues
on and off of
our.
This is very important for more.
So I agree I agree what you're
saying only that there are no
one thousand.
Your.
I will.
So madam chair.
The way the Legislative Council
point four
is that.
So I have worked with Senator
Baca.
On issues that have come up.
Where it looks like.
This.
One.
The from the public party or
independent.
We worked on the S. I see a
point in the other so when it's
the Legislative Council we work
across party in the Senate I'm
pretty sure they do that in the
house although you know the
house is a little bit different
in the sense that you know we
have the committees committee
that group
the point for the session.
So I think having it be
appointed by the lead counsel is
it forces us to work together
and work with the other chamber
so I don't have any issue with
the Legislative Council over
these.
Sure Senator I'm with you on the
council morning absolutely I'm
with you I'm just trying to
protect our rights to that for
like U. S. I. C. this specially
in light is on a roll one of the
sections J. the only way to
remove them.
For.
For.
so say we have an instance where
what's.
Someone we we are here it's and
then they go over operate all
you can't remove them we can't
remove them as we have that that
hang over.
On this.
Regions of once or.
I think we need to.
Let me also say.
So many things aren't for
confirmation.
Lost his one hundred three hi.
Okay.
And
all.
Please.
And.
Ford center transmissions there
are many functions that require
Senate confirmation so kind of
the idea of not forcing the
Legislative Council appointees
go through confirmation process
you know in in a way they
already do I going through life
council so.
Or if any appointees that the
reflected but we have to work a
lot behind the scenes.
So I I just I don't want more
and more and more confirmation.
I appreciate member of them and
they can still serve on.
What was used so I just wanted
to insure legislative powers
away just.
We don't have to rural schools
for but as a.
Here's a.
Some of those along.
So I I think I will be made
available on.
For.
Right.
I go.
Operations this morning.
With.
Right seven motion this page
four line eleven striking
appointed by the governor is
there is that a friendly
amendment.
You.
You know I'm almost in different
to this I can say that we're
crafting this bill we we allowed
for for Legislative Council
appointments at the legislative
branch would have input into the
majority of those seats at that
point
at three of them would have to
be confirmed to the legislative
branch would have to provide
some sort of okay our check to
the governor appointees but I I
have to I have to say that I
believe that the legislative
branch has an input enough of an
input through through
Legislative Council and again I
just want to reiterate that the
do you haven't approved any for
for years the Senate hasn't
confirmed anyone who still set
so it seems if it was
unnecessary that unnecessary
step here but you know we'll
continue on with this bill with
whatever the pleasure the
committee is that something that
you're leaning on friendly.
Friendly
unnecessary amendment to.
Chair Senators and why do we
have the lowest recorded.
It's not a necessary because
which is all your work power
you're taken with prostitution
are power of this body on the
surface and.
To give it to the Supreme Court
the issue was not of its
working extremely hard work that
we currently have as a body.
Madam chair and senator.
Representative madam chair and
senator Morris the legislative
branch hasn't removed any of the
game commissioners but the got
the currently serving governor
has removed many commissioners
at will and that's why we're
seeing this huge turnover so
what I would do is is actually
preventing the governor from
removing commissioners it well
with and without any indication
that there soon be a replacement
for that seat committee chair
senator if I may I don't think
confirmation is intended as a
removal power it's a.
Etcetera etcetera if I may.
I think it's intended as a pre
approval so it is there's
a lot of times if there's a
decision and you know I think
one of the problems we seen in
the commission is commissioners
being removed for political
reasons if you reserve the
approval prior power the
confirmation as a rule power
you're reserving that power to
remove people for political
reasons rather than to evaluate
them improve their credentials
and qualifications investors are
left stated in our constitution
or exactly when and the federal
level you're right you can't for
new ones issues and so your.
For our constitution that we
have in the server lacking any
action by this in this
community.
This body so it is it is
reversible here I'm here and
that is on the body as for is
that our because we are system
legislation going very often we
have vision and so on most.
Our offices last year so is the
exact opposite of that so this
is why.
So I apologize reviews when
this is our one that allows us.
On the amendment center part of
the new here thank you
Representative
Support in order for Google.
Let's council made a half house
passes.
Jobs these.
To have a combination or the
reason.
Especially on.
Workforce.
As I see
The other.
but the population.
Forty act absolutely is exactly
more stated
thousand sure that little road.
and it body of the chair wanted
to the committee and we have the
authority the constitution the
multiple times I've been on this
committee for eleven years these
that's something madam hello to
everyone they seriously of I go
to tons of interim committee
meetings.
But I go to tons of interim
committee meetings that are laid
waste a time frame so this
committee is is it shows to
get serious about a lot of
course.
For people
and do that that's something we
need to do it we should but I
don't think that means of we
should strip ourselves of this
authority just because in the
past we have and.
Long as I can as long as
subsection J. is in there and
and I would have a few minutes
to propose as well but as long
as subsection J. is in there
we essentially have to have
Just be in there for that
reason.
Saying that somebody can bring
in light of duty or malfeasance
I'm not an attorney but
good luck trying to
Figure out what that means.
And it is one of five is
measures what confidence.
malfeasance you figure out for
you but there's plenty of people
I feel are incompetent.
Someone else might.
Of
I I just have shot show with Jay
long as as Jay's in New Mexico
we don't have confirmation of
that is very problematic.
additional on the amendment
Sir McKenna.
Thank you madam chair.
I was really entertain Exeter
later.
Approval given this body was
full time.
what I have those connections
about.
It is
And all those that were waiting
for this body to me.
And.
Kalenjin just have a quorum so
we can approval
this so because of those reasons
to work full time.
You know we can can be very
early I just for you.
Follow
the
Just be
fun to do.
addition additional discussion
on the amendment judges.
The staff offices the server.
Regardless of this body.
Appropriations.
They're still in our full power
to source exact offices.
Office we don't have it here.
All right
there we.
All.
You don't take action.
Your reserves are right and you
all right.
The.
So that all two zero three law.
New Mexico there our just like
they are now we want to have a
confirmation hearing news
missions right now.
You just.
So.
Did you want to be reckless on
the amendment I know all passed.
certified on the amendment yes
here.
General.
Bill other.
There has to be.
That is not
On the really unpack.
Businesses.
And this is one of those.
I have a lot.
the.
Did they are.
Someone cryptic to me
sauces who's anyone else will
speak on the amendment.
Because then or not.
About some of the if it's not on
the amendment about can it is
okay we would we'd better be
careful not to take away this
committee to power because
there's certain commissions here
boards in the state to
streamline that whole.
We have been talking about one.
You're going to call the game
commission.
Thank you madam years and years
and years the most sought after
position.
Government.
The sheriff one not remove us
gentrification from.
Work.
We'll have we'll have some
really bad repercussions.
And senator mark on the
amendment yes thank you madam
chair thank you senator
Representative what I would say
is that and you know with
respect to my my colleague you
know
this this commission is
different this game commission
is something that's very
important to the state it's it's
sets itself apart from other
commissions that we have we just
had a lengthy debate on the
floor over just licensing fees
madam chair the other day and
and in that debate of what came
to light was the amount of
economic development and just
all the benefits that are
brought to the state simply by
having the game here that people
want to come and hunt and enjoy
our outdoors and so I think it
sets this commission part to
such an extent that it deserves
and is deserving of that extra
spruce me so I I think with that
the emphasis then goes to how
important are these positions do
they deserve that they deserve
that and so are committee gives
and that attention and I have
worked and and I've worked well
with the with the settlement pro
tem in in selecting other people
in for for other positions
however in those positions I I
feel like they're more of a
a resume and kind of put him in
in their slot type of position
where is this what we do here is
we get background checks we get
a packet we get information on
people that we do not have
access to any other way outside
of this committee and so for for
those reasons I I would I would
support the amendment I think I
think this resources
is important enough that it
should garner attention thank
you.
Yeah.
But I'm also going to support
the amendment
I I I one hundred percent agree
with what members times are
there to there's too many
confirmation of everything
having that now being and and
and this position
I I don't I I don't want to be
confirming everyone and their
brother we just don't have time
to and and and and just said or
their sister thank you for their
non binary simply
We what my my intention with
this committee is that we will
be meeting during from and we
will be doing confirmation
hearings during the interim
but the fact that they can serve
regard.
Even if they haven't been
confirmed resolves I think my
concerns about being a
bottleneck because I I I I hear
what etcetera the condenser
Sanchez saying and and and I
think they're good points but I
think because they can serve.
Of regardless that concern for
me is Matt
but overall I I agree that if
they can only we are definitely
increasing the standard for them
to be removed.
This is a I think rightfully so
to to address the real problem
with people being removed for
political reasons but I think
part and parcel to that is also
continuing the oversight of this
committee as part of that
process
And I I know that I know that
all the folks who we appoint
through let's council I know
that that a lot of work goes and
it with my madam chairman and
are minority leader and thought
of working coordination is going
on behind the scenes as a member
of let's Council I usually to
show up and and and and I I
don't participate.
In in discussion about those
appointments the same way we do
we have conversations about
conferees here I'm not saying
that's a bad thing that's just a
reason I think to to keep their
confirmation power for this
commission so I'm going to
support the amendment as well I
don't is there any further
discussion on the amendment are
we ready to go to a vote on it.
To roll call vote on this
amendment.
We clarified this is to this is
an amendment to page four slide
eleven striking the words
appointed by the governor.
Senator Paypen yes Senator but
yes Senator Ingle.
Yes Senator.
Senator Lopez is excuse Senator
McKenna.
Matt.
Thank you very and then again.
Shorts page four line eleven
striking the words appointed by
the governor so the way that
that subsection F. would read
would be all commissioners shall
be appointed with the advice and
consent of the set.
my vote is now.
Senator McKenna no Senator
Moores yes Senator Moores yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino has if you
excuse Senator Pirtle yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stefanics yeah Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart no Senator had a
meal no Senator how do you know
and senator do the yes Senator
Duhigg yes yes six yes three no
and to do so that the amendment
is adopted Senator Moores I
think you still have the floor.
After back on the bill is now
the director call center yes and
this is this goals one of those
ones that's on my front of for
someone from.
I guess the question is I I take
pride in always keep in mind
zero rated conservation voters
New Mexico so if I vote for this
or will they actually give me
some points that's going to
weigh into the side this is one
of those ones are going to
Greece on researchers
Representative.
Madam chair of the center you'd
have to.
Here so so madam chair center
maybe the fact they're not here.
Give you a hand I don't.
They are just as a thank you
madam chair that Senator on all
those for.
I.
Thank you next we'll have
senators to provide to a seven
percent RTZ piano and volva
center Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen a center
diamond there was another bill
twenty three that.
Tended to be laid aside
chair Senators to fund X. twenty
three stalled and house energy
is a five five of
twenty three proposed moving the
team department to be a division
of energy minerals and natural
resources along with forestry
park sort of conservation it's
at a it was an interesting
discussion and I thought it was
useful to have that discussion
but the bill has not with our so
madam chair I just wanted to
point that out so that
the.
Your thank you.
Thank you center part of.
You madam chair story off to
life by
It is I.
Of course the user
I understand.
I.
Grail is gerrymander.
She was.
To.
In order to establish.
I think this is confusing and
then the result will be the work
from the.
The system has worked all so I
would.
Share story of these two line
a line on the.
So I sent the receipt that H.
two line nine right.
The remainder of the page page
three drive lines one through
nine.
This would be taking out all the
information about specifying
that the compressional districts
and and what happens if we go if
we increase or decrease the
number our number of initial
congressional districts it makes
it an eight person board which I
think is problematic
we already have the language on
line six through eight where
talks about no more than one
residing in the county so I I
just don't think that the
congressional district languages
Necessary and online eight this
is where is where the amendment
will start after parting the
insert a period like the rest of
age.
Senator amendment yes Senator
fox Madam chair of is that a
family member funds with.
Madam I'm having a hard time
hearing sorry
kit.
You can see the lines again yes
so so Representative so page to
start online eight after the
word party we would insert
period and then strike
everything that follows that
through line line on page three.
Madam mess Senator question
checked so chair Senators is
your so you would just defer to
having them be from different
counties and that that would be.
Madam chair representative that
that would be better than having
a more eight member board in my
opinion.
And.
You know even even with that the
way the congressional districts
are
where every single congressional
district wagon wheels into
Bernalillo county.
All three could come from three
counties at all touch each other
anyway with the language the
congressional district lines so
I don't think it does what your
intent was maybe the way they
used to be drawn it would ensure
that they came from different
parts of the state but the way
that districts are now in their
wagon wagon wheel spoke to in
Albuquerque I mean they could
also it could be
three counties that touched each
other essentially so I as long
as are from three different
counties I think to me that's
that's good enough there's the
the party affiliation language
in there so I I don't think it's
necessary madam chair Center so
that the county language is
actually came from a prior
discussion about this bill in
this committee in the concern
that we had started out with the
congressional districts and as
you say they all wanted to for a
Lee County and that there is
concern you could have to I
think it was two or may possibly
three from the same county so we
had the county limitation
frankly you know I I see your
point.
Madam I think I could live with
just the county distribution
that would simplify the bill.
That's handling schooling
friendly clean friendly our
activities and Haas.
All right.
further discussion on the
amendment.
Senator Stewart.
Chair on I love I'm leaning
towards friendly personally.
I I agree with for.
Hello.
Really.
When I read it I I I didn't
think we really need to the case
we get longer we lose one I sort
of thought what is that.
so.
I really do think that the need
doesn't.
All state
Or if you need to.
this year.
he has.
The state.
Related.
No more than two filet with
state political party adding in
that language the any time the
that we're adding in on all
bills whenever we're saying no
more than so many of a political
party which would be so after
party and served probably semi
colon no member shall have
change their political party
affiliation and within the last
two years although you have to
have it already here for four
years never mind.
I think the back although that
is a question I have we'll we'll
finish up on the amendment but
that I'm I'm wondering why you
guys have for years but we've
been doing to in general fund
I'm sure that's that's the as we
turn the page as my issues okay
so what's the stick to this
ammendment now I withdrawal what
I was asking you to add to it so
it is just page two starting
line eight after party answer
period strike everything else
through Page three line line any
additional discussion Senator
Stewart.
Percent of.
By taking a position one.
Three.
This may mess up what the
temporary.
On
the.
Senator you know the usually
what we do in here is we've put
that the the positions I shall
be determined by law and then
what happens is that the
secretary of state you costs
law.
That so
I don't know if you want to go
there but if we do.
I have to deal with that.
One two and three because that's
the only place that we identify
these one two and three
Madam chair center there's also
position for five six and seven
and which is the Legislative
Council appointment.
Madam chair representative I
know that.
You.
For that.
Information.
Or other than temporary
information.
The manager you're correct this
is to there there for the
purpose of the temporary
position provision.
So I think we may have to the
test for information
And and then pretend I think
that is a very good catch
Senator Pirtle I don't know if
you want to.
gesture moment to account for
that now are.
If you want to take a vote on
the amendment as stated and then
and then present it should.
Madam chair I could easily be
done.
Now we online I.
Straight from members of.
And insert so it is essential to
the session positions one comma
two comma and three of the
commission appointed by the
governor.
Yeah I think that does it so let
me restate your overall
amendment you tell me that right
or not.
Page two line I.
Strike the words three members
and certainly there of positions
one two and three.
That would read except as
provided by subsection C. of
this section Senator yeah we
need to strike the introductory
exception Language okay as we
stricken subsection C..
We have.
Okay so page two line for.
Hi line for and I strike all of
the added language.
And certainly there B..
Position like the subsection B.
designation and then positions.
What okay sorry and included
members are at that rate the
center.
Page page two line for some five
nine four five strict added
language and strike members.
And then and certainly there the
subsection B. positions one two
and three.
I think it would be better to
start three members of the
commission shall be appointed I
have.
compositions one two and three
no more than one side.
That's that's fine with me
Senator Pirtle we're taking part
your amendment federally the
chair I applied for to the
educator of.
No comments save lives so.
All right I just want to start
with the three members of the
nation's point I haven't heard
as managers also get credit for
the idea.
All right so so do you want to
set the amendment Center or are
I can up to two point four five.
All the new.
Correct all the new language
through that com on page five
nine five yes.
So that in and of course they
would capitalize.
Three members of the commission.
Composition.
Three members of the commission
shall be appointed by the
governor Lujan positions one two
and three costs with no more
than one reciting anyone County
etcetera etcetera with the same
political party comma and then
add your
you have a.
Alright.
But no we don't need to add to
that because it's already later
and and the in the bill.
At.
That party and then we strive
everything that follows through
line nine on page three is
everyone clear on what the
amendment is as long as the cost
basis after physician to just
occurred to us.
All right
is there is there any further
discussion on that amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting that.
And then then we would remember
just the letter Senator McKenna
madam chair and.
Representative is the sole
friendly.
Madam chair center yes.
A little friendlier as we.
All right is there any objection
to adopting that amendment.
C. nine stations Senators RTZ
Pinos to phonics McKenna Stewart
Hermio Duhigg single Baca Pirtle
and mortars is putting us on the
amendment that is adopted back
on the bill as amended.
Taxes.
Right.
It was more problems Senator
Pirtle just one problem at a
late.
Madam the rate for subsection.
The other side the.
Four of subsection of this
section no more than to the
commissioners.
Order by the New Mexico
Legislative Council should be
affiliated to a political party
the way I read that is that
essentially lets council could
appoint three of one party
because we've exempted the
scientists from qualifying
is that the intent when writing
it or what was the intent of
exempting out the scientist
application of.
The madam chair Senators the
intent was my concern about
enquiring into the political
views of an academic that my
hope is that this position is
scientific and technical in
nature and that the political
background the the individual
would be immaterial.
All.
Madam chair representative great
but.
Twenty three.
And that just doesn't exist
anymore fortunately
I I I mean I understand why I
have an issue of the sciences
building on here but it
absolutely should count in my
opinion I would hope they would
be in the state or in the
pandemic from the ideal
but if they're not I don't see
why we wouldn't calculated that
in there because the the goal
was.
The original language I think it
is four out of seven.
Party with this language five
out of the seven.
The other.
For the and they're out of
course so I think.
Why problematic I don't think
that was the role of.
So I would hope the scientists
would be unbiased in in
decisions that you make sure he
makes.
but I I do think issues related
so I would strike.
Move to strike on line seven
starting with other.
H. four lines set there is
concern right here yeah.
Right other.
Nine eight.
Is that.
That friendly or unfriendly the
madam chair etcetera the the the
motivation wasn't to stack the
deck one way or another but
as I've said before a I am
inclined to accept that is
friendly.
Being friendly I think that's
the term.
All right discussion on the
amendment.
Any objection to adopting that
amendment.
The line please show Senators
are to the **** the phonics
McKenna Stewart Hermio Duhigg
Ingle I have heard on more
spending yes that amendment is
adopted that kind of those
adopted you some of the floor
center.
Thank you for all of my Trice
needed to.
I do have the issue on page six
subsection Helen that's.
party affiliation.
Yeah and I understand that the
house.
Amended it to.
Include provided that a person
change party affiliation for the
purpose of voting in a primary
election for state level plop
you know I appreciate that.
Years.
Hello.
Locking happens for years you
know the president for years.
Tired presidential term so I I
I I get straight I'm in Madam I
I have a problem with the
general because what if somebody
changes from Democrat to
independent or independent to
Democrat I just I just kind of
strange that we would penalize
somebody for that I understand
the intent of it but that's also
why we can for people and we can
look at that and say well this
person change their.
Destruction three months before
getting appointed maybe we
should consider that but I would
be inclined to come in at the
very least.
For the two.
But.
I think the incentives so that
people are changing from major
political parties so that it
doesn't.
Let's see up the numbers
but I don't know how you how you
do that other than through the
confirmation process so I would
just move madam chair page six
line nineteen strike for an
answer in lieu thereof to.
Madam speaker with almost every
other board.
Language that we have.
Senator Moores thank you madam
chair and I I we have had that
situation with people changing
parties members of the student
regent
I'm sure this question this is
more for.
In our package we asked that
question what is what is the
number that questions.
Two years here or we.
What what we.
Senator I I can't remember the
tax I know that we have consists
when we just on other bills in
the Senate we've always done it
for two years.
house before.
Health report consist of the.
Additional discussion on the the
amendment.
All right is there any objection
to adopt an amendment.
I think I think the Senate lead
friendly to do our our that
allows the last one I apologize
jerseys you Mr the song is a and
friendly on this and the reason
is because governor's service
for four years so what what
we're trying to avoid is people
strategically switching parties
so we can preserve that
distribution in the you know
fair and above board manner I
think you know.
Of course governor can get
reelected
Right so so when the governor
does come in the governor
doesn't replace the entire
commission.
Right so if they know there's a
term come in the physician
coming open in you know two or
three years you could say I'm
young I'm gonna need the DTS of
point why don't you switch now.
So that that's why we picked for
years because it coincided with
the with the length of the
governor's.
Senator says this friendly or
unfriendly that unfriendly onsen
okay all right and and etcetera
we got an answer on the packet
question we ask a hundred eighty
days.
is there additional discussion
on the amendment.
To roll call vote on this.
After yes.
Senator Baca yes.
Actually.
Senator Lopez this excuse.
Senator McKenna.
Senator McKenna no senator
Morris.
For
years.
Yes yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino hello Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino no Senator for yes Senator
Pirtle yes signatures to Senate
yup.
Which is different no Senator
Stewart.
No Senator had a meal is.
Representative reverting and
changing two years or four years
to two years or changing their
and and his sense of.
Senator how do you know.
Senator Duhigg I yes sent all
six lane.
yeah in all.
In Senator Ingle.
This year.
that is.
And and I just want to explain
it at I. A. with with due
respect for it being unfriendly
it's just consistency since we
we do make the same change and
built almost every time rules
meets we've we've always done it
to to
I but it did not pass it I have
it tied I I saw that movie is
not adopted.
All right so.
Back on the bill has amended
thank you madam chair I guess a.
Make sure my French change party
affiliation if I run for
governor in four years.
Kind of right on.
I also have issue of page six
subsection in its is the
director of the New Mexico
outdoor record of the economic
development department.
Or the directors designation
albeit next officio nonvoting
adviser to the commission and
madam chair Representative I
find that strange I think it
should be the other way around
of the game commission should be
advising the outdoor recreation
development department.
and I don't understand why we
want the executive to have
another employee.
or why their voices even really
needed.
Ufficio
if they want to come to the
commission meetings and give
input when issues arise that are
necessary that that should be
the but they have a shall.
in here correcting them I I
think it's a little a little
much
that they shall be there and
shall give advice so I would I
would move to strike that
subsection.
Where is that friendly or
unfriendly the mid tier center
that would be unfriendly you
know.
I think one of New Mexicos great
economic development potentials
as outdoor recreation certainly
hunting and fishing is leading
and that I mean hunting fishing
is four outdoor recreation the
that's been critical to New
Mexico for and.
For a long time.
Of what we're trying to do here
is just increase the
communication I think attending
is of you know.
Attending sing out in the
audience is different than being
with the commission and and
being on the board
you know we were just trying to.
to cross fertilize and and get
people on the same page so I
mean that that is a provision
that I think moves this
commission in the direction we
want them to go.
And madam chair and and Senator
Pirtle if I may as a
representative from the council
guides and outfitters well he
may be able to speak to this
better but they've worked hard
to try to to try to confirm the
to to to to really get the
message to both EDD and now the
out directed the hunting
industry has such a significant
impact on economic development
same argument was is been made
with tourism as what this brings
and so I think that they're
they're wanting to bridge that
making them part of the
conversations that they realized
I really wouldn't have an
economic impact timing has to
New Mexico in madam chair center
I think having that person at
the meetings.
Increases that flow of
information in the other
direction as well right so if
they're if they're the meetings
and they know what commission is
dealing with and what the
department is doing I think that
information if it's the director
or their designee I think that's
a good thing for a hunting and
fishing as well.
The remarks.
Mr chair is hoping to us.
One of those.
Exhibition for.
No I don't think you're going to
really.
with there's different rules for
braces for Roberts not sure when
the state law is that.
Show this.
Forcible.
that's been an issue
for.
Sometimes exhibitions are
counted towards more minimal
sometimes they're not.
Regarding.
This is now is worth more money
out
of all forms of the future.
So sure Representative by chance
know how.
For
our next visuals or issues on in
this city or the issues.
Mr chair of the Santo Moores
really interesting question.
Interesting might be over the
top really good question
because it's non voting ended I
advisory I would.
The the intent is not to have it
count towards a quorum but
that's certainly something we
can get clarification on our
expert I just want to
The madam chair.
A lot of times exhibition to
different homes for.
aces Roberts
rules government.
Both of those for more services
you will call on the next issue
on that front issues.
Is it is differently there for.
Those are those are on your way.
I I just covers of money out of
the
ordinary.
Representative father get
together Roberts not masons for
admission this I think it would
just be whatever Roberts.
Yeah madam chair if I may have.
The environment energy.
That's.
Why had I thought this.
Yes I the light for you this
trike exhibition of voting so
that.
The the directors designation of
an adviser to the.
In a call of that concern have
those either is in an advisory
role not as an meant non voting
member but they will be present
to to give advice and then hear
advice which is that's the
intent and I did appreciate that
intent that they they then take
that information back
but that way there there but we
don't run into issues of quorum
and all those.
And and Representative I'll go
to you on that but I'll just
know I I think it's important if
you want them to be non voting I
think it's important to keep on
voting and there to make that
clear.
Otherwise I what is advisory
meeting and I I think it's
really good to be clear about
who gets to vote and who doesn't
that.
The other seven members so if
all the positions are filled
they don't fill one of those and
they're obviously not loading
Can't vote if you're only by
every just as we do in last
council and every year on
committee that we're on.
Yes but then what I'm what is
the harm having the work terms
of non voting on that at I
really don't think it came to
anything tech to take an act.
But let's let's I don't know
that we have we gone too to you
all to help us then chair
Senators I think Senator Pirtle
suggestion with or without on
the thing I think it I think it
helps address etcetera portals
concern that thing answer center
more Sanchez.
Are off you don't care about non
voting I'm not going to take up
a whole bunch of times that so
so what is so can you just reset
the amendment one more time so
that we're all clear on page six
line twenty four striking ex
officio common on voting.
Any additional discussion on the
amendment and it's a friendly
amendment yes.
Hey discussed any.
Any objections to adopting that
amendment.
The line please show Senators
RTZ passed to fund next McKenna
Stewart Hermio do hang Ingle
Baca Purnell and more spending
this ammendment back on the
bills then that thank you madam
chair in.
The final thing I don't know if
there's any way to address it
here which is willing to
Issue committee.
But in subsection J. halfway
through online a diss records
given exclusive original
jurisdiction over proceedings to
remove commissioners under such
rules as it may promulgate
and madam chair maybe this is a
question for you on internet but
it's my understatement wasn't in
there the legislature the
actually the house of
representatives one that would.
It's to start proceedings it
would just go through a an
impeachment proceeding without
that language.
Yes I actually don't know the
answer to that
I don't know I I I I do know
that this hasn't Center Morse's
said earlier this is the
language that we use for regents
But but I don't know who the
removal of our and often and
bills we specify a specific
removal Authority.
I don't know if none is
specified I don't I don't know
how to to be honest.
But but would that be us so so
are you making a motion no
matter I was just curious if if
in other.
He is defaulted to the
constitution with the the
impeachment Authority.
House of representatives for
that we would Senator become
the.
The judge and jury
Just curious what we want to
involve the Supreme Court here I
guess we won all three branches
and in this piece of
legislation.
Nice but
That's just one of the other
hang up here
with this bill is is that
portion we're making where they
can't be removed and then
funding it.
And I think if it was with the
house of representatives of the
work.
Subsection chase kind of
audition.
And I'll just note that actually
think if if the goal is to de
politicize the removal folks
from this commission I think
that is better accomplish to
have a go to the Supreme Court
and then at a process
improvement process through
through the legislature
Senator Ingle.
Thank you mentioned lodges for
suggestions your problem is I'm
certain areas of the.
Thanks committee.
Thank you for us for the future
to.
Thanks committee understand
we're talking to a one million.
All information provided by all
employees.
Questions was talking about for
college and the.
Senator and and and senator I'll
just say we're we're not gonna
be rolling this out as this will
rolled out as.
Thank you Senator Moores.
After back to Center pearl's
point in your this is for the
lawyers here the constitutional
says article four section thirty
six all state officers all and
judges Bob law show go through I
have the PMR legislature so
madam chair is attorney and and
Representative McQueen as an
attorney.
Under in in in the the in the
language is good for the board
of regents because that
language is in the constitution
so the constitution gives this
report that power constitution
gives the house of
representatives the impeachment
power and then the Senate our
rural patients can we through
statute or I believe the answer
is no you're the attorney can we
do statute change that
constitutional power to take
away the impeachment power of
the legislature to give it to
another branch of the weekend
mentors etcetera Moores I don't
think this takes away the
beaches are I think this is
alternative removal process that
would be vested in the Supreme
Court I think the legislature's
impeachment power remains
untouched.
Of the year I was sure.
Some of the overseas.
no removal Shelby may.
On a on a this report no removal
is.
All removals sold I would
include recurring roles.
The managers are present and so.
Hello I'm reading about
monitoring so madam chair center
Moores if if someone made that
argument and I see that are you
you're making I think you're
correct that we we can't change
the constitution through statute
so this this language with trump
the legislature's impatient.
Yeah and you get the same result
even making that are.
Sure which of the.
I'm in with something is they
would basically give the.
The Supreme Court like that that
would be the first Avenue but it
but not the exclusive offers.
I think under under this reading
so Madam Representative McQueen
so.
The legislature the house of
particularly decides that
there's an issue with one of
these members that you use in
your opinion they can so go
forward with impeachment process
even if the Supreme Court
doesn't move board chair center
yes.
Bach okay.
Thank you madam chair thank on
that point
we're not we're we're we've got
to do some other changes I so
want to do too many on that
points on on consciously I just
I I'm I'm good with that I'm not
gonna try to amend it but that
maybe that really concerned me
that we're trying to remove our
constitutional part your
constitutional power to
And and it does you know another
word in there is exclusive but I
don't think we can give up our
constitutional powers statutes
thank
I think I think it.
You know as we need to do some
clean up to the title and
section eight to reflect the
other teams remain what we do
that let's start that works with
of.
And and and also to you
Representative before we.
Take any action on on any of
these but
on page one lines twelve through
fourteen.
We need to strive providing for
an increase of members of the
number of congressional
districts in the change in the
state changes reflect the other
moments that we made.
And then still online one.
Start online twenty four I'm
sorry page one star in New Line
twenty five with that language
that's being added there we need
to strive all of that added
language through page two line
three through the the period
again this is just taking out
language that's referring to
changing the numbers of members
if that number of districts
changed since we took that
language out.
And I'm also going to have in
this ammendment we're just
discussing.
Page six.
main line.
striking the word exclusive.
Now honestly that exclusive.
Looking at it does talking about
their jurisdiction not that it's
an exclusive remedy.
Actually I'm gonna withdraw that
part of my number because I
don't that's just talking about
regional jurisdiction for the
Supreme Court as opposed to
District Court or or another
court that would hear at so I
think we still have the your
concerns are still Matt leaving
exclusive and
and send it taking it out would
be problematic as far as what
other court could have
jurisdiction so so my mom is
just has to do with who just
wanted to fixing the title
fixing that language and I am.
section one to reflect other
amendments.
Hi folks clear on on what the
amendment is.
Okay I have every state that.
On page one line twelve
striking providing for an
increase of members if the
number of congressional
congressional districts in the
state changes that's just
changing the title to reflect
the change another change we
argument and then.
So on page one line twenty five
where we're adding that language
that provided if the number of
conventional districts of all
language for striking math and
we keep on tracking on page two
for all of lines one two and
three and again this is just
language that reflects other
language we've already taken out
another.
Senator Stewart.
Madam chair I my suggestion is.
If we can pass this.
Eight amendments contacts it's
not education that those two.
Act of two.
So you're Women's.
So then it you can see what you
got if we have set here and and
that committee could see if
there were any changes we've
done too much damage to it so
that you might want to adjust it
in that yes my.
And I before we got a more
discussion on the amendment.
Representative is a friendly the
manager of the.
Senator fox I was going to say
what the medical profession
okay.
On the list.
Furthermore some name on the
amendment.
It affects it in in the I'm not
joking about this Senator probar
proton and I will talk a little
bit about the committee
substance but when it does go
back and we know right why we
talk about that it has there's a
constitutional issue but there's
a committee so is there any
reason has to go to a committee
in the house we're gonna just
Senate more because basis so if
it goes back now that you just
can't do
Currents but it would have to go
they can't just take it straight
before that it is a really slow
down that much all joking aside
from those are rules if you have
a brand new bill and it will be
a brand new bills will have to
go through the process but you
know they they have the house
uses the amendments in context
much more much better than we do
and so this week we hardly ever
do that they started it you know
we do it we now I'm going to do
today but it it really is a good
way to see the bill in in its
entirety so that was a joke
about you know we've had our
conversations that is what makes
your and there is a something
coming up about members of
contacts with with some point
during Representative McQueen
and I talked about.
That's a different debate.
Okay
what the will of the committee
on this bill why did we adopt
the no reason to doubt the last
moment a further further
discussion on the amendment any
objection to adopt an amendment
the state line show all members
present voting yes for the
amendment is adopted what is the
will of the committee on this
bill.
All right we do a roll call
that.
What's the motion.
You have says Amanda as a
committee seventy two of hi.
Senator properties excuse
Senator Ingle.
Sorry what is your role on.
So I think that the yes yes.
Okay Senator Lopez is excuse
Senator McKenna yes senator
McKinney yes Senator Moores yes
senator Morris yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle no
explain my go.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes in your
heart of meal yes Senator Hermio
yes and senator do the yes we
need to do the yes they have
eight to one you have to pass
thank you and and chair of the
bill but I'm more proud of my
low score with C. B. N. M..
Set up okay we are going to very
quickly do house bill two
sixteen
explained to us in two minutes
or less Representative.
Terry to do better than that
this would allow the of.
Madam chair this bill would
allow our legislative education
study committee to how to study
higher education in full as well
as early education and with that
madam chair will stand for
questions Austin for.
That we have a motion for the
past.
Legislative your right to do
this for a long time the house
put a for a delayed date on it
so that we can get ready for it
a right now we have and we can't
do anything with colleges of
educations these of the anything
so with minors so this is
something I really need all
right and we have a motion for
do passes through a roll call
vote on.
Thank you for Senator Ingle yes
yes Senator Lopez is accused
Senator McKenna yes Senator.
Senator Moores absolutely yes
senator Munoz Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes.
Ortiz Pena Nieto Senator Pirtle
yes.
Yes just defending yes
