The former science teacher
herself.
And she's been involved in New
Mexico's education community her
entire life.
Marian is a native New Mexican
product of the Albuquerque
Public schools where both of her
parents were educators, you're
gonna hear me say that over and
over. It's important to the
education community that a
secretary is at she started her
own teaching in public schools,
she earned both masters and
bachelor's degrees from the
University of Mexico. I have
gotten to know her work.
With the children's cabinet and
cradle to career initiatives,
we've worked side by side
visiting exemplary literacy
programs throughout the country.
Weansas last summer. That was
quite an experience.
Uh, she under her leadership,
New Mexico has embraced
structured literacy as a
foundational approach.
Equipping educators with the
tools, knowledge and strategies
necessary to address the diverse
needs of learners.
In addition, secretary designate
Padilla has led the summer
tutoring opportunities,
supporting students, eating the
summer slide.
Marianna's dedication to
literacy aims to ensure that
every New Mexico student
regardless of background or
challenge can become a
proficient and confident reader.
Setting them up for long term
academic success. Mariana
Padilla has been the constant in
education from New Mexico
throughout this administration.
She's been involved in the
design and implementation of
initiatives, and she's been a
strong partner with us. She
works side by side with this
body to pass legislation focused
on children and education.
She's a collaborator.
As the director of the
Children's cabinet, she was
involved in many things. The
DCCD PED and HED before she was
even the cabinet secretary. She
is laser focused on student
improvement and has already
implemented initiatives to
improve systems and processes at
the public education department
in her short tenure.
I am proud to present to you
today, Miss Mariana Padilla.
Good morning, Marianna, thanks
for joining us.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
distinguished members of the
Senate Rules Committee.
It's an honor to appear before
you as Governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham's nominee for the
cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico Public Education
Department.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to be before you
today.
I appreciate the time you have
all given me prior to this
hearing to engage in
conversation and hear about your
interests and vision for
education in New Mexico.
Your insights are really
valuable and important to me.
Thank you, Madam President
Protemimi Stewart.
For your kind introduction. I'm
grateful for your support and
collaboration over the years as
we've worked together to improve
education in our state,
including the remarkable work
related to improving literacy.
Thank you for your continued
leadership.
I am a native New Mexican raised
in the South Valley of
Albuquerque adjacent to the
Pueblo of Asleta, where I
attended public schools.
My family has shaped my
preparation for this position
even more than my professional
and educational work.
I come from a family of
educators who have served across
all sectors of education and
communities throughout New
Mexico.
My parents, Julian and Camila
Baca both are here today, spent
their entire professional
careers as educators.
The impact they've had on my
life, modeling what it means to
be of service to my community
and the people of our state has
been incredibly profound.
They were both the first in
their families to graduate from
college and personally
experienced just how
transformational education can
be. Their parents had limited
educational opportunity,
however, hard work and
dedication was a way of life.
Growing up, education was a
priority in our home without
exception.
My parents constantly emphasized
that anything we strive for is
possible through education.
After graduating from the
University of New Mexico with a
bachelor's degree in education.
I worked as a teacher in the
community where I was raised, so
that I could have a positive
impact on students like me.
My father spent his career as a
teacher, principal, and district
administrator in Albuquerque
Public Schools, specializing in
bilingual education and Title I
programs. He was an English
language learner as a young
student, and in his career was
passionate about supporting
bilingual education.
My mom, Camila retired from APS
as an elementary school teacher
after a distinguished 25 year
career.
I'm proud of the work my parents
have done for children in our
state and incredibly grateful
for the guidance and support
they have provided me throughout
my life.
My experiences as a student.
An educator, a state and federal
policymaker?
A foster parent, a parent, have
all informed my perspectives as
a leader in education.
I understand the challenges that
our students, families and
teachers face in this complex
world.
I know that being a student
today isn't always easy.
I have 3 children in public
schools and know the pressures
of being a young person,
especially when there are
challenges at home, struggles
with mental health, or if they
followed or if they have fallen
behind academically.
I believe every student should
know that we support them and
are working every day to ensure
that they thrive in school and
in life.
I believe we must also listen to
our parents, so that our school
systems support them and welcome
their experiences, cultures,
languages, and knowledge.
There's no question our families
need to be involved as we tackle
our educational challenges, and
of course, the improved
educational outcomes we want for
students can't happen without
committed and meaningful
partnerships with our teachers,
school administrators, and
school boards. They are making
decisions every day at the local
level that have the greatest
impact on our students.
My priorities as cabinet
secretary at the public ed
department are focused on
improving student outcomes by
emphasizing the things that we
know that work and providing
targeted programs and resources
for students that need extra
support.
For New Mexico to meet the
national graduation rate for
high school seniors, we need to
graduate 2400 more students.
This is achievable in just a few
years.
It has been a priority for me at
the PED to ensure that every
employee and understands their
role in achieving our shared
goals, including accelerating
literacy and math achievement,
strengthening student attendance
and engagement, increasing
graduation rates and fostering
shared account shared
accountability at the state and
local level.
At PED we are setting clear
expectations, measuring
progress, and holding ourselves
and our school partners
responsible for achieving
results.
I believe that there's no higher
calling than supporting the
children of our state. This is
the work I'm passionate about
and then I have spent my life
focused on.
Our state's educational
challenges aren't new and must
be tackled head on.
My sense of urgency to do better
for our students motivates me
every day to be bold, to have
high expectations and to work
diligently to create a better
future for our students. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mariana, so the
public knows what we do is 15
minutes of the Senate and
conferre introduction, which
includes organized support. And
so you had 12 people who signed
up and organized support, but
due to the time restraint, we're
not gonna have time to hear from
all 12, but I'm gonna take the
top 5 from your list. I'll read
everyone out, but the 5 will
have a minute and a half minutes
to speak. So if I call your
name, if you can come stand in
line behind the desk, and even
though I call out your name,
restate
name for the record. I'm gonna
call on Joe Guian from the
NMSBA.
Dulcinea Pavia, the secretary's
daughter.
When uh Perreament from the
lateral Foundation.
Secretary Stephanie Rodriguez of
Higher Ed and my good friend,
Governor Janelle Royal of the
Pueblo Poca. You'll each have a
minute and a half.
And once again, if you can state
your first and last name for the
record, good morning.
Good morning Te Harramilo,
members of the committee. My
name is Joey and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico School Boards
Association.
I'm pleased to be here this
morning to express our strong
support for Mariana Padilla's
confirmation as New Mexico's
Secretary of Education.
I've had the privilege of
working with Mariana during her
tenure as director of the New
Mexico Children's Cabinet and as
a member of the New Mexico
Public School Capital Outlay
Council.
As chair of the council, I've
witnessed the informed
leadership and guidance, he's
provided to council members and
the support and collaboration
with staff, school boards,
legislators, and community
members.
He brings a high level of
dedication, expertise and
innovation in New Mexico's
education system, and I have no
doubt that she'll make
significant contributions to the
advancement of public education
in New Mexico.
New Mexico school boards urge
your favorable consideration of
her confirmation. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Guihan.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dulcine
Pillier Mariano Pellier's.
My mom has worked very hard for
the children in I.
For as long as I can remember.
I think she really works too
much. Students need good
teachers that can help all
students live.
They need extra tutoring when
they fall behind and they need
schools to be placed where
students want.
I know my mom is working on all
these things and work. My mom
has always supported me with
everything I have needed in
school.
He is always communicating with
my teachers about how I'm doing
with my assignments and pushes
me to do the best.
He not only cares about me and
my sister. She cares about all
the New Mexico students and she
wants all my.
He wants us all to be
successful.
I ask you, I ask you support her
as to the public education
department cabinet Secretary,
thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Gwen Perea Warnerman.
I'm the president and CEO of the
Lanno Foundation. I'm here this
morning to voice my very strong
support for Miss Mariana Palier
confirmation is a public
education department secretary.
Miss Padilla has provided a
consistent, remarkable through
line over the past 7 years,
focusing on everything from
addressing the failures of the
system and special education to
increasing reading proficiency,
to supporting kindergarten
readiness to seeking meaningful
experiences for high school
students.
Strong mental health as well as
universal.
I have been honored to witness
this continuity over the 6 years
that I had serving the state
both as the deputy cabinet
secretary at the PED and is the
director of the LESC. Yeah, what
I most want to lift up here is
Mariana's inherent belief in the
students of our state.
Our students deserve this type
of belief.
Her ability to establish a
collective confidence and
positive resolve across the
state, in fact, carries forward
significant work that has
happened from both branches of
government. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I am Stephanie
Rodriguez, and I am the
secretary of higher education. I
wholeheartedly support Mariana
Padilla in her nomination as the
secretary of Public Education,
Mariana has seen me at all
points in my life professionally
and personally. She gave me my
first job out of college, my
first promotion, and my first
recommendation to work for the
state of New Mexico, and on the
other hand, she has witnessed
many personal milestones like
buying my first home, marrying
my college sweetheart, and
becoming a mother.
She has played a profound role
in my life as a mentor,
and most importantly, my friend.
We work closely together on the
passage of bipartisan pieces of
legislation creating that early
childhood education and care
department and the opportunity
scholarship Act. Since their
passage, New Mexico's early
childhood system continues to
move up the rankings nationally,
and the opportunity scholarship
is the gold star of a promised
program that has delivered on 3
consecutive enrollment
increases. No other state in the
country has achieved such
remarkable successes. Mariana
embodies a profound dedication
to her family in addition to
nurturing both current and
future generations of
professionals like me standing
before you today. Her unwavering
commitment to New Mexico
students will undoubtedly play a
pivotal role in fostering
educational success. Thank you,
Mariana, for always being my
partner in crime and always
being there for me. Please
support this confirmation, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee.
Uh
Good morning. I'm Janelle Reba,
the governor for the Pueblo of
Poacia and my time working with
Miss Mariana Padilla, she has
always been responsive,
attentive, and make sure to
reach out to us if there's any
emails that maybe I haven't
responded to or missed
something, you know, that's what
we appreciate about her is her
dedication to our children, and
I am here uh in
And asking you all to please
consider her for this position,
as I've said, I haven't seen
anyone work as hard as her and
we we greatly appreciate it here
in Paauke. Thank you. Thank you,
Governor, and for the record,
Marianna, I'm gonna just read
out who else wanted to speak on
your behalf. Uh, we had Whitney
Holland of AFT New Mexico,
Sienna Flanagan of PE, your
mother, Mrs. Bacca, um, stand
rounds from the New Mexico
Coalition of Education leaders,
New Mexico superintendent.
association, Ricky Serna,
cabinet Secretary of NMDOT and
Matthew Paul, and in addition,
Um, and do you know what I'm
I don't know what to say. I.
It's so early in the morning for
Of old educator here.
Um before.
such as this, uh, you, you are
so outstanding in your own right
and um
Um, her father and I, I just say
it has been stated or or
educators retired New Mexico
educators. We uh always
instilled in our children.
Of the value of it.
Being educated.
And to uh be loving and caring
about family first and
And our
Dear Lord God, whom I have
instilled them, their faith.
And
He has to hear from me all the
time, but he's going to hear it.
And all of you, sorry, but
through the grace of God,
Mariana Padilla is here. Her
husband and
Our in-laws, my grandchildren,
my daughter and my son and my uh
oldest wasn't able to be here
because of a death her
mother-in-law passed away from
the community of Pecos, New
Mexico.
Um, so she was supporting her
husband and family.
But with a combination of
Hundreds of hours of years
experience uh I present to you
my daughter Mariana.
Now I think I needed a tissue up
here too.
Now, you have 28 letters of
support that came in that I'm
not gonna read, but I want to
just list off some of them. You
had 10 pueblo governors who
stood in your in your corner in
favor, the Navajo Nation, the
Mescalleto Apache tribelannel
Foundation, think New Mexico,
Santa Fe Public schools, the Al
Pablo Council of Governors and
the list goes on. And so with
that, I'm gonna go to the
committee. If you can raise your
hand if you're in support of
this conferee.
Practically the entire room,
Marianna.
Is there anyone in opposition of
this country if you can also
raise your hand.
Going to Zoom anyone in favor?
3 on Zoom in favor of your
confirmation. Any online in
opposition of the country.
Singan, I'm gonna head to the
committee.
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, and thank you for
being here, Mrs. Padilla.
As we, as we look through your
resume, I just want to
Acknowledge to people that would
say that you are.
Politically connected, you are,
in fact, you've worked for the
governor long before she's been
the governor and instead of
seeing that as perhaps
concerning. I, I see that as
perhaps valuable.
Because you know that within
this agency, we've had a
revolving door of secretaries,
and that's done a disservice to
the children of New Mexico. I
don't know why that is.
Um, I liked Secretary Steinhaus,
I like Secretary Romero is
optimistic with both of them. I
am even more optimistic.
With you in this position.
I, I wish we'd had you longer,
could have would have should
have. I, I don't know, you know,
I, I, I am optimistic though. I
think you are well suited for
this. Um,
I think that even the most
invaluable connection you have
also is your connection to the
classroom.
I think that that qualifies you
probably more than anything,
right? Our, our place of pain is
our place of rain. So all those
times, days in the classrooms
pulling your hair out, I think
is what absolutely qualifies you
to, to serve in this position as
well, um.
I'm excited to work with you. I
will tell legislators and in her
short, short time as a
secretary, she has been quick to
reach across the aisle. Every
bit of legislation that's been
introduced that has an impact on
PED. She herself and a very good
strong uh team of staff members
have reached out uh to vocalize
your opinion and, and try to
make bills better or just to let
us know the impact that that's
going to have on New Mexico
students. That's your job and
you're doing a really dang good
job of it in your first session.
Um, I
I also want to say before we, we
go, I think that what qualifies
you above all for this position
is your most important job that
you've ever had, and that is
your role as a mother, and I
think that your daughter's
getting up here, you've clearly
learned from a very good one,
but if you have kids in the
classroom, if you've been in the
classroom yourself, that
legitimizes you to those of us
that also have kids in the
classroom, because I have no
doubt that you want the best for
your own kids and, and that
leaves me hope.
that you want the best for all
New Mexicans, so I really wish
you well in this role. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you,
um.
Uh
Senator, um, Marianna, thanks
for coming by the office
yesterday. I think I know now
how to handle you. You don't do
good, I'm gonna call your mom.
It'll work every time. I think
that's the key. I got, uh, I
have her number before she
leaves,
but I, I do appreciate it. I
think many of the things that uh
Senator Brentley said are spot
on. um.
It's a big row and there's a big
need.
Education in New Mexico is
messed up.
And you got to fix it. That's
your job, and we're gonna, we're
gonna look to you to do that and
uh we're here to help where we
can.
So
Look forward to supporting you,
um.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Bergman, followed by Senator
Stephanie. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for being here and I'm
glad to see you here also. Uh, I
just have one quick question. If
you could be a quick question or
a long question, but briefly,
what are your biggest priorities
for PED?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Bergman's, um.
For me, my priority is really to
deliver on the outcomes for our
students we have um made
investments in this state during
this administration and over the
course of the years, we have a
great foundation literacy, as
we've heard about already this
morning is part of that, uh, the
work that we're doing related to
supporting our students with
disabilities, we've done a lot
of great work.
My focus is is clearly.
On improving the outcomes of our
students, improving our
graduation rates, improving our
proficiency rates, making sure
that our students want to be at
school, that they're supported,
that they're healthy, that they
are thriving and, and that is my
priority. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Sopanics.
Thank you uh very much, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, and Senator.
For bringing this candidate
forward.
I think um Miss Padilla will do
an excellent job. Could you
comment on
Uh, how your department might do
any outreach or work with the
rural parts of our state.
Senator Stefaniks, our job is to
be everywhere.
To be an all parts of the states
in all sizes of schools are
microdistricts in rural parts of
the state and our our um
tribally led and controlled
schools, um, our big schools and
APS, we should be everywhere in
our charter schools, that is our
our job to support all of them,
uh, to, to be engaged to make
sure that they have uh the
programs, the funding when
they're struggling, when they're
in need of improvement that we
come in.
And uh we work with them, we
roll up our sleeves and we help
them address the challenges that
their students are facing and
and develop a clear plan and
strategies with um measurable
outcomes that that's our job,
regardless of of whether you're
rural or urban, um, that is our
job uh throughout the state.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, for
that response. And I hope that
you will continue to encourage
your employees with that same
philosophy.
And thank you very much for
stepping up to this. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, um, and
thank you secretary, uh,
Many of our, our school
districts are, are Title One.
Districts.
Um, if there are, there's cuts
in, in federal funding for Title
One.
How well will the step the state
step in to deal with it.
Mr. Chair and and Madam Chair,
um.
You know, the, the uncertainties
that are happening at the
federal level are concerning,
they're real, we are seeing
impacts across federal
government.
Um, we are monitoring very
closely what is happening, we
have seen cuts to technical
assistance and contractors
through the US Department of
Education that um have impacted
states already.
But, um, we're that's something
that that we're monitoring
closely. I'm, I'm very grateful
to Governor Lujan Grisham and to
the legislature who indicated
that um the state is ready to
step up and make sure that we
are serving the the people of
our state in the way that they
should be served, and that
includes our students, so we
will continue our intent is to
continue to serve them at the
level that they need to be
served at.
Um, whether that's with.
Federal funding or state
funding, but we are not changing
course in terms of the level of
programming, supports and
efforts that we're doing for our
students, um, today and into the
future.
Thank you, I'm, I'm.
Happy to hear that. I think that
that title one support is
absolutely critical to, uh,
To New Mexico students, um, I
very much hope we do not see,
uh those cuts happen.
Um, I, I agree with everything
that has been said by everyone
else here, I think you are, are
excellent, uh, and excellent
choice for this position. I am
thankful for your willingness to
do so. Um, and, uh,
Look forward to to seeing what
happens with PED uh under your
guidance.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Gallegos.
Thank Mr. Moer, Madam Secretary
designee, I appreciate, uh,
we've actually had quite a few
times to talk and visit, uh,
appreciate your family being
here. Did I just a couple of
questions.
Be on school board and being
concerned on the uh lack of
staff at PD.
Uh, do you have any thoughts on
what your plans are for
Of feeling the the voyages and
retention.
Your stuff
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gallegos,
we actually have a pretty low
vacancy rate within the public
education department. We would,
um, very much like to have more
employees to do the important
work.
Of education in our our K-12
system. Uh, it's something that
we have requested year over year
for additional FTE. We manage
almost half of the state's total
budget, and so we have, we have
a big job, as you all have said,
and uh we keep our staffing
levels where they need to be and
would certainly welcome
additional staff to allow us to
do, to be in schools more to to
be more hands on and, and to be
more active.
So, um, thank you for that
question, Senator. Thank you for
that Mr. Chairman chair, um, I
designate, uh, maybe I need to
talk to my staff. It may be
response time, not vacancy, so
I'll follow up on that with you,
but my last question is, is, you
know, um,
Furnitures, mister.
In men designate the uh we
passed through here a bill
that's in favor for eliminating
the cabinet secretary position
in replacing the superintendent.
How do you feel about that and
what are your thoughts on, um,
giving us rationale and why to
keep this position instead of
the other.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator
Gallegos, I completely
understand the intent behind.
These, um, joint resolutions. I,
I do understand the desire for
stability. Um, I think we all
wanna see that.
And um, and so I really respect
and and I'm grateful to the
sponsors of those bills because
I think they.
are trying to do something about
an issue that they that they
perceive.
Um, I don't, I, I don't think
that it's, it's the direction
that we should go towards, even
though this is not something
that would directly impact me. I
don't think that it's the
governance structure that will
result in better outcomes for
our students, uh, there's really
nothing that directs us in
research or in history or in
other states that there's
necessarily more stability under
a state school board structure,
um, what I
I'm concerned about is someone
who in this administration has
worked across every agency.
I mean that was my job. And in
an effort to improve child and
family wellbeing, it was really
looking at our systems across
state government. It really is
deeply concerning to me about
carving out such a critical
component.
Of
Of our K-12 education system
from, from the executive, the
work that we do across as
secretaries every day is
critical and we have aligned
initiatives and work that we
really have to have that
alignment to accomplish them. So
that's really concerning to me.
Um, I think that we've laid such
a great foundation, we have
things moving to change course,
I think would be um not wise in
terms of seeing the out.
improved outcomes we want for
kids sooner. I think changing
course, especially with federal
instability that we're seeing
right now. Um, the timing isn't
great. Um, we've heard recently
in committee that this is such a
huge move, we probably should
take a minute and study it, I
think that's why. I think it's
wise to really look at is this
the thing that's gonna get what
we all want, which is better
outcomes for our students, we
want it and we want it now.
And so, again, I appreciate the
intent. I just, I really don't,
I don't think that we have a
clear indication and research
that that's the thing, um, so.
Thank you for the question,
Senator. Thank you for that
ma'am
um, I, I just wanted, uh,
First off, thank you for being
willing to do this. Um, I lost a
bit, uh, when your name was
proposed, I gave you 6 weeks
because instability and in this
uh cabinet or not, not in the
cabinet position, but the
governor seems to change.
Direction often in ma'am Chan,
Miss Chan, um,
Senator and designee, I, I guess
my thing is looking at the
differences, if we had
Chosen you first, we may have
had stability, and I think our
kids, and it's been brought up
that you do, you have shown
stability, uh, I think our kids
deserve that kind of stability,
so I'm going to vote in support
of your confirmation because you
give us that, uh, I think the
others, they've, we've had some
really good uh candidates that
have been in there for one
reason or another, they're no
longer there, and I'm hoping and
I'm praying that you will be the
last.
for this job for this tenure
that the governor's in, so with
that I yield. Thank you. Thank
you, man.
Thank you, Senator. And so
Senator Townsend is ready to
make a motion, but before that,
I have one question and then a
comment. So my question is about
chronic absenteeism. We're
seeing that a lot in my district
in the rural parts of my
district, including the not so
rural like Espanil and Los
Alamos, um, do you by any chance
have a plan to work with schools
and communities to engage
students to want to come back in
and support them to want to stop
missing school and coming back
into the classroom.
Mr. Chair, thank you so much for
that question, that is one of
our biggest challenges in New
Mexico and we must address it if
we're going to see improved
outcomes for students, they have
to be in school.
Um, New Mexico has made some
some major gains in the last uh
couple of years because.
We actually are putting money
towards efforts to support
students who are missing school,
um, last year we saw a 10%
improvement in our chronic
absenteeism, we were last in the
nation. We've moved up a little
bit, but we're still among uh
the the highest chronic
absenteeism rates in the
country.
Um, it's absolutely essential
that we focus money and efforts
that are a driving students not
being at school, it's a very
complex issue. It's not a one
solution issue, um, students are
missing schools for a variety of
reasons, including
transportation challenges at
home, uh, mental health.
Whether or not they feel like
the adults in the school are
invested in their success.
If they are struggling in school
that there is a clear.
Support network to make them be
successful, it's incredibly
complex, but these are things
that we're working on at PED
we've been advocating for
funding for years and we're
doing it again, this legislative
session so that we can get money
to our schools to hire um staff
who are focused on this specific
effort that that we're looking
at early sort of warning systems
when kids are are missing school
and that we really have programs
like tutoring and other
interventions if there are, they
are falling behind, so that they
can show up and be supported,
um, we, um, have implemented a a
survey, it's a student.
Uh, wellness survey.
And we've asked students what
matters to you and these are the
things that they say we need to
pay attention to. They want
better teaching.
They want to be engaged in their
educational experience. They
want help when they fall behind.
They want more counselors in
mental health support.
They want us to address school
safety, that includes bowling.
These are, these are the words
coming directly from our
students, we know we we need to
just listen. We need to listen
and we need to be responsive to
those things and uh we're we're
um going to be relentless on
this issue, it's a priority for
us, one of our top 5 strategic
priorities in the agency, and we
know it's essential if we're
going to um see the outcomes for
our students that we want.
Thank you for that and knowing
that student's voices will be
heard, it makes me feel better
too, Senator Dock for a second
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and I
apologize, I, I missed your,
your initial presentation, so I
don't know if you address this,
but, uh, everything I have heard
about career technical
education, CTE makes me think
that it's downstream effects are
and and on everything from
absenteeism to uh substance
misuse prevention, that, that
has a profound impact. So,
So
I think it would be amazing to
see at least uh the option of
seat of of CTE in every high
school, uh, in New Mexico. I
don't know how realistic that
is, but what
What efforts around CTE will PED
be taking?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Doheck,
thank you for that question. CTE
is one of our, um, top
strategies and really making
sure that we keep students
engaged, that we make education
relevant for them. It's a
interesting kids say like, I
don't, I don't always feel that
school's relevant to my
interests and what I wanna do,
um.
So, so CTE is essential. We've
we've invested funding, thank
you, legislators for making
those investments, we see it as
a key strategy and uh and
getting our students graduated
in in 4 years, we, um.
Upd updated our graduation
requirements, the legislature
did recently in the public ed
department worked closely with
the legislature and and the LESC
to to do this work.
Our new graduation requirements
really support.
Various pathways for students.
Through high school and CTE is a
critical component of that.
Work-based learning is a
critical component of that. And
so I think we have um a unified
sort of approach to this by the
legislature and the department
and the work and workforce
solutions and higher ed, we're
all working to make sure that we
have strong CTE programs.
Throughout the state, we have to
continue to invest in them and
really figure out what does it
cost to create CTE programs, we
need to recruit our educators,
our CTE educators, which are is
really essential to having any
program, um, and uh this, this
will be a key to us really, um,
delivering on our high school
graduation rates that we're
working to improve. I, I am
committed to reaching the
national average for graduation
rate.
in just a couple of years. That
means we have to graduate 2400
more students to get there. We
can do it. CTE is gonna help us
do that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and so we
have a motion Senator Townsend.
We, we sure can. Um,
Um, Mr. Chair, I move a Senate
Rules Committee support the
nomination of Mariana Padilla to
Cabinet Secretary for Public
Education Department of the full
Senate.
Like you said, there's been a
motion to move you forward to
the full Senate for confirmation
and just a quick comment as a
former educator. He taught
middle school in Berlin. It's,
I'm happy to know that the
person who's leading public
education is also a former
educator. I'm also happy to know
that you're a native New Mexican
as a proud native New Mexicans,
we grew up understanding
something. But we do anything we
can for family, and we grew up
knowing that community is
family.
And when you take that entire,
you take exactly what Senator
Brantley said. You think of
every one of those children in a
classroom as if they are your
child, and you do the best that
you can. And so I look forward
in supporting this nomination.
And with that, I'll ask for a
roll call book.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block, Senator Block is
excused. Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
With a vote in favor of your
confirmation, we'll be seeing
you later this morning in the
Senate chamber for a full Senate
confirmation.
Congratulations.
Thank you so much.
So we'll ask if you're waiting
to congratulate the conf if you
can do that out the doors cause
we're gonna head to the next
item on our agenda, which is the
appointment of Heather Jordan to
the Workers' Compensation
Administration, and I'm gonna
ask senator Stephanics to come
on up to introduce the country.
Everyone, we're gonna go ahead
and get started if folks can,
can keep it down as as they head
out.
Good morning, Senator Savans.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, if I am called away by
finance, Senator Dewey will step
down, but today it is my honor
to uh introduce Heather Jordan.
As the workers' comp director.
She was appointed as the
director of the Workers'
Compensation Administration in
November of 24.
She has devoted her career to
public service.
Starting at the Bernalio County
Clerk's Office at the age of 19.
She worked at the Metropolitan
Detention Center for 20 years
where she managed a large staff
and work closely with
Metropolitan and District court
judges and staff on a number of
inmate population uh
initiatives.
She managed several projects
including overseeing the
McClendon lawsuit, creating and
implementing a quality assurance
department, and the inmate on
pods, which focused on helping
inmates complete their high
school diplomas.
She came to the workers'
compensation Administration in
August 2015 as the clerk of the
court.
She assisted in the development
and implementation of a new case
management and e-filing system
that provides electronic service
of court filings and allowed
electronic filing of court
pleadings.
This paperless initiative
reduced postage costs by over
$40,000 in 2018.
The first year of full
implementation.
She was promoted to the court
and programs administrator in
November 22, and then appointed
to the executive deputy director
in May of 24.
She worked diligently to improve
efficiencies within several
bureaus while ramping up
outreach efforts.
To ensure employers, workers,
and healthcare providers that
were knowledgeable of the
resources and services that the
agency provided.
These executive roles prepared
Miss Jordan for her appointment
as the director.
She has knowledge of the inner
workings of each bureau within
the agency and a keen eye for
improving efficiency.
Heather cares deeply about the
agency and her role as the
director, and I believe she's
highly qualified and so I would
like to introduce Heather
Jordan.
Good morning, Heather.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
senators, I want to thank
Senator Stephanic.
For that lovely introduction.
Mr. Chair and committee members.
I am honored to be here before
you today.
I am very grateful for this
opportunity.
And grateful to my loving and
supportive husband Greg.
And my incredible and beautiful
inspiring daughters, Renee and
Kaitlin.
And to my family that is
watching from afar.
My friends and colleagues who
have supported me throughout my
career and through this journey.
I never imagined my path would
leave me here.
I was born in Louisville,
Kentucky, and moved to
Albuquerque just before I was 10
years old.
I graduated from Monzano High
School and went to work at
Bernalo County at the young age
of 19.
I was young when I got married
and started my family.
But I understood the importance
of a good work ethic, a day's
work for a day's pay.
I've instilled that value in my
children, and I am proud of the
incredible work my daughters do
every day at their jobs in their
relationships, and as they have
become young women.
These values have guided me
through every stage of my
career.
From my first public service job
in the Barnnelio County clerk's
Office to my role as director of
the Workers' Compensation
Administration.
I have been driven by a
commitment to fairness,
accountability, and results.
Whether it was obtaining my
first big promotion at the age
of 20 years old.
Implementing jail population
reduction measures or rolling
out new case management system.
Systems. My focus has always
been on solving problems and
serving the public.
I recognize the weight of this
position and the responsibility
I carry.
I approached this role with the
same dedication, humility, and
tireless work ethic that has
guided me throughout my career.
I am committed to upholding the
law.
Advancing programs that benefit
New Mexicans and ensuring
transparency and accountability.
As I sit before you today, I
think about the many people who
helped shape my path.
The mentors who believed in me.
The colleagues who challenged
me.
And my family that supported and
loved me.
Even when I was less than
lovable.
The workers' compensation
Administration does incredible
work for many New Mexicans every
day, but there are so many who
do not know what we do or the
resources we provide.
One of my biggest efforts is to
bolster outreach and include the
bureaus within our agency that
have not been typically involved
in outreach efforts.
We are in the middle of a
modernization project that will
replace our outdated silo
databases with an agency-wide
case management system where
information can be shared with
built-in workflows.
I want to improve processes and
systems, so staff can work
efficiently for the New Mexicans
that we serve.
I want to thank you for your
time today, and I appreciate
your consideration.
I stand for questions. Thank
you. Before we go to questions,
we do have some organized
support, and I'm gonna ask those
who are here to stand up, you'll
have 2 minutes each. I have
Heather, OK, so I have my cult.
Lea Martinez.
And I have one via Zoom, which
is Amy Suman.
Although I've said your name, if
you can state it again for the
record.
Mr. Chairman, um.
Members of the committee, my
name is Michael Holt. I am
general counsel for the workers'
comp Administration.
I've been in this position for 4
years. I've been a licensed
attorney going on 35 years.
During my tenure at the WCA.
I've been privileged to work
with Heather Jordan.
First, when she was a clerk of
the court.
Next, next when she was promoted
to deputy director.
And now, uh, as the director of
the WCA.
Over the last 4+ years, Heather
and I have worked on many
complex projects and issues
together.
That have required uh many
months of collaboration to
achieve success and finality.
We've also worked on many
situations that required
immediate attention of upper
management and the Office of
General Counsel.
Heather Jordan
is battle tested, she is cool
under pressure, and all but also
can take a step back.
And become in an integral part
of the agency team that
addresses an important statutory
or rural responsibility that our
agency faces.
Um, she has great instincts to
draw upon, even upon all her,
all her years in the state
government and with the workers'
comp administration.
The Legislature is given uh our
agency broad statutory authority
over the entire workers'
compensation system.
To this end, the WCA has many
bureaus, including adjudication,
clerk of the court, compliance,
economic research, enforcement
facilities, field programs,
finance, general counsel, human
resources, IT, mediation,
medical cost containment,
ombudsman, public information or
PIO safety, self-insurance, and
the uninsured employer fund.
It's quite a laundry list of
bureaus.
Um, as the agency director, uh,
we need to have a person has
subject matter expertise and all
these different bureaus, and
Heather brings that expertise to
the table for sure. She can deal
with the long term problems and
the short term problems of the
agency.
In addition to what I've
described, Heather can um
interact on a high level with
the governor's office and, and
the legislature. Thank you so
much. I would, uh, encourage
the, uh,
The committee to
grant of Miss Jordan, uh, the
director of position. Thank you
for your comments.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
senators.
My name is Lee Martinez and I
retired from my role as deputy
director of the Workers'
Compensation Administration.
An agency I served for 28 years
this year.
Thank you for allowing me a
moment to speak regarding
Heather Jordan as you consider
her appointment to be director
of the WCA.
I had the opportunity and
privilege to work with Heather,
including working closely as
senior managers together over
the past several years.
During our time as colleagues,
she always impressed me with her
knowledge, attitude, and
abilities as an administrator as
manager.
She's honest, direct, and has
the ability to see the big
picture when solutions are
needed.
so important in this position to
not
Create unintended consequences
when you, when you plug one hole
in the dam.
Creating a leak somewhere else
and that big picture vision is
Heather possesses the skills,
right, to serve the agency well,
not just in its regulatory
functions, but also in her
ability to manage the dispute
resolution and court functions
of the agency.
It's rare to find a candidate
with Heather's knowledge of both
these areas, and even more rare
to find someone with her
hands-on experience with the
agency.
Complementing that experience,
Heather's developed her
abilities in managing the
agency's budget, legislative
processes, and strategic
planning.
No doubt she will continue to
push the agency forward with her
hard work.
And it's with confidence and
pride that I recommend you
confirm Heather Jordan as the
director of the Workers'
Compensation Administration.
Thank you. Thank you. And now
heading to Zoom, Amy, zoom in.
Good morning, Amy.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
I can hear you.
Excellent. Um, thank you all so
much uh for inviting me. I am
here to support my dear friend,
um, Heather Jordan. Uh, my name
is Amy Suman. I am the
superintendent for the Pewaukee
Valley School District. I'm also
the co-chair of the rural
Alliance for Career Technical
Education, uh, representing 17
Northern New Mexico school
districts, but I'm here in my
capacity as Heather's friend and
family. Uh, I have known Heather
for about 7 years.
She has tirelessly worked her
way up in the state government
system as a woman in leadership,
she has faced great challenges
in trying to make sure there's
an equity focus in everything
she does, including making sure
there's an audit in her
department that those that have
the education and experience are
plugged into the correct
positions. That takes a lot of
courage, uh, to have that kind
of personal integrity to ensure
that everyone is getting a fair
shot. That's one of the many
things I admire about her, but
But having known her for the
last 7 years, uh, our, um,
meeting each other in, in a
variety of different ways with
schools and activities that our
children were involved in. I
know Heather personally to be a
woman of great integrity. Um,
she is strong, she is unafraid
to stand up for what is right.
She's courageous and she's an
inspiration. Lastly, I'd like to
say that on November 9th this
year, uh, Heather became more
than a friend to me, uh, because
her kid married
kid, and so she's my sister as
well. So it's with great
pleasure, uh, and pride and joy
that I, um, support, um, Miss
Heather Jordan in this position.
She has earned it and she, um,
you've, you all have a gem
there. Thank you so much for the
opportunity to support her.
Thank you, Amy. You brought some
tears to your eyes, by the way.
Amy, we had two letters that
were sent in in support of your
nomination, I'm just gonna read
out who they're from. One is
from Ben Sherman from the Ben
Sherman law, and the other is
from Megan Coleman from Wala in
Albuquerque. And so there was no
organized opposition for your
appointment, and I'm gonna head
to the committee room. If you
can raise your hand if you're in
favor of this conferre.
Wow.
Practically the whole room.
Anyone online in favor of the
country.
2 online.
Back to the committee, any in
opposition in the committee
room.
Sean, what about online?
No, I'll go to questions now
from the committee.
And
we are functioning as a
subcommittee right now, because
we don't have a quorum, so we
will need to wait to have a
quorum to take a vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Questions from the committee?
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you.
And congratulations.
One
One of the issues that
I hear from employers and
And
And people looking for a job.
is
Trying to interact with the
agency.
Being um
be short-staffed. I, I don't
know what to, what the issues
are, but many of the offices
seem to be
Um
Having
Shortages or having a hard time
having people at the office.
Can you address that? Is that a
widespread issue of budgeting or
in employing people in your, in
your department.
Are you having a lot of people
work from home versus at the
office.
Is, is that a problem that, that
you're aware of and, and are you
addressing it?
Mr. Chair, Senator Townsend,
thank you for the question.
Our agency currently has a 13%
vacancy rate.
However, excuse me.
We have 6 field offices across
the state of New Mexico.
Knowing that those field
officers are an extension of our
main office located in
Albuquerque, we ensure that
anytime there is a vacancy in
our field offices that those are
filled.
Regardless of our budgetary
constraints.
The
What's most important um is to
ensure that the key positions
that
Facilitate programs and
resources for the citizens of
New Mexico are filled.
I also understand the importance
of support clerical staff.
And higher positions.
We
Have experienced some budgetary
Issues over the last several
years, and that has been
forecasted for some time. Um,
I'm working closely to to try to
resolve that.
Because of those constraints, we
have
Had to
Closely evaluate our vacancies
and fill
Based on
The funding that's allowed
within our operating budget.
Our field offices are
Always staffed as soon as
there's a vacancy, those are
posted.
Those are extensions of our
office. Those are critical
offices to have fully staffed,
and I cannot see.
Holding off on one of those
positions.
I hope that answered your
question. Uh.
Of Senator, it, it does. I, I
understand the issues are
running an operation quite well.
I would um
I would tell you that that.
It is something that I hear all
the time and so you can take
that back to the department this
year.
Integrating into doing.
Your job.
With respect to the interaction
with the legislature.
What can we do to help you? What
do you need most?
And, and what would you believe?
Um
Maybe something that we haven't
done as good as we should have
to support you. I mean, it has
to be a team effort.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Townsend.
Thank you for that question.
We, the workers' compensation
Administration is a self-funded
agency.
Based on a quarterly assessment
fee.
That based assessment fee has
not increased since 1990.
We all know
Costs have gone up since 1990.
Our revenue, we do not accept
any general fund money and our
revenue is no longer supporting
our operating budget.
This was the first year that we
actually proposed legislation to
increase our assessment fee.
It was included with other
administrative fees from other,
um, agencies.
And that bill was tabled.
We are working on a solution. If
it does not get accomplished in
this legislative session, we do
have plans for next year's
session to propose an increase
to that assessment fee.
Um, senator.
Um
Miss Jordan
Do you see the fees.
Um, that you are
Or
Charging and proposing.
Did they put the employers in
New Mexico on a
Level playing field with
competitive businesses around
us.
in different states.
Mr. Cha, Senator Townsend.
We
We looked at the businesses
within New Mexico. We did not
look outside of New Mexico.
However, we did an extensive
research on
Business sizes within New Mexico
from micro to large businesses.
The number of those businesses
and the economic impact that
that assessment fee increase
would have on those businesses
down to the dollar of we
recommended 3 incremental
increases over a period of time.
And we have
Those numbers and how down to
the.
Obviously down to the penny, but
how much it would, it would
increase for those businesses.
Um.
I think we're prepared to
Uh, present legislation and have
those numbers and be able to
answer those.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair.
Yeah.
Thank you for that. Now I have a
question, are there any other
questions from any other
senator?
The ombuds program, ombudsman's
program, how many budsmen are
there who try to answer those
calls that come in.
Mr. Chair
We are required by statute to
have an ombudsman in each field
office. So we have 6 ombudsmen
in our field offices and 2 in
our Albuquerque office.
We have a hotline and so
If for some odd reason,
The ombudsman in Albuquerque
were all out sick on the same
day, that hotline will be
answered.
Everyone in our field office,
even if an ombudsman was out
sick in a field office, there
are backup employees who can
answer the call in the field
office, take the message and
ensure that another ombudsman
will return the call.
That was gonna be my question if
they weren't in the office, it
looks like everyone covers each
other, but those calls will be
answered and returned. Thank you
for that. Senator Bergman.
Thank you, madam, Mr. Chair, I
have a motion just, I move that
we.
Move Jordan for director of the
workforce Compensation
Administration to a full Senate
hearing.
No need to apologize for calling
me, madam chair. I'm gonna head
over to Senator Geos before I
take that motion.
Mr. Chair, thank you and
Senator.
Me designee, uh, appreciate the
opportunity to visit with you.
Uh, I did just wanna clarify, I
know Senator Townsend asked you
if there's anything you can do
in your talking about budgetary
constraints after our
discussion, uh, I've been
looking at some clarifying
language to your role as
secretary to uh clarify the
authority that you have.
Uh, have you had any thoughts on
that? Do you see any gray areas
in your
A job that we can actually help
you fortify.
Mr.
Mr. Chair, Senator guy goes.
Thank you. I, I appreciated that
conversation. I
I do think they're
There are a couple areas, um,
I think specifically when you
and I had the conversation
regarding um self-insured
groups.
There is some vagueness in
That statute.
I'm not sure if I think it would
take a little bit of research to
determine whether
The statute needs to be
clarified or if we could
Clean it up with a rule
revision. Um, I think I would
need to, to sit with my general
counsel and, and take a deeper
dive into that, um.
I think there are some statutes
in our
While they are slightly outdated
more because of technology than
necessarily.
The actual law, um, but I do
think it's worth looking at, and
I, I think we could, we could do
that.
Jointly. I would appreciate
that.
Thank you for that.
Miss Cha, Madam chair.
Does he, I
I, I, I would like to help you
because I know the
Things changed, structures
changed, uh, so I'd love to work
with you to clarify that. The
other thing I was gonna say is,
Madam chairs, uh, Robert just
said who was acting for a while,
uh, really has a high regard for
you, and I've worked with him on
other things. He GST and I've
worked with him for a while on
it, so, um, to me that was
really
Big indicator
Of how your colleagues look at
you.
And I think that's really
incredible that he's willing to
stand up and say, no, that he
totally 100% supports you and uh
I'll be voting for you on the
floor or even here in committee,
but it's just one of those
things I just wanted to make
sure if there's a chance we can
help you to do your job better.
I'd love to be a part of that.
So with that all to you, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much. So there's
been a motion by Senator
Bergman's moving forward to the
full Senate for confirmation
before I take the roll call, I
need to just say that when you
said you were less than lovable,
both your daughters shook their
heads that that could never
happen. And so just so you know,
and it's on the record. So with
that, if I can have a roll call.
Senator Bergman. Yes.
Senator Block, Senator Block is
excused. Senator Brantly, yes.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami.
Senator Duhig.
With 6 in favor of your
confirmation, you'll move
forward to a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Congratulations.
I'm gonna hand the gavel back to
our madam chairwoman, who will
be hearing the next items on the
agenda, which is Senate Memorial
3 Beaver population and
management plan with Senator
Hamblin.
Yes, who knew the Beaver
Memorial was so popular
You love your beaver shirt.
Go ahead, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. It's so lovely to be
here, uh, in this room and
especially have to walk so far
from my office right across the
hallway. Um, Madam Chair and
committee, Senate Memorial 3
asks the Department of Game and
Fish, Forest Street vision of
the energy, minerals and natural
Resources Department, the state
land office, and the Department
of Agriculture to work jointly
on a statewide beaver management
plan and present their findings
to the appropriate legislative
committee or committees by
October of 2025. Just to give
you a little bit of
Background beaver ponds and
their associated wetlands Act as
contaminant sinks and filters,
enhancing downstream water
quality and during extended
periods of drought, beaver ponds
and their associated wetlands
greatly enhanced the resiliency
of riparian zones, including
riverine plant communities and
fish and wildlife populations.
Uh, the Department of Game and
Fish includes the American
beaver on its list of species of
greatest conservation need in
the draft of the 2025 State
Wildlife Action Plan because it
is a keystone species with an
important impact on environment
and is threatened by climate
change and declining
populations. And Madam Chair,
there is a, uh, an amendment,
um, that we have from the
Department of Agriculture for
this. It is uh 231-152.2.
I, I think that's getting passed
out now.
And it, what it is, I don't know
if you want me to go ahead and
explain. Yeah, yeah, right,
thank you so much. Um, it just
really, it adds the Department
of Agriculture to this at the
request of the department, um,
to be part of this, this
opportunity, uh, and so you'll
see on page 3, line 21 after
department will insert the New
Mexico Department of
Agriculture, uh, and the
Department of Environment, page
4, line 4, adding again New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
and the Department of
Environment. And then again, uh,
on page 4, line 10 before
commissioner.
Inserting director of the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
and so very 3 just adding this
per the request of the
department, um, to be part of
this, this, uh, this group of
people to study.
The fever. I'll, I'll go ahead
and move this memorial. Uh, is
there any objection? I'm sorry,
move this amendment. Uh, is
there any objection to adopting
the amendment?
See none.
The amendment is adopted. Go
ahead.
Thank you. And so just to give
you a little bit of background,
Madam Chair, um, this just in
summary, this request game and
fish, Forestry division of Mner
State Land Office, Department of
Act to make recommendations to
develop a statewide beaver
management plan, and giving you
a little bit of history in 2014,
Senator Keller and Senator
Gonzalez introduced Senate
Memorial 4.
Which is identical except for
the date of the report to
interim committees is due. This
memorial passed the Senate in
2014 and was signed, and
according to the game and fish
department, it was, um, not
focused on by the Martinez
administration, so no plan was
developed, uh, as requested by
the memorial. So we're just
bringing this back up, um,
especially given the situation
that we have in our state in
terms of really making sure that
our water goes as far as it can.
We want to make sure it's also
It was healthy in those
populations that are helping
make that water healthy are, are
certainly supported.
Great. Thank you, Senator. We do
have 2 people signed up in
support, uh, Gillian Joyce and
Jenny Ener.
Come on up.
Thank you.
You should go ahead for about 2
minutes.
Good morning, Adam Sha and
members of the committee. Thank
you for allowing me to speak
today on behalf of Rocky
Mountain Farmers Union and our
members across New Mexico. As
farmers and ranchers, we
understand the critical
importance of watershed health
in our arid state. We support
Senate Memorial 3, recognizing
the profound watershed health
benefits of a healthy beaver
population and the need for New
Mexico to look strategically at
how we can better protect and
restore this Keystone species to
improve water security and
ecosystem resilience across our
state.
Wild beaver activities benefit
our watersheds, extend our
surface water irrigation seasons
make us more resilient to
drought and replenish our
aquifers. They also present real
and unique challenges on
agricultural lands. Our members
and producers across the state
need practical assistance with
infrastructure adaptations, as
well as support for expedient
beaver at relocation when
necessary.
We are grateful to the sponsors
for working with us to add the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture to the list of
agencies tasked with developing
recommendations. With NMDA at
the table, this memorial would
help develop the framework to
provide these essential
resources while balancing
ecological benefits with
agricultural needs, ensuring
agricultural stakeholders will
have a voice in creating
solutions that work for both our
watersheds and our working
lands. Thank you for this
opportunity to speak, and I urge
you to support Senate Memorial
3.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jenny
Berner, and I'm here speaking on
behalf of Sierra Soul and Water
Conservation District, um, just
a couple comments about a year
ago our office started receiving
calls um from local landowners
who live along the Rio Grande,
um, asking us for some
assistance because of beavers
were coming up and destroying
the cottonwoods and all of along
the stream uh stream bank,
excuse me, of the Rio Grande,
and so we've kind of reached out
for for.
some help, you know, to some
other agencies that have more of
an expertise on that. Um, in
addition to that, we also have 5
different established akass and
other ditches um within our
district that we work with those
constituents and um these
critters also create a
challenge, um, for that
situation. Um, so this is
certainly an issue for um our
district, um, and we are very
glad to see the NMDA was added
to the list of agencies, um, and
I realized that this memorial
doesn't.
Um, I guess the agencies are
tasked with the stakeholder
input, um, if this memorial
moves forward, and I'd like to,
um.
Uh, respectfully request, um,
with the sponsors or any of the
agencies that so and Water
districts, um, and asia um
irrigators, farmers and ranchers
be um considered um critical
moving forward if this memorial
moves forward. Thank you.
Thank you. We did not have
anyone sign up in opposition
members, there were a number of,
uh, letters or emails and
support can pass out to you,
members of the of the committee.
Well
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. I want one of
those t-shirts. Do, um.
Don't you have a turtle named
Beaver?
Madam,
yes, I do, it's a tortoise. um,
that is about 50 pounds and free
ranges in the yard and um.
One of the reasons why I was
brought onto this just because
we have had this tortoise since
it was a hatchling and my nine
year old neighbor kid when she
was 2 stuck. So we're, we're
dealing with the furry beavers,
not the hard shell beaver, OK,
OK thank you for that
clarification.
Yeah, just getting my be correct
here. So I will tell you on a
serious note. One, I want to go
back to this when I read this. I
have learned a lot about the
roles of Game and fish. This
session, whether I like it or
not, they can already do this.
They can already man.
Beaver populations. Now, are
they putting enough emphasis?
Are they putting enough money
behind or? Are they putting
enough time is an entirely
different, uh, conversation, and
so initially I thought, well,
this is kind of unnecessary
because you could go to the
Department of Game and Fish,
they already have, uh, the, the
right to work on any management
plan, including New Mexico
beavers until I just had a a a
supporter stand up and in the
back row or the Sierrasol and
water conservation districts.
These are landowners of
landscape.
ranches there in southern New
Mexico and we have a lot of
streams in Asia that come
through that area, and the
reality is there's, there's some
beaver problems happening and so
if we have, you know, our
conservative a group community
who's saying, you know what, we
do need a little bit more
research and a little more help
from the Department of Game and
Fish and how we're gonna manage
this population, then I, I mean,
I initially was gonna say this
isn't necessary and vote yet,
but I'm gonna support my
district wholehearted on this.
If, if they need a little more
research and it's gonna help our
farmers and ranchers and
ri g ator s along here manage
these beaver populations and
make sure that there's a balance
then then I'm all in, so thanks
for bringing your beaver
forward.
Thank you, Senator, and it is
true, and, and, and I also had
opportunities of understanding
because it's not just rivers and
streams, it is uh a lot of our
communities that we are very
dependent on and that are very
vital to the fabric of our
state, and so I, I don't see an
issue and I'll certainly talk
with um my co-sponsor, Senator
Wirth, because I think the more
groups that are impacted by this
who
and put on that, the more solid
that data will be, so that there
can be uh a very thoughtful and
effective plan moving forward,
and I think that's really the
critical element.
And the Senator Townsend.
I'm almost afraid.
So
I'm so sorry, Madam Chair, if we
don't, if we don't get caught of
the day,
I think from this presentation
she did a pretty good one there,
yeah, I saw it
a few, a few smiled, but uh uh
others of us ducked our head.
um.
Mancha.
Is there any appropriation?
tied to this.
This memorial.
Madam Chair and senator, um, it
is in the, I, I believe the
general appropriation Act, um,
and so that would be something
that I'd need to, um, this, this
one contains no appropriation,
but certainly there is a
conversation about costs to
different agencies that we've
talked about. Um, but I don't
see that there is an actual
appropriation to this.
Correct me if I'm wrong, Madam
Chair, but I think I saw on that
sheet that just came out where
we were picking our.
priorities that there was
2 or $5 million.
Remember?
There, there was some money in,
in that.
which
And, and, and yes, senator, yes,
there is, I think it might be
$10 million that's already in.
In there for that would go to
this. I appreciate that I
appreciate that heads up because
that wasn't something that's
some expensive,
uh, do you want
Yeah, I would
hope it's not 10 million just,
just, just for beaver, but
Senator, do you think, Madam
Chair, members, uh, John
Courtney, deputy director of LFC
currently in House Bill 2, there
is 3.
5 million in.
Where the department of game and
fish for cap capacity building.
Uh, for the American. I, um, I'm
sure.
Um.
It's not a real problem in my
district.
Um, so,
Probably not set my support, but
I understand what you're doing
and.
I will
Uh, reserve the temptation for
quip at the end. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, at this point in
committee, I think sometimes a
little bit of levity is at, at
this point in the session is
always kind of welcome.
I agree, San, any other members,
Senator
uh Har. Thank you, Madam Chair,
did you know beavers worldwide
are celebrated on April 7th.
And so there's the international
Beaver Day, and so we're just a
couple of days away from
celebrating every beaver.
On the 7th, and so I think this
is coming at a fitting time that
we're just 2 days away from
international Madam chair. I'm
just speechless, thank you.
So there Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. Uh, I just wanted to
talk to you, so, um,
I've had be problems on the
ranch I used to own in Colorado
and uh we didn't.
Um, I think you called or talked
about uh moving the deep beavers
off site. I appreciate that
cause I used to pay someone to
eradicate them because they
cause problems, but I in that
conversation, ma'am Chair and
Senator, uh, it was talked about
the secus. I think it would be
good.
Or even the land grants to be a
part of that discussion. What
happens in the secas in, in, in
the erosion.
Go downstream and can affect
other, I was telling someone
earlier, my grandfather was
upset because I paid a gentleman
that had taken out a beaver in
my area, and he was also
charging my grandfather
downstream because the water
goes downstream, so we're both
being charged for the same
beaver, but it's just one of
those things to look at just the
overall value, especially in
moving them where you put them
and where you position them, and
if it's gonna affect the seca,
it's probably gonna affect the
land grants.
In the areas. I just want to
clarify that, uh, I, I
appreciate the relocation part
of it, uh, but I just wanted to
bring that up because I think
they're, uh, I like the idea of
what it's gonna do to the
watershed.
I do have some concerns, uh, our
property was in Colorado. The
headwaters from New Mexico.
The head gate was in New Mexico,
but I was actually sued by the
state of Colorado for the
Colorado, Texas Water Compact.
Because the Mexico closed the
head gate, so I'm just wondering
and worried that if you make too
many of these ponds, and it
takes away from on our property,
we had a weir that was measured
daily.
Uh, in the displacement of that
water, they came back up to me
and tried to get me to cover it,
and I understand if you make too
many ponds, it slows the process
down.
And it at Texas will be
watching. I think it's great for
us.
Just in the overall, I just
thought I'd throw that out
there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Appreciate it,
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you.
And that's why I feel like
bringing bills like this to
committees, bring all the other
players, uh, you know, to the
table, and I think, um, I've got
notice and, and I'll talk with
my co-sponsor about, because I
think it's, it's, it's bringing
in those organizations that um.
And those agencies that I
already know cause I'm not a
water specialist, um, and, uh,
it's certainly out of my
wheelhouse, but it's certainly
something that I also believe in
and when we're talking about in
my communities as well with
rural farming communities and
so, um, I appreciate that input
and, and we'll certainly um
bring that in.
Do that. Thank you, Madam. Yes.
Thank you. Um,
The birds, you don't want to get
it on the beaver. I don't have
any beaver jokes.
You know, Senator, uh, I, I
usually, I don't like memorials
because they are, they are
strongly worded suggestion.
That's kind of it. But this one
I can't wait for this to be
heard on the floor. That is
gonna be hilarious,
uh, yes, I cannot either, um,
you know, one of the things
that, you know, given the work
that we're doing here.
Sometimes when we have these
little quotes or something that
was said, Senator Wirth had, I
think environmental groin.
Um, on the floor. And those are
the moments where we just kind
of have to take a moment and
just kind of enjoy the humor out
of things, out of the
seriousness, uh, otherwise that
we are doing, and so I
appreciate the opportunity, um,
you know, it is something that
is impacting people and it is uh
something as serious, but I, I,
and I appreciate the
understanding uh of that, but I
also appreciate the, the, the
humor that is coming along with
that because sometimes we just
need that.
Senator Townsend. I just thought
it would be interesting.
Senator Block is not here and
and it's not that he is busy.
He's preparing himself for the
floor, so beware.
Uh, well, maybe we'll get
another quote out of that, um,
today.
Senator Bermans, Madam Chair, I
would like to request a t-shirt
though.
Madam Chair and senator, if you
do, um, we have the creator, uh,
Sky Devore if Sky wants to stand
up because she is also wearing,
oh, and Kim is also wearing a
shirt.
Um, you know, this, this might
become a trend of uh making
limited edition shirts from
weird stuff that is being heard
during the Senate session.
Uh, so, uh, Sky and I will, will
get that and we'll get your size
if anybody else wants one, just
let me know.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Gates I'm just a question, are
you a trio? Are you guys gonna
singing on the floor or you, you
have a place tonight that you
guys are performing, just
wondering, Madam Chair and
Senator, actually, I can't take
any credit for this shirt, this
is really sky and Representative
Hernandez, who came up with this
brilliant thing and now they're
starting some other shirts, so,
uh, we are not performing or
going on the road anytime soon.
Thank you for that. I mean,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah,
we're all saying that Senator,
I'm disappointed there's not
gonna be a beaver show with, uh,
what, what is, what is the, the
will of the committee, Madam
Chair move would do pass on this
amazing fever memorial.
All right, is there any
objection to that motion?
See, no, you have 6 in favor,
uh, your beaver has passed. Go
ahead. Oh gosh, there's so much
that just came out of this.
Thank you very much, committee,
and I do appreciate your
commitment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator Woods,
come on up.
um uh send a bill 5:14.
Madam Chair, today I present to
you Senate Bill 4514, 514.
And this is gonna be something
that uh
You'll say, well, why wasn't
this done a long time ago?
We're talking about severance
tax bonds here.
I don't know how much
information or how much
knowledge you have on severance
tax bonds.
But this particular severance
tax bonds we usually use for
capital outlay.
Now we've been so flush with
cash lately.
That we actually
Do both, we sell severance tax
bonds for capital outlay and
We use cash for capital outlay.
This year we're gonna use
somewhere around 500 and.
540, 554, I think is a figure of
cash, million in cash.
And we're also going to sell.
Around
265 million.
That will be available.
With severage tax.
This year being an abnormal
year.
And when I say abnormal, we have
lots of cash.
Many years we don't have cash.
Many years the only place that
we get to spend is severance tax
capacity.
What this bill does, it will put
in statute.
That this will be divided in 3
funds.
Third would go to the governor.
For statewide projects.
A third would go to the Senate,
and a third would go to the
house.
The arguments
For this
is
When you go to negotiate, it
said in stone, there won't be
negotiation about.
How much will go to the Senate,
how much will go to the House,
how much, that's the positive
part.
The negative part that you will
hear probably today is, well,
wait a minute.
The statewide projects must be
much more important than the
legislators project.
Those are the two arguments.
That you will probably hear
going forward if you hadn't had
that in your mind already.
So, the question before you
today is, do you want to put in
statute.
To divide this 3 ways.
From now on,
or someone else changes it.
But that is the argument that
goes forth.
And so,
Uh, it's real funny when I put
this in front of Senator Munoz,
he couldn't sign it. He didn't
understands the negotiation that
goes on.
And with that
Uh, Madam Chair, that's
essentially the bill.
Thank you, Senator. We did not
have anyone sign up in support
or opposition on this bill, so
members of the committee,
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
Senator, this bill
Just
Pretty much saying
Just do what we're supposed to
do when we come into dividing
this money.
This may be one of the most
important.
Financial impact bills that
we're going to see this session.
You're right, we shouldn't be
going through the negotiation
process every single year, and
you shouldn't have one entity
that's saying, well, I'm gonna
take half the pie and then we're
gonna use the remaining and
we'll split up those 3s. But
first, I'm gonna spend what I
need and then we'll, then we'll
divide the thirds up with what's
remained. That is not the intent
of how that was supposed to be.
I, I also agree that the
governor's project should be
limited to those with statewide
significance. Statewide
significance is, well, in my
case, the veterans hospital in
truth their consequences for the
veterans cemetery at P here or
wherever it may be, we can
agree, but some of those
projects have statewide
significance, but not a lot of
them. I, I think this is
absolutely fair. I think, um,
this has been a long time coming
and, and I think it's, I think
it's crazy that.
This is the first time we've
seen something like this. It's
unfortunate that we we need to
put it in statute, but we do.
And so I hope it makes it all
the way up there. I think that
this bill it protects the
integrity and the role of the
legislator as the appropriators
and guarding this money and and
thank you and I wish you and
Senator Munoz through well
through the process. Thank you.
Senator Townsend.
Yes ma'am, just a notion I move
Senate bill by 14 to pass.
And before we take up that
motion, Senator Bergman, thank
you, Madam Chair. Just one quick
question. I'm wondering if
you've discussed with the
governor this proposal, and if
you have.
engaged her thoughts on it.
Have I talked to the governor on
this?
Is what you're asking. No, I
haven't talked to the governor,
although I have talked to the
governor's staff. I've, I've
recently been in the group that
negotiated the present capital
outlay system that we have for
this year.
And like I say, this particular
year.
We have uh uh
We're gonna have
Money out of cash that goes to
the legislature.
And I will admit it's more than
what the severance tax bond
would bring in totally.
But this is an unusual year.
I hope that it's a usual year
for many years in the future.
I might also give you the
indication that the statewide
projects that are, many of those
are vetted.
And we spent a lot of time in
LFC. We send teams out to look
at projects and make sure
they're planned, make sure that
they're necessary projects and
make sure there's something
that's ready to spend money on.
And we bring that list into the
governor's office and we say,
here's the ones that we've
discovered.
Now she also
As people walk in, can you
imagine walking in and asking
for their project or asking for
more money for their project.
And it became quite the uh
Trying to think of the correct
term here.
Like the uh
Speedfest
So to speak,
Uh, and I know that each one of
you've heard from your
constituents that please fund my
$10 million project.
And I negotiated you for me.
I
So how do I get my $10 million
project done.
That's where
We send out the statewide
projects to be vetted to make
sure there's money.
And how much would it cost to
complete them?
I, I was personally involved
with the little deal of about
$70 million trying to find
projects that just needed more
money to finish them.
Can you imagine there's projects
out there. I didn't get to the
bottom of the list, but I found
about $70 million worth of
projects that had been that
people had the planning done,
they had some money already in
the project, and they needed
more money to finish it.
I'm, I'm trying to force that
into this conversation.
This year.
I'm trying to force
It up, let's get some of these
projects finished.
Has nothing to do with this
particular bill.
This particular bill.
is a future deal, a futuristic
look at it, so we can stop
negotiating.
3rd, 3, 3rd, it's just in
statute, uh, uh, it will close
the gap.
We can finally come to an
agreement if we want to put up
cash to finish projects.
It stood a
to someone
Putting 100,0004 to $4 million
project.
And then
We have to be responsible for
what we do up here.
And it's, I mean, it's easy, I
mean, most of us never had $4
million to spend at one time,
any time, right?
And trying to find that
particular project. I'm I'm
taking too much time and I
apologize, but
So how do we be responsible
spending money.
There's, we've talked and, and
there's much pushback. We've
talked about.
Moving the process of people's
asking for money.
Back further
Make it earlier in the year and
then send teams out.
To see about these projects, see
if they're shovel ready. See if
they just need money for
planning.
See what needs to be done to
make it a more efficient money
instead of having.
$4 billion setting out there,
not spent.
You know, we don't want to go
out there and pull that money
back.
It's not
That's not what we want to do.
But again, we want projects
done. We want fully fund
projects to get them done.
These are good projects. There's
no doubt about it.
But how do we do that? How we be
responsible. That's all the,
the, the questions that need to
be asked today while we have
money.
Because we may not have money
tomorrow to finish these
projects. But this particular
bill, like I say,
It's just taking out one piece
of the negotiation, and then the
legislature can, in my eyes, can
say, let's send people out there
on statewide projects, see what
needs to be done, see if they're
ready, see if they need money
for planning and design, and
then see what we can finish up
projects instead of having so
many projects out there.
Instead of having people come in
last minute.
In saying
That government senator.
I need $4 million.
It's hard to resist. It's hard
to resist your fellow
constituents when they come in
here wanting some money.
That's what we're trying to do,
we're trying to close this deal
up.
Give you more options.
To give you options to say this
is where would be a good place
to put your money.
But again, this really has
nothing to do with this
particular bill, this particular
bill is talking about severance
tax money.
Divide it three ways.
And, and knowingly,
That this is going to go on in
the future.
So, I'm sorry.
I get to preaching. I apologize.
Thank you, Adam sure that's all.
Senator Stefanis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
over in uh finance presenting a
different, different bill.
Um
So, I'm sorry if these questions
have been asked and, you know, I
appreciate that right now, we
can use general fund.
And save the
Interest
Money on the STBs.
And the eos, but um I have
concern about
Uh, the statement in the bill,
the governor's share shall be
committed to the acquisition or
improvement of state assets.
And Capital projects of
statewide or regional
significance.
And the reason I bring this up,
Madam Chair, Senator, is that
Um, state government and the
governor in particular has
assisted with a courthouse.
Andorta County.
Um
The tax base in some counties is
so low that when you talk about
even building something for $4
million you don't even have.
The tax base or the approval of
the residents.
And sometimes the governor will
step up and match.
Legislators
Uh, appropriations, sometimes
not.
But when she does step up, fear
he does step up to match.
Uh
It's very helpful to those rural
poor communities.
So you would be deleting that
opportunity.
With this bill
Madam Chair senator
is. When I say statewide
projects.
But
As you know, Senator, we go out
and we
Vett projects. There's the
Each county, each local entity
sends projects in. They
requested capital outlay for.
We actually send a team from LFC
out to look at those projects
and that.
Those are the projects that I'm
talking about statewide
projects.
From, from the whole state over.
What projects are vetted, what
projects need to be done.
I know it sounds like it's just
limits this.
To particular projects.
But there are some regional
projects that take a lot of
money that need to be funded
too.
But we do that through other
ways too. We do that through the
water transport. We do that from
the local road project fund.
We do that many other ways.
Should we direct a lot of these
projects that way instead of
trying to do it ourselves.
It's only logical. Why did we
set these projects up to do
regional projects.
So, yes, I understand your
concern, senator, that this may
change something, but if we
don't start
Fully funding projects, what are
we gonna do in the future?
So Madam Chair, Senator, I
totally appreciate uh the intent
of the bill with the 1/3, 1/3,
1/3.
I think that's great.
But the part of this bill with
the statewide really
That's us as legislators back.
That's all. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
We're on a a motion for Du pass
just real quickly before we we
get to that motion.
Uh, I, so I.
Something like a courthouse, I
mean, I would see that as as a
project of regional
significance. Um, so I, I, I
understand that your concerns,
uh, Senator Spos, but
But I think that this language
is broad enough.
That for some of these, these
projects where
I, I, I think there is, there's
some flexibility in the
language. Um.
But I, I hope we'll, we'll
address the, the concerns that,
that you've raised, but we're on
a motion for a due pass. Um,
let's do a, a roll call, but on
this one.
Senator Bergman's. Yes.
Senator Block, Senator Bloch is
excused. Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal. No.
Senator Doha.
Yes, Senator Townsend, to
explain his vote.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, thank you.
I see this bill is a bill that
preserves
Legislative.
power.
Of, of appropriation. I have
been on appropriations when
there was a Republican governor.
And there's never been a
governor on the 4th floor that
did not think they had the right
to all the money.
And we're smarter than all of
the legislatures. So this is not
a Republican or Democrat bill.
This is a bill that strengthened
and preserves the the power of
the legislature, so I support it
for that reason. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, with 5 in
favor, 2 against, you have 2
pass.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Just,
just so you know this particular
year.
The governor gets uh 200
million.
From severance tax bonds.
And she also gets a 3rd.
Of the 500 and
24 million or whatever that is,
same amount.
As
Each legislative group gets the
Senate, the House, and the
governor, it's a third of that.
So she's getting a lot of money.
Um
Right now, which she's gonna put
to good use, I'm sure.
So lobby the hell out of it,
guys. OK, sorry. Thank you,
Senator Representative. Come on
up.
We're going to uh HB 181.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
Madam Chair committee, House
Bill 181 is uh a bill to
increase legislative oversight.
Uh, and, uh, allocate
appropriate legislative
responsibility for um oversight
of important new funding
investments that we're making.
Uh, this requires DFA and LFC
Madam Chair, committee, to
jointly develop accountability
and oversight mechanisms for
pilot programs funded through
the Grow uh fund, Madam Chair,
committee. These are 3-year
pilot projects intended to test
out important, uh, new
investments to see if those
investments are working to make
the lives better for New
Mexicans, specifically, I'm
gonna go through really quickly
6 different uh accountability
the components of the account.
and evaluation plan identifying
program goals and outcomes,
describing how program
activities will achieve expected
outcomes, summarizing evidence
or research on a program
effectiveness, including a plan
for monitoring performance.
Uh, including an evaluation plan
to assess uh the causal impacts
of the program.
And finally describing methods
for statistical analysis and
timelines for reporting results,
Ma'am, uh, committee, basically
we wanna have uh ideas that are
supported by research, ready to
be implemented, and then as part
of the funding and evaluation
plan uh that goes in on the
front end. So at the end of 3
years, we can determine what
things are working for New
Mexicans, and potentially
continue those, and Madam Chair
committee, uh, the things that
are.
We working to discontinue those.
Doctor John Courtney, the Deputy
LFC director is here as my
expert and with that we set for
question. Thank you,
representative. I, I don't think
we have anyone signed up in
support or opposition on this
one, so members of the
committee.
Uh, Senator Brantly followed by
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. I think this is as
important piece of the grow
project. I think arguably could
actually say it's the most
important pieces because we need
to be able to evaluate the
outcomes of that. Um, and so I
absolutely support it. In fact,
if we didn't, we're missing the
most important components, and
that is, did the project work or
not? What went wrong and how do
we evaluate it. So, uh, full
support. Thank you.
Senator Townsend. Yes, thank
you, madam chair, um,
representative, I, I too, um,
support initiative. I think it's
kind of embarrassing.
That we haven't already done
this.
Um
You would think that
As much money as we spend up
here that we would have an
An institutional
Oh, look at every dollar that we
spend and then and then we had
post-economics to say,
This is what we
suppose this is what we
presented as the
That what a bill would do.
Three years later, 5 years
later, this is how it worked
out. So that we have some basis
to know.
Was that, was that good or was
that bad? I mean, we should not
be.
shooting in the dark all the
time, so I, uh,
I agree with you. I think it's a
good process and I hope it grows
throughout the rest of the
legislature. Thank you.
Thank you, other members harm
you. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. What happens if
they don't submit the evaluation
plan.
Uh thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
um, and senator, the evaluation
plan uh in if we're able to pass
this legislation will be a
required component of developing
the appropriations. So we
shouldn't see uh appropriations
developed without that
component.
Good, so the plan needs to be in
place for that money to come
over, I support that, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
I don't have anyone else on my
list.
Um, so,
So if, so I know, uh, so some of
the growth funding, uh, that
I've done, uh, in the past has
really been going to, to a
local, um,
So what if like looking at
number one, identify the goals,
objectives, expected outputs and
outcomes.
We're asking the agencies for
that. What if those goals and
objectives between the agency
and the local who the funds
would really be going to are
different.
Uh,
thank you, Madam
Madam Chair, sounds like, um,
you know, last year there was a
grow appropriations that went
district by district that uh
maybe you're referring to,
that's not, those were for a
two-year process. We're in year
2 of that process. Um, I think
our sense is that these apply
most squarely to the agencies,
as you mentioned, Madam Chair,
um, and this will actually go
into the government
accountability Act. So the uh
sort of legislation that governs
a wide
range of other reporting back to
LFC on report cards and many
different things, program
evaluations. I think we should
treat those individual grow
dedications if those are sort of
made district by district, a
little bit separately, although
sort of have a bit of a
front-end process, but this,
this applies to the agencies for
the largeronics.
Thank you
you said um.
made me remember something from
a past bill that we had in here,
and thank you, uh, Chair Small
for being here.
Um
My question has to do with the
fact.
We had another bill in here.
That had to do with performance
measures.
And losing money uh in the
budget if you didn't meet your
performance measures.
And my experience has been that
departments come up with
performance measures and LFC
sometimes accepts them and
sometimes writes their own.
And I'm concerned about.
That happening here.
Where
It would be decided by an an
non-service department like LFC.
Um, what the standards were or
the or the performance measures
and.
That the department really
doesn't have a say in this.
Did you respond, Madam Chair
senator
by requiring DFA and LFC to
jointly develop these. I think
we we avoid sort of one or the
other, uh, sort of having full
say, Madam Chair, Senator,
jointly developing these, uh, in
consultation where DFA is an
equal partner, I think is an
important component. And as you
point out, you know, the
executive agencies implement
funding.
There's an inherent tension and
push and pull there. But this
doesn't imbalance that. It makes
them, uh, partners and Madam
Chair, Senator.
They're as invested as we are
in.
Things that work
Uh, and help New Mexicans
finding those things.
So that's, that would be my
answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Thank you.
Other members, um, but
And then just following up on
Senator Sonic's question.
Because do do we have the same
so.
So that the, these are not
service agencies, so is, is DFA.
Does DFA know the appropriate
performance measures or
Every, uh, every agency, I mean,
I think the concern is that
these are these are folks
setting the performance measures
who are involved in the actual
work.
Go ahead. Uh, and I'm sure
Senator, it's a good question,
um, and, you know, and I think
in the, the vision for, for this
is in the process of developing
those performance measures in
conjunction with DFA, it would
be a collaboration with the
agency, and if, if you'll notice
there, there's kind of two dates
set in there, one for the
initial submission, and then
some time for for review and and
discussion, um, with another uh
deadline of September 1st, which
would give.
Some, some flex time in there if
if there were discussion or if
an agency were to say, you know,
that that's really not
measurable and and I think we've
talked to DFA about this, we, we
certainly want to come up with
with metrics that are are
representative of of what's
happening, but also things that
are are able to be accomplished
on the part of the of the agency
and and measures that they, they
see as meaningful.
And, and just to clarify.
All this would go to is.
Is a is are the recommendations
that would be made. This would
not be determined to
determinative of whether
Projects could be raised or
funded, period, right? Thank
you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
the sort of the choice to fund
will still rest with the
legislature and the more that I
think is the deputy director
said, the more that there's uh
involvement from different
agencies who are gonna be the
ones who are executing that
spending, uh, the better plan
there will be more confidence
we'll have, and if the money's
there, we'll be able to invest.
But it
Madam Chair, that decision is
still very much squarely rests
with the legislature. This will
just inform it and give a
really, we hope for sort of
front end, clear sense of why we
think these investments will
work.
What the investments are
intended to do and a measurement
to see if the investments are
working. Great. Thank you very
much.
That's the will of the
committee.
move would do pass.
All right, there's a motion for
a due pass. Is there any
objection to that motion?
See none. I have 6 in favor, you
have a 2 pass. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you.
All right.
Senator Brantley and Senator
Boone.
Come on up, or, OK, Senator
Boone, come on up on Senate
Memorial 19.
One of Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I appreciate
being here this morning. I'm,
I'm here this morning to present
a Senate Memorial 19, uh.
We're asking in this memorial.
Uh
To have 50% of the beef milk and
cheese fed to the schoolchildren
in New Mexico come from New
Mexico farmers.
And producers
And uh
I realized that uh.
This is a pretty ambitious
undertaking. I, I understand
that, but what we're asking for
here is just for a working group
to be established to look into
the feasibility of this because
uh.
We as ag producers are pretty
proud of what we do we we're,
we're pretty pleased that uh.
The uh
The industry that that we
participate in, uh, is a is a.
Alive and well and doing doing
very good job we feel like
we're.
Cutting edge on our technologies
we feel like we produce a really
good product and, and what
better way to showcase it and
and hopefully make really good
use of it and to feed uh our our
school children with it.
Uh
One of the most
Diverse agriculture.
E
We have one of the most diverse
agricultural.
Industries in the whole United
States, uh, here in New Mexico
we're a leader in milk, cheese
and beef production and uh beef
cattle ranching alone
contributes over 16,000 jobs and
producers uh $1.7 million in
output.
And almost $450 million in labor
income.
Um, we have
More than 100 licensed dairy
herds.
Herds in the largest average
herd size in the nation at 2700
cows.
And uh that makes us 9th in the
nation for milk production and
4th for cheese production, so we
feel like we have ample supplies
and and uh we feel like it would
be.
Uh, really beneficial if we
could if we could get this
pulled off and what we're asking
for here, we would like to see a
working group with
representatives from New Mexico
cattle growers, dairy producers
of New Mexico, Southwest cheese,
and Tucum carry Mountain cheese,
and we would hope that this, uh.
Working group could come
together and, and make up a
report of its recommendation to
the interim legislative
committees work in agriculture
and public education by
September the first of this year
and send copies of this memorial
to the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture and Public Education
Department for appropriate
distribution.
And with that, uh, I, I
neglected to mention my, my
expert witness Candy Sweetzer
from New Mexico, uh, Department
of Agriculture, and I think we
have online.
Jason knew, I think he's, he's
available to uh a division head
to answer any questions that you
might have and uh with that
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator.
We have 3 people sign up and
support, uh, Gillian Joyce, Tom
Patterson, and Larry Reagan, uh,
if you all are here, ma'am, you
have to, you have to sign up at
least an hour ahead of the, the
meeting, um, but go ahead and
folks who uh whose names I read,
sign up or stand up and
Uh, go ahead for about 2 minutes
each.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you, uh, for
the opportunity to speak today
for a 2nd time.
I'm representing Rocky Mountain
Farmers Union and our, uh,
family farmer and rancher
members across New Mexico.
We strongly support Senate
Memorial 19 as a critical step
toward supporting sustainable
markets for New Mexico's
agriculture producers. For many
of our members, securing
reliable institutional buyers
like our public school system,
and mean the difference between
profitability and real struggle.
The guaranteed market for 50% of
beef, cheese, and milk in our
schools would provide a
consistent revenue stream that
allows producers to plan,
invest, and grow their
operations. This initiative
isn't just about keeping farms
financially viable, it
strengthens our entire in-state
food system.
When local producers supply
local schools, we create
economic multiplier effects,
reduced transportation costs,
provide fresher products to our
children, increase the needed
redundancies in and resilience
of our food system and build
community connections between
those who produce our food and
those who eat it.
We urge you
To support this memorial.
Uh, New Mexico food and Ag
Policy Council also stands in
support of this. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members.
My name is Tom Patterson. I have
the privilege of serving as
President-elect.
The New Mexico cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers support Senate
Memorial 19.
The meat, cheese, and milk.
We give our school children to
be healthy.
And nutritious.
New Mexico produces that food.
Senate Memorial 19 is clearly
aspirational with the targets
its setting.
But it is not a moonshot.
Cattle growers accepts the
challenge to work with the
secretary to develop the plan to
feed our schoolchildren with
beef.
Meat and cheese grown here in
New Mexico.
Doing so will allow us to focus
on the supply chain
infrastructure that will
facilitate feeding New Mexico
grown.
To all our citizens.
Including our school children.
We urge your support for Senate
Memorial 19. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Uh, my name is Larry Reagan. I'm
president of New Mexico Farm and
Livestock Bureau.
We support Senate Memorial 19
for the reasons that have
already been stated, uh, it's
imperative that uh our kids
received nutritious homegrown
food, and it provides a market
for uh
Our producers.
I would like to see New Mexico
farm and livestock Bureau
represented on that committee as
we are the state's largest ag
organization, so thank you.
Thank you, we did not have
anyone sign up in opposition,
Senator Gallegos.
Madam Chair and senator, thank
you.
Candy. Candy and I served
together on the house, uh, I
appreciate this. I just have a
couple of questions, so, uh, Sam
Pearl retired, uh, has a dairy
farm in the Rossville area and
I've gone through there to buy
uh meat from him.
And I'm just wondering if you
guys are looking at regional
areas, more local, or are you
looking at a statewide, I would
think in your work group, Madam
Chair and Senator, that you be
discussing how to get the
product to the schools. I'm just
wondering if it's more of a
local area or if you're gonna do
a statewide type of service, and
if that would be you or would
that be through the schools? How
would that mechanism getting
The products back to the
schools.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Senator Gagos, uh, I, I would
really.
Tend to think that that uh.
The answer to your question is.
This, this working group needs
to come together and decide how,
how's going to be the best way.
I mean, like I said in my
opening statement I really
realized this is a pretty
ambitious deal, and I know it's
gonna take lots of preparation,
gonna take lots of work and it's
gonna take some really big time
planning.
And uh I know that uh.
By the, by this uh.
Number of people coming together
that we can surely come up with
a.
Uh, a workable plan where we can
where we can make distribution
and and supply and all of those
things come together.
Uh, to make it work, uh.
You know, uh, we, we don't have
answers.
Specifically to those questions
right now, but that's what I
envisioned.
The mission of the working group
to be is to put all that
together, bring it all together.
Well, thank you for that, madam
chair,
Miss Senator, and I, I like
that, um, because our packaging
and distributing distribution is
gonna be important, uh, just to
tell you being on school board,
there's many times I go into the
schools to eat lunch.
And it always comes back to mind
that little lady had a
Burger place and she's taking a
bite and she hollers, where's
the beef?
I would rather have
R
Are locally grown.
Produce, you know, whether it's
beef or milk or or cheese to be
in those.
Then the processed stuff that we
giving them now, so stand in
support of your um
So uh Senate Memorial just
because I think it the outcome
after the work group goes
through everything, it's gonna
be better for children in the
classrooms, and I, I appreciate
that, but uh I would look into
how you're gonna do it, and I
know that's what the work group
will do, but I just think that's
critical to us. We just want it
in a timely manner.
I think that'll be great for us,
our kids.
Thank you, Senator Stephanic
followed by Senator Brantley.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Senator. I, I support
this almost totally.
I do think on page 3, line for
that section needs to be
statewide, and it needs to be
expanded.
Uh, you have farmers' markets,
you have people growing, uh,
Various items and uh.
Different types of meat all over
the state we're talking about
eggs as well as dairy as well as
cheese, as well as meat.
And the other uh comment I would
make is that instead of by
September 1, I would put in
November 1.
That still allows for the report
to get to Arim committees before
they finish at the end of
December, so November and
December are the last two months
of interim committees and that
gives a little bit more time.
But
Uh, just the other day, I and
Senator Brantley and Senator uh
Josh Sanchez, we're discussing
this, and Senator Sanchez is
from the middle of the state,
and he's very concerned about
this. I'm very concerned in my
district, and I have the king
meat in my district. So that's
why I think this needs to be um
expanded to statewide. Thank
you. That's all.
Thank you so much Stephanic,
Senator Bradley, followed by
Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. I think to, to
follow up on Senator Stephanics.
Comment I think it's important.
Let's add Senator Sanchez and
visit with Senator, um,
Stephanics as well about how we
can really put some more meat
into this, um, is this, as this
goes forward because I think we
can expansion expand it. I also
do think that I agree with the,
um, the edit for the date.
Um, overall, what we see is
there's been some real champions
for healthier meals in schools.
We've seen that with Senator
Padilla to the governor's
credit, she is trying to to make
healthier meals. We see them
available now free in all
schools, but what's happening is
we're working in silos and so
what from that conversation that
we had with the governor's
office, myself and Senator
Stanix is while there's a long
list of local producers, they're
still schools that aren't
getting local produce and so
we're operating in silos we have
available.
producers, we have consumers
being the school and we're not,
we do not have the
infrastructure in place and
what's happening is these
schools are just doing what
they've always done and that's
in their means of ordering food
and it's not coming local. I
think it's an awesome idea, and
I think that through this, this
is the first step in identifying
how we can put the
infrastructure in place to merge
those two so that we have.
Really fresh meals in school and
I know sometimes what our intent
here in the legislator, we think
we've done that because we've
seen many bills come through
that were the intent was to do
just that, and I'm going to tell
you that as a mom with girls in
public schools. I have a number
of photos that get on a regular
basis of what's being um served
in the cafeterias, and it, it's
not healthy and it's not local.
And I don't wanna say that broad
from all schools cause I'm sure
there are many schools that are
are doing it, but I
wholeheartedly support this. I
think we should expand.
our effort a little more to
include others and um I, I wish
you well as this goes through. I
think that something big can
happen from this.
Thank you, Senator Bergman's
followed by Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator for bringing this.
Hello, Representative.
Uh, just echo what Senator
Brantley was saying, I totally
agree. I went to Moriarty High
School and I didn't even know
the tuum carry cheese.
The mountain cheese factory
existed.
Which is great. Nothing that we
had in our high school was
local, and it's a farming
community.
And so
With New Mexico being the 4th in
the nation for cheese production
and all these other high
rankings we have.
I love this attempt. And if
It needs to not be a memorial.
Or if this memorial is too soft,
then maybe we should also look
at doing this, um,
Legislatively. But thank you so
much for bringing this and I
hope it succeeds.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Yeah, you bet, Mr. Chairman. Um,
representative.
I, I
Thank you, Ma.
I totally support it.
You might want to think about
starting it.
30% and ramping up.
So that you can get the
Infrastructure figured out
because it's gonna be, that's
gonna be an issue. The other
thing that you'll be pissed on
if you bring back in the bill,
is that you're protecting the
financial wherewithal of
PED meaning, are you getting the
best value for the bucks to to
the school children.
That'll be another thing you'll
have to address. So you'll have
to make it a commodity-driven
issue where you're
He, uh
The Prices are, are, hide the
symptoms so they, they have that
stability. The other thing, um,
Yeah, I think those are two main
things. I support the issue we
need to do it and ramp it up a
little bit, give you some, give
you some leeway.
Because
You know, if you say 50% of, of
Milk, for example, and you get
Albuquerque done, you've knocked
out a big chunk.
So, just figure out how you
wanna
Run that out, but I'm sure the
work group will do that and it's
a great idea and we ought to be
all using the Mexico grown when
we can. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, just, just as a follow up to
that, Senator, is, is that it
just is, um, the New Mexico farm
and Livestock Bureau asked to
have a seat at the table and
just walked Kindle from the
governor's office. She's been a
big champion when it comes to
fresh and healthy meals. I think
it's important that we can
collaborate with you too so that
we can uh really just move New
Mexico forward as a team effort
and I think you'll be supported
by, by all of us. So thank you.
Manage
That are
Ma'am, I'm wondering if the uh
senators because Senator
Brantley's on this too. I'm
wondering if you would revise it
and bring it back. I think that
you have a lot of support or if
you would.
Consider revising it before it
goes to the floor.
I'm sure members of the
committee, uh, senators Fox,
yes, we're, we're here.
At the, at the behest of this
committee, we, we, we wanna see
what y'all suggestions are, and
we appreciate them very, very
much because we want this thing
to fly and whatever we need to
do, we'll be glad to do that
that's a friendly suggestion and
we'll, we'll take it and go with
it and I would to Senator
Brantley since her name's on it.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and Senator
Stephanics, I think that um in
good faith we can make these
changes between here and Senate
education and come with the
amendments ready to go to Senate
education and visit with them
for more of a local school
perspective.
Senator, if that's something
you're comfortable with or we or
we can bring this right back up
on Friday, and, and pass it out
with your amendments then.
Um
At the center, I have missed the
discussion, so if the senators
who have concerns would prefer
to see it back in here with the
amendments. I'm happy to do
that.
If y'all are OK with it, you're
madam chair uh
uh Senator Stephanics is OK.
We'll gather those amendments
and have them made in education
just to keep it moving.
So
I, I just want to move a do
pass.
Inappropriate. Before we get to
that motion, Senator Hermio,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators. So I was the
co-sponsor of Senate Bill 4 that
ensured that students have
access to free and healthy
breakfast and lunch, and 50%
just seems a little high to me,
and I'll tell you why. The
Salamo school, public schools,
which is in my district, is
having a hard time even keeping
up with the requirements of
Senate Bill 4 on local produce,
which then I jotted down a few
questions, um, when thinking
about your title, which lists
produce.
Are you also including fruits
and vegetables when you're
talking about the increase.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Harmio, uh.
Our primary aim in this was was.
Milk, meat and cheese because
the, the.
The thinking group that put this
together, the brainstorm, that's
what we are, that's what we were
was was producers of those uh of
those commodities I, I would
have been under the impression
that there was a produce, uh.
Provision for for school
lunches. I didn't know how
extensive it was or anything
else, but, but that was the
thrust of this thing was but.
I, I certainly wouldn't be
opposed to looking at.
It including
Everything New Mexico. Thank
you, Senator, and then just a
couple more. Um, what would be,
do you by any chance have a
guesstimate of what the cost
would be to cover that 50%
requirement.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chair, we, that's one of the
purposes I think of the working
group is to try to figure out
exactly what supply chain issues
we're facing, what um producer
capabilities we have, so I, I
don't disagree that it's an
ambitious target, but it is
strictly just a target, and the
work group could come back with
perhaps a more realistic um
phase in. Thank you, Madam Chan.
Thank you for that. Now I'm
putting on my hat and and what I
the conversations I had with the
Los Alamos uh superintendent,
and I have a feeling if she was
sitting.
He, she would ask this question,
which is why I wrote it is who
would cover the cost with the
school district be responsible
for covering the cost.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Senator Jaramillo, we certainly
wouldn't want to speak for PE,
but again, I think that would be
one of the things that would
come out of the work group. So
you're balancing fresh fruits,
vegetables, from your, um,
legislation as well as meat,
cheese, and milk on this one as,
as better.
Freer, healthier with the cost
of cheap food that can come
from.
Long distances and have a huge
degradation of nutrients. So
it's a balance, uh, at the end
of the day, it's also a money
issue, so those are I think are
the the exact things this
working group needs to address.
Thank you for that and then the
last one, Madam Chair, is, um.
I know that Senate Bill 4 is
working with local providers. Do
you by any chance know of any
other programs that we might be
working with local.
Producers and providers to to
incorporate is, you know, if
there's anything else that's
currently out there. So thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator
Jarami, the New Mexico grown
list of our approved supplier
program is exactly the the basis
for what we'll be looking at
and, and it is a no cost program
for producers to be able to
register to become available.
And that's exactly how we start
pairing, you know, the school
districts with the producers and
providers in their area.
Thank you for that. I think you
might need somebody to sample
all that cheese and the meat,
and I'd be more than happy to be
sampling
we can both be on there. No
further questions, Madam Chair.
All right, let's do a roll call.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block, Senator Block is
excused. Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Hanna Mel, yes.
Senator Doha.
Yes, with 7 in favor, you have
to pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, we, we really
appreciate this, uh, vote of
confidence, and we will put all
these uh suggestions together
and we'll bring back a better
product. So thank you very much
for your confidence.
Thing and.
No, no, it's 7. I, I, I'm having
trouble counting today, uh, but
