We heard on Monday.
but we're gonna start with
leader worth with SB fifty
eight.
Good morning madam chair and
members Senate bill fifty eight
is a bill that is back I carry
this since two thousand fifteen
and actually in two thousand
nineteen it passed both chambers
and was pocket vetoed by the
governor this is a bill that
relates to water and changes the
membership of the Interstate
Stream Commission.
the genesis for this bill was
kind of two fold one in two
thousand and three we changed.
And added to the role of the
Interstate Stream Commission
some really in support and
responsibilities in terms of
water planning and looking at
our water future Interstate
Stream Commission deals with
compact compliance and Mr Rolf
Schmidt Petersen the director is
here today
and.
When we made the decision to add
to their role the oversight on
planning it seems to me that the
board should be made up of a
more diverse set of members with
different backgrounds and that's
what this bill does it changes
the makeup of the board
and deals with a number of
different things and I'll go
over that the current statute in
and specifically what's happened
what we're doing in this bill I
will say that this is one of
those pieces of legislation that
has.
Kind of been through it multiple
times with multiple amendments
finalist I don't go back and
start from scratch I think it's
really important to acknowledge
and reflect the wishes of the
members who have made changes in
the votes that happen and that's
what we've done here we also
worked with is the Interstate
Stream Commission director of
last year and I want to stay
right up front about kind of the
current make up of the board and
and the signal that this bill
sense in no way is this bill
designed to kind of send a
negative signal to those
commissioners that are serving
now on the board I think it's
it's working very well and we've
put in some appointment process
to address so we're not gonna if
we pass this it would result in
a whole board turnover they're
staggered implementation to
address that
there is some history though
with the Interstate Stream
Commission that's not as good
under the previous
administration of there was a
period of time when.
Multiple Interstate Stream
commissioners were resigning
there was differences with on
water policy with the state
engineer and certain folks in
the board and it just got really
contentious and what we're
trying to do is create a board
that's more diverse and
representative different
interests and also kind of
mitigate some of the potential
for this to become a super
political board based on who the
governor is we're not changing
the fact that the governor makes
the appointments others
currently under the current
statute the governor appoints
nine members
and it states and all quote
seventy two fourteen dash one
which we are now going to
replace but the current statutes
says that the members appointed
by the governor shall be
representative of the major
irrigation districts or sections
and no to membership be
appointed from the same
irrigation district or section
the governor shall point at
least one member of the New
Mexico Indian tribe or pueblo to
the commission so here we have
an agency that's doing not only
compact compliance but.
Landing the future of our
state's water and all of the
members come from major
irrigation districts and so what
we've done in this bill
is the following we continue to
keep for members from irrigation
or Conservancy districts
appointed by the governor
subject to advice and consent
from the Senate which is a new
addition one member to represent
an acequia or community ditch R.
one member to represent a
utility that provides over five
hundred acre feet per annum of
water one member from the New
Mexico water research institute
at for civil or environmental
engineering faculty from and I
miss you are you NM the water
Reese resources reach a research
institute is that New Mexico
state and I think you'll
remember that the biggest
champion for that was Senator
Paypen I was able to really get
the resources for them to move
forward and finally one member
will be a professional
hydrologist with expertise in
New Mexico groundwater resources
or a professional engineer with
the New Mexico consulting
engineering practice in water
Reese's resources or water
utility engineering
these aren't exactly where I
started all those years ago we
had some more environmental
groups and different difference
NGO representation but this is
where this bill has has evolved
to
and so that would be the the
make up the state engineer would
continue to serve as a secretary
of the board.
And then there's a number of
things that that this committee
in particularly worked on in
terms of party registration
making sure they don't change
party registration having a
balance of party representation
on on the board
and so effectively that's that's
what the bill does it did pass
the Senate twenty nineteen
thirty to ten of the house forty
six to sixteen
and I just think this is an
important step forward as we
talk about water during this
session that we ensure that the
agencies in place to do kind of
proactive water plants Planning
have that type of balance
representation so that's what
Senate bill fifty eight dollars
and I'm happy to stand for
questions chair.
Right thank you Senator and I'll
just say for move on folks
watching in those at home can
probably see that we are
functioning as a subcommittee
right now so we will continue
the subcommittee and will take
official action want once we
have a caucus
do you have any organized
support.
Good question we'll see we'll
see who showed up.
See who's who in the room is
here and in support of this bill
anyone.
And madam chair a motion
appears.
And when you come forward and
speak to Mike just so that folks
at home can hear.
Madam chair members of the
committee Rolf Schmidt Petersen
as senator Wirth indicated on
the current director of the icy
and I was just thinking last
night when I woke up for
thinking about this
bit down here with thirty some
years a water resource
experience in twenty four years
at the state have now gone
through five different
Interstate Stream commissions in
that time period and I you know
there there are many different
issues associated with those
parties but what the senator is
seeking to here today I think in
many ways goes to the type of
commission that the governor has
already appointed and so we
support this bill with just a
couple copied us that we'd like
to work with the center on and
just remark on the on the two
pieces the there's just one
aspect of removing the sections
language that was in here before
that for the commission one of
our commissioners who left to
take the top federal job at the
department of interior in water
time your tier Trujillo would be
excluded in the way that the
that the that the years are set
up here and it's primarily that
wording and so we would work
with the senator on that and
then just thinking about the
future and and you're absolutely
right when we're looking to the
next ten to fifteen years or
more the longer we have a
replications with court with
climate change but we have
implementation continuing with
Indian water rights settlements
with tribes those are going to
go on for more than a decade I
just the takes the lead on
those.
And what's what's hanging out
there it is settlement or
litigation over the water rights
of the six middle Rio Grande
pueblos and there are also
ongoing pueblo the goushi Asians
today in the the northern part
of the state a lot of work
effort in that and while the the
legislation would allow tribal
or pueblo representation in
thinking about this we should
really be thinking about a
tribal Representative in a
public because they are distinct
they are different the laws are
different in that regard and so
we'd like to work with the
senator on those types of
issues.
Thank you.
And
on that.
Madam chair representative with
a registered live lobbyist for
the environmental Defense Fund
we stand in strong support of
this and appreciate Senator
Wirth always willingness to work
with the NGOs and and the
environmental list on this issue
in these issues so thank you as
senator for that and we stand in
support of this bill thank you.
We have anyone on the phone.
Okay I'm is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill.
Great then we will go to members
of the committee.
madam president.
Thank you madam chair and.
You know I have been around for
all these iterations of this
What what is this.
So madam chair my understanding
and we can make sure that it
goes to Senate Judiciary
more correct on a wrong
I just conservation conservation
okay good good so Senate
conservation and and and let me
just say I.
Between here and Senate
conservation I I very much
appreciate Mr Schmidt Petersen
standing up in support because
it hasn't always been that way
for Iraq and I understand that
and I I appreciate he's also
waking up at four in the morning
welcome to the club.
I think we're all doing that at
this point but I think the
suggestions he makes makes
perfect sense a yes and a
conservation and so that
something that we will we will
work with
you know the current statute has
the one tribal representative I
also know the department of
Indian affairs raise the
question of just one
Representative and the fact that
we're having these compact
discussions having a second make
sense how you factor that in you
know it's tricky so we want to
get it right but I think we'll
will bring an amendment into
Senate conservation to to deal
with that issue and I will call
the Tania Trujillo issue because
because she's fantastic and
obviously that you can't have a
situation where someone of that
caliber doesn't qualify.
So madam chair center for maybe
Ralph why would she not qualify
what part of this.
You.
Madam chair Senator Stewart M.
if you look at the the she would
not have been a conservation
district for irrigation district
member or any one of those other
parties so the way that her
appointment worked when she was
and I just see commissioner was
in the sections language and and
really in that regard she was
representing NGOs and more.
Yes sections of the state is the
way that the the language was
set up and so madam chair and
senator Stewart I mean there's
an easy fix because if you look
the way it strapped on page two
line six we put in for
representatives of irrigation or
Conservancy districts you just
go back to the original language
in the statute is a districts
four sections and so that that
would be I don't see any reason
not to do that so that that that
would be a friendly amendment to
add those two words and we can
do it right here if you want to
take care of that one.
The motion you're making Senator
Stewart.
Yeah.
Line.
Six seven.
The regional language I think
we're sections I believe Mr on
on line seven after districts
had two words for sections and
that would then take it back to
the original language and input
to address the twenty Trujillo.
Well let her know that she has
been such she has amendment
named after her.
I can you should.
And that six.
We do yeah.
And since senator Morris
responded as we're talking about
the amendment before you we ask
you to vote on it one way or the
other just to go over what what
we're doing we're on SB fifty
eight and Senator Stewart has
proposed an amendment to page
two line seven after the word
districts adding four sections
and Senator Wirth you want to
replace your so up Senator
Moores this just real quick this
is this is a bill that you've
seen before it's been around for
a long time we brought it in
basically the same way that it
that left I think last time was
twenty twenty one
but the the issue that was
brought up was in the current
statute all eight members I
think I can give you the voting
tally sheet if you'd like to see
it refers.
It did pass amended passed the
rules committee eight to nothing
I don't know where the you might
not of been here.
But you can look at your vote on
the floor and twenty nineteen if
you'd like basically the current
statutes as a members a point by
the governor should be
representative of the major
irrigation cation districts for
sections and so we're just going
to take this back I had taken
out the word for section and I
don't remember exactly why but
by putting more section back in
the Interstate Stream Commission
said that's an important
addition that will broaden the
pool and help them make sure
they get the right folks in
there so as a friendly amendment
with Interstate Stream
Commission center act as that
Number of water resource
professionals including lawyers
thanks a and in this case that
that one in particular who is
now the top water official at
Department interior Tania
Trujillo native New Mexican ones
on the NYSE and was on the icy
specifically you know because
that language allowed it so by
taking it out individuals like
Tonya would be precluded from
from being members of the IOC
and I think that would be a
detriment to New Mexico.
Some of the floor correct.
Correct correct.
So Senator Wirth or Ralph.
Four sections secretary.
I think it is bit up excuse me
Madam chair Senator Stewart I'm
in my time here it's been used
to kind of represent areas of
the state you know different
parts or even the the aspect of
different voices and so in
particular I would say there's
two with the which time your two
Hugo representing the really an
NGO voice but also her water
expertise and today Mr Peter
Russell who represents the icy
on the commission from southwest
New Mexico.
So that in that section language
kind of allows that opportunity.
Thank you so with this back here
we're just going back to the
original language right just
right there.
Madam shares Senator that's
correct.
All right so are on the
amendment is there any
opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none that amendment
passes or is often
Senator so this.
I thank you for this.
chairs looking to go to
Scarborough
Peter Wirth senator Wirth was
there several of us were there
where we had.
Day and a half of intensive
water education and we're to me
is that we need more expertise
and professional to help us this
is really not a political issue
this is a serious issue right
now we are having less water
available to the entire
southwest and I was just amazed
at the level of expertise in
this state about what to do
about water so to me this makes
it much more modern much more
professional and so I fully
support thank you for bringing
it Senator Wirth.
Thank you and we have senator
mechanical Senator ma'am.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Wirth for your
presentation this morning and
I'm so glad that no questions
are stupid.
When I asked next to and I and I
always think madam chair and
senator Wirth that I'm asking
questions that perhaps folks
from the webcast wondering about
to and so that's what's giving
me energy to go forward with
that
so I'm curious on page one the
state engineer and the eight
members appointed by the
governor does the state engineer
or any of the other eight are
the do they service tie breakers
is that why we have nine
members.
So madam chair on that is a good
question and I think the answer
is certainly it functions in
that capacity and also I believe
the state engineer currently
under the is the state engineer
the chair of the.
Or the under under this bill I
think becomes a secretary
anything is the secretary also
has been okay so it stays the
same so this is the secretary of
the of the commission but you're
absolutely right that's why you
want that on number three
traffic and then the.
The the synopsis page.
Page one madam chair and senator
Wirth.
I notice we have one member will
be from New Mexico water
resources research institute for
the civil or environmental
engineering faculty of New
Mexico state for the University
of New Mexico and and I'm
curious because I'm I also think
about another one of our
wonderful universities and
that's New Mexico tech in
Sapporo and I'm wondering are
they omitted because they don't
have such a program.
Yes so madam chair they're
they're actually not a minute I
think if you go down to line
seventeen the hydrologist with
expertise in New Mexico
groundwater resources a faculty
member of the New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology okay and I believe
that may have been a Senator I
think that was a Senator Griggs
amendment in twenty fifteen on
the floor Senator Griggs gave me
an amendment he was shocked when
actually accepted it many I
think you have to vote for the
bill because accepted the
members went on.
Not true Senator.
So yes that was that's a great
point in that okay tak was
purposely brought in okay great
And then.
On the same synopsis page one
member will be a professional
hydrologist with expertise in
New Mexico ground water
resources board profession
profession professional engineer
suspect with the New Mexico
consulting engineering practice
in water resources or water
utility engineering now what
what would pre with that
language it would preclude
perhaps a very talented new
resident that has the requisite
credentials from another out of
state university is that correct
so madam chair Thursday there's
no question that this does
target into our specific
universities here in New Mexico
and that is something that over
the past iterations of this bill
There was a comfort level we
started with something broader
and we kind of narrowed it down
here so I think you're correct
that where where it's got
specific limitations that has to
be from these institutions that
is a limitation under the
sections but I I just would
point out and I think it's it's
very interesting that that you
know the current way the
commission has been appointed
has been through a pretty
liberal interpretation of the
statute and that's great that's
what should happen I think that
explains why you know the
current commission is working
well and so I think I the
amendment that Senator Stewart
put in back up top that's going
to give them allow them to keep
some flexibility to be able to
pull in someone.
Who's got you know as an out of
state type experience that would
otherwise fit in here so I think
there's going to be enough room
to do that but this is just
making sure and and this is one
of those things were we've seen
the pendulum really swing and
how this agencies appointed and
and you know we're not coming in
and taking away the governor's.
Appointments just there's been
some discussion about balancing
things out having legislative
appointments I'm actually done
that and it's built one point
but again I think this keeps it
with the governor we do at ATA
device and consent of the Senate
which is a check which I think
is a good thing to have and in
no way I just want to reiterate
is this any reflection on the
current commission in fact the
in Sapporo I wasn't necessary
gonna bring this bill back but I
sat next to the Interstate
Stream commissioner from Silver
City and talked about he said
darn right you should bring that
build back we need to have the
discussion and and I just and I
think I visited with the
directors well about it so it's
it's a work in progress and I'm
delighted to have their the
Interstate Stream Commission so
conceptual support of what that
way because obviously we need to
work out the final piece to
this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Wirth so in fact if we
find a stellar candidates to
serve on a future
To to serve on the commission if
that person earned his or her
credentials from another out of
state
university or had.
A business from another out of
state.
Business but now lives and works
in New Mexico that person could
be considered.
Yes ma'am if there I think
that's exactly right there's
enough flexibility here to track
happen that's great thank you
madam chair thank you senator
Wirth.
Thank you senator Hermio.
Thank you madam chair and mine
is a to questions or comments
that senator I'm happy to see
that a secular listed as one of
the members because
representation matters and for
generations punch the office
have been taking care of my
staff yes and ensuring the water
flows in my community and so I
just wanted to say thank you for
including them as part of that
new membership you have my
support for this the
representation once again
matters domestic is having to
sit at the table is very
important for northern New
Mexico thank you.
Anyone else on the committee.
I move the past.
All right.
As many of our.
Okay and just before we we take
the vote on that Senator this is
a great bill except as someone
who is now looking at all these
confirmations to be done.
Adding another.
Despite that I also support.
All right is there is there any
opposition to the past mission
please show some remorse as
voting now
otherwise Senator you have a
good thing thank you members.
All right Senator media centers
on the back.
And think still that yeah.
Good morning.
Coffee written.
What a.
What is.
Well this is.
News agree committee but no
is the best copyright there.
School's good.
Committees that are just as a
heads up because you haven't
been before the the rules
committee before we have a new
new procedure for presentation
and debate and public comment hi
you basically have twenty
minutes to use as you would like
you had to use as many experts
as you want and that twenty
minutes will include your public
comment and support leave it
Madam I did see that PDF on
online thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay.
You can make friends doing that
so.
All right well thank you
everybody madam chair and
members of the rules committee
thank you very much for having
me today I'm very excited to
present this bill to you I'm
calling this the voter privacy
act and this really has been
idea of mine since I've been in
the house what it does is it
additional help with thank you
all I I won't object.
this this what this bill does is
it stops us stops really the the
state from in real time saying
you know Senator you you voted
you early voted yesterday so
we're gonna blast that out on
lots of emails to political
operatives and people in DC or
Senator you a request an
absentee ballot today and so
we're gonna blast that out on
emails I think we all have a
right to privacy to vote and my
my second favorite US senator
Cory Booker says that the
Active voting is sacrosanct it
is sacrosanct I believe that.
What is the word secretary
sacrosanct me it means that
something is so valuable and so
treasured that we must leave
alone and not interfere with it
not mess with it.
Now in some background research
That I perform during developing
this bill
Which by the way did have a
prior iteration that I did I
didn't live but I really like
this version but Dianne
Feinstein took up this issue of
voter privacy and sponsored a
bill unfortunately never went
anywhere in two thousand
nineteen that was done to the
voter privacy act twenty
nineteen and her bill that
really focused on voter
manipulation people that are
vulnerable that have mental
health disorders or physical
disorders that are prone to more
more of a more than
Maybe some of the doesn't have
those those problems to
manipulation.
And and I'll read above just a
very short part of her bills as
communications tailored to an
individual's unique personality
traits are designed to
manipulate cognitive function
rather than to persuade the
appeals of rational decision
making which I think is what we
want in a democratic society we
want people voting based on you
know who they think the best
can't are the best candidates
are and what they represent and
so
basically to to summarize I will
say this these are the problems
that I have with how we do this
now.
And then I'll explain how this
bill fixes those things number
one is it violates our consent
if you look on page to this bill
you'll actually notice and I'm
not changing this is the vote
the telephone numbers can be
prohibited by the voters that's
it that's all we have so you can
you can choose to not blast out
your your telephone number to
everybody but you cannot consent
to say the you know Hey I don't
want everyone to know that I
just requested my us into bill
yesterday or I don't want
everybody to know that I just
early voted okay I think people
should have a right to this I
don't think it's everybody's
business knowing exactly how
everybody votes how you voted
yesterday we do have a right to
vote in private and I think the
way we do it now violates that
right to privacy.
The second is the manipulation
piece as we all know and
technology has really changed I
revolutionized how
We've all been raised how will
operates with the internet in
the once again that's what
Feinstein's bill looked at is
now people are so sophisticated
the not just microtargeting with
the you know an issue on
taxation roads or whatever
they're actually finding peoples
personality traits and
vulnerabilities and manipulating
thought and using that and so if
if we disallow some of these
third parties from knowing that
such and such either hasn't
voted for the have voted I think
this will help this problem.
So we have a problem with
consent with a problem with
manipulation we have also
problem with harassment we had a
with a voter in to the
consequences area say someone
came to his door twenty three
days in a row because they knew
they were getting these real
time updates and they knew this
voter had not voted I don't know
the party of this individual but
they knew that that person had
not voted and they were to come
to their door every single day
until they knew when they got
there nice spreadsheet and email
the that they were gonna leave
this person alone so it once
again a right to privacy and
preventing harassment and lastly
third party interference the way
we do this now is someone who
wants access to this real time
information once you know the
the the the day you vote the the
day request your absentee ballot
they want this information well
how do they get that will they
pay a small fee and the
basically say well I promise to
only uses for election purposes
very loose term others no chain
of custody so these emails go
out of state there's no
background check madam chair
members of the committee there's
no there's none of that you just
you just fill it out secretary
of state we'll we'll put you on
this list and you get all the
emails so in closing.
I will say this I know we're
used to doing our absentee
ballot chasers were used to
campaigning in certain ways but
when I came in when I first
campaign in two thousand
eighteen I was I was absolutely
blown away that we get all this
data and I just find it on
democratic I find it
manipulative and I think it is
and and that manipulation once
again takes advantage of certain
classes of people that are more
prone to manipulation based on
maybe their health conditions or
disabilities whatever else and I
think that we need to start
respecting individual's privacy
and I think it will help lastly
I will say this I did get one
email and transparency this bill
does nothing with transparency
for what the secretary state is
doing.
It is that offices job to make
sure our elections are free and
fair and open in conducting you
know legally it cetera so this
bill does nothing for that it
doesn't
Tyler has secretary state in
doing all their quality stuff
all it does is ask that we're
not going to blast out this
personal information on a
sacrosanct Act in real time.
So I have for you thank you
thank you senator do you have
any organized public comment the
left.
I know nothing nothing organised
New.
We have anyone.
Do have any.
No sign at all okay great is
there anyone here in opposition
to this bill.
Madam secretary secretary that.
The secretary state health.
Legislation other than with.
Back to the sponsor
understanding the server further
thank you for us.
Our offices.
The bill is rising you're seeing
for example
the federal case that you're in
the lane with just further
information being fired in the
proper way there's already very
have statutes that
Find virtual teas for improper
use of that data
and so we are just at your Madam
chair in just for the members
information excuse us that is
why we consider at comprehensive
legislation that addresses our
privacy and number of different
ways particularly just the last
day of other information on the
internet
that we want to trade that has
been our experience reading
Friel
earns around.
So in short manager and and
members
She were the the sponsors coming
from this particular legislation
doesn't address the real
concerns that you're hearing out
in our office and it also
creates
actually lose transparency for
the state.
Thank you madam secretary
quicker Clark that's insane.
Senator.
Well however my office we see
that million campaigns are
helping drive out of.
Very dangerous.
Want to do that as we make sure
that counties are party leaders
have access information so they
can follow up with our chase
Representative
Sanchez concerns about the
future assets not something to
address the seventy five
removing the transparency bility
of
this is a partisan making sure
orders no valor information like
for instance don't offer valid
you don't million dollars within
seven days because the postal
service is taking a long time
those are all messages
altogether that we need to be on
the same page as for the that is
that we somehow closed off very
important partners stakeholders
any service tax on our families
so
thank you very much as I
understand why but this is not
the way to go about the share
some of those.
Thank you misconduct.
Contact with the registered
lobbyists common cause New
Mexico.
What the secretary of state
where we're able to discuss this
before I did but upon our
reading of the bill we feel that
this bill creates absentee
voters differently than those
who are person it also indicates
this is a set of transparency
and it's how we need more
transparency New Mexico that is
what I do that some of the of
those.
Thank you has anyone else.
We'll go to members of the
committee.
Senator Morris is that right.
For us to the secretary of.
And and secretary few if this is
going to be asking a question if
you want to come up so that we
can get you on the Mike for for
folks watching them.
Okay.
After should be yours must have
that yes thank you or to
purchase a home solutions this
committee or or.
Use the clerk said that the this
is a concern my questions are
you willing to work with a
sponsor to address these has
concerns about the biggest
concern project our system where
you're also can you guys worked
with him because.
The address of where you guys of
course of concern.
yet madam chair and Senator
Moores what we're always open to
chatting and happy to do that
and I think that at you know to
reiterate what I said in my
public comment the the the
comprehensive piece of
legislation that that is going
to be before this committee next
week is going to address a lot
of the voter privacy concerns
that we are hearing about.
So chair of surgery would you
get with the sponsor.
To address this issue and the
and the conference one or.
Our our consular dresses at
madam chair and senator we are
happy to meet with him and see
if we can find a place of mutual
agreement yes.
Madam secretary thank you for
being there.
There is
the members of the committee.
Anyone.
So there you and I talked about
this bill
and so you know I I I tend to to
agree with with madam secretary
and click Clarke Moore I say
that the easier to this to say
But yeah I.
I I I I understand.
Your concerns and and and where
you're coming from
I just don't feel that this this
is this the solution
I don't I'm not.
I'm not of the opinion that I
think the secrecy of the ballot
is sacrosanct whether you voted
or not or whether you apply for
an absentee ballot I don't think
there's the same compelling
privacy interest in in that
information hi and if we were to
pass this
That that ballot chasing that
that all campaigns do on on
every every side of the aisle
and that that good government
groups due to insure people who
might not otherwise be getting
reached out to get every chance
they have to participate in our
democracy I think that's a
really important part of our
process we certainly don't want
people to be harassed and you
talk about someone coming to
someone state house everyday for
twenty days that's that is not
appropriate by any chance we
have to be able to.
To reach more folks to encourage
their participation in our
democracy I think that's a good
thing so.
Senator Baca just sat down so I
don't have.
Yes Senator Stefanics then
fearing a question is more
technical in nature
that and secretary of.
For for the military wanted
there about twelve forty five
days earlier.
At that
place.
No other state.
Especially because I don't
create a ruckus with this chair
madam chair Senator semantics by
federal law and by state law
we're required to begin mailing
out ballots to overseas and
military voters that have been
requested as of that date by
forty five days before election
day.
So
Madam chair madam secretary are
there any other circumstances
would be earlier than.
Madam chair and and senator now
thank you very much of Madam
thank you so Senator thank thank
you.
And Senator one one other issue
this is some to look out for in
the future I fear three and
another bill like this this
conflicts with the the challenge
provisions of our election code
to one of the the basis upon
which we we've talked about this
I think we both agree it be
great if we didn't have the
space at that as a basis of a
challenge but right now under
our law the fact that someone
has applied for absentee ballot
is a basis for imposing a
challenge I and frankly that is
a challenge I think that is yes
far more by by your side of the
aisle probably than ours but it
would take that away I agree to
the it would now well I'm all
for taking that away as a basis
for challenge personally
and I I have a feeling it might
have some some impacts that the
others in in your party might
might take issue with so I
warned them.
Right
Before so I'm I'm I'm I'm gonna
I'm gonna move to to table this
bill but before I do Senator
Baca do you wanna.
No I just want to thank you
madam chair for taking care of
our side of the aisle.
My pleasure you know I I really
I started out doing a lot of non
partisan work itself started.
All right so.
We have a motion to table is
there any opposition
I think it's a table do I need
to specify temporarily.
and definitely I would say
that any opposition to that
motion face shows under the.
Orders and Baca opposing.
Thank you very much Senator
thank you madam chairman of the
committee and thank you for the
coffee very much appreciated I
did not have come through this
morning and and also the last
thing is let us remember voter
turnout should be driven by the
will of the people and not the
government thank you.
We we have Senator hopes SB
thirty four is Center pope.
Representative manager I just
texted.
Down from education right so
that will yeah and I don't know
has been.
There is just a yes
and they're all the amendment as
well.
Yes No.
Okay Madam
yeah we're passing that now.
In the analysis.
Yes the analysis that's in your
books talks about the sob so we
we did get this up in a timely
manner I I did not send it out
to all members because it's it's
pretty brief and so I think it
was something to deal with here
and committee but in the future
if you all would like those sent
to you before committee ahead of
time let me know and I'm happy
to do that it's always short
term.
No I anything like the will
always be provided and if you
want also provide investors
funds well.
Sure.
Sure.
And we'll just kind of hold in
place still under probe joins
us.
Hey.
You.
Just look at that time.
Yes this.
On this.
He's not able to lease and
education right now understand
if you need to roll over to
Monday.
All right I I can't promise that
we're going to hear Monday
because we already have other
things planned for Monday so if
he's not able to be here then
that's all we have are done that
today we have four rules
