Senator Brandt this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator do.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen your Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
These online.
Kernan.
Center many us.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz piano.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Etcetera Tommen.
Senator Wirth.
Here.
Etcetera what.
You do not have a quorum Mister
president.
You now have a quorum Mister
president consent to allow
cameras in the chamber no
objection cameras to be allowed
in the chamber only thank you Mr
president we can all please rise
allegiance to be led today by
senator Neville pledge
allegiance in Spanish to be that
today by Senator my SS and
Mother of life and father of
creation.
You who are the author
friendship in the inspire of
selfless service come to today
with humble hearts to prepare to
grace as we undertake this
important responsibility.
As we begin this legislative
session yes he hopes to
cultivate empathy kindness and
understanding in our hearts.
We also ask you to help support
our governor no matter what our
political affiliations maybe
when we come together in unity
and collaboration to move our
state forward and improve the
all our hearts minds and souls
we may understand that what we
take on today is not a mandate
to lead for the mental to surf.
Help us to see the other as are
We pray for your blessings and
guidance and all that we do make
our work be fruitful and
impactful we always strive to
elevate all who call New Mexico
Then the Z. as symbol of perfect
do have some members are
participating yes zoom just a
reminder to all those
participating B. as in to have
your cameras are here Mike's on
mute if you wish to speak or to
but the thank you Mr president
do you consent that we go to
that order business
announcements miscellaneous
hearing objection or in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator by the
thank you very much Mr president
I also want to thank that our
chaplain Craig ago one of the W.
wing chaplain at Kirtland Air
Force base here in Albuquerque
and thank you very much chaplain
for your words on service rather
this week we're gonna start with
will be having a joint session
tomorrow to hear to members of
our congressional delegation
Senator lu Han and
Representative Stansbury will be
halls of history from eight AM
to one PM please try to drop in
and a program at noon in the
rotunda that should be very
interesting and Mister president
unanimous consent to please
veterans day off the president's
table to be placed on today's
calendar center for the thank
you very much Mr president and
that will not be read today but
table seeing no objection will
remove center more thirty two
which is New Mexico athletic
trainer day off the president's
table and will be placed on
today's calendar center for the
thank you very much Mr president
moral nine Hiroshi H. me a more
a in honor and that'll be
Senator when you all can you
just consent to remove that for
for the president's table see no
handle today by senator Munoz Mr
president we do have some guests
but before we do that if I can
just do a few things units
consent to excuse Senators
Gonzalez and Pinto into the
want to give folks a heads up
that the Lutheran advocacy
ministry of New Mexico is
hosting their annual luncheon
this year at the bishops their
other announcements thank you
Senator bye there we are in that
order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Baca
followed by senator Neville
center Baca thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
I might proceed Senator.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I have with me my
daughter Kelly Neville if you'd
stand Kelly Kelly is
among other things she used to
Partner was law partners are is
a law partner with the former
speaker of the house of the
Wyoming legislature she lives in
Laramie Wyoming and she's an
attorney up their works
primarily for a bank she keeps
pretty busy and she is the past
And with her is chip Cirillo and
in New Mexico it's a surreal but
lives in Laramie Wyoming and is
down here they're down here
visiting we went up to bandolier
marched around for two couple
miles yesterday and got a little
exercise waited in the mud had a
Thank you Mr president like to
recognize a few folks in the
gallery first off I'd like to
recognize the Democratic Party
committee for veterans advocacy
the chair Dorothy Seton US army
major retired I'd also like to
recognize Brock with the the CEO
of Veterans integration center
Thank you senator pope Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
it's a.
A distinct honor if you will to
individuals of the Pecos cross
country team and myself and
Senator Stefanics of course
continued to advocate in support
not only Pecos but this entire
and they were successful with
the state twenty twenty two
championship and they won that
by one by one point margin and
then this is the first time in
Mr president members of the
Senate as you take a look at
these young men think about the
days that continued to move
forward the work that they've
done the discipline that they
these young people in the way we
do that is a course here in the
Senate chamber by not only
listening and participating in
this particular celebration but
may with us we have a course
Eliza Lujan it on Holton Lorenzo
Ezekiel of the eight us and
Eliza Gonzalez and also with us
are the coaches coach Jonathan
Garcia.
team thank you.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent to be able to
introduce my guests for
interjection proceeds have a.
breezy's and she teaches at St
Pius XI's ahead of the theology
program is same pies she's been
there for.
Ten years now and the she she
One of her daughters will tour
daughters were here on Friday
with me one of them is back in
that city Collett Korea process
an academic of it's you know top
performer at St Pius and and
somebody who's going to
Washington soon she also like
her sister is a great lover of
animals and I forgot to mention
also here with this this is a
Cristian Coria proof of
enrollment Cristian is
originally from Santiago he
think members may remember a few
years ago when he when he became
just got back from Kenya and
next week will be going on to
Ethiopia doing work for the
organization for which she is a
Korea Bruce just a family who
are here with me today.
Senator Tallman.
who is a I beta Kappa graduate
of Colorado College plus two
masters from Syracuse.
And during her career she is
headed up a couple of non
profits one of which was
works for hope works.
Which is the largest the
nonprofit provider of of
services of the homeless in
Albuquerque they recently opened
contribute to some state money
to that project and they're also
in the planning stages of
constructing another
Building for the homeless order
And he he's also in the city
wide youth orchestra and I
recently participated in
In a mock trial one of his
So thank you thank you for your
attention and patience please
give a nice welcome to my two
guests thank you.
guess pressing Senator thank you
this morning.
Very honored to have a students
from the university of New
Mexico
A native American studies here
policy and community building so
I'm gonna go ahead introduce
them first of sitting over or
yeah Dr Wendy gray ice she is
No this young girl since she was
a high school from rock point
Arizona went to the
undergraduate and.
Pomona College and got our PC
it's Stanford and she's back
The NMAA sees taken a of the the
course as well tray banality DNA
he's a student with the American
studies.
Lori Lee from today Navajo
Nation I also knew Lloyd when he
was working on his PhD at
Stanford so we got some really
good folks here and CENIC
pueblo and Hopi so so allow me a
will allow me to welcome I guess
to the Senate chambers.
excited about the their
championship what was there to
watch them run I went to Saint
Catherine's in Santa Fe that
school closed in nineteen ninety
but before it closed our
the rate goes up in asco aquesta
and all the small schools may
service the Coronado in northern
New Mexico's but so I just want
to thank you guys my grandkids
congratulations.
Thank you senator sendo.
Any further announcements
Senators.
actually introduction Mr
president today as you know as
presidents day so some of us
have our our extra guests who
are with us today and if you
just wanted to mention I have
cherish rose with me today thank
you Mr president.
shown in this country for the
whole world starting with
Abraham Lincoln who freed the
slaves and provided unity
following that for country for
this code this country along
with Ronald Reagan's peace
through strength and so I just
wanted to give a reminder of
those three that came to mind
thank you Mr president.
about Abraham Lincoln just
reminded me that many of the
folks don't know but if you go
to any of the pueblo governors
the ninety pueblo governors home
four I believe maybe a the
numbers might be wrong but we
have a capability to the pueblo
governors in recognition of the
sovereignty of the pueblos
twenty ninety states government
does seven of the came from
that's the thank you Senator
Baca for that and it just popped
in my mind that you know about
the Lincoln king so thank you.
president's day I couldn't help
but think about president Jimmy
Carter who has decided to enter
hospice care and
the week that he is left is just
quite a measureable and I have
visited the Carter center a few
years ago and I left some
campus and I I greatly admire
president Jimmy Carter and his
wife Rosalind thank you
president.
Thank you center McKenna.
As president the need to excuse
Senator Griggs Senator committee
senator Sanchez Senator Moores.
Si no further announcement
Senator Mike affiliated take us
to the next order of business.
You very much Mr presentation
members of the body thank you to
everyone in their comments on
business messages from the house
of the clerk will read the read
or read well we are on that
order business message from the
house the reader to read.
This president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
five house bill forty as amended
by the house and require a
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa McCutchen chief clerk
journal show that the message
by the house House Bill to
sixteen as amended by the house
house bill one ninety eight.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
Center Mike over there to take
us to the next order of
business.
Thank you Mr president you
consent to go to that order
referred Senate bill thirty five
as amended has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
Senator by the.
This.
We get a motion on that Mr
president.
I'm asking is consent of the
Senate bill forty eight do pass
as amended.
Senate bill sixty three do pass.
Senator Stefanics Senator
Stewart but Canadian researchers
we have a motion to adopt
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill seventy seven has had it
under consideration and reports
the same with recommendation
of the three to be allowed three
all the committee reports and
that we will and then with one
motion and that the term
reflected they were acted upon
individually see no objections
the minutes read the report
Senate bill one twenty to do
committee substitute for Senate
bill one forty seven do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
committee report Senator there's
a motion to adopt committee
reports all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed nay the eyes have it the
committee report has been
fifteen has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
we vote on them with one motion
and that the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
individually seeing no objection
the reader to read.
Senate bill two fifty six do not
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill two sixty four do
pass and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
bill two sixty seven do pass and
thence referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill three ten do pass as
centers there's a motion to
adopt committee reports all
those in favor signify by saying
aye those opposed may the eyes
have it the committee report has
been adopted as journal reflect
resolution one as amended has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflected they were
acted upon individually but Mr
president before doing that
there is one that has a an
Of together so what we'll do is
just identify that one that's
requested that gets pooled and
then we can address we can do
the other code reports and we'll
come back to that so Mr
president I would request that
The reader to read.
Senate bill three sixty five it
without recommendation and
Senate bill three sixty seven do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three eighty five
without recommendation and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill three ninety seven
committee respectfully submitted
Senator William P. souls
chairman Senator cells I move
adoption the committee report
centers there's a motion to
death Committee point although
cels thank you Mr president I'd
like to make a motion that
Senate bill three eighty six
have the referral changed from
Judiciary to finance the bill
has nothing to do with judiciary
program at the university New
Mexico School of medicine
college of nursing college of
pharmacy in college of
population health.
Mr president I have checked with
Judiciary next thanks Center
cells would you wish to make a
unanimous consent motion I move
unanimous consent that Senate
bill three eighty six have the
referral change from Judiciary
thence referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator William P. souls
chairman Senator souls I move
adoption the committee reporters
have a motion to that's
committee part all those in
been referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six with emergency clause
has had it under consideration
and reports that same has been
cliff R. Pirtle co chairs
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report enters there's
a motion to adopt committee
poured all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
Senate bill six with emergency
clause the reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty has
senator Kerry Hamblen Senator
cliff R. Pirtle co chairs.
Senate Mr president I move the
adoption of the committee report
All those in favor signify by
saying aye those opposed may the
allies have at the committee for
We're gonna go through and do
that one again I have that right
again it was read out as Senate
bill rather than send memorial.
The reader to read Mr president
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs Senator have a Mr
adopted and allows to the
members of the body that the
offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Senator
moral forty the reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen Senator
cliff R. Pirtle co chairs
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
adopted and like to announce
that the this is the Senate have
signed an open session Center
memorial fifty.
The reader to read Mr president
your Judiciary Committee too who
has been referred Senate bill
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
been adopted I'd like to
announce that the officers were
to the money that the office of
the Senate have sign in open
session Senate bill three sixty
four as amended.
Senator Michael Padilla to take
will yield now to Senator pope
for Senator moral fifty one.
Military and veterans day.
Seeing no objection.
memorial fifty one be put on the
final passage in subject to
debate amendment or substitution
see no objections Center pope to
explain.
Thank you Mr president first of
The country and serve our nation
please would you please stand.
Senate senators who serve my
Today is Military and Veterans
today here in the legislature.
And it's important that we
recognize these folks these
plus many of our guard units are
member serving in our National
Guard and we also have reserve
units as well they will also be
veterans.
blank check to basically say
they will give their life their
body.
Some of given their lambs and.
You know a much more.
You know today is military
veterans day but it's also
important that we recognize
these individuals.
home and recognize their
families and do all that we can
when it comes to policy.
That ensures that we take care
of them when they get home.
more fifty one Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr president in the.
Bridget the sponsor bringing
this forward
has lost a limb.
In the defense of this country.
But I would encourage each and
everyone of you to do just that.
But I think it's very very
important we take a few moments
out of one day.
To acknowledge these men and
We're in a matter of hours can
be shipped halfway around the
world.
Into a conflict.
That they may not know a whole
lot about but they were ordered
on this floor would never ever
make.
So as a secondary I certainly
encourage each and everyone of
you to talk to a veteran or a
back to us.
And finally I just one of with
regards to active duty remind
everybody is a very special
missions.
munitions.
And other yes systems including
stealth.
Are all done at white sands
from Canada airforce base in
Clovis New Mexico.
Pilot training for probably the
or now on manned aircraft we
call more PA's a remotely
piloted aircraft the only school
houses the entire Air Force is
also special operations assigned
there but they have the biggest
nuclear enterprise.
in the airforce and they're also
These are very special missions
critical absolutely critical to
the defense of the United States
of America.
So.
work as contractors and special
appropriations for these bases
businesses benefit from these
bases in their communities
purchasing equipment each and
encourage you not only to talk
to veterans with folks who are
in the military to have a better
understanding of that lifestyle
of what they do.
I think you will gain a new
Thank you Mr president.
As a veteran there's a couple of
things that I want to make sure
everybody understands first of
all the United States military
The U. S. military can get there
and find food and shelter and
clothing as well as simple
protection from from riots or
But we do that to protect other
people the United States has
been of a more full in the world
history this claim that land and
that is just unusual in the
history of the world.
Almost every other army in the
That's the American military and
most people just don't even
think about it that way greatest
humanitarian organization on the
planet.
One of the most dangerous things
that happened in Iraq and
And it's because we were
humanitarians even in war.
That's the thing that I think we
need to understand is.
For every.
behind them.
Anywhere from about five members
in the marines to about forty in
the Air Force.
All of those people are highly
The military has every job that
you can think of somewhere in
the military in all of those
people support whatever's going
than the guys pulling triggers.
That mean they don't know how
they're trying to do that as
well.
But their primary job is
something else.
And those exactly the kind of
twenty years to open up a
restaurant Alamogordo
Albuquerque or Farmington
because they know how to do it
they've got lots of experience
running restaurants.
there's another major part of
the military that is often
overlooked.
Those are the spouses and the
children the spouses and the
children.
Because the service members
gone.
Spouse and kids still have to to
live through whatever's going on
sometimes they have to watch
television to see where they're.
know something happened but they
don't know if it included their
parent or their spouse.
Senator Stefanics followed by
Senator Brandt Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator pope for bringing this
forward as I mentioned several
veteran and I happen to have a
deaf you who is high ranking now
in reconnaissance traveled the
services and I do understand
that the
Trials and tribulations of
families because sometimes the
sun.
It doesn't get to see his father
for six months or a year at a
Thank you Mr president and as.
As a veteran I to stand in
support of this memorial I think
the sponsor for bringing it
An honor to serve this country
it's an honor to have
Been willing to give your life
for this country.
And I think every.
The children who have been
raised overseas as their
families are stationed overseas
who have very different
experiences than.
Other children who haven't seen
that.
So you're not a lot of people
can say that not a lot of people
can talk about how they got
their first pet passport when
they were less than a month old.
Who served during World War two
and then went on to serve in the
CIA the rest of his career.
And he's got some very
This is what it takes to keep
our country safe.
Yes men and women who are
willing to do that when women
who are willing to stand in the
gap.
and and we like to you know
poking each other a little bit I
think we have any marines in
this body but we really enjoy
messing with them because they
But you know and that's what I'm
talking about we like to you
know ready to other but it's
because of the camaraderie that
we have all of us were willing
needed to defend this country
and so I think my brother's.
Holly we have any sisters in
here the served but I think my
brothers who served.
president Senator Brandt with
center city Lopez followed by
Senator Steinborn Senator
Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr president I too
want to stand in support of this
important memorial as I said
want to add Mr president isn't
in in addition to all of the
accomplishments and all of the
bravery that so many of our of
our veterans have shown we also
they come home the the housing
everything that they need when
they come home to.
To show that we welcome them and
that we honor them and that we
value them thank you very much
you know it's a we have New
Mexico has one of the highest
per capita number of veterans of
any state in the country and
super proud tradition in the
demands that we as as government
support our veterans in and
strong mental health services
big deal because you know well
something actually military lead
on but that we just have to
continue to support them and all
the multitude of other ways and
that's the most important when I
Miss Presbyterians.
Thank you Mr president I to
stand stand strong support of
this memorial first I want to
thank our great Senator pope for
bringing light and awareness
have done and continue to do and
I just I wanted to say that this
is a special day but it's a
special day every day because
services as I serve on LFC we
see how many needs there are out
there for our veterans and we
need to step up to the plate and
say and now work together
collaborating and figuring out
how to build this new building
in and we're going to do it in
fact it should be ready by the
Senator up hope for all the
legislation he has already
sponsored in the short time he's
been here to augment services
for our veterans and that as a
group in collaboration and
Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr president
and I stand in support of Senate
memorial fifty one and I think
Senator pope for bringing this
forward and also thank you to
families because they to also
are serving along side our
service members and also Mr
president just to remember that
when they return home after the
Services housing whatever it
maybe Mr president because
They've given all for our
country and we need to make sure
that we as I say in simple terms
just for the memorial but also
for his service and the service
of so many that now serve in the
Senate thank you very much I
have the honor of coming from
Sierra County it's a very
patriotic community both
to thank the governor for the
investments that they have made
and really coming in and making
that a Shining a place for New
Mexico into taking care of our
veterans down there just next
community it is right off the
interstate for anyone who is
passing to the truck
consequences area pull off the
interstate for a moment it
really is a very meaningful and
Center for the thank you very
much Mr president I also stand
in support thanks Center pope he
continues to to to to carry that
flag with many of our other
actually great employees all
around show up on time work
really very hard and we're
always very grateful for them
and then with that Mr president
to us as consent that that we
pope to close on several more
fifty one.
Thank you Mr president I want to
thank my colleagues here in the
the services and the services
that they served in
We talk about core values like
integrity first service before
self honor courage commitment.
So I would take that suggestion
from Senator Burt to get to know
a veteran understand his story.
But also welcome them and
welcome them in our state.
With that Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show that the
roll then called and all those
present voted affirmative
including the president.
S. and all forty two members
including the lieutenant
governor voting yes and showing
in the affirmative.
Thank you Mr president thank you
colleagues and happy military
veterans day.
Thanks Center pope Center Mike
for the to take us to the next
order of business thank you Mr
president very quickly and just
consider that our business
announcements miscellaneous that
will come back to their reading.
reading I think another member
has an announcement when that
order business announces
miscellaneous Senator my sis
thank you Mr president are will
members elected it is my guess
she's in the second grade and
then my son my tail Maestas of
those dressing sharp he's up you
love soccer and love geography
and he knows every flag in the
disproportionate to all the zero
symbols we see that we've ever
seen in our lives including the
Z. a symbol behind you and the
beautiful the assembled by the
chief clerk so.
Mr president thank you senator
welcome tear gassed.
Any further announcements
assist children grow up the come
to mind with tons a every couple
years thank you senator so good
will units consented that to go
to that back to that order
business third reading of
legislation and I will yield to
I move that center memorial
thirty two.
Do not printed not referred to
committee and that it be read
for the third time in full
preparatory to its final
passage.
New Mexico athletic trainer day
in the Senate or as athletic
trainers have a long history of
providing quality healthcare
services for athletes and those
engaged in physical activity and
comprehensive health care in
five domains of clinical
practice and whereas the five
domains of clinical practice of
athletic training include
illness and injury prevention
administration and professional
responsibility and whereas
athletic trainers must pass a
national board certification
examination and are licensed in
athletic training of our
profession including two hundred
eight athletic trainers in New
Mexico and we're as athletic
trainers are employed in of our
industrial settings and all
branches of the United States
military.
And whereas leading
organizations concerned with
athletic training and health
provision of healthcare quality
services and over as the
national athletic trainers
association sponsors national
athletic training month every
the annual legislative
basketball game now therefore be
it resolved by the scent of the
state in Mexico that February
twenty twenty twenty three be
trainers association and the
national athletic trainers
association signed and sealed at
the cap capital in the city of
Santa Fe.
Senator of Siah Correa Hemphill.
know parameters are really
important I mean well they've
just sent a list you put it in
and to if you're doing the next
portion of your script.
I move that sorry I move it
Senator Mario thirty to be put
on its final passage subject to
debate amendment or substation
sorry about that that's okay
they're just there to support
you in and there any of these
days of scope of practice of
notice it I as I understand it
there are their responsibilities
the reader for reading that just
a bit ago we're debating Center
moral thirty two.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president I rise in full support
was not for this is Santa being
there taping up my ankles and
putting the state machine on and
all the ice and things that we
were we were given whenever we
our kids in schools even see
support that they get there so
I'm just really appreciative of
what they do how much easier
they make it on the coaches and
of some of the conditioning so
that was quite nice to so thank
you Mr president thank you
Senator Pirtle anyone else
wishing to debate.
the affirmative including our
very athletic lieutenant
governor
and so with that I sign off.
There's been a motion see no
Thank you senator nail.
sponsor to get here and so we
will now go to the regular order
of third reading and we'll go to
item number one Senate bill
ninety four as amended that'll
be Senator Steinborn.
to place your microphone on and
your video.
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president if you unanimous
consent of the Senate the rules
be suspended in the record show
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution see no objection
Senator Steinborn to explain the
bill thank you Mr president
colleagues Senator Diamond and
are very proud to sponsor this
commission which has been in the
energy minerals and natural
resources department since it
was created a few years ago and
to move the commission to move
the project to the to the
outdoor division which didn't
project and and it also moves
the associated fund that goes
along with that with that I'd
be loaded turn it over to my co
Senator Steinborn I
Representative but it's a five
hundred mile trail that exists
from the the southern end of New
Mexico all the way up to the
errors of Colorado border I want
to be clear that the the meat of
recreation center of EDD Willie
where it belongs because as we
know the trial was established
in twenty fifteen but the
outdoor recreation division of
EDD was not established at the
time I do want to note that both
trails there was some concern
expressed earlier and I do want
to note that on page five lines
six through nine it does address
landowner concerns that
And donors and jurisdictions
around the Rio Grande the end of
page five it does state that
will consider impacts on private
and commercial interests and
then again on page eight it does
debating Senate bill ninety four
as amended anyone wishing to be.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
bill.
Resident now.
That was strict did you find
money in junior some of the
place Mr president actually it's
already funded it we already
Part of the title of the bill is
is making appropriation was
stricken and one of the
committees Mr president yes it
was and Senate finance okay
thank you that's all thank you
Mr president thank you senator
sponsor please yield Senator
Diamond deal.
Mr president yield thank you Mr
president and senator of will
this include connecting the
pagus river trail to the Rio
Grande each row.
existing trails executive that
that follow the Rio Grande
corridor.
Thank you Mr president and and
it won't because we don't have a
pic is river trail thank you Mr
president.
college thank you Senator
Diamond to the Rio Grande trail
is going to be a big a big deal
in the future it goes through
six national monuments three
hugely proud of once we once we
get it done so with that
colleagues I move that Senate
bill ninety four do now pass and
ask for unanimous consent of the
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Mr president Senator so the
you Mr president bank accounts.
We're going to the next item on
the calendar that's going to be
item number two Senate bill one
fifty three with emergency
clause Senator yes.
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution seeing no
objection center there is to
explain thank you Mr president
this bill is a disclosure bill
the Legislative Council Service
to publish the on the
legislative website a searchable
list that is clear and
transparent comprehensive
basically for each appropriation
days after the adjournment of
the legislative session and if
it signed of course and passed
in is is basically Mr chairman
requires the disclosure and in a
searchable list and that's all
we're doing here we are in fact
doing this now last year we did
in the junior bill but it was
individually in the bill we need
Thank you senator Senator is
very debating Senator wanted to
agree with emergency clause.
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
president and.
Many of you all know that I I'm
junior bill years ago where
funding was allocated for the
purchase of the building and
then that building ended up
being owned by a member of the
legislature at the time and so I
full right to know where and how
and if there is any type of
impropriety thank you Mr
president thank you Senator any
further debate.
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative slide show pandemic
this tier seats.
emergency clause has passed the
Senate Senator yes thank you Mr
president members of the Senate
one on to the next item that's
going to be item number three
three as amended on final
passage has been taken so
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
center Stewart to explain.
You Mr president this is the
too many restrictions on the
funding this is the program that
looks at the highest poverty
schools all over the state and
funds schools all over the state
extends this pilot one more year
there is fifteen million in the
budget to extend that one more
year because of the pandemic
requirement that a third is
spent on mass the third on
reading on third on other things
giving them more flexibility in
extending at one year happy to
Senator Stewart closed thank you
Mr president I move that Senate
bill three as amended do now
pass ask unanimous consent of
the Senate but the record show
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Thirty five the Fuhrman is in
the name of the Senate bill
three as amended has passed the
requirements and I yield to
Center o'neill thank you Mr
president Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
See no objections internet to
explain the bill is thank you Mr
president Senate bill seventy
three as amended immense
election code to allow voters to
select a major.
Party ballot and vote in primary
election saw a whopping twenty
five point five percent turn
out.
I personally am troubled by that
I know many many independent
important these days with the
lack of competitive districts
across the country so with that
I I stand for questions thank
you Senator debating Senate bill
with the sponsor yield center
nail detailed Mr president I
yield thank you Mr president
senator they get a chance to
hear this bill in either of the
primary only I wanted to vote as
a Democrat so I could block one
of my you know the the evil ones
from getting in there because I
that under this bill Senator
Brandt so much present center it
would only be for those who are
not registered with the majority
party they would be allowed to
basically pick a party for the
The able to get my information
to them I mean because I don't
know who's gonna vote him again
have to mail everyone them
with your fantastic message you
could bring them to your side
even though it to primary I mean
my goodness it's would make some
folks nervous inside there in
confident in my party's message
I'd bring it on let's let's go
act independent voters and those
we'll see how we do but I could
see how you would feel confident
in the same way as a member of
Three Senator just reminded to
go to the chair please Mr chair.
Excuse me three and then Mr
president what are those three
major parties Senator now.
it's okay Mister president.
We know we're just to the sign
language basically.
Mr I would have had to object to
that one anyway.
primary whether major party or a
minor party ceremonial Mr
president what he's talking
about Mr president Sir why not
have every minor party also.
for their own person it's just
too confusing all right I don't
so you know this is what's the
great thing about this bill
that's actually as you know it's
been around communities this
huge demographic of independent
voters a tend to be young they
don't you know get out of
college and say I'm a Democrat
or I'm a Republican they don't
them to participate in our
increasingly important primary
elections.
Thank you senator Nelson Brent
thank you Mr president center
and I'm probably going to
picking who's going to represent
the party in the general and so
that's been one of my struggles
with that and so if you're if
you're wanting to pick who's
representing your party.
is one way to allow independence
declines states are minor
parties to be able to vote in
the primary but one way would
in is this really about the
party choosing who's going to
represent the party.
And if an independent party
wants to have a primary where
I look forward to sponsoring
that our oil we'll go to the
next person and you'll you'll be
able to respond there Senator
Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president and I
almost every single Senate
district and every single house
district pretty much locked in
for one party or the other which
really prevents a lot of people
from participating in having
participate and so you know I
also appreciate Mr president and
and members of the body that you
know it seems like the Senate's
going to honoring individuals
Steinborn followed by Senator DC
Pino then Senator committee
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president and I don't need my
colleague the yield I just want
to say congrats on this bill I
said is the young people
register as independents more
than any other party and two
young people.
Really the parties and maybe
the time you get to the general.
It's kind of bacon in some cases
and so this really makes our our
important piece of legislation
to our democracy and and I
applaud the sponsor for carrying
it so that's all I have is
present thank you thank you
can you as a progressive be
against a bill that would
attract more young people to
vote and just because they don't
want to be Democrats Republicans
is is it is a kind of a of a of
generation X. kind of thing
where we don't really want to
have any responsibilities for
we that's all we should ever
have to do if we have parties
it's because the parties are
what have made this country able
the ones that make the phone
calls and I I just have to say
that I see this bill as saying
here's a whole bunch of people
who won't help the party at all
party that doesn't mean they
have to agree with everything
that's in that party but if they
really want to tell the
Republicans who their candidate
should be my gosh the other
want to tell them where they
should be running.
We have a way for independence
to run they can run they can
vote for whoever they want in
the general election the
primaries are for telling the
basically sound the death knell
for the poor to party system and
maybe that's what the whole
point of this is but I happen to
think that when the when the
college young Democrats came and
will your votes are fine but
will let anybody who's not
willing to do that work also
tell us who our candidate should
be so I know I maybe you know
the primary is not getting
involved getting involved is
making a deeper commitment in
that so I propose a bill I don't
know how it's going to fair
Senator McKenna in Centerville
Senator committee claim is
present with the bill sponsor
please yield Senator yield
Mister president I yield Mister
president I believe this the
don't oppose this bill now I do
have a question.
where does the funding come from
for a Democrat or Republican
that an independent voter in New
Mexico is paying tax money.
To someone else's elections they
can't vote in part it did I hear
few seconds to let that sit and
that's that's pretty wild I can
think of few other scenarios
that applies to not going to go
there
Mr president.
libertarian are or any of these
groups formally opposed or
formally support of of of your
bill Senator o'neill Mr
president I do believe the
what
might my colleague senator Ortiz
Pino was sent I mean you know
like these are just honest
disagreements totally get the
it's probably a mixed bag on
your side you might have the
leadership saying officially no
but then certainly I was
encouraged by by our our hearing
in rules for example in in
this is going to have bipartisan
support but I just didn't hear
from the Democrat party I had
did they take a formal position
or they kind of just neutral
this point Senator nail Mr
party if this bill were to pass
of would these minor parties
still be allowed to nominate
explore that just a little bit
Because my my understanding is
now if you have a green party
person they'd be able to vote in
state a Democrat primary but
then they could also have some
Okay thank you Mr president and
I I I see that as a minor
downside to to this bill that
that we can now have people in
my part is it have kind of
major deal but it is you know
potentially a problem of kind a
little bit of double dipping the
primary but I'm certainly happy
to support this bill and I think
the good Center for think Miss
the sponsor you Senator deal Mr
president I yield.
This presents center I just sent
a couple of questions so I've
not heard this bill needs in my
unclear there it is clear this
unconstitutional if you had
discussion with them Mr
president center Mr president
yes we've we've debated at
length you know this is to
my Attorney colleagues and
Judiciary I tended to agree that
well that's that that is really
it's a it's a talked a jump ball
that the position that it isn't
unconstitutional this is saying
like this this is happening and
it's you know the case that they
refer to is kind of dated and
ordered by I've been in law
litigation takes a lot of time
here in New Mexico so this may
tied up for for years but Mr
president center my next
is not an official position I
know individual county clerks
have come out and support and
I'm sure there's an individual
county clerks that are opposed
president center I know I've
gotten the information from my
County clerk that's got some
reservations and fears on this
so I'll listen the rest the
debate and see where we end up
Yes senator Neville thank you Mr
president that there's someone
else had a ma'am sorry
Mr president I don't need those
Democrat human donor riches a
Republican and I know I can
agree with that but ninety five
percent of the people don't
register as Democrats
Republicans because of great to
philosophical reasons of Irish's
because that's what our people
to people around us and I I
don't know that that's
particularly an argument what I
think is an argument is the
state pays for the elections and
percent Democrat round numbers
right that's kind of the way it
works out from the state.
The reason why the people are
like what's going on so they're
changing office but not that
their descent arrested in the
politics of what's going on
they're just fed up with parties
and I think this is a great
chance you know what Senator
sapien years ago when he was
change registration on site.
Trouble is when you walk out
you're still a Democrat may not
want to be a Democrat so they
got it within the courthouse or
what are you going to do to
change it back that's the issue
this just changes that one step
primary if you walk into tax if
you walk into the polling place
in Texas the matter what your
registered you can be a
Republican or independent or
can vote go in and vote whatever
you want I strongly support this
because I think what it does is
it balances out the extremists
of our parties we both got a we
community know me they vote for
or against me because they know
me and that's I think pretty
much the case and and and all of
us.
I don't know I think I think
Thank you Mr president Is will
the sponsor yield.
The stress and I yield.
o'neill and Senator Perea
Hemphill for sponsoring this I
really enjoyed the conversation
I had with my colleagues in the
Enhancing and increasing.
Our participation by our New
Mexican voters I'm a long time
canvassers from various
turned off because they can't
participate in our primaries and
I would share their frustration
to.
They would get frustrated
because they would have to
And more often than not they
found that too time consuming
because they would have to
change back again.
So I think if anything we're
immediately Mr president.
So I'm looking forward to our
next at the next election Andrew
this is law and I'll be
fascinated to see our increase
Thank you Mr president presents
this is always an interesting
bill it is been brought before
the Senate I can't remember how
many times in my years here.
this particular primary.
We're going to make it more
difficult to find people to run
for office because you're adding
with and it's also going to be
something that increases the
cost of elections because you're
going to have to go after these
folks individually by different
run in presidential years well
the presidential candidate had a
tremendous amount of money and
did things to register voters
and registered voters registered
numbers and you have vans and go
and get them and pay bills
specifically.
There's tremendous amounts of
money in elections anymore
particularly when you look at
roll primaries where anybody can
vote whatever anybody can vote
let's not have a point of order
it's a specific thing and you
different state in many aspects
for for a lot of different
things I worry about these
things because it will give I
don't know which one advantage
somebody about running for
office.
And you go through this this is
how you're going to do this this
is how you're going to have to
do this this is how you're going
Now you go past a hundred
thousand more in these races
just.
Without even trying.
I do agree with some of the
things that are said in this
bill I truly do but I B. I'm
very.
I'm very skeptical of how how
well this will work because I
it up for you can go in and say
this is how I want to vote in
this election you get to vote
that way if you register to
vote.
Because this never works as well
as we think thank you.
Any further debate centers.
the first two are echoing Center
another L. on this the
unaffiliated to pay for the
election but they're not.
election in Texas is a solid red
state in some ways and we're
we're so solid blue state but in
some ways.
Including this particular issue
simply a more democratic and as
you may know the unaffiliated is
one of the largest parties we it
in in New Mexico twenty five
percent of the people
A party as the Republican so for
those for reasons I strongly
support this bill.
Bank Center o'neill for bringing
this forward to it's really a
Senator closed on the bill thank
you Mr president I move that
Senate bill seventy three as
amended do now pass and I ask
for a roll call vote.
Let's see what we can hear.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca center Baca votes
no Senator Brandt.
both CS Senator bought this
Senator bonded both CS Center
diamond.
Senator Diamond passes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Center Hammond both CS Center
have pale.
Senator Ingle votes no center
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto both CS
intermedio yes Senator me of
both CS Senator Kernan.
yes center McKenna both CS
Center Morse.
Centerman yes.
Center male votes yes center to
the Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino votes no
center Padilla.
Senator Padilla passes Senator
Pinto.
Santo poco CS Center Rodriguez
center I agree guess both CS
Center Sancious.
Senator Sanchez passes Senators
no center Shendo.
Senator Shendo passes Center
solves Center so small CS
Etcetera Thomond both CS Center
worth.
Yes Senator Wirth both CS Center
was.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator McKenna.
Many of us.
Centerman yes.
Thank you mean yes votes yes
Shendo.
Senator Shendo votes yes.
Representative Ortez.
Santa Fe DS thank you.
requirements has passed the
Senate center o'neill thank you
Mr president thanks the body
once again for great debate
thank you senator nail senator
Mike Lee to take us to the next
order of business thank you very
We're on that order business
survey legislation would ask for
the body's attention.
As we all to Senator many of us
on this special memorial.
Mr present ask then looking for
Do now pass national and trying
to find the right script here.
I move that Sam Waksal Memorial
Senate memorial nine a memorial
honoring medal and of honor
recipient Hiroshi H. Zamora for
god love of family and love of
country died on November twenty
ninth twenty twenty two and
whereas Mr member was born on
immigrants owned and managed a
twenty four hour diner and
whereas Mr Muir more was
nicknamed Hershey because one of
his teachers could not pronounce
volunteered to be part of the
all the state or one hundredth
battalion as a member of the
famed four hundred forty second
Japanese surrendered and later
and listed in the United States
Army Reserve.
And whereas Mr mir Moro was
recalled to active duty with the
as a corporal United States Army
company H. second battalion
seventh infantry regiment third
infantry division a night attack
against the enemy return to this
position and administered first
aid to the wounded.
And whereas Mr more more up.
wounded and whereas despite his
wounds Mr mia more are killed
fifty enemy soldiers as he
continued to repel the attack
until his position was over run
other prisoners were forced to
March three hundred miles over
five weeks with very little food
and whereas Mr more more was
held prisoner for twenty eight
conspicuous gallantry and
intrepidity above and beyond the
call of duty in courageous
actions on April twenty fourth
they was awarded because he was
still a prisoner of war and
there was a concern that the
enemy would retaliate against Mr
mayor Morrow if it was known
that his actions were being
to him by president Dwight D.
Eisenhower on October twenty
seventh nineteen fifty three and
whereas during his military
the United States Army Mr more
more a married Terry the super
su chi mori and established a
career as an auto mechanic and.
countless military veterans and
school groups and whereas in
September twenty ten more more a
high school in Gallup was
officially dedicated in his
in recognize mission of his
activities involving youth in
his community Mr more more
receive the director's community
leadership award from the
fifth annual Nisei week parade
and whereas Mr mayor Mara served
as the grand marshal in the one
hundredth anniversary veterans
national board of state funerals
for war veterans organization
whose mission is to convince
Congress to pass legislation to
and women who serve and whereas.
At the time of his death at age
ninety seven Mr mayor Miro was
one of the last two surviving
medal of honor recipients from
was married to his wife Terry
for sixty six years until her
death in twenty fourteen and
whereas Mr near Mira is survived
granddaughters Megan me Amira
restoration and Joe and Madison
me amero his grandson Ian me
Miro his great grand children
Michiko Yoshida Susie to Shiro
and she gave sagas such
legislation Sasaki.
and honored for his stellar life
lead by example and be it
further resolved that copies of
this memorial be transmitted to
see more of this.
President sherry do Lujan chief
clerk New Mexico state Senate.
Thank you Terry we can have the
few times in your life do you
meet a friend or person that
changes the way you are
regardless of what they did.
But Hershey who was a close
When the federal government gave
the choice for cities to put
their Japanese families
interment camps during the war
Gallup was one of those
Hershey and what they did in
Gallup.
But winning the congressional
medal of honor and being out
with him in certain places where
everybody in this room remember
is the humble the humble for
what you got and we kind other
people because you never know
what's going to happen and
that's the way he lived his
do that for her she lived long
great life and in Gallup
my dad used to love to go
fishing and as I got older one
time I had to take about seventy
it's interesting how he made his
relationships and and and even
that with us he said we it's not
that we don't want you to go
it's that we wanted to spend
them about how life is in
opportunities are going to have
and not how to lose those
opportunities and not about what
he did and what he accomplished
questions thank you centerman
centers any centers mission is
yes Senator share.
thank you Mr president no this
It actually says when last seen
when last seen he was fighting
fury furiously against an
But instead of leaving.
He picked up is rife with a
bayonet in order his way to
another machine gun and used it
were there assume his been debt
because it is filled with holes.
They assumed that he died right
there that night when they wrote
This was a prisoner of war.
And is he said they didn't want
to the enemy to know.
And then find out that he was
seen again.
Later.
That's what makes this so so
And protecting the rest of his
unit is the state.
Retreated from that overwhelming
odds.
guy on his own I mean other
people obviously recognized all
over Gallup in New Mexico in the
United States.
But for him he was just a humble
For that he deserves a medal of
honor.
Thank you Mr president.
Think centre share any further
debate.
talking about having seven medal
of honor six or seven medal of
honor winners in one room
including and Petri from New
about all in I think you want to
be about everyone that served in
the military and their respect
and what they're do and how to
help them had a great
nation I think we're gonna try
to do some of that with the new
cabinet secretary but I think
one thing you want to member of
the guy is.
some moral line do now pass and
asked that all forty two members
including the tent color be sure
to loading the formative thank
you senator Munoz.
Senator Michael Padilla to take
us to the next order of business
thank you very much Mr president
a unanimous consent that we go
to that order business to
and reports same without
recommendation and thence
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
William P. sold chairman there's
adopted center Michael for the a
ticket to the next order of
business thank you Mr president
it is consent that we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation no objection or on
House bill forty introduced by
representative Thompson and act
relating to motor vehicles
creating the nontraditional
communication or disability
disability registry house bill
forty House Bill Ford having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee then Senate finance
or to the public works
apprentice and training fund for
all public works construction
projects conforming references
to the workforce solutions
transportation committee then
Senate finance committees house
bill forty.
House Bill is me house bill
forty six.
establish a renewable energy
office house bill ninety five
house bill ninety five having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate
conservation committee then
Chandler and act relating to
magistrate courts making the
magistrate court a court of
record revising magistrate
qualifications expanding
magistrate jurisdiction to
committee house bill one
thirteen.
House bill one fifty five
introduced by representatives
read and redeem and act relating
Judiciary Committee then Senate
finance committee house bill one
fifty five.
House bill one ninety five
introduced by representatives
McQueen and Leiber and act
to contract for and conduct
forest fire prevention
suppression control suppression
rehabilitation and repair post
fire slope stabilization erosion
repeal forest conservation fund
making technical changes
amending and appealing sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight house bill one ninety five
House bill one ninety eight
introduced by representative
Lente day and at a Allison
education house bill one ninety
eight also one ninety eight
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate and in
rural and cultural affairs
committee vents Senate Education
Christine Trujillo Spence Ezzell
and then about Maria and act
relating to education providing
Bill to sixteen House Bill to
sixteen having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate rules committee then sent
Education Committee house bill
two sixteen.
of business announcements and
miscellaneous center for the I
thank you very much Mr president
so I think this is a good time
for committee chairs to make
announcements on upcoming
committee meetings.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president of the
bills on the on the calendar
so we have built by committee
Senator Ingle is going to
Representative Senator Woods
Neil Senator o'neill can present
for Senator Hemphill and
Senator Stewart in again so it's
a long agenda we have sent out
for food we will have a dinner
Senate conservation committee
will meet tomorrow morning on
your blue agenda we are not
meeting at nine nine AM we are
starting to meet at eight thirty
Any further announces for going
to Senator Brandt.
Senator about this.
Residents president Judiciary
Committee will meet this
can have a hard stop this
evening so to fifteen percent of
judiciary please thank you.
Senator many of us thank you Mr
president Senate finance we're
executive they're gonna spread
those out today as soon as they
get them if they have an Oregon
and and then they're going to
send it up and see where the
execs can participate with
to do your cap Ali into we're
gonna put your money.
On Senate finance today we're
going to hear the budget so
everybody that.
Cares about what's in there
what's happening in the state.
from the house because some
things are under funding
somethings are over funded we
have to prioritize some stuff
the executive still wanting more
come listen today on where
agencies are at war specials and
supplementals are at which is a
large portion of the budget.
And and where we're headed with
Say no further announcements I
yield to Senator Brandt thank
you Mr president you all have on
your.
In in honor of him
Missy he served this country
greatly.
married to his wife Marjorie for
seventy eight years and a lot of
people that can make seventy
eight years of marriage
courtship to live a long time to
make that.
the thank you very much Mr
president thank you Senator
Brandt for sharing that with us
and that with that I ask
unanimous consent that the
Senate stand recess until eleven
AM tomorrow morning.
