We have a new analyst with us
here within the rules committee
Natalie Carroll.
Yes.
We
We kind of stole from Judiciary
so far that will.
Yeah.
We're also work in the working
at not necessarily go in order
on the agenda here this morning
we are here as J. R. eight and
nine but first we're going here
SB three oh eight because who
are here and all these
constitutional amendments
I think the the three away which
is a constitutional revision
commission is is an important.
Conversation for us to have and
have in mind as we're hearing
all these constitutional
amendments
and on just when we get to share
line we will have and
interpreter available
Amanda finally if you are
wanting to participate in the
assume and you signed up please
check your email make sure you
have the most recent
Lee is assumed link because that
link was change last night
everyone who signed up to get
public comment was emailed the
new link there last night so if
you have trouble getting in
please check your email and with
that we will go to Senator
Stewart and we have not quite a
quorum yet so we'll start the
subcommittee we want to
professional accent.
Bill.
You know and so because then we
literally just started yesterday
and I gave him a massive agenda
and I told him you you might not
and I I told him that I we
probably might not get to all
these at the bottom of the
agenda and if you didn't get all
those analyses that was not a
big deal but we have Mr leader
who's going to is basically a
human analysis you can be
talking to us about three away
this man is.
Hi there is no FIR
today.
I understand and we're as we're
kind of re schedule reshuffling
staff we're gonna have a a brief
catch up but that's that's on me
I had told them.
That I I I only decided late
last night that it made sense
that to start with this this
bill this morning so I I I
apologize for you not having is
with.
But Senator Stewart go ahead
thank you madam chair
and I think the I have with me
Phillip medical today who is the
chief of staff for Senator serve
on tests on for the Judiciary
Committee so I'm gonna be brief
and then I'll let him answer
some of the questions so this
bill would create a commission
to propose constitutional
amendments to the governor and
the legislature.
So it creates a twenty one
member commission.
Fifteen voting members five from
each congressional district also
included in the commission would
be an additional six non voting
members.
Consisting of two from the house
of representatives to from the
Senate as well as the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court and
the Attorney General or their
designees.
so
since we adopted our
constitution
it's been evaluated by the
constitutional review commission
the first attempt at
constitutional revision by some
type of commission began in
nineteen sixty three that work
was completed in sixty eight and
we accepted some of the
constitutional amendments that
were proposed so this is an
attempt to do that again to have
a high level of committee for
filled with experts review the
constitution and proposed
amendments to us and the
governor and I will turn it over
to Phil Clark like to to say all
the things I didn't.
Thank you madam president madam
chair the committee good morning
this this legislation proposes a
constitutional revision
commission the first and most
important point I think is that
this commission will make those
recommendations to the
legislature so the legislature
is still is empowered to propose
an amend the constitution in
accordance with with what this
commission might suggest in
nineteen sixty seven this was
the first effort this is what
the report looked like back then
I was privileged to serve in
governor Kings administration on
the last constitution revision
commission
we came out with a number of of
proposals many of which have
been adopted piecemeal we've
we've we've provided you I hope
with the this document provided
by the Legislative Council
Service called piecemeal
amendments of the constitution
it lists all the amendments that
have been that have been
adopted.
Since statehood and I think what
we're coming to see now is that.
thank I think we've seen and we
continue to see a lot of
proposals to amend the
constitution
It might benefit the legislature
to have body selected by you to
review carefully the current
constitution I know we've been
discussing modernizing the
legislature
the judicial branch article may
need some work
and with that is this is your
this would be your commission
staffed by the Legislative
Council Service staff to the
prior commission and we just
think it would be a good idea to
undertake this this examination
of the constitution in the
commission for.
Without madam chair and have
them to questions madam chair
this is if you look at this bill
most of it is temporary
provisions so there there's a
finite date for the end of this
commission I think it's two
years from the date of this
appointment so this is not
forever this is a for two years
they work and then they suggest
to us so we're ready for
questions.
Have anyone sign up.
Or or opposition okay so there's
no no incentive to support or
opposition for some Senator
Pirtle so actually before you
that anyone in the audience you
want to raise your hand to
indicate.
You are is a handicap session.
Center.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you Phil Mr Gordy
for for bringing this I do have
my main concern when I read this
being the legislature it it's
our sole responsibility to to
propose amendments
that the governor has really no
state and in and what what we
propose is that the twenty one
member commission fifteen of
them.
Will be governor appointees.
it seems strange to me that
that's that's how we would we
would want to do it I know it's
it's easier to the governor is
here full time to to make those
types of appointments but madam
chair Senator should I I'd feel
more comfortable if if you were
making more appointments and and
the speaker of the house and
maybe our minority floor leader
got to throw in a little bit
because this is the job of the
legislature and and I I think
for me this I don't know if I
would support it even if you did
that I'd have to give a little
more thought but once I've I've
read that part of it that the
governor's base going to be in
in charge of this commission it
was just an automatic red flag
no votes for me just for that
simple reason that it is a
legislature's job to to propose
the amendments up to the people
but I will also say that if you
go to page one ninety two of
your constitution article twenty
one section one this is always
the.
In the constitution that just
makes me chuckle a little bit so
there's obviously some revisions
that need to be made I'll just
read the last line polygamists
or plural marriages and
polygamist's co habitation are
forever prohibited so I I mean I
think there's always room to to
make edits but I find it funny
this is you know they to put for
ever prohibited language in
there so there's eight hour work
the things in here that you know
those are good policies to have
a doesn't need to be in your
constitution you know probably
not so I I didn't understand the
point of this and why we need it
but I I just would appreciate if
if the legislature did the
appointee thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Madam pro tem I
I am not I'm just I have
question what feelings about
this bill because I think it
would in fact.
inhibit.
Good ideas that have come
forward for example the one that
we just had on the board of
education.
We had a discussion in here
about did that board of
education get discussed during
the interminable where and yet.
Many of us think it's a good
idea so we voted for but it is
possible that this group could
stifle of ideas is that possible
chair Senator.
madam chair I don't think so
do you see the big report coming
out of the last I mean they can
propose things to us but you
know Center pearls actually
right in the end it's up to us
it's not even up to the governor
so you know we we do what we
want we change over the years
and new people come and so
I mean I think that the
commission would propose
probably would propose more
changes than we would want but
we don't have to take the report
we don't have to take their
their recommendations fully and
we didn't the last time it has
been piecemeal so mean that
constitution is filled with.
Thanks don't do it says the
governor's salary should be five
thousand dollars a year that's
in the constitution I mean it's
things like that that.
Up to be taken now so they'll
proposed amendments and will
decide which ones we want and
will continue to produce our own
amendments to the constitution
so this is an attempt to kind of
do a wholesale cleaning of those
things that we're not doing
we're not following and our
service a hundred years too old
to implement like self a salary
structure for executives is
currently in the constitution so
we're breaking that every black
law everyday so madam chair
Senator
the name escapes me but do we
not have the
Some kind of state standards
revision.
Committee that were member of
that's interstate ten like
standardized language across
states so we bring bills all the
time to update.
Is that correct some the madam
chair Senator so that's the
probably the uniform law yes it
is yes you're thinking about and
yes we have members on that
Senator fungus is a member of
that in fact yes Philip they're
going to just member of that so
roll Burciaga is a member of
that we had a few senators that
were members in the past so but
there you know what they do as
look at particular laws that
affect everybody because it said
it sent interstate and
intrastate issue and perhaps
Philip can talk up forty eight
bit more about that
we have to madam president
Senator madam chair
the uniform law commission as a
secretary pointed out is a
national organization
representative representative
from every state the original
idea of the uniform law
commission was to facilitate
commerce among the several
states and so that's what
brought us the uniform
commercial code the uniform
probate code etcetera and and
that conferences once a year for
a week and we get to sit there
and read some pretty that bills
and discuss those and debate
those
With regard to the revision
commission and which I I was
privileged to serve
we did our work we didn't really
have enough time governor
Johnson did not see fit to
continue the work of the of the
commission at that time Michael
Browde he was the staff it's
it's the council that that the
legislature relies on so.
I I feel pretty confident that
it's it with an even handed and
thoughtful process that was
brought back to the legislature.
Thank you madam chair thank you
so.
Thank you madam chairman and and
thank you secretary.
I just quickly I understand the
sentence would be this one time.
This one time you can clean up
late with just the idea
Madam yes this is that it to
your limit all the changes of
this bill would come to us with
then we would have a little
distracting the.
Exactly and included with
marriages.
The US.
That but then it was still of
the submitted to the bone except
that the because we.
I'm not sure how thorough
cleaning.
Conceivably they can we can be
proposed.
Forty or fifty because then
this.
So madam chair I don't think it
would work like that but we're
hopeful State go ahead
Madam chair Senator.
My recollection is that as we
all met and went through the
constitution we we address
various provisions among them
being salaries for legislators I
might add
Live in the in the division I.
Well that that perhaps could be
a discussion all the all the the
all the discussions were
bipartisan the report was
unanimous there was no
dissension the commission
arrived at a consensus and work
toward a consensus and indeed
those the proposals would be
brought to you.
Senator and and considered by
the legislature.
But we submitted to the voters I
would well there's a there's a
couple of options
you could either do it.
Section by section and there is
a provision if the Legislature
elects to combine many of those
proposals perhaps even combining
articles in in one opposed
amendment changing different
articles out of course would
depend on the legislature and
how you want to structure that
that that ballot.
Well I I I'm old enough to
remember madam chairman the.
In the nineteen sixty seven or
sixty eight sixty seven attempt
to rewrite the constitution
which.
Presented a whole new
constitution the problem that is
if there's one element in there
and I think the sheriff was it
basically shut that one down.
Because it also shows to point
that left it.
And so I mean you might like
ninety eight percent will
resolve that thank you to the
like that be able to let you
sheriff you voted against the
whole shebang and that would be
my only concern how do you how
do we presented to the voters in
a way that a they they
understand that we're not trying
to sneak something past the but
also the the middle of the this
has brought few senses and and
they have a chance yeah I do
want that bit of flu this merry
for their bills for no don't
take that ban on Energy donation
out and then voting insulting
just for that one how do we
avoid that that problem.
Madam chair senator I think we
avoid that by care by being
careful about how we propose
them on the ballot I know that
we now all understand that what
goes on the ballot is the title
only of that of that proposed
amendments and some voters I
mean all the constitutional
amendments are passing it at a
pretty good clip eighty two
percent seventy eight percent I
frankly worry little about the
education that we now find the
voters as to what's in the as to
what the proposals are legal
women voters does a good job of
of help in the voters with that
the Legislative Council Service
draws art arguments for and
against the various
constitutional proposals so I
missed it would be challenging
Senator.
The thank you Mr chairman that
that's my concern about this I
think we do definitely some
cleanup that is pretty clear
that is this show a lot of.
Unusual things in here and and
clean up would be helpful but
the the challenge will be how we
present I'm not as concerned
about who's on the commission
because nobody will want to be
on the commission list.
Unless there really you know.
It's on the steps of thank you.
Thank you center part of thank
you madam chair thank you said I
did I did find something on page
two and three the bottom of page
two and top of page three there
might be a little time line
issue here it because we're the
fifty six legislature madam
chair and and the commission's
gonna exist for two years.
And they would be presenting to
the fifty seventh legislature
and so I think that it's just a
small technicality but we
wouldn't want to give all this
information to people who aren't
even in the Legislature anymore
so I would propose on page two
line twenty four.
Right six.
Insert into their of seventh in
on page three line one do the
same.
And and
we'll go to chair can someone
tell us where this goes next.
Probably I think Judiciary you
know I I I'm really unwilling to
be here and accept or or even
reject amendments to Senator
survive yes this bill so Senator
Pirtle service with him and us
in Judiciary if you I mean I I
agree with you but I don't want
to I don't want to do that here
if you could hold off till
Judiciary I would appreciate it
if madam chair Senator that
gives us plenty of time to to
have the the good formal claim
amendment I would be fine with
that thank you.
Other discussion ready.
No I and also I had a small
amendment to all do the same
I'll hold it for four Judiciary
it's just adding that language
we we had everything these days
whenever we're appointing folks
and saying only so many should
be of the same political party
if we added and shall not have
change their party affiliation
within two years prior to the
appointment but we'll do that in
Judiciary and that's already in
here not as a second part of us
page one line twenty one more
than eight voting member shall
belong to the political party
right but what we don't have is
that they shall not have changed
if within two years percent but
overall I I think this is would
be a very good thing the more we
have.
Thank Senator Ortiz Pena said
the only people who are going to
want to be on this to people who
are really in the weeds on this
stuff and that is the kind of
people who we want sitting
around being real thoughtful
about what we do with our our
constitution so I'm I'm a big
fan of this is there any
additional discussion from the
committee report.
We do have a quorum so go ahead
yes
To.
All right I have a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca and Senator Ingle
are excused Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores excuse Senator Ortiz the
Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Pirtle no Senator
Pirtle no Senator Stefanics.
Yes.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes and Senator how to
music also excuse Senator duties
yes.
Yes we have it to pass I yes to
now.
Thank you very thank you Senator
Stewart for calling in for
Senator products madam chair
thanks to Phil Clark with madam
chair the committee think.
And.
The.
For us and I'm so I believe
members have has to run to
another committee but we will
still have a quorum I think
without hers Center little.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee they have a four
U. S. J. R. eight
In.
You know one of the benefits of
of being a farmer's you get a
lot of what we call wind chill
time.
driving our tractors and we get
to just be alone with our
thoughts and that's how I come
up with a lot of these ideas
that I bring before you but.
It's it's interesting to me
madam chair members that New
Mexico is actually only one of
four states that doesn't in one
way shape or form regulate or
state have some type of law on
the books for foreign entities
owning land within their state
one of four and and so I found
that quite interesting whenever
I started to research and and
research was was given to me and
so that's essentially what this
would do it doesn't prohibit it
but it would allow us as the
Legislature if we needed to by
law increase taxes on land that
is owned by foreign entities for
nations so it wouldn't
prohibited but it would just
allow us a tool that we can use
to either raise funds for a
specific purpose or if need be
if it was getting out of control
in our our small farms our state
kias in areas that that are are
being brought up or being forced
out doing due to rise in
property values and things like
that that we could have a tool
that could probably do TIRS a
lot of that purchasing of all of
our farmland in New Mexico land
by entities that essentially put
our own citizens out of business
within Austin project questions.
We have anyone sign up for as
for opposition hello thanks
everyone in the audience want to
raise their hand to get support.
Anyone want to raise our hands
in the K. opposition.
We'll go to questions from the
committee Senator phonics.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator
did you see our committee
analysis on this
this I ask you to it's a general
questions not meeting at all it
says it is worth noting that as
of twenty twenty one there are
more than one million foreign
owned acres of land in New
Mexico.
Do you have any idea if what.
Countries are what big companies
that would.
Include and and madam chair and
senator I assume there's going
to be quite a few from Mexico I
know China phones quite a few
companies a they just bought out
what is the the pork manifest
midfield I believe they're
heavily involved in a lot of our
green processing facilities and
I will note that in other states
they've actually had.
Factories that didn't go in
because it was a Chinese based
company it was gonna be located
too close to a U. S. Air Force
base and so likely they have the
ability within their state to
help prevent that due to a
national security issue so I
mean there are some things that
go that that are around I mean I
think just recently just a few
days ago the US senator from
Montana actually proposed to
outright ban it with wanted L.
revenue within his own state so
I think this is kind of a hot
topic right now to not realize
how much of it there was but yes
there there is quite a bit owned
by for national and this doesn't
do anything immediately it would
it would just make it available
to us make it a tool if we ever
needed it in the future.
So madam chair of the Senator
goes on to talk about
How this looks to specifically
increase the tax rate for
foreign nations owning real
property.
And that real property has a
legal definition.
meaning land and any
improvements upon are connected
with land and includes an
easement or other interests
there and.
So.
This is an open.
They're finally.
That we're talking about
So could you just could you
madam chair center talk a little
bit more about your.
What you were expecting that
this would bring in I mean what
would be covered in madam chair
and and senator I thank you for
the question and so I just point
out again that it doesn't raise
the taxes just allows us that
that opportunity and then the
provided by law portion within
allow us to decide do we want to
include homes do we want to
include restaurants do we want
to include all these other real
property of the way I envision
it would be for farmland because
that is a huge concern I believe
prior to two thousand ten less
than one percent of farmland
with state owned by China or an
affiliate and then within the
last eleven years that increased
four and a half times how much
they have bought up so for me as
a as an American farmer if it
makes me very concerned that a
lot of our produce our our farm
activity is going to go to
entities outside of the country
whether it is China or a
different nation that we're
taking it out of the hands of of
the American farmer in in in New
Mexico agriculture still such a
huge part of our culture and
traditions that I would hate to
see that go away this just
really just is kind of getting
ahead of the game to say Hey
we're gonna have a tool that if
it does get out of hand we can
use this as the legislature.
Thank you so madam chair I'm
gonna pose the question maybe
it'll be discussed in a minute
I'm wondering if our analyst is.
The testing.
That.
The ad property that you're
talking about and the real
property are two different
things so I'm gonna stop and
listen to the conversation thank
you very much chair.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pena
thank you madam chairman and and
thank senator I I I had not
realized.
The we've that we
Had it differently.
Kind of situation here with us
but this talks about a nation.
Only in full or part but for the
nation not a budget for national
so for example this would apply
to your my understanding of what
you're getting at here
Used to have a time share down
really does of.
And.
That time share was
Almost eighty percent of it was
owned by people from Mexico some
of the really does so for the
racetrack or for the skiing or
for just vacationing in the area
of this wouldn't apply to to
their property that that they
would by individual the what it.
And madam chair Senator exactly
so this wouldn't save it's a you
have dual citizenship or you're
you're of of for that that.
Frequents Ruidoso that's a very
popular place for
individuals that live in New
Mexico City or to all of the a
lot of people have real property
in own houses it would not
affect them would not apply to.
and I will say there's only one
state that that actually goes
that far to do that that's we're
again of all places actually
restricts
for individuals of real property
and that's not where I wanted to
go I felt like that went a
little too far you know that
that was not the intent so
that's why we we've put into the
specific language of a of a
nation.
And and madam chairman do we
have any property in New Mexico
owned by a nation.
And and madam chair said I'm not
aware of how much but yes there
there is some I mean anytime you
have
indices or those types of that
that's going to be.
Our nation owned and then there
are some properties that that
all our I'm not aware of how
much but again this was just
kind of let's get ahead of the
game we're seeing a pattern of
for nations buying up farmland
that we can get ahead of it and
ensure that it didn't get out of
control.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Additional discussion.
I have I have a couple of
questions
So.
Have you talked to them.
I wonder how are we going to
know if property is is owned in
whole or in part by formation
and this TRD have the ability to
track that in a way that there
that if we do enabling
legislation around this that
can.
Effectively be implemented in
madam chair I I haven't heard
from specifically but all of
this information is included
within our clerks you can look
up right now I have an applicant
pool of.
Kind of scary but I could pull
up your house specifically and
it would list who and then where
the addresses of the owner so I
think there is definitely a way
to do it with we do it now with
with everybody that owns real
property so I believe it would
be.
Plausible in in do uble the end
would come from the clerks and
they would have to then report
that to TRD and then that would
also allow higher tax rates
within counties as well.
And senator my concern is so we
allow for
And on a missile sees here and
New Mexico and so I can create
an LLC
no matter where I live and and
you have the address be someone
who a professional person for
service of process is here who
that's who ends up actually
being listed for process
and maybe a PO box and I'm
actually China but
but everything that I have filed
with the government basically it
looks like I I am an LLC here I
just I think it'll be hard I
think it'll be very easy for
people to set things up in a way
to avoid action of of it being
owned by for nation and I don't
know if there's other laws in
place that we require for
nations to.
Disclose ownership and somewhere
that that I might not be aware
of
I that that's a concern for me
the other part we're just
talking about the individuals
and and I appreciate that that
your intention here is is just
to let of this too properties
owned by by foreign nations the
because it says owned in whole
or in part by for nation if on
that time share.
Eighty percent of the people are
are individuals and then the
four nation I know this
ridiculous talk about four
nation having like a twenty
percent interest in time share
but just get go go with that
but the point is that if a
foreign nation has a partial
interest in something and then
whatever increased tax rate we
have adopted
As allowed by this applies to
the property as a whole not just
to the tax payer of the four
nations so those all those
individuals they're going to get
hit by that increased tax rate
as well because of that or in
part language that's in here
The other thing is circling back
to to what senator Sanchez was
saying it sounds like your your
intention is is for this to
apply to farmland and I read
here and our analysis that the
fourteen states have that
existing laws that specifically
for better limit
group
Foreign business entities or
foreign governments from
requiring our own owning an
interest in private agricultural
land I think if that's your your
intention that I think that
should be we should say it
specify that because otherwise
we do leave it.
Really wide open to any kind of
property and I I believe from
the analysis that we would be
the only state in the nation who
would have it be that brought
and not have it be specific to
agricultural property or our
farmlands
So.
So I guess all also the in in in
in here like my question Senator
is.
Because part two parts of of
those construe those concerns I
know how to address pretty
simply with amendments
the other one I don't the one
about how folks would be
identified in order for us act
ever be able to effectively use
this and I'm just wondering if
it's worth maybe a conversation
with TRD about language.
Maybe if there is better
language that would.
Would make sure it would be
easier to easy to implement
Any enabling legislation if this
past so I and the others I'm
pausing is because I I don't
want to I don't want to say it
let's do these two moments that
I have and I'm gonna vote
against your bill after so I
money I are you at all open to
maybe having that discussion
with TRD and was to hear this
again
you madam chair actually open to
it but I mean again when we were
dealing with the constitution
we're not I don't like putting
statute into the constitution I
want something that's permissive
not prescriptive so all of these
issues you're bringing up or or
absolutely valid in one hundred
percent on point but I like to
do those things in in let and
legislation as opposed to the
constitution and have to come
back if later on we want to do
something else I'm it it it's
already hard enough to pass a
bill
and for good reason it's hard to
pass a bill so this literally
does nothing other than put in
permissive language to allow it
we might never impose some type
of tax or anything like that it
just be where we could if we
wanted to as a legislature and
the governor that one hundred
thirteenth vote matters quite a
bit as we all know but you know
back to the point of you know
the vacation home and really
does so you know maybe if it is
a four and
individual and twenty percent is
owned by another nation but it's
a vacation home really does so
maybe it's it's time for them to
pay their fair share into New
Mexico I must say so I think
there's a lot of things here but
it's permissive not prescriptive
and and that was the at my
intent as you've heard many
times when it comes to the
constitution I don't I don't
like to get to we just had the
constitution of the revision
commission of going to address
so many of those times that
we've we've been to prescriptive
in the constitution so I I do
have concern if we can't come up
with something but I don't know
that TRD necessarily is really
needed in the conversation at
this point but I mean I'm more
than willing to talk to them
yeah and and you know Senator as
you're talking.
I was thinking is that that
particular is here right should
be addressed in enabling
legislation something that I
will offer the other two
amendment so because I I do
think.
Even though I I understand that
you're trying to be permissive
not prescriptive but I also.
To me this is a this is would be
an awfully broad step to take
not having it limited to to
agricultural property so I would
so all propose on page two line
one.
before they were real.
Inserting agricultural so would
read provided the in the case of
agricultural real property
Well I'll stop with that one is
that friendly or unfriendly in
in madam chair as long as
agricultural goes on to say
cheese plants feed mills
agriculture related businesses
if you feel like that would do
that then that's a hundred
percent my intentions I I think
it was senator I think it what I
think anything I think those are
agricultural the businesses that
would be on real property and so
it would apply to them okay
seventeens that are.
Madam chairman of.
Our technical field properties
typically taxes the lowest
possible rate in in madam chair
answer that's the point of this
is it is such a low tax rate
that if we put that in and we
can help Kerr maybe if if for
nations are coming in buying up
our farmland then we can raise
the taxes and make it not as
enticing to purchase our
farmland because our farmland is
taxed at a much lower rate than
than say your house and in
Albuquerque the vacation homes
the time shares in Ruidoso.
Treatment centers that lower tax
rate for and cultural property
does that extend to cheese
factories or Jerry product
processing plants hi and madam
chair and senator I'm I'm not
aware of where that that it does
I myself don't own cheese plan
or anything like that to know
but I I will tell you that my
house is taxed at a much much
higher rate than the pharmacists
on.
I just the.
Right yes it wasn't K. Center
Hamlin's grandfather great
grandfather who came up with the
the block of cheese with should
the task
okay so so we're on so that
we're on the the proposed
amendment adding agricultural
before real property any
additional discussion on that
amendment.
Senator Baca.
Thank you madam chair of of I
would I would say that if you're
going to do this ammendment you
might want to change the title
as well as added in there I I I
tend to I probably will support
the amendment I think a I think
that I kind of like the idea of
curbing foreign nations from
really any real property
I think there should be some
benefit madam chair to US
citizens and US foreign
businesses for owning property
here in the United States and
that that would be a actually
kind of a beneficial thing but I
understand what it what we're
talking about here in a
with I guess if the intent is to
narrow down agricultural land to
on this will get it done but
probably a policy then it
anyways it is.
Senator and and and I think
you're right we would be also on
page one line twelve before the
word property adding
agricultural there to the US to
the title as well
any any additional discussion on
that in the at an agricultural
page one line twelve before
property and page two line one
before real property.
Senator Baca has indicated that
he would he's propose is there
any other opposition to the that
amendment adopt amendment
managed care I think.
And you know I definitely for
four thirty on bills you're
right I I think that I think
anyone want to home.
More talking about amendments if
it's clear that that there's one
person who's of posing and no
one else that and I I'm I think
I'm okay doing that not for the
call.
Is there any opposition other
than Sundar Baca to drive that
amendment seen that's adopted
the other moment all offer is on
page two line two striking the
words or in part so that it
would read.
That provided the in the case
of.
Actor cultural real property
owned in whole by foreign nation
the percentage of value may be
at a higher percentage as
provided by law and that's to
deal with that issue we're just
talking about where if it's co
owned by a nation and
individuals the individuals
don't also get hit with that
hired potentially higher tax
rate is that friendly or
unfriendly and madam chair I it
with with the utmost respect I
would have sits on from the
because now we're going to go
the other way what's the best
work around now if you're
looking at having a tax rate of
ten percent on a property you
just bring in a partner at point
zero zero one percent ownership
and now it's owned in part by an
individual and then this section
would no longer apply maybe the
best thing to do since we say in
part of the constitution that's
a little perspective that we
just put real property owned by
a foreign nation and then
through the enabling legislation
we can get into the weeds and
that might be madam chair the
better way of satisfying both of
our thoughts on how
so some individuals or entities
might try to work around this
section Senator I I think that's
a good suggestions all men's my
proposed amendment to strip on
page two of money to to strike
in whole or in part.
Is there discussion on that
amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting that.
Scene and that is adopted.
also back on the bill as amended
additional discussion on the
bill.
No
Senator box office to pass on
that okay okay and.
Hi.
As amended yes I think we have a
roll call vote.
Yes thank you bye yes
use Senator Lopez.
Also if you.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris is
excuse Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle
Yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senators
defense.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes.
Yes Senator had a music youth
and senator do here yes thank
you yes Representative seven yes
thanks for members of the past
thank you.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and.
Few of the features of because
Sure yes so yesterday's Senator
Sedillo Lopez hat came to me and
asked me to roll
and share six the green
amendments and that she asked
that it not be heard until at
the earliest next Wednesday.
I'm not sure if we're going to
be put in on next Wednesday or
not but that that would be the
earliest we we would here at at
her request.
and now we have S. J. R. nine
and we also do so how do we have
an interpreter.
J..
Yes
as for pent believe that there
is you were going to do this so
if anyone
when you come on up and and and
that's whatever whatever you
like to note so that folks who
will need your services now.
Sure Senator here so we can.
You can see.
Thank you.
My name is safer safer
translations LLC and I'll be
providing simultaneous
interpreting services I call it
language justice because we're
in a bilingual state.
And I've been hired by a
nonprofit organization today to
provide the service so tell us
what nonprofit organization yes
sexy on something simple New
great thank and you can learn
more about language justice that
stage where translations dot com
if folks in the audience need
need to have access to areas
translation are there and set up
with that or or do they need to
see the memos eight people but
though to me sing with them is
seen as a seat insisted we still
where we're going to keep
working going on but a good one
which of those who want the name
and date and see the motor city.
and the I I don't know if we do
we have folks we're going to be
speaking on screen heard and we
speak in Spanish that such that
members of the committee on the
transition services as well.
Possibly online but Madam
speaker but they didn't get the
news in Lincoln.
So.
In the news and links for all
the staff the commission check
check their email because they
they were all out.
Last night okay
so and are they actually saw
indicated that the.
Okay I guess we'll have anyone
indicate for for online that
they're they they would like
translators I'm not sure if we
are set up to to do that
Representative.
Serveraid seventeen needs to be
for the people person today and
I'd also like to do it landed
knowledge meant for table up.
Thank you okay Senator Ortiz PO
please please go ahead and and
folks could please please put
their phones on silent.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee
With the is set for a net issue
who is worked on this issue with
the large number of nonprofits
county governments municipal
governments over the last couple
of years we actually the.
brought up the the
constitutional amendment on the
anti donation clause last year
but it but it does it kind of
got subsumed into the discussion
of the constitutional amendment
that was passed that permitted
the use of public funds to take
utilities right up to the
doorstep of individual homes
This bill this constitutional
moment this year's been
thoroughly reworked we we we had
sessions with the
people have been working on it
all along and we've had sessions
in which
the department of finance and
administration in tax and
Whatever TRD Texan Revenue
Department of met with us the
the state finance authority met
with us so we we we we think we
thoroughly vetted and what we're
trying to do here is
as you know the the anti
donation clause has been.
Particularly troublesome when
government wants to get
something done.
That it doesn't ordinarily do
and the classic example is that
I always uses domestic violence
we don't have a.
Direct department that provides
domestic violence services or
maybe working with
Troubled youth
But all of those instances that
the government relies on some
local organizations that a
contract to do these good things
for the.
And and and of course if there's
a contract.
It it makes it possible for
services to be delivered in
state payment to be made on
behalf of the people being Sir
what we've tried to do in this
in this amendment is to codify
in and change the language of
the existing anti donation
clause in a way that makes clear
that.
Government retains the authority
to to decide when something is
going to be done by non profit
what is going to be done bye bye
the local organization but that
it does not preclude of directly
funding that it shouldn't have
to go through necessarily go
through some government
department which then puts out a
request for proposals which then
evaluates them that there could
be much more streamlined ways of
doing this the problem we have
now is the local government when
they receive these funds from
the legislature on behalf of
some service to individuals.
The fed ex of getting that money
out to the people is very slow.
Burdensome the million tales
that delays in get issuing an
RFP receiving the R. F. P. and
by the time the the the money is
actually made available it's the
the fiscal year is almost over
and it and it's become a real
bird and and and and and the
county governments and municipal
governments are caught in the
middle of that they're the ones
that have to do all the work
there's literally no way for
them to claim.
We don't pay them for that poor
portion of the work so some city
governments know started saying
well we just can't do that
anymore which leaves it very
difficult to get the money into
the hands of the people who are
working so what we're trying to
do here is take the existing
language of all the different
exception exemptions from the
anti donation clause that over
the years of the cumulated the
one for lead to the one for
affordable housing the one for
utilities taken right at the
door with all of those involved
in proposed and accepted by the
voters over the years put them
into into a single easy to
understand section.
And at in them.
The language that would
this could make it possible for
of.
I know the other one was the the
scholarships within you know we
we we accepted exceptions for
scholarships and that included
with the way the look of the
amendment read it was for
veterans of the Vietnam War and
we brought in the the
understanding of that far beyond
that so that tries to make clear
that we would continue to be
able to do that.
And that we would also have.
we would take the the exception
for sick and indigent and
broaden it to include any kind
of social and and beneficial
service in the community that
that would be provided by the
nonprofit organization
with me is the
Person that's been the driving
force behind trying to pull all
these different groups together
Sephora net fish is with the
center for New Mexico thrives
New Mexico thrives yet used to
be that works with nonprofits
and tries to help them with some
of their technical assistance
and I'd like to speak about this
where we we go to the the
committee.
Madam chair and members of the
committee the original language
of the anti donation clause
dates back to the eighteen
seventies so part of what we try
to do is modernize and simplify
the language to clarify and make
it easy to understand it is
interpreted in different ways in
different parts of the state at
different levels of government
which makes it complicated and
confusing
we have kept all of the current.
Exemptions to the anti donation
clause and we have added three
new ones one for disaster relief
another for community well being
and the last one for payments to
individuals as part of a
government program.
And none of those new exemptions
would go into effect until
enabling legislation has been
passed and concurrent with
working on the anti donation
clause we have also been working
on enabling legislation.
And the working group as senator
Ortiz Y. Pino said includes
legislators
High level staff from the
department of finance and
administration The New Mexico
counties association Bernalillo
county staff someone from the
southwest council of governments
lawyers nonprofit leaders we've
tried to bring together all the
different stakeholders and to
ensure that what we're proposing
workable for everyone.
And part of what's the and S. J.
R. nine is the repeal of article
four section thirty one and that
states that no appropriation
shall be made for charitable
education or other benevolent
purposes any person corporation
Association institution or
community not wholly are not
under the absolute control of
the state and that's what has
forced local governments to
become land low landlords and
property owners for non profits
in their communities.
It places a huge burden on local
governments they don't want to
own all that property they don't
want to own vehicles and
computers forklifts cars.
But just on that last point
madam chairman and committee
members when they own the
property takes it off the
property rules and so the that
the of the property tax rules
that's one of the other issues
involved here.
Thank you.
And help people sign up and and
do do have organized support
yes.
So we have with you.
Okay.
Oh we forgot to discuss we have
a we have an amendment I I I
apologize okay the headwall we
have that up here will go head
to pass that out for you.
And and if if you like Senator I
don't know if you want the
amendment to be part of your
overall presentation if you have
public's comment that you wanted
for his party public support you
still have about ten minutes for
that I don't know if you wanna
take that doing the amendment
forget the amendment after we do
public support or opposition as
I did we can do the amendment
about two minutes I think the
the amendment basically after we
propose the the constitutional
amendment it was brought to our
attention that language about
and tribes in there was really
the subject to grossly being
misunderstood so we've deleted
that bill that language.
So it's deleted from the title
and from the he said that from
page six.
All right and so are you wanting
to move that amendment now or
if you all right okay so
discussion on the amendment.
Saying that Senator Stewart.
Every month.
Thank you.
And for the benefit of the
public so the strikes including
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos from the title
and then on page six it strikes
language that where private
organization is being defined
and the language is being struck
also it is and includes a
federally federally recognized
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
located wholly or partially in
New Mexico right it was it was
being you can read it is saying
that the.
The the tribe is a private
organization that was what was
specifically were trying to
avoid I said any objection to
adoption.
Yes.
Excuse me madam chair Senator.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino what what
again is that rationale for sure
you read the the way it's worded
madam chairman and senator
McCain of the way it if that was
originally written in the it
includes a federally recognized
any could be taken to mean
that's part of private
organization that we're trying
opposite of that and okay it was
operating so we just said we
don't need that so just take a.
Okay thank thank you for that
explanation
Thank you.
Is there any objection to adopt
an amendment.
Go ahead center.
Senator Stewart.
The third tribes are.
But which is your intent to make
sure that I also recognize.
Contacts.
No more generally yeah we're we
we consider tribes to be
eligible for hearing their not
subject to the anti donation
clause there because they are
government so we wouldn't want
it we didn't want to include any
any reason to believe that they
would be subject to the anti
donation clause.
Further clarification madam
chair thank you just so the
public knows why also yeah.
Any further discussion on the
amendment.
Any objection to the amendment.
Seen on the amendment is adopted
okay so we're still we're still
on your presentation overall and
I apologize center because I
forgot to start the timer when
you first started to you get a
couple extra minutes as
resolved.
well geez need I I.
So but you still have have about
ten minutes left to your
presentation to provide any
organized support that you would
like to to provide or we can
just cut people who've signed up
in support is there
any.
Please state your first and last
name and here with mining.
I think it's on is not okay
cleaning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Lydia
pocket I am me research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
voices for children horses for
Children stands in strong
support of S. T. R. nine as
amended
as here in previous discussion
on the constitutional.
Review commission in that
context anti donation clause has
been.
piecemeal you know through
legislation and traditionally
created exceptions over the
years and we believe S. chair
nine as amended will provide
clarity.
And proper safeguards for public
funds but will also.
Create opportunities for.
Community based services that
are vitally needed and that a
lot of that work is currently
happening already the anti
donation clause as is provides.
A lot of confusion we believe
this will clear it up and thank
you for.
Thank you.
Cynthia Garcia.
Cynthia here.
Please come on up to that
microphone and and tell us your
first and last name and who
you're with.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name that yes
FLOTUS in a member of the
workers center of someone's cell
phone the need in Santa Fe the
and to the nation class has
constituted a barrier for local
governments and other
organizations to fulfill their
missions of safeguarding the
public's interest.
Especially in difficult times
when this advantage communities
like the immigrant community
urgently needs direct financial
support from the state as it has
when was the case with the
pandemic passing this resolution
will make it easier for the
state to provide economic relief
to this advantage New Mexicans
when they need it the most so I
urge this committee to support
this J. R. at nine thank you.
Thank you.
And we have some people on zoom
I believe.
For.
The
Yes.
We're actually in person.
Thank you you chair members of
the committee my name throughout
the whole to do.
Perfect I'm gonna really one is
because money on the staff
attorney it's almost what loan
you though we are a statewide
immigrant workers rights
organization we stand in strong
support of S. J. R. nine we
participated in the working
group with Senator OTC Pino.
We stand in support of the state
or nine for two very specific
reasons we want to.
Remove this expanding exemptions
for disaster relief and
community wellbeing via thorough
vetting process and it would
allow for payments to classes of
individuals as part of a
bonafide.
New government programs.
During the first years of the
pandemic.
It became glaringly clear that
there was an even interpretation
of the anti donation clause for
example there were some local
jurisdictions to use their
federal money to provide direct
economic assistance to New
Mexicans who were excluded from
federal assistance.
And while other local
jurisdictions wanted to provide
the Senate a similar sort of
program their legal teams use
the anti donation clause as the
rationale for not providing a
similar program and.
We want to prevent that from
happening in the future.
So as J. R. provides a much
needed upgrade to the clause and
allow state money to be used
towards the state's most
valuable resources.
Our people our community while
continuing to to ensure basic
fiscal and accounting safeguards
thank you thank you.
Yes.
With I've really.
Translation but the the
duplicated it's very distracting
so it's very hard to focus so
is there something that can be
done just so that we can.
It's.
Talking to some of the for some
topics and
I
understand center in New and I I
I know that is district I wonder
if just for the purposes of
today maybe just moving down a
seat would would be helpful
Just I I I think our our our our
interpreter I think needs to be
close enough so that she can
clearly hear what we are saying
so that she can be doing her
interpretation
I appreciate those and others it
may be I I don't know where you
know
I understand appreciate the need
for that.
What is difficult we have a job
to do here.
May I suggest may I suggest you
build infrastructure to allow
seven.
In the.
In the meantime if if you're
able to send over here and so
clearly and that works.
Shares being brought.
Thank you also have about five
minutes left and every time she
deals on the.
Yeah as I have a list here of
the folks who have signed up I I
Cynthia Garcia was the next
person we had signed up wishing
them.
Jennifer.
I'm sorry Mr Hernandez Mister
Hernandez that Ag it Senator
this is your presentation so you
to I have this list of folks
from you guys tell me when you
want to have speak.
Okay
good morning madam chair and
then much of the committee my
name is and because of this and
I am a member of some of the top
my husband has worked for ten
years in the industry however.
When oil prices went down he was
laid off due to our status we
were unable to ask for an
employment and we have five
children under twelve years of
age it was very frustrating and
stressful.
There were many workers lately
has been working yes it.
And we do not get any help of
the state right now we're.
There is no way for the state of
financially help oil and gas
workers who are unable to work
and so I just last if they are
meant to essential workers in
the Permian basin needs economic
help in changing the and to the
nation plus will help us get
the resources we need I support
that is G. R. nine and I want
you to support as well thank
you.
Thank you
You all have about three minutes
left to who else from this list
would you like to have speak
okay no I don't have the list of
hello I'm sorry I thought this
legislation from strenuous but I
think for you but if you would
just like to cover the industry
in your book you have letters of
support from facility
organizations that have been
working on this Roadrunner Food
Bank.
Earlier County the the assistant
county manager clay Campbell
from
Julie us the who who's work done
with the Navajo Nation tribal
government for many years of the
food and agriculture policy
Council and farm to table.
Of the workers rights attorney
for the New Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty community action
agency of Southern New Mexico.
And the of the western
landowners alliance in
environmental group so you see
the diversity of the the the
organizations that have been
working on this and other
supporters of that I think with
that will will stand for
questions.
Thank you senator we did not
have any organized anyone sent
for organized opposition we did
have two people sign up for non
organized opposition so occur
under our procedures they'll
each be given one minute the
first is shell name more are you
here he supported season support
yes she is with the rural
libraries of action
at the end years on home.
And there is something that is
not on sale Madam.
Okay all know Mr Sonntag es
supposing hi folks in the room
who would like to raise our hand
indicate support please do so.
Anyone in the room would like to
raise a hand indicate opposition
please do so.
Anyone on sale.
As we can't see the numbers on
the money how I'm not not sure
half what just happened.
Great thank you all right so we
will go to members of the
committee.
A discussion Representative.
Senator Baca thank you madam
chair I I understand the this is
focused Center and and senator
what was it was intended this to
be mostly focused on on a
disaster relief is a or is that
just part of it.
Madam chairman and and Senator
Baca.
Yeah it is just part of it the
the the the group that's been
working on this also brought in
the concerns over disaster
relief about halfway through the
discussion so we we thought that
was also a valid issue that
because what we were working at
the fires were raging C.
I guess part madam chair and
Senator that of the if it was on
disaster relief I like that
because it's focused on a
specific period of time there's
a certain beginning and an end
to a disaster or we should hope
and and and so would be able to
provide relief to that so the
that part doesn't concern me as
much the part that does concern
me is is is the part that
relates to and all just go to
this page to section three
making payments to a class of
individuals as as part of a
program that identifies
eligibility level while the to
redress that the the that along
with on page three section a
supporting affordable housing
projects my worry is exactly
what I feel like the anti
donation clause madam chair and
senator is designed to do that
out of these two portions or
sections in this in this in this
resolution we could take on pet
projects things like that I know
the intention is very good and
and I don't question that in the
least but but I just see that
that this could be somehow
I guess turned into a a some
sort of program or area that
maybe we don't want to get into
or maybe some more nefarious
people could utilize the
sections to profit off the
government essentially in and
create a cash flow out of
taxpayer dollars in that that
part worries me I guess a
disaster relief I understand
well then respond to.
After and madam chairman be glad
to Senator Baca the affordable
housing that is already one of
the exceptions that that that we
already have enforceable housing
exemption from the anti donation
clause that the other one is
I think the thing I'd like to
say about that is that that we
have a bill the implementing
legislation that would take a
cut this constitutional
amendment and an upper make it
operational is is is in a is in
another piece of legislation a
bill that we have of pending and
and and it's built up to prove
the process that we go into
effect if this were to pass and
that involves people submitting
in advance to the department of
finance and administration of
the state of their proposals
the the the vetting process will
be done by a by a panel from the
legislative.
Finance committee I forget who
always is on at the three or
four governmental agencies the
the state finance authorities if
if they're involved in a in a
construction project or
something like that they would
be involved in that and in those
vetted projects would be brought
to the legislature much as we do
now with the water for projects
or other things the the the
legislature that would have the
final say about whether this
particular project would go
forward in a the differences
instead of having to give it to
a local government which then
would have to contract with with
somebody that could be
contracted directly were per
giving directly for that project
in that specific purpose that
the legislature is is said they
would like to use it for
I I see thank thank you sent
madam chair Senator for your
answer it.
I would tend to be a little bit
more comfortable with the local
government myself you know and
and then the language in here in
the formal housing I won't get
into is just a little bit
different what we what we have
currently it seems to be within
the constitution now and I think
this is broadens is a bit much
for me but you know all all
leave you to it and all continue
listening to the debate from the
committee thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator phonics
thank you madam chair thank you
senator for bringing this
forward
I do generally supported madam
chair hi in page two eighty
three on line fourteen the
section that Senator Baca was
bringing up we do have some
examples of that already in
State programs we have general
assistance which is state funds
that go directly to individuals
that qualify with certain
conditions we have a law for
human trafficking victims which
we rarely Fund but if we did
funded funds could in services
could go to those individuals so
As you progress with this madam
chair Senator.
I would ask you to think about
whether.
You could add some limiting
language there.
Not make it to constructs that
maybe.
Make it somewhat limiting in
terms of meeting certain
qualifications now I know that
nonprofits are eligible to
receive funds for their
services.
Invited under the anti donation
clause.
Provided that they meet a
certain threshold of serving so
many indigent persons within
their programs and then they are
eligible to receive services
many years ago for example I was
it able to receive money for
adult day care services because
I could prove that X. percentage
of my clients were below the
poverty level and that qualified
them and me as a.
Act a nonprofit to receive those
funds so you might think about
this issue move forward but I I
think overall I support this
thank you very much chair.
Thank you.
Senator Stewart.
I thank you madam chair.
Having a little bit of
difficulty with this you're
you're replacing eight eight two
paragraph current prohibition
with the six pages that you want
to put in the constitution
and and you know the the strange
thing about these constitutional
amendments are it's the title
that gets put content about and
it just seems a little.
Hey it seems a little
disingenuous to mention the
things in the title we already
do scholarship fund loan
programs for post secondary
students
we've got we've just passed a
hundred million dollars for
disaster relief you know I I I
know what you're trying to get
to but you know those things no
we're already doing
the so I I I feel like I have to
thoroughly read the six pages to
Ballot for our truck resolutions
no Senator but whatever is in
the title that we pass that is
what goes on the ballot that is
I I support the aims of this
it's but I I also think it's
important and and you're right
centers it's we don't want to
have a valid question that is
you know six eight pages long
because her laid out every
little thing we're doing
and and I'm not suggesting that
that that we should do that.
I I decided I share senator
source concern about the
language as it is now
I I also share the.
Concerns I think voiced by a by
both Senator Baca centers the
phonics about that sub three on
page two
page two lines fourteen to
seventeen.
I.
I kind of see this as a catch
all
but the way that and and I
understand why you're you're
doing a catch all but the way
that this is drafted.
So this says that you can.
The soap making payment
holonomic making payments to a
class of individuals.
So for small what what kind of a
class as part of a program.
Purpose is this broad that
identifies the but this is what
we're really hitting me up here
that identifies the eligibility
criteria for receipt of funds
and obligations if any.
So that if any does that only
modify obligations or does that
also modify eligibility criteria
for you see the funds because if
it modifies both basically what
this means is like also you can
like make a payment to anyone
for life like it's so broad it
does not require that there be
eligibility criteria included
necessarily that there be any
obligations on on the part of
the folks would be covered by
this necessarily and that that
might be your intention I see
that as super super brought in a
way that that gives me pause and
then I'm not sure if you need
because I'm looking at all these
other.
This legislation that are are
laid out here and I'm wondering
why it what is this capital
trying to capture that is not
otherwise.
Very specifically laid out in in
the the rest of the language in.
After three
through to like kind that you
have page three.
That could address that Senator.
I think the three the madam
chairman I think other than
three the the
The.
The effort is made to just
incorporate everything that
we've already done in the
previous exemptions and the ones
that have accumulated over the
last thirty years the the
affordable housing thing the the
the the scholarships actually we
we made it possible for us to do
the existing language in the
constitution does not permit
scholarships under the
opportunity scholarship back
because it's limited to veterans
of the Vietnam War so this is an
effort to clean that up and
making clear that no we.
Much of what's in here we're
already doing because we we
we've we've ignored the anti
donation clause in some
instances and and and and it I
mean I think it's generally been
been viewed as a as an obstacle
because it's so easy to block
things.
Now the for the question madam
chairman that you you asked
about the
the eligibility the that would
be set out all of that that's
trying to say is that you can
only make a grant to an
individual if you've specified
in that the legislature has
approved because all of this is
subject to legislation.
the criteria for it for example
the the program that that that
to Senator Stefanics alluded to
the the general assistance which
we've made payments under that
for for a long time using state
funds directly to individuals
for their support.
And but we had no I mean it's
it's some smart lawyers
had wanted to say Hey that's a
violation Indian nation plus we
would have had to stop it.
It is the attention of this is
to require that there be
eligibility criteria yes and
this is done then take I would
strike if any.
Because that is what's given you
the opening for there not to be
eligibility criterion that's
that's what's causing heartburn
here
What are the obligations in the
general assistance program.
I don't know so so I so I think
there's two questions is.
Is your intention here for there
also to be obligations put on
folks if not then and I I and if
not then I would take hours
obligations and if any or if
your intention is that there be
obligations and then just strike
if any and then that we were
requiring eligibility criterion
obligations any time this is
done
So so you take out obligations
as well well you said Tom I what
I'd like to know from you is is
is it your intention that any
time there is potentially be a
payments assistance being
provided under this sub three
as authorized by the sub three
that there are obligations that
would be attended to that if
that is your intention that we
only strike if any if that is if
your intention is that like is
that they're not always the
obligations include but they're
only only every time be
eligibility criteria included
that and we struck up and that
could be built into the madam
chairman I think you're making a
great point that could be
absolutely built into the actual
eligibility criteria right that
you're eligible if you do this
as well right now I think you're
your suggestion is a good thing
we if you want to make that we
would consider the friendly
amendment okay so on page two
line sixteen
we are staffed funds striking
and the obligations comma if any
call.
So the way that agree with that
right.
Would be making payments to a
class of individuals as part of
a program that identifies the
eligibility criteria for receipt
of funds.
of yeah for the period you're
right so after everything
straight after on page two eight
sixteen.
After funds a period strict the
rest of the line and then struck
seventeen.
Michael thank you semicolon at
the end.
Those are some of the S. seven
called in after funds.
Thank you.
so I I think I understand that's
a friendly amendment two three
four five we do not have a forum
to adopt that amendment but if
someone else comes in in the
next twenty five minutes we can
do so
we'll we'll so we'll go back
that we inform etcetera
etcetera.
Madam chair Sir okay time to ask
a question about the proposed
amendment yes.
madam chair Senator to see Pino
so for instance on that.
Page two section what we section
one members agree making
payments to class of individuals
as part of a program that
identifies the alleged
eligibility criteria for receipt
of funds so.
Could could someone give us an
example with so with this be
someone on the poverty line
income poverty line how would
this be played out in in in real
life.
If accepted.
You will the I mean we we have a
couple of examples co going on
right now I think some pilot
projects that have been done by
local governments to to test out
this theory about the guaranteed
income.
That would be part of it
there is there is the general
assistance program is another
one
madam chair Senator McKenna
another example is as we try to
transition away R. as we
transition away from oil and gas
some of the people employed in
the oil and gas industry
currently at very high wages
will need to find other
employment and possibly learn a
new skill sets and may need
assistance during that
transition period.
The.
Okay madam chair and senator so.
Eligibility criteria I'm just
wondering.
That's just kind of brought to
me too I mean
who defines the eligibility
criteria then maybe I'm missing
something you madam chairman and
and then Senator McKenna I think
the whoever's going to make
those payments okay so you know
the the if it's the if it's
state of the state government it
would be the legislature that
would have to approve the.
The eligibility who was going to
get these payments basically
spelling out who it is it's
going to get it and what the
they're going to get okay.
But when I thought of another
one the.
Deep dive coding chipset that
CNM that in twelve weeks prepare
people for jobs that pay an
eighty thousand dollar range the
civil why don't more people just
pour into those deep dive coding
can't will cause.
It's eight hours a day.
Five days a week to participate
in that to get it done to learn
everything that to get and
there's no way to earn money
while they're doing that they
can have another job the
deceptive and so this might be a
way that you make a payment is
not a scholarship it's kind of a
living stipend while they go
through that camp that might be
something else of that we able
to do.
Madam chair and senator that
that's a good example thank you.
And then further madam chair cav
one more question on the wrist
on the on the amendment of.
It's a question off the
amendment so I'll hold.
Thank you will will come back to
you
So.
Turning to.
For
page six so will we'll come back
to the amendment when we have
have a.
The turning to page six.
Okay so.
So we asked voters to vote on
constitutional amendments and
first we give them Office very
to and this is this is not just
for this bill but in general
this is just a beef I have with
a constitutional amendment
we give them often some very
awkward language in this of a
title to read and try to figure
out what it what it means and
and and then this they they
really wanna know what it means
they go to the actual.
Language in the legislation and
the other was provided by good
folks like the league of women
voters.
And then they read through and
try to understand whether
they're being asked to do to
take this massive stop to change
the state constitution and we
have words like on page six line
eleven.
Illegal in the I don't even know
how to pronounce that I looked
up the pronunciation really most
in areas.
Which I remember or was added in
Judiciary last year and everyone
was kind of entertained by that
and all it means chair table
which we already say at the
beginning of that line
But we have a state where.
Past articles about literacy
that came out about a year ago
and said like a third of New
Mexico adults read it about a
third grade level.
We are we are doing a real
disservice to our voting public
when we use language like this
Act and constitutional
amendments
and.
And I I would set my my eventual
dream is that we actually summed
it has something that says
anything that goes on the ballot
has to be
at about a third to fifth grade
level of reading comprehension
and can't be on that because we
want to make sure people
understand what they're voting
for so.
I would move to strike that were
that is difficult to pronounce
online eleven page six at the
end
we could either I've now here's
thank you again have this kind
of like your ending this is
defining charitable organization
is ending it with kind of a
catch all.
We could instead put in their
beneficial but I don't know that
you need to catch all do need
charitable organization to be
defined as anything beyond a
federally recognized tax exempt
organization that is organized
for charitable literate and
literary or educational purposes
will you want it broader than
that will no madam chairman I
think we don't want to run the
the the fact is there something
what is it eighteen.
Categories of five oh one sees
right fifty fifty nine twenty
nine or twenty nine okay some of
the land they include things
like you know sports programs
and things like that and you
know the they're they're all
they all have their own value we
were trying to focus it in on on
those things that that state
government feels it's his
responsibility to to help out
with and so that would be the.
That I don't know how you can
define charter organizations and
organizations charitable and
that doesn't help a whole lot
It in the us that it's it's it's
it's not the most are full
definition already
And and it is does get a little
sticky when we start looking at
the the IRS definitions of these
things because that goes into a
whole bunch of stuff that that
is not intended to be covered
here
I'm I'm kind of okay with the
repetitiveness of that terrible
and there.
But aside but I definitely want
to take that other language out
and and and I guess.
Would benefit the beneficial I
think is a little problematic
too because who's deciding
what's beneficial
So I guess what I'm gonna
suggest is that we amend it to
say so are a charitable
organization means a federally
recognized tax and organization
that is organized for charitable
literary the memo would be after
litter the committee literary
for.
In certain or educational and
then to strike.
For other you must miss merry.
strike just that and then keep
purpose but I think that make it
plural purposes.
and and
Sephora suggesting madam
chairman the some of the work in
cultural and direct social
service is that a possibility
the including that for instead
of charitable because you don't
want to define charitable for
direct social service.
Comma.
Cultural come a literary for
educational purposes the the the
and just insert those considered
charitable so we're not defining
the word with another word with
itself.
so.
yes US senator Senator McKenna
at thank you madam chair thank
you senator yeah this when I
read this at a I'm not
knowledgeable about the I OC
three criteria but I I think of
also health public health.
do we have such organizations
that would benefit from this if
they're included in that public
health.
I think there is a danger in
into starting to look at a whole
bunch of things okay in the
sufficient okay it even with is
your direct social service and
cultural stuff
First of all I'm I'm not I'm not
entirely sure what drug social
service means our and if that is
a I I would tend to doubt that's
that's the term that's used
otherwise in our constitution
And I don't know that cultural
necessarily.
Just because of the is it is a
cultural that that that would
make it a charitable
organization that that cultural
purposes are inherently terrible
once because because what we're
looking at the definition of
charitable organizations
so.
I'm.
I think in general and it's it's
it's good to be brought here
but just brought using.
Language that anyone can can
read and understand
So I think if you if you're does
preference is to keep it
brought.
Then I would say it's.
Then and then I think we're kind
of getting back to like using
something like beneficial.
Instead of the Leo Miss America
but.
But I think that.
Is this potentially problematic
as well I'm I'm not exactly sure
what what the fix is here with
our that starting to like list
out a ton of different things
for being overly restrictive.
Madam chair part of the
challenge is that in legislation
we're not allowed to reference
the IRS code because otherwise
we could.
Described as a five oh one C.
three non profit organization.
But even that I don't think we
want to do that because there's
so many I want C. three is that
that was the do not want to see
their years a lot of I and CD's
right the three is the
particular kind of I want to see
that we would limited to but at.
That we can apparently the the
drafter told us we couldn't do
that.
and I I remember the
conversation from last year and
and judiciary which is how we
ended up is the men's madam
chairman maybe maybe the thing
to do just leave charitable as a
definition of general
organisation has that kind of
says it all drop them element is
an airy whatever it is Ellen
most centenary.
The and then just leave the rest
there for charitable literary or
educational purposes.
Okay
all right so we have a quorum
so.
So let's let's deal with this
amendment most of us that other
moment now that we have
important lessons from now so.
It would be taking so on page
six line eleven.
after the word literary.
Insert for.
After educational strive for
others the Leo miss merry.
And then on that line I I'm
sorry line twelve
Make it turn it changing purpose
to process so every terrible
organization means a federally
recognized tax exempt
organization that is organized
for charitable literary or
educational purposes.
Is that a from the moment yes
flu taxes discussion on the
amendment.
Senator Stewart madam chair this
is the case I need to take the
call on our after Labor.
The right here right the school
LCS Hayes office offer comments.
All right I.
Do you have all that.
Okay
any additional discussion on the
amendment any objection to
adopting that amendment seen on
that amendment is adopted let's
go back to the.
Amendment on page.
To.
So this is page two line
sixteen.
After funds.
actually strike everything after
funds and then struck Alliance
seventeen through the semi
colon.
So the language we are striking
there is the and the obligations
if any of the class of
individuals receiving the
payments.
Is there any additional
discussion on the amendment and
and and.
Yeah.
Yes.
Seven.
So we're straight through the
semi colon online.
So what that so that someone
called in that we have will
we'll keep at the end there.
I called up to thank you up
until up until the seventy five
yes thanks.
All right any other special
madam.
Any objection to adopting that
amendment.
The scene that is adopted
and I I all of this to use
center I still don't know what
the fix is on the title and I so
as we heartburn
And we will take it up to to we
we go to Judiciary next.
And so I will take it up to
Legislative Council and see if
there's some more elegant way of
doing this.
Thank you and then Center
McKenna who once you had a.
I just want to.
Thank you for remembering me.
Madam chair.
thank you madam chair and
senator so I'm on page two line
twenty three.
Through twenty five creating new
job opportunities by providing
land buildings or infrastructure
for facilities to support new or
expanding businesses.
That when I read that that seems
like a really wide open to what
we're are the constraints
chairman okay Senator that is
the existing leader language
okay.
That's already in statute that
that that that that's already in
the constitution that part we
received yeah get madam chair
and senator do you see how I see
that's who it is is wide open I
don't need a leader does such
broad things that's right.
Okay they're all in the name of
job development okay yeah there
just seems to be no crate your
site above we got eligibility
criteria I would think we need
something in here of eligibility
criteria.
Madam chair Senator I would
agree with you here of about
fifteen years too late I think.
Madam chair larger it is in the
enabling legislation in the that
there is there the madam
chairman and and senator that
that's true that would be the
case with any any of these
things that they all have
enabling legislation that goes
with them legislature and and
and we would have a look we have
a litany of the legislation for
the new pieces that we're adding
as well okay so there it so
there are some breaks then okay
all right thank you madam chair
thank you senator.
Any close calls our motion.
I am if there's no more
discussion yes I would move a do
pass on Senate joint resolution
online as amended.
We do a roll call vote.
That is excused Senator.
Ingle six Q. Senator Lopez yes
Senator Lopez yes I can yes
Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris excuse senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Pirtle is excused
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart no Senator had a
meal is excused and Senator
Duhigg.
no explain my doctor.
The two now and for years I
think he's to and you have a I
do pass and I'm glad we're gonna
see this the only reason I'm
voting no now is because.
We didn't address the the issue
with with the title I don't know
how to addresses in here
but.
But knowing that they have the
votes to to move on in general I
I think that I wanted to but no
just just and knowledge then as
I think continuing stating that
will will continue to work on
education thank you madam
chairman thank you members of
the committee and and we will
make an effort before it is
distributed figure something out
about that really offered to.
Thank you I think we can do this
very very quickly so we're going
to hear Senator Stewart
SB three fifty one.
All right.
Senator Stewart thank you folks
as your as you're leaving please
just keep it down to in your
business.
Madam chair this deals with the
rules we have around Legislative
Council
We are having difficulty finding
forums that are interim
committees in part because the
leadership that serves on
Legislative Council tend not be
currently to be either chair
vice chair for voting members so
Senator Lopez is not been able
to be a voting member I've not
been able to give voting member
Senator Baca has not been able
to be a voting member so this
bill continues the prohibition
for any council members to be
chairs or vice chairs but just
allows them to be voting members
and that's all it does right I
don't think we had anyone sign
up in support or opposition
So we'll just go straight to the
committee Sanchez.
All right.
Okay have a roll call.
Senator Baca and Senator Ingle
our excuse to the to the office
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores is more space
excuse Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator prolific you Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics is yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator had a meals excused and
Senator do the yes we do yes six
yes there are now you have in
the past
with that
we're going to pick back up on
Friday are no on Monday we're
going to start doing we're gonna
start mixing built in
confirmations so I'm not exactly
sure what what bills were gonna
have backup on on Monday but
we're gonna be having at least
three confirmations level if.
Introduced to the committee I I
have for the day please yes.
The.
Well here your grandfather is an
institution here
Thank you guys for joining us
also it may have been previously
announced that we were going to
be doing confirmations the
Saturday we are not doing any
confirmations the Saturday we
will start doing them probably
