on SB 19.
Madam Chair committee, good
morning. Good to be with you
guys.
Um, Senate Bill 19 is a bill
that would require the higher
education department to provide
10 hours of training.
Uh, within the 1st 6 months of a
regent being appointed by a
governor.
Um
Regents of universities
enumerated in section 12 of the
Constitution and community
college governing boards, which
in many cases are the regions of
the universities, but in some
cases, they have their own
elected boards.
That's what it does. The bill
enumerates what those 10 hours
are, but they're really crucial
areas of, you know, fiduciary
management.
Um, New Mexico transparency
laws.
Um
Student success and student
services, um, resources
available for regions
themselves, um, because I think
probably a lot of regions they
get put in these positions and
then
They're in silos and they have
to make these decisions where in
fact there's national
organizations to help support
them. So I think this will help
connect them with those
resources. And if done well,
connect them with each other.
Um, so that's what it does and
um.
have to stand for questions. I
have a gentleman who's gonna be
my designated appointed expert
witness because he is a regent
and he's in a Mexico alum and
you can speak to all these
issues as well, ma'am sure.
Go ahead and introduce yourself.
Madam of the committee. My name
is Cedric Page. I am a member of
the
The Mexico Military Institute.
I've also uh
of higher education over 55
years as a faculty member, as a
dean, as a, a campus leader and
uh I fully support this bill.
And the whole focus on training
for, for Regents, I think it is
critical, um, not only do we
need to understand the inner
workings of, of our institutions
and of higher education broadly,
uh, we also need to have the
skills to lead those along with
the presidents that we, we may
hire.
So, uh, based on that, I fully
support this. I also would
suggest that uh the uh regions
have a responsibility not only
for.
Is your, is your mic on?
Oh, I'm sorry.
So, uh, I, I believe the uh
regions have a responsibility to
continuously improve their
leadership skills and their
ability to to lead those
institutions, uh, by having
retreats. I think those could be
added on to the training that's
uh recommended here for the
higher education department, and
there are a number of other
things, committees at the regent
sit on, uh are important ways
of, of making sure the
institutions are running uh top
efficiency.
and effectively serving the
students of our, our, of our
state. So with that, uh, I will
conclude by saying, fully
support this uh uh legislation
and uh I believe it will make
for stronger and more effective
institutions of higher learning
in our state.
Thank you.
Thank you, we did not have
anyone sign, you don't have any
organized opposition or I mean
support today. Um, we did not
have anyone to sign up and
organized or unorganized
opposition. So we will go to
members of the committee,
Senator Brantly, I had you down
already, Senator B block, anyone
else?
I'd like to get on the list.
Go ahead, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Steinborn, um.
Or what
If, if they don't take the
training.
What are the consequences?
OK.
That's a good question. It's
been raised before, I thought
about it, um, you know,
constitutionally, these are
appointed positions. Some cases
are elected positions, so I
don't know that.
You know, we have the authority
to say they have to stop serving
anything like that. I think
because we're making a
responsibility in this case of
the higher education department
to provide it.
You know, it's kind of an
executive appointment, so it's
kind of on the university too, I
think there's a lot of uh moral
authority for them to do that
and get it done or face the
wrath of, you know, the public
eye, media. So I think we're
relying on that and
professionalism to make this
part of the culture of becoming
a new region appointee, but
there's no penalty per se
written into the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Senator, it's more of a, a
strong suggestion that a mandate
if there aren't any
consequences. I wonder if you'd
consider, I know that on the
school board, they have similar
encouragements, but there really
isn't a an enforcement side of
that, but they do post it
publicly, so you can see if, if
one of your school board member
has refused to take the classes,
it's public record and easily
accessible to consider. Um, I
did note in here that the
university in Mexico had
responded to you.
saying they already provide some
sort of training, I would
imagine that a lot of
universities do, I know New
Mexico State does. I think 10
hours total is reasonable and
all you're really doing is
breaking it down as to how you'd
like that time spent, so as long
as I don't have to exceed 10
hours, I think this is
reasonable. I would just
encourage you to somehow have
some sort of disclosure of it,
so people know. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Block. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um.
I know you're surprised I'm
asking questions here. Um.
As I always do. uh, Senator
Steinbor is a senator, is it
Page? I'm sorry, I didn't get
your name, sir.
Madam Chair, uh, uh, Senator
Cedric Page, professor Emeritus
from the University of New
Mexico. I'm also a regent at the
Mexico Military Institute.
Kind of ending my term, uh,
another couple of weeks when we
all you a new person. Thank you,
sir, for, uh, serving down
there. Are you a veteran by
chance? Yes, I am. What branch?
Air Force.
What did you do?
I uh started my academic career
as a faculty member at the
United States Air Force Academy.
That's enough. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm the ROTC grad. I
don't need to hear it from you.
So same as well ROTC grad from
Syracuse Senator, I'm grab
all right. So you served in the
Air Force, uh.
OK, thanks for your service, uh,
my friend. Very much appreciate
that. Senator Steinmore, let me
just ask you a few questions on
this one. I, I, I agree with uh
Senator Bradley completely.
There needs to be some type of
accountability in here for the
uh for the regions.
Um, and I understand the higher
education department is
developing the training for this
particular, um, these folks
here, for these good folks that
want to serve, and it's supposed
to be in place by December 31st
of, of this year. Is, is the
training, uh, topics currently
available now?
Madam Chair, Senator, not that I
know of. I've spoken to the
higher education department
about this. I've spoken to the
secretary. They do not go into
all areas that are enumerated in
this bill. Um, I think it's kind
of one off, quite frankly, is
it's so voluntary that most
regions have never heard of it
or even got an email inviting
him to do it that I've spoken
to.
Uh, so, I think it's limited.
OK, I just want to be, be quick
here because I think this is a
pretty easy, easy bill. All
right, so the training currently
is not available. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, but can I assume
the training is in development
right now.
Um, Madam Chair center, I
wouldn't assume that I I would I
I know that they, if someone
asks for it, they will offer
some training. I don't think for
the words of the department,
it's not covering all this, so I
don't know what's available,
what is being developed. I think
if we do this, it will obviously
have to be. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Have you
coordinated, uh, Senator, with
the higher ed department for
this. I assume that's been
already accomplished. I've
talked to him, Madam Chair, I I
wouldn't say that this is their
bill, but I've talked to them
about it and.
And there was agreement that
what they're doing is not what
this bill is comprehensive is
what this is. So thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. I, can I
assume that um because we have
board of regents that live all
over the damn state, right, with
all these different universities
and in higher education schools.
Is training gonna be available
on on Zoom or Teams or Webex.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, senator,
actually what their FIR says is
that they would develop online
modules, so that's what they're
planning. I don't actually
necessarily agree with that. Um,
I, I mean, in terms of the
optimal, having been a public
employee and gone through
training, I think when you said
eyeball to eyeball and meet your
peers, it's, it's better
training, but having said that,
I'm not, that's, we're gonna
leave that decision to them, and
they're planning on online.
Thank you, thank you. Oh, that's
it.
Former Air Force guy, we do a
lot of that stuff and you just,
by the way, and I agree with you
because all you're doing is
clicking slides and you. Um, is
this gonna be standardized
training all across, everyone's
gonna get the same training, uh,
they're gonna see the same.
Same slides, same information,
can I assume that
senator, yes, exactly right. And
that, and I did also reach out
to several members of community
college boards including uh one
of their presidents and what
they all said, they said the
same thing to me, which was this
is kind of nice cause we amended
it to our community college
because it'll be standardized or
across them. And that way, even
these universities that are
doing some training about their
priorities, they get to leave
this standardized good stuff to
the state, and then they get a
really do stuff focused on their
university.
city and
Perfect.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and one of the things
that came up, I can't remember
if it was rules or public
health, but we were talking
about per day, I think it's
public health on the parole
board is talking about per diem.
Um, members will not receive per
diem for doing this training
online sitting, uh, sitting in
their bathrobe in their office,
is that correct? Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, that's a good
question. I don't think the bill
provides for it necessarily.
Maybe I need to reread it. Uh,
it, it doesn't, it doesn't,
yeah, so I probably not if in
that circumstance if they try to
Santa Fe for a day or two, so.
Senator, that would be governed
by the per diem and mileage Act,
and that was a, that was a big
issue on, on the bill that we
just heard a couple days ago,
um, I think it was might have
been with Senator Hermio if I if
I remember right on the parole
board with the per diem
discussion we had.
I just want to make sure it, it
might be good to just have a
Provision in here, we can talk
about that after of a of an
amendment, hopefully would be
friendly to you that they would
follow the um.
The state state rules and
guidance and statutes on on
pretty
and I'm chair center, I would
have no problem with that, the
question would be, would it be
necessary, um, because, you
know.
We have some laws governing that
already,
so just to codify it.
Thank you. And uh lastly, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Steinborn,
when
The, the members, the regions go
in and are taking this training,
how, how's it documented so
there's that trail of they do
something wrong or do something,
you know, it's documented like,
hey, I had that training, you
should have known better. Don't
be an idiot.
That's sure I followed the last
part of your. I was with you
until the last part of your
question. Um, how do we document
if they, uh, are an idiot. Yeah,
no, it's um.
Well, I think certainly
They, they will know if they've
been given the training or not,
whether it's online or in
person, so, well, I mean, if
that's what you're asking. Thank
you, Madam Chair, but, but that
I, I would argue.
That if the Department of
Uh, what is it, the higher
education higher education
department, if they're
developing it, I would hope they
would develop some type of
mechanism to to track.
Training, so it's there so we
can document it.
Um, because there's nothing here
that shows where it's documented
and how they're gonna do that.
Mountain Center, are you saying
how, how we, how we or they
document that they could do up
the training at all.
Well, the.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, yes, sir. I
want to make sure there's
something documented, there's a
trail said.
Hey, um, Regent Steinborn, he
completed only
Or of the 5 classes, cause it's
10 hours, and then, you know,
they gotta, they gotta poke you,
I think that's what's kind of
going toward what um Senator
Brantley said was there's gotta
be a flag somewhere if
training's missing within a
certain amount of time, I think
it's 6 months, but it's got to
be documented somewhere and
maybe the higher ed department
is the one who should be keeping
track of that. Well, and that's
a fair question, Madam Chair,
Senator. I think they'll have to
because they're the one required
to provide it.
But I think the university also
is required, I think the
executive branch, I think the
governors required. These are
executive level appointments, so
I think it kind of puts that
responsibility on everyone. All
right. Thank you, thank you,
man. So you're telling me that
the documentation of the
training is already covered by
by different policy.
Uh, mountain chair, Senator,
this is a new proposal, so that
there was not a policy governing
this because it's not mandatory
and most don't get it. If we do
this law, then yes, I'm sure
they will develop a policy and.
You know, and then, you know, as
Senator Brantley is proposing,
if we put in some sort of
requirement.
Of, uh, you know, notification
will be made public on the
higher education website for
those that have complied and
not.
Then, uh, you know, a little
accountability for those that
don't and then lastly, this is
lastly, I don't want to do an
amendment here cause we have
some other things going on, we
can deal with that later, but I,
I would ask that you think about
that when it gets to the next
committee of the Senate floor
maybe tighten it up just a
little bit. I'll support and I
appreciate, uh, you, sir, and I
appreciate your service. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator
Gallegos.
And turn
and gentlemen, I appreciate the,
the bill. I'm gonna give you a
little bit of history. I've been
on school board for 23 years.
Back in the day we actually were
in the classroom, um, evaluating
teachers and the process.
Currently, because
Uh, one of our, our governors
decided we'd be just a financial
analysts. We hired some then we
do nothing else but read through
the um the bills in the budget,
uh, but I'm wondering what the,
the Board of Regents actually
does. I, I, I hope it's broader.
And what the school board does.
Because I think uh Governor
Richardson took my authority
away and made me just a
financial analyst. Can you give
me some information on what a
regent actually does.
And, and, and
please go ahead and answer. This
is, this is a little off topic
of of the actual bill. So please
go ahead and answer. We'll make
sure that we get a extra
training, uh, for members before
we're gonna be doing Regents, a
lot of Regents next week. I'll
make sure that you get, get all
the information you need about a
region.
position. I appreciate the
education, but I don't think
it's off topic because we're
talking about regent training,
if, if just I am, I'm going to
just ask our presenter to
briefly describe obligations of
of regents and, and otherwise we
will go into more in-depth
training on that as a committee.
Thank you for stopping me.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Senator,
he goes, uh, as far as the
responsibilities of a region,
and I've served as a trustee for
a private college, uh, 4 years
and 6 years as a regent as New
Mexicoilitary Institute. So the
training that prepared me for
that was working as a faculty
member, as an administrator
within the higher education
institutions that I have served
over the years, uh, as far as my
responsibilities, primarily.
uh, making sure that the budgets
that are submitted for approval
and uh funding for the
institution are clear that they
meet the needs of of the
institution, the number of
students at that time. Uh, the
second is leadership, uh, at the
Institute.
At the institution, uh, along
with the president.
Uh, providing leadership, uh,
setting a strategic uh
directions planning for the
institution in terms of what
programs, what number of
students who want to serve, uh,
going forward. So those are the
two primary ones, uh, uh,
fiduciary responsibilities to
make sure the funding is there
and it's uh spent properly, and
secondly, uh, to do the
strategic planning with the uh
president and other uh lead
staff at the institution.
Ma'am, if I could add to that
cause I think it's super
important. Thank you for that,
you know, they hired the
university presidents, which is
incredibly important.
Decision.
They also make decisions on
infrastructure that are
required. They literally chart
the direction, of course, the
university. Do we invest in a
science building, do we invest
in a media building, you know,
it's literally making the
institution.
Relevant and meet the needs of
New Mexico, innovative policies,
so I mean they, they chart
the direction of school.
Thank you for that chairing
center, uh, great explanation,
and I just wanted to know
because there's some broad
topics of training.
And if you're just doing the
budget.
Uh, there's more here than, than
you'd need. So I appreciate
that. I do have another
question, um, I'am chair and
center, are there any um
training required in regions of
other states.
Um, Madam Chair, I've heard from
national organizations, some of
them do provide more training.
Um, I can't speak to kind of
numbers, but I know that it's
Many other states have.
Training, they have
qualifications of Regents, they
have nominating.
Processes for picking them
vetting, which is my next bill.
Yeah, some of them do do
training.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
uh, then my final question, uh,
and, and I like the idea of
training. Uh, I just wanted to
make sure that we weren't.
Um, or that we've looked to
other places to see what's best
practices, uh, in our FIR, uh,
it talks about university of New
Mexico already doing this? Uh,
are you guys working with them
to see what's worked there again
going back to best practices if
uh we're gonna have to duplicate
this, they may already have some
Opportunities for us without
having to rewrite everything.
so I've read the FIR as well,
and I think what it says about
UNM is they go into a few of
these areas, you know, just like
some of them do, but it's not
comprehensive. It's, you know, a
lot of focus on their school.
And then some
Background on the Mexico law and
their requirement, but it does
not cover all these areas and.
Comprehensive and standardized.
I think the cool thing about
this is we would have.
Broad-based relevant, high
quality training and it would be
uniform across regions and
across schools. So, um, and
then, you know, it's not a
one-off training for a
university that be hit or miss.
Well thanks for that my center
and I, I like that, um.
Standardization, um,
So you talked earlier, the one
on one face.
Because many of my lawsuits
during COVID because I think
that we lost some interaction,
uh, but, but I appreciate this.
I think there's some
Uh, thoughtfulness in this and
uh it would be good to see the
UNM if this is a better practice
and they would adhere to it. So
with that all you'll think,
Mister Chair, Madam Chair and
Senator.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Bergmans.
I was just gonna move and do
pass.
All right, before we take that
motion up, um, Senator, I thank
you for bringing this. Um,
I think this is a good idea.
I think you know we heard from
now Commissioner Neibert the
other day that for the PRC he's
getting what, 32 hours of, of
ethics training for that
position, um,
I think that I don't think
there's anything wrong with.
Ensuring that people who are in
these very important positions.
have all of the, the training
that that we would want them to
have, um, and I don't think this
is a, an
An onerous amount of training.
Um
Senator Gallegos was asking
about the training that UNM is
already getting.
They said that that was through
the the association of Governing
Boards, the AGB, um,
Which I'm sure is is great, uh,
but it's also giving that is not
New Mexico specific.
Training that they are getting
there. That is, that is, I'm
sure that the same national
training that is given.
Given to all of their members.
Um, and, and they should keep
getting. I.
Uh, we were looking at their due
schedules.
Uh, which were handed out to you
all. UNM pays, pays a decent
amount of dues to AGB, uh, and
should, should hopefully get
that.
I would hope that
If there is valuable training
they're getting from them
already that they would continue
that in addition.
To whatever training is required
here.
Um, a lot of the details that
Senator Block was asking about
are the kinds of things we do in
reg.
After something passes, it
wouldn't make no sense for any
of that to be.
be established already, and it
really wouldn't make sense to
establish it here because those
are really matters for
regulation, but they are
flexible enough that you can
adjust them as needed, um, and
we're not having to pass a new
law, uh, just because, uh, a
form that confirms whether
someone has done their training
or not isn't working out the way
we wanted it to.
Uh, so with that we are on a
motion for a due pass from uh
Senator Bergmans. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing none, please show all
members voting in favor. Senator
you have a do pass and stay
right there
because now we're gonna go to
SJR 7.
You know SJR 7.
This is, uh, this is a really
important one, maybe the more
important too, frankly, um, this
is a
Constitutional amendment
That would create nominating
commissions if passed by the
voters, would, we would then be
tasked to pass legislation to
establish a nominating
commission, nonpartisan, no more
than 50% from one political
party.
To basically that and interview
candidates and recommend the
best ones.
To a governor for appointment.
So, the governor would still get
to make an appointment, doesn't
take away the governor's power.
Senate still gets to confirm
these appointments. What it does
do though is set up a
professional interview process.
Of non
I won't say non-biased, but a
nonpartisan group of people
including hopefully education
professionals, people.
Like this gentleman who actually
understand.
You know that
Um, so that we can actually try
to get the best pool of people.
Right now, quite frankly, it's
been a patronage-based system, I
hate to say that, uh, not, not
totally, and sometimes people
who are supporters of governors
are excellent candidates. We
have one of them sitting in my
right, uh, I mean, uh Doctor
Devili
and and, you know, I don't know,
you know, but the point is, is
that.
Sometimes we don't, and I've
served now with 3 governors
previous 2 is unbelievable. They
had no education experience.
And it just really does a
disservice to maximizing the
performance of our schools for
our kids. We're making them
relevant so that we can move
forward as a state.
These are very important jobs,
and I can't think of any job in
America where we would just hand
out one of the most important
executive jobs to a buddy.
And say, go for it because this
is a plum, you know, you deserve
this. No, you, you're gonna cast
a national net even, you know,
depending upon the job. So
that's all this does, it creates
an interview, and I think it
really helps the governor
because Governor staffs, as we
know, they've got one young
staffer who deals with boards
and commissions trying to pick
these people, they're busy doing
a million things. This actually
creates a really thoughtful
process where you get a cast a
very wide net if the governor
has some excellent people that
they think should go through
this process, Great. Doesn't.
Prohibit that just says, if the
cream doesn't rise to the top,
where a group of people doesn't
even think they're in the top 3.
It probably means there's other
people who really have something
to bring to the table that
excites.
Something to bring to the table.
That's what we need and that's
what we deserve as a state, and
so this is our opportunity that
I will, I will say one final
thing, Madam Chair, there was a
study done.
Number of years ago, looking at
Regent systems across the
country.
And they found that the schools
with the highest performance
based upon student achievement
of various metrics.
found that the top performing
ones had
Qualifications and vetting
processes for their trustees or
regents, the lowest performing
ones had none.
Um, and so it just kind of makes
sense, you know, you get the
best people you can, and then
they make good decisions.
That's the way it works.
Uh, so with that, Madam Chair,
I, you know, look forward to
answering, answering your
question.
Thank you, Senator. So once
again, we did not have anyone
sign up in support or
opposition, uh, of this bill,
uh, you your here and support. I
do see that we have some regions
sitting, uh, in the audience
though. So if you would like to.
Provide any, any comment on
this, you are welcome to. I
will.
I want to give you that
consideration.
Yeah
Madam chair
Adam,
Madam chair
of the committee. Thank you for
allowing me this opportunity. I
am not, um,
Sure how I feel about this bill
because there are many
unanswered questions for me, who
will be on this nominating
committee. What are their
qualifications to actually be
the ones who are picking these
candidates, and what is the
potential for um misuse of power
by this by this committee, uh,
when it comes to uh picking the
potential candidates. So I just
have a lot of questions. I'm
not.
Convinced that, um, we are at a
place where.
We can actually, um.
Move this forward.
I would like some more. Thank
you, Madam. Thank you.
All right. We will go to members
of the committee. First person I
have down is Senator Townsend,
uh, who else would like to be on
the list?
Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Um
There seems to be a
I, I'm not a, I'm not.
In opposition to the thought
process.
I, I have seen now 2 bills.
I don't know if I've just become
more aware of it or it's a new
trend.
But there's, there's a trend,
um, for language that says,
And, and you spoke of it, it's
on the top of page 2.
Um, where we're talking about
political
Of parties.
And, and it qualifies that at
the time of appointment.
Meaning that a person with one
affiliation.
Could immediately change.
And still remain in tip the
whole
Process.
And so
I can't
I want to support the effort,
but are
I think if you're qualifying a
person because of their
Political affiliation or
credentials or whatever, and
then that changes. They have
misrepresented what they were at
the time of appointment and has
skewed the.
process.
So
Would you
Is it possible that we could
qualify that political
affiliation and say when it
changes, they have changed their
E
That and so they're no longer
qualified.
and I
think you're talking about,
right? I am. So you sometimes
with these things,
he's actually, he is talking
about
Uh,
Uh, the border regions existing
language.
applies to regions not no
commissions if we're at the top
of page 2.
Well,
you're referring to,
but what I was talking about was
um
On a
Section 1 A.
Find one on page 2, and it is
existing language.
We're talking about a process
and I'll take the opportunity to
address it. I, I do think you
granted it is existing. OK,
thank you, thank you, yeah.
The new language talks about
partisanship of the. Yeah, I
wouldn't be open to to tweaking
that requires someone had been
registered that party for at
least 6 months prior to their
appointment or something like
that, just as an idea. We've
done that in the past with
certain other types of
appointments to avoid that
switcheroo situation.
Then I'd be totally open to that
because I don't support.
and that's that's
we've seen that.
Um
Instead of
Trying to do that right now. Are
you committed to doing it,
yeah, I'm sure we could work
together out with this committee
and then um.
With that language, not only for
that for the appointment. Now
we'll say for the appointments
of the nominating commission is
the constitutional amendment so
that would we would defined in
the statute if the voters
approve it, we would then come
up with a law of how they're to
be constituted for each school.
Um, and then you could have
those kinds of requirements.
Madam Chair, thank you, sir.
All right, Senator Brown.
Thank you, Madam chair. Senator
Steinborn, can you clarify very
quickly page one, line 21 to 22.
There's an exclusion for the un
of New Mexico. But then when I
come back to page 3, it's added
in. Can you
quickly summarize why there's
some sort of inclusion and it's
not just broad language that
includes all of them.
Sheriff Senator Brantley, um,
you and it's kind of an
interesting deal. It's the only
school with 7 member boards.
And so that's what they say,
that they're all I member
boards, with the exception of
the University of New Mexico,
that's a seven-member border
region, which is another thing
we can talk about benefit by
being a little larger.
That's, that's why it says
they're, they're all managed by
a border region for many reasons
I like this bill because it
gives those of us in the
minority party, more of a voice
to have influence on this, but
But there's also some negatives.
One is, as you know, the devil's
always in the details and so
it's the selection of that
nominating committee and, and
how we would make sure that we
had oversight and fair
representation on that
nominating committee, um, and
then I also think that we need
to just talk about how this
removes the level of
accountability. I would say this
is probably, I don't wanna see a
knee jerk reaction because we've
seen this proposal before, but a
lot of these um bills that are
addressing regions is.
Let's address the elephant in
the room is in response to
what's happening in Western. The
accountability falls directly on
the governor who made those
appointments.
And so that my only concern
about creating layers of new
nominating committees and who
did this that the general public
doesn't know is there's no one
to hold accountable.
Right now we have, we have, we
have, you know, the bus stops,
the governor's office. She,
she's the one who put those
ports in, so I don't like that
it kind of removes
accountability from people who
just want answers, um, but the
other, on the other hand, I do
like that we have a voice on
here. So I'll listen to the rest
of the discussion, but I
appreciate you bringing it
forward.
the governor still gets to make
the pick.
The governor still is
accountable. The governor makes
that selection.
what I like.
As much as accountability won't
say more than accountability is
I like.
That we know we're creating a
process that we're gonna get the
best people we can find serving
these schools, not that there's
someone to blame when they make
their brain decisions.
Um, from unqualified people.
So
We get both, I think with this.
So it matters to Senator
Steinbar, it really would work
very similar to the appointment
of a legislator in a vacancy,
correct?
The kind of same concept, you
get to choose from the list but
not, you can't go off the list.
that arm.
Madam Chair, Senator, I
appreciate the intent of the
bill. My only concern is if you
look at northern New Mexico
College in Espanola are makeup
of students is a lot different
than New Mexico State
University, where rural serving
the dynamics of our students are
a lot different than those in
larger universities, that my
concern would be that when the
nominating committee is looking
at regions that they set a
standard of those for larger
schools than taking into account
the student populations of the
communities we serve. And
So for example, northern New
Mexico College has a great
nursing program, but we also are
working on building our trades
programs. So we would need to
ensure that the nominating
committee would look at every
university as a one size fits
all for regions, but that the
committee looks at our diverse
populations looks at the student
population we're serving, and
take that into account when
we're looking at putting our
regions in place, that would be
my only concern and comment and
check.
beauty in that
is that we can do that, because
this would require us to set up
a nominating commission by law.
And the composition we would
decide as legislators for each
school. So for your school we
could have um ethnic um
representation, we could have a
member of a local community, be
required to serve on there, a
member of academia, so that we
really get to kind of tailor
them.
Not just academia, but to the
university.
And the needs of the community.
Thank you for that and thank you
ma'am. Sure, no further
questions or comments.
Thank you, Senator Block.
I, I, I wanna, uh, thank you,
Senator Steinborn for um
What you just, uh, you desire to
to fix this with Senator
Thompson, uh, cause that was a
big concern of mine, so I, I
appreciate you doing that. I, I
think that's correct.
I also agree with, I think, one
of our regions back there with
with her comments as well.
Uh, just a couple quick
questions that are, are just
detailed questions, yeah, pretty
simple stuff.
Um
I, I have some issues with this.
With the nominating committee,
how how many people is that
gonna be?
And who nominates those people?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, good
question, we get to decide how
big they are.
So we get to decide
Typically, the way these kinds
of things work and I'm sorry,
who's we?
Legislature. OK, so if this is
passed constitutional amendment,
if we, if the voters pass it.
Then we will actually have to
create a law that determines the
composition of these committees,
we will determine the size.
will determine are there, you
know, who are the members, you
know, there must be a teacher,
you know, one member of the
local community, you know, 3
people with academia, we gotta
come up with the mix of what we
want for each school if we want
separate, doesn't have to be one
size fits all, but as far as who
makes the appointments,
typically the way this works is
you spread them around amongst
the majority of minority party
in the legislature. So for
example, the governor might get
to make some appointments. The
minority leader might make some
appointments, the majority
leader. So
And I would even commit that to
you. That's very standard here
and that's, given that this is a
multi-partisan nonpartisan kind
of a deal.
The minority party, whoever that
might be, would get a make.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So you just said
something that, um, it's very
interesting because it says for
each institution. So you're not
talking about a, say, a 13
member statewide committee that
is spread out from Espanola down
to Las Cruces over to.
Clovis, or Portalis or anything
like that you're talking about
nominating committee from every
single institution.
Would that include branch
campuses, so Rio Rancho has a
branch campus at Highlands,
where they fall under the
Highlands umbrella.
No ma'am Chair, Senator, no,
this would just be the school's
enumerated in section 12 of the
Constitution, so it's not the
branches, but it would be UNM
and MSU. There's actually 10 in
total, 7, and then there's 3
what we call special schools and
uh and MMI.
School for the Deaf school for
the blind.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, and on page 2 here,
Starting on line 13, it says the
terms of non-student members
shall be for staggered terms of
6 years, and the terms of
student members shall be 2
years, and I'm OK with that. But
when this
When this is passed.
Are we, do you envision uh these
people getting
Well, I guess
Right now it's a whole new whole
new committee, so we'll just get
them on. So when we get them on
6 years.
It's gonna be staggered terms,
so when you have a
Say, uh, New Mexico State.
All right, so say we have 5
people there, you appoint them,
they're all on 6 year terms, but
they have to be staggered. How,
how, how do you see us working
that out to comply with this.
Um, good question, Madam Chair.
So you know the the these
nominating commissions and maybe
even the chair herself, I mean,
we do this for judges.
And these people are kind of on
call. It's not a professional,
you know, they're, they're kind
of caught in the service when
they're needed, when they're
needed type of a deal, but I
would think that our law
We could create 4-year terms,
right, for people who appointed
a nominating commissions and so
it would be who would be
appointed to that commission at
that time that a decision had to
be made or a recommendation had
to be made would be called into
service to then have a couple
days of interviews, that's
typically how it works, and then
they send their recommendations
up.
Thank you. Thank you, they would
not, you know, they would not
overlap perfectly with the terms
of these regions, right? So one
region from another may have a
slightly different nominating
commission just because of the
terms of the 2 last questions
and, uh, in, in one is related
to what the chair told me on
another issue that she had in
her bill with the date, but this
one doesn't, I guess I'll get to
it now. You know, when we had, I
can't remember what bill it was,
Madam Chair, when you put the
date in there on the general
election, I think it was um,
hey, legislative pay for 2028.
Um
You had that date in there, but
this amendment proposed by this
resolution.
They'll be submitted to the
people for their approval or
rejection at the next general
election.
Or any special election prior to
that date.
Do you know when that's gonna be
on the ballot. I'm gonna turn to
the chair on this one. This has
found a friend because, because
normally this would mean the
next general election, but then
we passed the local consolidated
Election Act, and they call it
regular election and so.
I think that would still be
November of the general, but
Madam Chair, would that be this
November?
So,
uh, senators, um,
We have often, so that that
language that is, is in section
2 of this bill. This, this is
the language that's in our
Constitution, it's just taking
that direct language. We have
often as a state treated that to
mean the next general election
after the session in which we
have passed this, but that's not
what it actually says in our
Constitution. It says the next
general election after the
legislature adjourns, where it
has been passed, a legislature
is 2 years long.
So we are in the fifty-seventh
legislature right now that will
adjourn in uh January of 2027.
The next, now that year in, in
2027, there is a regular local
election, but that is not a
general election. The next
general election is 2028.
I I think there's a lot of
confusion around this because
frankly, we, we haven't strictly
followed the language of our
constitution, I think oftentimes
when we have done.
I don't know that we have, we,
we have always treated it as, as
the adjournment of the session
when we passed it.
But that's not what our
constitution actually says. So I
think that with, with this eye,
so that's why I put the specific
year.
On mine, but I, I think this
would be in an interpreted by
the Secretary of State's office
as to when it would go on the
ballot. I don't know if their
interpretation is the same as
mine. It may not be based on
when things have been put on the
ballot previously Madam, I, I
like your detailed focus better
than Senator Steinborn's, um,
we'll see who's right.
Uh, last, uh, lastly, real quick
in section F on page.
For, um,
You know,
I just want to understand the
timeline here, get, get your
idea of the timeline. So this
goes through this committee and
other committee goes to the
house, uh, goes to the the
floors of each house and get
signed.
It doesn't.
I'm, I'm sorry, it goes to, go
ahead, uh, sorry, Madam Chair,
Senator,
are interesting, they don't go,
they, they don't get signed by
the governor. Senator, is your
microphone on? We got a note,
OK, we're getting a note that
folks are having trouble hearing
us online. You're right, it goes
on the ballot in 20 Governor
doesn't sign it. OK.
That should probably work.
So before it goes on the ballot,
or is it after it's say
theoretically is passed by the
the citizens, then we start kind
of filling in the gaps of the
policy and start putting this
thing together. Exactly, Madam
chair, it would be premature for
us to do it before the voters
approved it, so it would be the
session after the voters
approved it, we would all work
together on a cool bill. Yeah,
OK. Thank you, sir. Appreciate
it. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, I have a senator
Gallegos, and then I believe
Senator Townsend and Brantly
both want to go for a 2nd time.
Is that correct?
OK,
Senator, uh, just really quick
question. So, um,
Going back to Western.
With a full
Or being replaced with the
nominating committee, if that
were to happen, they would be in
place if, if they had been in
place, they would right now be
taking requests and, and, um,
going through the process. So
what this would do is have it in
place, well, if we ever have
another problem, but they're
called in at the time of a uh uh
someone stepping down for
whatever reason and they
addressed it right then. Is that
what I understand,
I chaired.
That is correct.
And I will say that now is a
good time to do this because you
are gonna have a new governor.
We will have a whole host of new
regions.
And we really need this in place
with this, you know, a new
administration, whoever that is
to help.
You know, takes cause, cause
then they're there, you know,
once they're there, so.
be there to help.
Do their thing.
I'm sure, thank you. And just
one last question. Uh, this was
run in 24 and past.
Uh, to the Senate or in this
committee. Do you know what
happened to it last time?
center
You know, this is Bill has had
an interesting history. Ma'am it
is passed the Senate before it
has passed the house before,
just not in the same session.
Uh, it has passed this
committee. It has not passed
this committee, um, I think, uh,
I won't, I won't give any of the
reasons why. There's a lot of
them insider influence, frankly,
that people that don't like that
privilege and, and but.
But it just wasn't heard in the
Senate Judiciary Committee last
session, they did pass this,
that's true.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Sara, I guess I, I would have
thought the inside influence
would be in the audience today,
and so put that on, thank you.
Senator Brantly R. Townsend, I'm
not sure. Madam Chair, this
question is directly for you.
Could you address a page one.
Line 21, the word each rather
than all, and then also on page
4, line 10, the word used is
each instead of all. Does that
mean that each individual
institution will have their own
nominating board.
Uh
Senator, I believe that is the,
that is the intention of this
bill.
Yeah.
All right.
See no one else on the list. Um,
I, so we're just Senator Block
was asking about enabling
legislation and, and you were
saying that generally we don't
do that until the sun has been
passed by the voters. Um, given
that
Depending on the interpretation,
there could be a long wind up to
when it goes on the ballot, um,
I just wanna know, that's
something we could do while
we're waiting for it to go on
the ballot with a contingency
saying this only goes into
effect if the voters pass the
amendment. Uh, but, um, and
then, and I, that's, that's,
that is the intention with the
one that we heard the other day
on paid legislature so that the
voters would have a real flushed
out idea of how it would work.
That's something, that is our
prerogative to you.
Do that or wait until it passes
with the voters and do it then.
Um, I don't think one is
necessarily better than the
other, um, but we would not be
restricted from looking at that
enabling legislation ahead of
time if we wanted to. I have a
question for you, Senator. So
this only applies to the
non-student members. So the
governor would still pick the
student regents without, uh,
without having been restricted
to the list submitted by these
commissions. Why is that?
Because, uh, Madam Chair, it's
an interesting thing laid out in
here for the student region that
the student region is still
picked by the governor, OK,
they're all, they're all, but
they're the student region is as
recommended by the student body
picked by the president,
recommended by the university
president. So it's interesting,
when I first started working on
this issue, I put the university
region in the same category with
everyone else, and I actually
heard from a student body
saying, you're taking our voice
out of that student regent
position. So that's
why I stopped doing that. Now,
having said that, we've seen
Interesting things happen with
that student region on time and
it'd be turned into a partisan
pick too.
So, but the student voice part
of it is important and that's
part of this, so I that's.
Why we don't deal with that.
OK. Thank you, Senator. Um,
yeah, I, you know.
I was making some notes when
when you were talking and I
think anytime.
We are adding qualifications and
vetting to important positions
in our state. That is, that is a
good thing.
Um, and having a thoughtful
process to cast a wide net. Uh,
I, I can only see that our
institutions of higher learning
would be benefited.
Uh, by that, and so.
And what is the will of the
committee on this bill? Motion
for a pass. All right, we're on
a motion for a due pass. Uh, is
there any objection to that
motion?
seeing none, please show all
members present as voting in the
affirmative, and Senator, you
have a due pass. Thank you.
Really appreciate the.
All right, Senator Pope, you're
on SB 90.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
apologize for that.
Madam Chair, committee members.
today, uh, want to talk a little
bit about trust, trust in our
government.
Trust in our leaders, trust in
the policies that shape our
lives.
One of those threats is the
trust of the revolving door
between public service.
In private lobbying.
When legislators move straight
from office in the lobbying. It
raised a serious ethical
concerns.
Are they making laws in the best
interests of the people.
Or in the interest of future
employers.
Without a cooling off period, we
risk decisions that favor
corporations and special
interests.
Instead of hardworking citizens.
A waiting period ensures that
public servants remain
accountable while in office. It
prevents conflicts of interest.
Reduces corruption.
and encourages independent
decision making.
We need policies that serve the
public good, not private gain.
Let's stand for transparency.
Fairness and integrity.
In our democ key provisions of
Senate Bill 90 were introducing
restrictions on lobbying
activities or former state
legislators here in New Mexico.
Former legislators would be
prohibited from becoming paid
lobbyists for 2 years, um, after
leaving office.
Employers of lobbyists are also
prohibited from hiring and
compensating former legislators
as lobbyists during this period.
Lobbyists must file a statement
under oath when registering.
And disclosing whether they have
served as a legislature,
legislator in the past 2 years.
And the Secretary of State is
required to notify lobbyist
employer of the individual has
served as a legislator in the
past 2 years.
The penalties for not complying,
um, would be subject to the
penalties that are defined in
the lobbyist regulation Act.
Um, if this bill were to pass.
Um, this would apply to anyone
serving as a state legislator
after January 1st, 2026.
And the provisions of the bill
would hopefully take effect
January 1st, 2026.
Once again, this bill aims to
prevent conflicts of interest.
An undue influence by ensuring a
cooling off period between
legislative service.
And lobbying activities, thereby
promoting transparency.
And integrity and government
relations. Uh, with that, Madam
Chair, um, that's the end of my
presentation. I'm ready for a
public comment or any questions?
All right, we did not have
anyone sign up and support or
opposition to this bill, so
members of the committee.
And Sonics. Who else would like
to be on the list. Thank you,
um, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this
forward again.
Um, I remember part of the
discussion.
From last time that
Uh
Imposing
Restrictions
legislators who are volunteers.
does not seem wise.
And I know we had this
discussion in the past, so could
you uh reconstitute my memory
about this.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I, I
don't remember that specific
conversation, and that might
have been something that um I
wasn't privy to.
Um
That might be the fillings of
some, um.
And while we're.
Uh, in a volunteer situation.
I believe
The influence and power that we
have to.
Uh, pass laws and make policy in
the state.
Um, while we're not paid.
When we leave in some cases that
power and influence.
And sometimes still feel like
it's there in those
relationships that we have, so
I, I just believe whether or not
we're paid in this position, uh,
we all know we have some power
and responsibility.
So thank you for that, but Madam
Chair, does your bill, and I'm
sorry I didn't.
Uh, examine it closely. Does it,
um,
Distinguish between a paid.
Lobbyists and a volunteer
advocate.
So could Madam Chair, a
legislator.
Uh, retire from the legislature
and then decide that they were
going to become a volunteer
advocate for the
Multiple sclerosclerosis
Society.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I have
not distinguished that in the
bill.
Um
I think that's a great
discussion to have, I think.
For me, it's the.
part of being a paid lobbyist.
Um, is what I really have the
concerns of. I would not want to
to um.
Hamper any individual's.
Voice, um.
Um, if it's unpaid.
And in coming up in here and
advocating.
Uh, for what they believe in.
And so
Um
I don't know if that's something
we can talk about or something
we need to talk about in the
bill, but that part is not my
intent. It's more of being uh
paid.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all for right now.
Thank you,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Would your bill prevent a
lobbyist from deferring
compensation for a period of 2
years and then collecting it
later.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, I don't have that
specific language and and that's
one of the reasons why um I'm
asking for, you know, the oath
to say, have you served in the
last two years.
But also holding the employer
accountable as well, so we kind
of have the checks and balances,
so.
Once again, I, I don't have it
here specifically that they
could get paid after or.
Um, but the intent is, is that.
They are not getting paid during
the two years and
They're not lobbying as a paid
lobbyist in the 2 years, so my,
my hope is that there wouldn't
be any type of shenanigans where
they're lobbying unpaid and
then.
All of a sudden, this big
windfall comes in 2 years later,
but that's something.
We can discuss and maybe we
would need to adjust on this
bill.
Madam Chair Senator, this is
Santa Fe shenanigans happen all
day long, so.
I agree, madam um.
I, I don't know. I, I
Do you to restrict a.
Legislator from being a regent.
For the same period of time. I
mean,
I don't know
I understand what
Your intent, but I'm, I'm having
trouble just trying to
Isolate them from one person.
Specific
Um
Position and not others or why
not others?
Madam chair, Senator Townsend,
I, I think that was part of the
discussion, um, a couple of
years ago on this field.
Um, does it cover state
employees, you know, just
different roles, um.
I think in some cases there may
be concerns there, but this bill
is not really intended to deal
with anyone that works in the
executive branch.
Anyone trying to be a regent,
um.
I think that's a discussion, but
I think that would probably be a
separate bill, but for me in
this bill, it's, it's really
about
Us as legislators.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Block followed by Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Senator Paul, for
putting this together.
You know what this reminds me of
with our background.
What do you think it reminds us,
you and I of.
Think about it, but we're always
doing those, you know, type of
ethical forms, especially with
me and always had to worry about
even.
having lunch with the contractor
and paying for it ourselves and
things like that, just just to
not look like there's any
impropriety, and that's really
kind of the basis from that. I'm
not.
Trying to turn the legislature
into the Air Force or the DOD,
but I just think
You know, we just have to follow
a standard where
It doesn't look like
Anyone is
Doing any undue influence. Uh,
yes, sir. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, I would take it a
step beyond that.
Because, you know, if you're a
uh.
You're in uniform, like you and
I were, uh, especially as a 63
acquisition officer on a source
selection that you have to.
Uh, you can't, you can't do
certain things when you retire
or separate or whatever, and
then, and when I, when I read
this bill and I saw your name on
it, and I was thinking this guy
was thinking about a little bit
about the Air Force here on this
because you see general
officers.
Um, really, quite frankly, a
Senator Pope.
Do some things that I didn't
agree with.
Um
And the acquisition process and
then they retire and go get a
job at Northrop Grumman, Boeing,
Lockheed, or whatever. So I
really appreciate what, what
you're trying to do here. Um, I
I also want to ask um in page 3
on line 5, it says,
Whether the lobbyist has served
in the state legislature,
legislator in the past two
years, do you, do you know, did
you happen to look at any other
states that might ban
legislators from being
lobbyists.
Madam Chair Center block, um, I
saw that there are some states
that have it and from my
research and what I understand
is I believe Congress has a
two-year waiting period as well,
so that's kind of what I
modeled. I knew that they could
do that, and I thought that was
a good time when I that it's
happening in Congress that way,
we should be able to follow
that.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair, but
do, do you know if if you could
just guess how many other states
might be doing something what
you're trying to do here, um,
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I don't
have that number. I wouldn't
want to give you.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair, one of
the
Cool, software questions I got
for you is page 3.
Uh, your underline there in line
20 to 23.
Um, how, how do you envision?
Uh, this getting flagged.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, much
like what we do now, right in
the systems how we have to do
our online disclosures, right,
every year. We just got doing,
you know, finishing out those
forms.
Last year, so this would be
something that would uh be
flagged by the Secretary of
State.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So the Secretary of
State's office.
Um, your thought processes once
they see this particular issue
that they're going to contact.
The appropriate lobbyists and
saying, hey, uh, former
Rep for Smith, a former
representative Jane Doe or John
Doe cannot not be a lobbyist.
Madam Chair Senator, um,
Essentially, yes, and to notify
them and so.
I know in some ways that might
seem controversial that we're
having the Secretary of State do
that to an employer, but I, I
just believe it's kind of a
check and balance so that.
Say it did get through and a
person signed and said, yeah,
I'm good to go. That employer
might not know, and then it's
like too late by the time it
gives that employer an
opportunity to say, hey.
This isn't right. This isn't
legal, so I can't hire this
person.
Uh, thank you, and, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. Lastly, uh,
Senator Pope, where do you,
where do you see the gaps in
this, um, I think.
Center Stephonics brought up a
couple and uh Senator Townsend
as well.
Um, where did you see the gaps
in this and how come those gaps
weren't um.
Reduced or eliminated.
Madam Chair Senator, I, I think,
um, the question that Senators
Stephanic brought up, I think is
a a relevant one, but I think.
Um, I was focused on folks who
are paid lobbyists and so folks
who are volunteering or up here
advocating.
Um, wouldn't fall into that, but
I think there might be some
things that we maybe need to
tighten up so that there isn't
confusion there.
Because I think that's a
relevant question if we're
talking about paid lobbyists and
the assumption is it's being any
type of lobbyists or or
advocate.
Um
I wouldn't want to scare folks
from.
You know, using their voice.
Um, here in the in the
roundhouse. I, I agree, thank
you, um, Senator Pope, and uh
thank you Madam. I agree with
you 100%. I, I think it does
need to be tightened up a little
bit and um
More than willing to
You know, uh, jump on this, uh,
with you to, to tighten it up
because I, I can see people
going around this where you get
out of office a year later,
they're working for firm X.
But they're going to 1099 to
them or something like that,
they're gonna try anything that
they can to come in here and
say, well, I'm not, I'm not a,
not a paid lobbyist, I'm just
going around talking.
That that's the part that
worries me, and I think I see
the head nod 126 with you as
well. So, um, Senator Pope,
thank you for doing this. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator Brantley.
Madam Chair, I would move to
table.
Right, that is a non-debatable
motion. So let's have a roll
call vote.
On the motion to table.
Senator Bergman's path.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallego, Senator Lopez,
Senator Lopez is excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Send Jara meal? No.
Senator, uh, Senator Bergman's?
No.
Senator Doig. No, so that.
motion dies on a tie vote, you
still have the floor.
OK.
Senator Bergmans.
I don't have anything
additional.
All right. So no one else on the
list, Senator, I'm gonna have
the same conversation with you
that we've had multiple times
before. This bill never gets
heard in judiciary, and there's
a reason for it. So I'm going to
offer you the amendments that
will get this bill to actually
become hopefully become law and
move past this committee.
Um
Also, uh, a lesson for all our
freshmen of read your bills
before you're up in committee
because you do address
compensation in here on page 2,
you, you do say that this
applies to paid lobbyists. This
does not apply to apply to
unpaid advocates, but that, that
issue is resolved, but there are
some other issues with this.
Um,
So first of all, looking on page
2, and I, and there's an
amendment. Let's go ahead and
pass up the amendment.
I'm gonna talk through the
issues first and then we will,
and then I'll go ahead and move
the amendment.
So on page 2, that subsection B,
starting at line 6.
That says
That is going beyond regulating
lobbyists.
Um, and is now seeking to to
regulate their employers in a
way that is not done so
currently under lobbyist
regulation Act. There are some
um obligations placed on
lobbyist employers in the
lobbyist regulation Act, but
this would be a, a vast
expansion of the Secretary of
State uh authority over
lobbyists, employers, uh, that
is, that is not appropriate. We
are, we want to regulate
lobbyists, not their employers.
Um
So also it would be essentially
unenforceable because senator,
as you said, it would be the
penalties under the lobbyist
regulation Act that would apply
to any violation.
And those penalties.
R
Ah, that the lobbyists, in
addition to a fine, lobbyist has
his registration revoked and
lobbying, lobbying activities
are enjoined for up to 3 years.
Um,
That's not, that's not punishing
the employer. Uh, it's just
lobbyists in line with the point
of the lobbyist regulation Act,
which is to regulate lobbyists.
Um, so part of my, my amendment
is going to be to strike.
that be?
Um
So then we have this language on
page 3. The center block was
asking about, which is saying
that for a lobbyist who was
indicated in the registration
statement that they've served as
a state legislator in the last
few years, the Secretary of
State shall notify the lobbyists
employers.
Um
So that is, is that not in my
I don't see that in.
Oh wait, oh wait. Yes, it is.
OK.
So, so how this is set up right
now?
is when you're doing your your
lobbyist registration statement,
there would be a box or
something where you would
indicate that you've served as a
state legislator in the last 2
years. That's that added
language up higher on 3.
But then this invites that
person to violate the law by
allowing them.
2, go ahead and file that.
Um, now that is in direct
contravention to the Secretary
of State's statutory duty to
seek a um voluntary compliance.
First
And so
So that part needs to be fixed.
Um, it needs to be that they, if
they click that button, their
filing should be rejected. It
should not be accepted, they
should not be invited to violate
the law, um, by doing so, it
should be a rejected filing, and
they should be they then the
filer should be notified of the
rejection.
But also, we then are having the
Secretary of State tattle.
On the lobbyist to their
employer.
Now, this our lobbyist
regulation Act only deals with
lobbyists who are lobbying us up
here, the legislature.
It doesn't apply to people who
are lobbying and all the other
areas of our state at the local
level.
Before, um, various boards and
commissions that it only applies
up here and a lot of lobbyists
don't.
Their job isn't just to lobby up
here.
They are employed year-round,
and they lobby in lots of other
ways. So what's gonna happen?
When the employer gets that
call, that
Katie Dohe has violated the law,
you should know your employee
has just violated the law by
doing this, because it's against
the law for them to to lobby up
here.
Um
That person is gonna get fired
from their job, from, from the
ab lawful lobbying, and they
would be allowed to do anywhere
else.
Um, so I, I don't think that's
appropriate. It's, it's also, it
is not the Secretary of State's
job to manage relationships
between lobbyists and their
employers. So,
The amendment, I will move the
amendment that you all have
before you and and uh 550.1.
What this does is it strikes
that language on page 2, that
be.
That's seeking to let to
regulate employers.
Rather than lobbyists.
And on page 3, it takes out the,
the language about tattling to,
uh, the Secretary of State and
replaces it with a a requirement
that she instead rejects the
filing and notify the fier of
the rejected rejection, so we're
not inviting people.
To, to violate the law.
Any debate on that amendment.
Right, see none. Any objection
to adopting. Oh, I'm sorry,
Senator, is this a friendly
amendment or unfriendly? Uh, it
is unfriendly amendment, Madam
Chair. Um,
And just wanna
Comment on a few things if
that's OK.
So, this bill was first brought
in 23.
Um, it wasn't heard in judiciary
because of the amendment that
was put on from Senator Morris.
So I just want to clear that up.
That's, there were a couple of
reasons it wasn't heard in
judiciary as a, as the vice
chair of judiciary Judiciary at
that time, I can tell you that
was not the only reason. That
was, that was one big reason,
there was a poison pill that,
that was, you had said it was a
friendly amendment in here, but
that wasn't the only reason.
Go ahead. Well, Madam Chair, um,
once again, this is the 2nd time
I brought the bill.
It hasn't been brought here many
times.
And um
To comment on page 2 about
Compensation. I just want to
understand what I didn't know
about my bill.
That you mentioned
Senator, you were asked if this
applies only if you are a paid
lobbyist or not, and you said
that wasn't addressed in the
bill.
I, I think you did address it.
In the bill. At the top of page
2, when you say a former state
legislator shall not accept
compensation as a lobbyist for a
period of 2 years. Well, Madam
Chair, I would like to correct
that when I said I didn't
address it in the bill. I was
saying I didn't address the fact
that.
Or unpaid lobbyists.
Senator, this does not address
unpaid lobbyists. Your bill only
addresses paid lobbyists that
was my comment.
The question was about advocates
and people who are unpaid, and
as this bill address that?
And that's what Senator, I, I
misunderstood.
Thank you. I just wanted to
clear that up.
Um, Madam Chair, um, we had this
amendment last time.
Um, and once again, it'll be the
will of the committee.
But I
Just look at
Have you more checks and
balances. I'm not about.
Creating more work for the
Secretary of State.
But just as a conversation we
just had.
And just my background in the
military, having
More transparency and people
following up on this.
I think the more the better.
Now, if
Legally, we cannot do this.
I totally understand.
But this would be the path that
I would want to go, but once
again this is an unfriendly
amendment. It's an unfriendly
amendment. Senator Stefanis. Oh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Do we
have anybody from the Secretary
of State here today.
We do, we have, uh, so my
question, Madam Chair and
Senator Pope is um
Oh
Have you
Reviewed this bill, and do you
have a position about
Notifying the employer.
Because that seems to be the
issue of the amendment.
Senator, that's part of the
amendment.
It's hard, but
I'm asking your physician on, do
you have a position on that?
Sure, um, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Lindsay
Batman, director of.
of affairs for the Secretary of
State's office. It's good to see
you all again.
The way that the current system
functions is that there's a
technical relationship in the
way someone files as an employer
or creates an account as an
employer and someone who files
as a lobbyist. So there's an
automatic sort of connection
that goes on and we're
automatically notified if
there's violation of current law
in the way that they are filing
and interacting with each other
within the system.
Um, as to a position, what, what
I will share is there is a cost
associated with, with the, with
an enhancement to that system
that would make, um, sort of
that registration piece um
workable within the current
system environment, but it would
work pretty much the same.
Does that help answer your
question?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. And
so the cost that's noted in the
FIR is $30,000.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
yes, because it would just be an
amendment to an existing
process, it would cost more and
you'll see in other FIRs from
our office, um, if there's a
creation of a new module, a new
report, etc. That's more, um,
costly than just making an
amendment to an existing. And
so, um, in that, uh, on page 2
or 3, I don't remember at this
moment, um, but the amendment to
the registration process is an
amendment to an existing.
techno.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I, I
think I'm hearing that the
Secretary of State doesn't have
a position about the employers
versus
Lobbyists. So thank you very
much.
Debate on the amendment, Senator
Block. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Pope, I'm trying to help
you out here. Um,
The chair had these 5 amendments
and when I was reading through
the bill because I did read the
bill, I have all these notes
here, I just.
Read something differently in my
interpretation, different from
the chair like any two lawyers
would have differences of
opinion on both sides of the of
the issue, um, what specifically
Of those 5 amendments, do you
find friendly and or are there
any of them that you find
friendly?
And Senator, do you have a copy
of the amendment?
OK.
Madam Cheru to see which would
be friendly.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, Senator,
I, I didn't, I didn't hear that.
Um, uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, I'm just reviewing it
real quick.
My apologies. Thanks.
3122.
Madam
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
Senator Block, um,
I don't find any of these
friendly right now.
But once again, it's the will of
the committee.
Thank you, Senator Pope. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Is there additional debate on
the amendment.
Seeing none, we have motion to
adopt. I've made a motion to
adopt the amendment. Is there
opposition to that motion.
Show Senator Block as opposing,
and that amendment is adopted.
We are back on the bill as
amended.
What is the will of the
committee?
Motion for a DuPath.
As a.
All right. Do we have any
opposition and actually on this
one, let's go ahead and do a
roll call.
Senator Bergman's.
Pa.
Senator Block.
No
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil. Yes.
Senator B Bergman's, yes.
Senator Doig.
Yes, on a tie vote that you your
bill fails 4.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members. We, uh,
have. Yes, this is a query. uh,
when there is a tie vote on
this, uh, would it not just lay
on the table?
Uh, madam, uh, I'm sorry,
Senator, um, so no, so it's it,
it was not a table in motion.
Now, if, if someone
There's always a question, you
can do a motion for
reconsideration and someone
voting in the majority can make
that much when there is no
majority, I think that it is
reasonable to let either side
make that motion if they wish to
do so.
Uh, so if someone wanted to move
for reconsideration of that
vote, um, and our rules say in
the next calendar day.
Now
That's hard to do because
For our I guess our next.
Legislative calendar day would
be Monday, uh,
But, um, so yeah, so if, if
either side I think wanted to
move for reconsideration on
Monday of that vote, we could do
so essentially. So, Madam Chair,
you're not saying that we need,
needed to have a tabling motion
to do that, we could still.
Moved to reconsider even with
this.
I
Senator, yes, in fact, our
rules, and I think this is
something that we should change.
Our rules say you can't do a
motion for reconsideration on
something that's been tabled. I
think that was very silly. I
think if you put something on
the table, you should be able to
pull it off the table as well.
Um, we dealt with this issue and
and judiciary the other night,
and the motion ended up being to
remove from the table rather
than a motion for
reconsideration. But I think in
this situation, it would be a
motion for reconsideration if,
if a member wished to do that.
Thank you very much.
Senator.
OK.
Right, right.
And so I don't think you're,
your microphone. I'm sorry.
Since there is no there is no
majority. I think the bill is in
limbo and it fails.
And so Senator, this is, this is
something I've looked at before,
um, and I think under Masons
there is an argument to be made
that on a halo
because there is no majority
either side, either.
Either side could
The proffer that motion. Um,
it's not addressed in our rules.
Um, our, our rules do say for a
motion for reconsideration, uh,
but it's someone voting in the
majority, um, but we have, we
have had been somewhat flexible
about that on Thai boats in the
past in the Senate since I've
been here. So.
I don't think it's, it's super
cut and dry. I would be inclined
to to allow it if if either side
were to make a motion on, on a
bill that died on a yo.
And I'm sure you could probably
expect a lively debate on that.
Absolutely. I didn't expect
nothing less. Thank you.
All right, so Senator Stewart is
presenting a bill in
Um
In education, so I will put her
this last bill on for her.
The
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
going to the last order of
business in our agenda, which is
listening to Senate Bill 237,
the MLK Commission activities.
Senator Stewart is tied up in
education, stepping in in her
place as chairwoman.
Duking
Right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, this
is just an appropriation to the
uh Martin Luther King Junior
commission of $250,000.
Um, and, uh, anything that is
not spent will revert to our
general fund. That's all, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for that.
There's no one who signed up and
organized support or opposition,
there's no one left in the
committee room, is there anyone
online who is stating that
they're either in support or
opposition.
Sing none, anyone on the
committee with any questions or
comments.
Senator Block. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, for stepping in for, uh,
Senator Stewart. So real quick,
do we know what the, can I, can
I assume that since this is um a
one time appropriation we've
been doing this previous years
as well in accordance with the,
the legislature approving
general fund allocations for
commissions.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, I am
sure we have,
um, I'll I'll take your word for
it. That's fine. Um, I, do we
know what what the money was
spent on previously, is it
contracted out or is it all just
organic, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair,
is it, um, uh, Senator Duha is
it
Contracted out, do we know, or
is it just organically spent uh
doing advertisements or um other
type of media that the the state
puts out.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
The, the real, my real answer is
I don't know, but seeing no kind
of qualifying language in this
appropriation that would narrow
its use for a specific purpose,
I would think that the
commission would use those funds
as they deemed appropriate.
Uh,
thank you, Madam Char. uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair. The only
Thing I had in here.
Was
It's said in the analysis,
granted the analysis is, isn't
in the bill, but it talked about
this only being for 32.
30s, you know, this should be
used across 32 counties, there's
33 counties obviously in New
Mexico.
Um, I just want to make sure no
one is left out, uh, from what
the analysis is talking about
there.
That was my only concern,
reading through the bill, uh, in
the analysis, as I always do, so
I don't know if that's an issue
or not, Madam Chair, but I just
picked up that little tidbit of,
uh,
Information. Mr. Chair, Senator,
I suspect that was a typo.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, and looking on the
website, um, Madam Chair, it
talks about advocacy and policy,
educational advancement,
economic empowerment, health
care, community development,
social justice, and youth
engagement.
Any other questions or comments?
Seeing none, what's the will of
the committee?
Motion for a due pass anyone in
opposition.
Signan let the red coat.
Let's take a roll call book
then. There's been a motion for
a due pass if I can have a roll
call.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos. No, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart is excused or is
excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Yes.
Senator
Block
No.
Senator Doig. Yes.
I believe that's a tied vote
again with two excused, so that
means this is on the table.
And before I adjourn, I'm gonna
hand over the gavel back to you
in case you have any last minute
comments, um, leading into next
week.
When Monday we'll be meeting as
a committee once again.
Thank you members for your, your
work this week, uh, Monday and
Friday of next week, we're gonna
try to get as many regions done
as we can, um, on Wednesday,
we're probably gonna hear some
election bills. Um, so,
oh, on Wednesday we're gonna
hear some election bills. And
so, but Monday and Friday are
all going to be a Regent
confirmations, and you should
be, keep an eye on your email,
uh, our staff will be sending
you all out some little briefing
packets about
the, the institutions that we're
going to be hearing on Monday
for, for those regions.
So, Madam Chair, we're gonna
have a free training on the
Regents as you pointed out
earlier, you know, Senator, my
understanding was that these 4
bills were going to take our,
our whole meeting today based on
our discussion with the the
ranking member. And so we did
not prepare a presentation. I
wish we had because we have half
an hour left again. Um, so we're
gonna
start putting more on on our
agendas if we're we're getting
through stuff, um, but so, but,
but written materials will be
provided to you. Well, Madam
Chair, I appreciate that, but
you called me out on training of
understanding the reading
process, so I just wanted to
clarify that cause I took
offense to that, but my final
question is, um, we're getting a
lot of the, um, secretary
designees coming. Do we have a
schedule on them because they're
waiting confirmation.
so
So first of all, Senator, I
apologize. Uh, I did not intend
to insult you in any way with
that. I just wanted to let you
know that we were getting some,
some in-depth,
some in-depth training on that,
um, but so as I, I announced
when at our organizational
meeting, we're doing all the
cabinet secretaries in the
second half of the session. So
that's what they understood.
They're just trying to.
