The amendment but we're just
trying to get rid of the cafe
that you.
So six min else's in here are
you comfortable with amending.
Sure yeah I I am comfortable you
know with the
with the proposed amendment to
delete of that last sentence for
burger a the from nine sixteen
eighteen that puts a cap on on a
per year.
Okay so there are no objections
to the amendment.
Senator Shendo you'd have an
amended bill
and madam chair I don't know
Senator Shendo would be willing
to accept this as a family
member as well.
But.
Just before that.
Where it says but in the fund is
subject for visualization
provided funding source for
tribal governments to the match
requirement for federal tribal
the prescription drugs.
Projects wholly within New
Mexico.
Would you find that to be a
friendly amendment insert there
except in Senate district for.
so district for yes.
For the members.
This is
about.
Without here with that the
taxes.
The okay.
Already I'm almost up to.
So we don't have a motion for a.
Discussion.
are there any more questions
still had the
so there was further discussion
to that there is another bill.
The thing that to create a board
of our in office of some sort of
a bit structure
and I think the structure of the
board is probably something that
we should be looking at two to
make sure there's tribal
representation instead of
creating
what so there's gonna be some
conflict madam chair what will
talking about madam chair
Senator Shendo I also sit on
Senate finance bars analyzing
and on one of the first two days
is yes the legislative finance
committee endorsement solution
to create a standalone Center
infrastructure office with that
to ten FTEs to develop the
process for vetting the high
impact regional projects and to
make the annual recommendations
for the legislature to the
capital outlay projects eight
eight they did not say anything
at those activities there was
gonna be any assigned to the
Department airs and with the
amount of projects that are
already on the books for the
tribe's that was the point that
I suggested to madam chair she
can talk to Senator.
Should.
Thank you secretary.
Sure they have for three or four
of those entities that are
assigned specifically to tribal
nations tribes implementations
madam chair is this a particular
bill.
it was part of the
Policies versus recommendations
on the first week that we could
they started medians.
Did receive said that look at.
All of my paperwork for the
first week I save everything
that that was there and I please
in my analysis.
To madam chair so that she would
know that there.
My suggestion chair Senators.
To talk to senator meals that.
Appreciate that thank you thank
you in the Senator Shendo.
Because it we know that there's
going to be some kind of
increased spending whether it be
to whoever's in administered
this further B. and IAD of or
And the other was.
You know having to forty eight
created been going this route
how long would it take to to
implement this I mean if we're
already looking at right now our
budget cycle which can be until
next year but if something's
already been vetted
That process will be started to
to tackle it and it thank you
speech to two hundred so it was
saying about forty going through
this for statewide
Plan to tackle all the Madam
chair of a bring it to the
sponsor me I I think we want to
make sure that we are you know
efficient and effective and
deploying this money as soon as
possible because these federal
grants already started to hit
districts and of we provide a
mechanism to to expedite is
certainly I think all before
that so read up to the sponsor
but I think we all agree that
you know within the title there
that there has to be something
to to that the federal tribal
infrastructure grants but tied
to those requests to our
requirements so when I play
cares Act came through
you have to make sure that you
were meeting those requirements
so you would not testing back or
put money would be called back
then left as a whole so.
I know that could with the
nation with some of the question
state put out when they were
putting out the stimulus checks
mmhm that the so that when that
money was available they're not
going to end up not qualified
for a missile that
qualifications I think they're
really making should making sure
that we do we meet the
requirements even with that cat
canyon peak you know those
projects if somebody misses that
money who's gonna be liable for
paying it back and it's probably
going to be us that might be in
the whole of that the Stefanics
misused because we won't be able
to recover it.
Yes yes very sure thank you
thanks for the comments you it
bash the stuff so that looks to
me like we're the capital outlay
discussion yes and the issues
this is our separate from from
that
And madam chair education
That's one of those deals where
we have that capital outlay
discussion of what we need to be
aware what that might be doing.
To your ability to have capital
outlay the action and to provide
for your district coach if you
get shot up in that manner.
That takes away some of your
all.
And push it on to this committee
do a valuation date white
project and to me that's
problematic.
But the madam chair and senator
I think the two things or
disdain and passion this bill
checks it funding for side two
or that is already indications
which there will allow them to
allocate the dollars the station
for that
and hopefully they are located
in impossible I think Carolyn to
do that.
So madam chair those my comments
in relation to to that.
Parts of.
Any other questions from
committee members of Madam chair
of.
We have a the the the person
tribal minister from tells
problems
maybe I'll put on the spot but
when we applied for tribal of
federal grants the only way the
if it's not fund and then it's.
So.
Proposals go ahead and
understanding with the
expectation that there is a
match.
Of that so the federal
application will go in the state
application will go and but the
only way that the state of the
state funds will be expended
appropriated for expended by the
board.
Is that if there is the federal
from the coming madam chair a
like us on duty
This is.
Thank you senator Senator chair
members of the committee please
state your name and charter ran
the chief operating officer
talks but will point about yes
public general counsel here with
are unable governor Gary J.
Lujan
and I do believe that if you're
talking about a separate
committee being developed is
that what you're and what not
I'm just or find for grant
played the process fits in the
match is very quick as we know
and so any sort of movement to
help make this process work
quicker and better thank all
Worried separate committee being
formed for infrastructure that's
involved in this process because
it's gonna take time to train
and educate folks in the country
so it makes sense to keep it
within the two confines within
ninety so that there are you
familiar with working with
trying to I think that would be
the best way for us through but
also the expedience this
capability is also key because
of the funding that's coming
down current and we are having
to we've already identified
which funding sources to go
after a lot of tracks have a new
preparing for that and to have
the capability of matching funds
would be excellent.
That the budget request not the
NEC clarifies it thank you
Okay.
Thank you and I think there were
questions during the interim
about the to process I don't
know if we have anybody here
from of the Indian Affairs
Department about actually going
through that policy process
again to have it further
clarified or shortened in in
that sense to to Expedia some of
the what is happening are these
projects.
But I don't know how far that
would cause come but there were
concerns during the interim with
about the two four and.
If we could create a state
needed to be more efficient.
Of madam chair I I'm I'm trying
to member of the sit the board's
process or is it the projects
being awarded and expending the
money.
Because the course to go out
yeah.
But some projects are stalled or
whatever and and money monies
expended.
A mission
I just remember it was about two
or maybe it was more along the
lines to though
This to the how to the
cooperated with the to for I
don't know Madam chair of I know
that the.
I have my tribal leaders from my
community here before we the end
of this session I would the S.
chair if we're done with the
discussion on this particular
bill that hello our tribal
leaders folks maybe at the in
the audience to introduce
themselves at the whip of
governors and lieutenant any of
these yes so once we get done
with the before we address that
anyone questions by committee
members.
And then be go to the LFC that
yes Senate finance okay
community the cost that will
entertain a motion.
Yes yes.
Yes but to change it what's
amended on Senate bill thirty
three a seconded by Senator Ivy
Soto Julio please call the roll
Senator Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Sir.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator meal yes.
Service of yes thank you session
of yes.
Thank you and so then.
Six
and a beta of zero of opposition
for Senate bill thirty three one
cemented tribal belong.
I know the Senate bill thirty
five five eight.
Matching funds.
Senator what else you have.
Thank and that will go out to
the audience for introduction to
start from the side of the room
for our leadership are here
today for more local public
stations in.
After.
Services Committee.
On the house.
And supported by tribal council.
Forty seven thirty seven years
Daniels are on the cusp of the.
To the fact that.
All of the.
Alright.
He'll be.
Did you see the the the the
please apply now
Everyone.
The usual outside some storm
and
that's been.
Four buildings from two to
three.
Thank you.
Thank you.
You can see the.
The morning of.
Rural what are your major thank
you for us you're looking for.
Also the Senator strives to
so the first order hello.
Discover your.
Thank you.
It was I she's a morning
everybody one eight zero zero on
the second.
Yes thank you for.
Chair committee.
With the use of this is just a
small good morning my name is to
make this possible and I shared.
Thank you for.
Thank you and god bless all the
treasure of all the risks.
Read.
This is.
Got a thank you for joining us
today thank you not only for the
service with their presence here
in Senator Shendo okay committee
members still for the next this
