we're waiting for that unanimous
consent we go to that order
business messages from the house
or on that order of business
message from the house the
reader to read the message.
Bills two and three as amended
by the Senate and request the
Senate to recede from the
amendments respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
that the house has passed Senate
bill two as amended by the
Senate Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five Senate bill
thirty six Senate Judiciary
returns the same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
Journal so the message from the
house has been received.
Senate supplemental counter
number one
and the plants and I is to start
with house built with item
number twelve which is the
down and I'll get you Sanchez.
Mr president as we.
Get those I don't have them all
yet but we'll get you updated
and we'll work our way down and
Mr present give me just one give
me just one minute.
things down so we're gonna skip
over that I'm not sure if anyone
knows number thirteen is the
public project revolving fund
Representative Herrera I don't
you ready to go on that my ex it
Mr president my expert witnesses
are on their way.
Okay so we'll just keep working
our way down the list Senator
Shendo.
read Mr president your finance
committee to whom is been
referred Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one has had it under
one knows chair sending us Mr
president I ask Miss consent the
Senate the re to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and the journal reflect
they were acted upon
bill to thirteen do pass house
bill seven as amended do pass
house bill thirty seven as
amended do pass.
objection.
I see no objections the
committee part of an adopted in
the journal show they're acted
upon individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
your Judiciary Committee to home
is been referred Senate bill one
has had it under consideration
reports that same has been duly
enrolled in engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report have a motion
to adopt the committee for any
objection.
Seeing no objection the Canadian
forces been adopted I'd like to
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom is been
referred Senate floor substitute
for Senate bill thirty nine has
had it under consideration
reports that same has been duly
Pirtle co chair Senator Pirtle.
Move adoption of the committee
report we have a motion to adopt
the committee for any objection.
thirty nine.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go back to that order of
business third reading of
legislation and what we're
revolving fund projects.
Thank you senator Wirth we are
that order business serving
legislation.
We ought to Senator Gonzales.
forty two as amended on final
passage and has taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendments and substitution.
Hearing no objection centers all
with our New Mexico finance
authority for the public project
revolving fund the P. P. E. R.
F. and we'd go through this
every year with the listed it's
I see no debate center Gonzalez
close thank you Mr president
members of.
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the rule has
been called and all present
voted in the affirmative except
those holding the negative by
show of hands.
Thank you senator Byrd Senator
Burgess for your including all
votes unless you choose to vote
no then you can notify us of
until then you'll be voted as
Fuhrman is there on the negative
house bill forty two as amended
with emergency clause has passed
the Senate Center Gonzalez thank
you Mr president thank you
members Senator Wirth thank you
record shows that all actions
placing Senate I've been house
bill six six seven as twice
amended on final passage and has
been taken and that is now
or of this bill is to insure
that we simplified existing tax
credit it removes an unnecessary
fund which was initially thought
as a creative idea but in
innovative work to support New
Mexico business and lastly the
bill reverts money from the
existing frontier back to the
general fund.
This trigger is in the second
with national laboratories to
bring innovations to the market
now Mr president by continuing
this investment in New Mexico
companies will ensure that we
Welcome to the chamber
Representative.
Senator are you ready for debate
yes thank you Mr president
senators we're debating house
Senator out in the of yield to a
couple of quick questions
Senator meal we yield Mister
president I yield so I wasn't on
committees of her this so.
is really start up money to help
programs that were developed at
the labs.
Mr president know what it does
is it provides access to tech
businesses with Sandia national
understand what this one is a so
what are we doing with this bill
the Mr president this will
extend the funds that by five
years and will clean up the
current tax credit.
president you're correct the
noted thank you thank you Mr
president I guess center
anticipate any further debate.
Si no further debate center how
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
There is reverting to your seats
if you wish to vote no please
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative zero the negative
down the list item fifteen house
bill one sixty seven Senator
Shendo Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president sorry I
seven on final passage has been
taken there is no subject to
debate amendment or substitution
during the objection Senator
Shendo to explain the bill Mr
a tribal reservation.
That the.
That the tax gross receipts
sales and compensated a similar
tax levy by the tribe or pueblo
Recorders owner and the
registered New Mexico you would
do the same thing all we're
doing is creating parity with
the our our tribal nations.
Thanks etcetera etcetera
Thank you Mr president.
So if the sponsor would yield
Mister president yes I will here
to the good senator from San
Juan.
rate up there and then drove it
back here and register to hear.
That would be a credit for what
I did in Colorado is that how
this would work we that's the
current that's the current
presidents is to avoid double
taxation.
Okay all right Mr president so
now we're just paying one tax
instead of the potential of
tax that did I get that right Mr
president the yes right thank
you Mr president session I would
like to identify your expert
witness yes Mr president my
welcome center representative to
the chamber.
Any further debate.
Senator Moores agency present
with us Senator Shendo yield.
assume correct me if I'm wrong
Mr president center single this
has to do with the party yes yes
law dealership Mr president it's
Mumbai.
And.
It applies to any auto
dealership not not just MB.
So Mister president senator so
Mr president currently the do
Mr president Senator Shendo ifs
if non bay or any other Pueblo
or tribe starts oh yes law or
any other rival whatever
buys a car uh pay The New Mexico
excise tax.
Senator Shendo.
Mr president
that.
And then you register to New
Mexico you will have to pay
another excise tax on that so
you'll be taxed twice.
Senator Morris.
so non bear any of the tribe's
I'm just picking on them because
they have the tussle there will
currently they can charge an
excise tax.
state of New Mexico of federal
government state of New Mexico
of the tribal government they
have the right to.
their own taxes on their lands.
Mexico ever right to pay tax
also to make sure our roads on
the excise tax and the programs
that we pay for for all the
tax is present where would those
tribes are with a be required to
spend that excise tax on roads
for all New Mexicans or for
anyone anyone including their
state would do it for so we're
not getting that excise tax to
pay for roads all we're asking
for this is the same parity that
we already do for all other
Colorado.
All state you mentioned who have
excise tax spend that money on
roads as part of federal highway
system or any use of our highway
Charges agency presentation
frankly we just raised the
excise tax.
On the state of New Mexico on
all New Mexicans recently making
are working on New Mexico
families.
Now we're not going to commit to
a collected for people who can
go to collect buy a Tesla or
should be paying for all of our
roads is now going to be
diverted and we don't have a
state numbers president Senator
so what will this money be used
can't speak for them may they
have roads that need you know
also to be improved I I assume
you know the government says
like us as a government will
make those right choices about
our family buying a new vehicle.
Session of Mr president four
percent we increased it from
three to four twenty nineteen
this presents a four percent to
taxpayers the summer goes and
buys this theoretical Tesla
from.
Of this dealership and I'm very
four thousand dollars correct.
dollars we won't have roads in
the state of New Mexico Mr
president so if you buy the test
long on bay do you have to drive
it on Monday.
yes long spent four thousand
dollars to non bay and don't
skip given the four thousand
dollars to the state of New
Mexico to pay for New Mexico
highways.
Mr president no
I'm sure I believe Senator
Coleman about his potential in
Arizona so he's not restricted
hope
it's always driving that road on
the New Mexico roads.
So at that time he probably only
spent three percent to buy that
Senator.
Etcetera etcetera.
Of.
So Mister president so.
With senator Tom about his Tesla
and Arizona state you problem
up.
tax but Turner Tolman paid for
that yes law.
Is now helping us to build roads
and highways across the state of
New Mexico including the non
thousand dollar term and just
because I wasn't picking on you
senator Tom and your name was
brought up.
Now he pays four thousand
dollars he goes up to non bay.
Albuquerque everyone else.
Not using the highways and bay.
So who's going to pay for all
the wear and tear his tussles
educate me tell me what's for
exactly right.
Okay Mister Mister president
excise tax.
So the delivery is not on them a
it is at your home are that's a
great point I'm glad you brought
that up but the bill was talking
about the future the future of
blue booming number of companies
saw lots of vehicles.
On the other trucks that are
coming out on some really cool
things so they start selling on
tribal lands.
vehicle company comes out then
there's a number one coming out.
Sets up our shop on any of the
tribal lands.
That excise tax now stays on the
tribal lands correct Mr
president Senator.
Senator Shendo.
That's right.
Mr president we're not gonna
have any road money.
Here pretty soon an excise tax
out with a new model I am
purposely going to put that
dealership on tribal lands.
If that tribe only going to
That hypothetical four thousand
dollars that would have been
spent is not going to New Mexico
excise tax in helping pay for
roads.
Costs the state.
on tribal lands rules were
across the state.
And now we're going to take that
money out but you all just raise
the taxing it was incredible.
raise the excise tax to help pay
for roads.
I argue at the time you're
raising taxes on working
families by thousand dollars and
we should do that you guys
wanted to pass that law.
To areas where we can taxes.
Mr president.
You really got to think about
what we're doing here.
we're just we're picking on non
bay I'm not picking on him but
this is close example because
early their first to market with
the electoral program.
We help pay for roads through
the non by pueblo.
You did that saying we had to
build new roads and now you
create a situation where we're
not gonna be collecting excise
tax that is dangerous.
because our excise taxes down
not only for five percent even
created more advantage.
Incentive for new companies to
tribal lands.
You guys created regressive
taxes on working families in New
Mexico.
You all voted for
overwhelmingly.
Be careful what you do.
We're not gonna have money to
pay for roads and non bay we're
not gonna rebate money to pay
everything is diverted this way.
This is unfair to the working
families in New Mexico that you
raise taxes on Mr president and
the Democrats Authority you did
it.
is bad policy bad public policy
Mr president.
We do have further debate twelve
center DC Pino followed by
senator Neville Senator Ortiz Y.
declaration that is the working
families of the state that are
buying Tesla's and that our
truck paying four thousand
dollars excise tax on their
really isn't that much
difference from what this bill
proposes then Senator Shendo
would Mr president with
sanitation just yield to a
couple of questions on the
background of this etcetera
And and we do this already I I
did a lot more working families
in the state by cigarettes and
They don't pay state tax to the.
But no.
Know the tribe the tribe because
receipts taxes to keep things
balanced but they get to keep
those revenues and use them for
for the for their operation of
their of their government.
of sovereignty to the tax on
automobiles so far we don't have
any automobiles sold on tribal
land but if we do.
This will be the same principle
Thank you Mr president Mr
president with the sponsor yield
finish entity ill yes sprint are
you this presents senator I've
certificate you bring back to
New Mexico to go to the DMV and
you get a license plate and you
pay the tax in New Mexico for
that when you register the car
and I don't think that's changed
true Mr president center Senator
Shendo.
Since we first use and delivery.
Mr president it depends the
center I think that we're you
buy the car and you register the
car to be licensed is where you
pay the tax.
I may be wrong they may change
the laws and some of these are
little different but cars are
the the excise tax you pay in
the state where you register the
license plate I believe that's
true is that not true Mr
That's possible I would yield to
I would I would like Senator
Ingle to yield I know he's
bought a vehicle or two in other
states what has been your
experience the senator would
Texas and there's never a case
for you don't pay it in New
Mexico.
Because I bought two cars in
different places in Texas the
gross receipts are vastly
different.
Texas and certain portions of
Dallas the taxes thirteen
percent that's what you pay R.
no you pay New Mexico I'm sorry
but that's what they pay you pay
case of all the pay in New
Mexico to purchase a car in
Arizona you still pay that tax
in New Mexico when you get your
license and register your
this bill The New Mexico does
lose all or part of its
groceries not percent excise tax
and I don't really think that's
exactly what we want to do
If you had a hundred thousand
dollar car and you could save a
thousand dollars because the
tribe would only charge three
percent tax would not people
if the excise taxes four percent
of if the tribe charges two
percent you'll get credit for
the two percent so used to all
the state the other two.
Mr president of two percent of
it perhaps.
And two percent in generally I
Those are excise tax dollars to
pay for the road and even though
that was on the Navajo
reservation I'm not sure that
we're begin beginning much by
this and I would hope that the
body would study this very
Thank you Mr president and the
those the sponsor yield.
Senator Shendo deal Mr president
highest it has the lowest
expects the effects of any
surrounding states Arizona
Colorado Oklahoma and Texas so
if you buy at current taxes you
The water.
If you buy a Tesla issues
delivered to your you take
delivery and Colorado or
Before the sales are going to be
that great.
No some reservations lately.
The worst roads in the state
and all in the winter time in
enough we pick I don't have a
problem give them a little bit
of money thank you.
Any further debate senators.
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the rule has
been called and all those
present voting affirmed except
those ability to negative bushel
hands Senators tier seats
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator share voting no Senator
Brandt voting no.
Senator Moores voting no Senator
Senator Sanchez ozil Senator
virtually no senator Byrd voting
no.
By a vote.
Twenty five in the affirmative
fourteen the negative house bill
one six seven has passed the
of business committee reports
the refrigerator for.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom is been
referred Senate bill two twelve
has had it under consideration
and report same with
one knows chair sentiment us
move adoption the committee
report have a motion to that's
pretty for any objection.
See no objections the committee
point been adopted.
same with recommendation that do
pass respectfully submitted
Benny Shendo junior chair
Senator Shendo.
all of them with one motion that
the term reflected they were
acted upon individually hearing
no objection to reiterate house
bill one oh four as amended do
bill one seventy one as amended
do pass respectfully submitted
Benny Shendo junior chair
Senator Shendo.
Mystery to read Mr president
your Judiciary Committee to whom
is been referred house bill one
thirty two as amended has had it
under consideration and report
committee for.
And the objection.
See no objections the committee
fort has been adopted Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go back to
order business third reading of
Thank you thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing House
taxation and revenue committee
Senator Rodriguez to explain
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent also to have
my expert witness is here
everyone knows I'm sure Linda
key how are capital outlay
the emergency clause authorizes
the issuance of general
obligation bond capacity
totaling two hundred and fifty
eight point eight million
dollars the capacity maintains
three bond issues contained in
the bill include twenty four
point two million for code
compliance meals and other
equipment vehicles renovations
and construction for senior
fifteen point six million for
higher education special schools
and tribal schools for
infrastructure improvements
statewide the chart before you
collaborative art and technology
at the university of New Mexico
thirty six million for a
children's psychiatric center
for the health sciences center
at the university of New Mexico
building at New Mexico State
University nine million for a
student academic services
building at eastern New Mexico
university eight point three
applied technologies facility at
central New Mexico community
college Mr president members of
the Senate thank you senator
there is Senators we're debating
house taxation revenue committee
to close Senator Lopez Mr
president animus consent to
excuse Senator said about this
until he returns to the chamber
no objections so ordered Senator
really biggest to close on the
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands.
It is very voting tier seats.
Yes.
clause has passed the Senate
center yes.
You Mr president members of the
Senate.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you very much up Suazo
president present asking us some
of some of the records show that
all actions for placing House
Bill fifty six on final action
have been taken out from time
bill that allows nationally
accredited zoos to be able to
hire
veterinarians let's them get up
to a six month
areas of the zoos and we don't
always have that level of
specialized veterinarians in New
Mexico and so this will be a
great benefit towards a
sponsor yield Senator so the
deal is present Representative
so Mister president how many of
these of zoos are there in New
Mexico Senator Ivey Soto this
So we've got to do in
Albuquerque or calls but either
one.
what kind of outbreaks we having
now that we didn't have on a
last year twenty years ago.
there's there's been a variety
of operates that happen at the
zoo's in that area but there are
other diseases that happened and
it's been a real challenge for
If if if this is a problem in
our suits here.
Where the veterinarians going to
much Mr president so miss
president and senator.
Wirth said that only has two
national twelve Susan at so
consequently we don't have the
Senator.
So Mister president senator so
we're going to we're we're gonna
put out a the call for
veterinarians please come to
New Mexico and then you're going
to go away at the end of the six
months and will bring in another
veterinarian if we need to is
that what this bill says Mr.
Senator Senator this presents a
consuming any kind of rule about
normal licensure New Mexico.
Senator.
so we gotta keep going outside
the state to get everything but
why not let's bring in the
veterinarians I'm okay with that
thank you Mr president.
We do have further debate
senator Wirth.
President to Senator.
I guarantee if.
That is that there is are in
short supply.
expenses for our students how do
New Mexico to go to veterinary
school.
And that Amarillo Texas a Texas
tech veterinary school.
The need for us to fund that
studies and most of that money
that is used for that is to
bring those kids after they're
in the third year of that school
with the doctor where where he
does his clinical since Germany
where he states.
So I have not a problem with
this bill at all but it brings
Is one of the smartest people in
the world just think about it of
that has to go look in an animal
that can't talk to him.
Vendor Kate.
So.
Mr president I know we're trying
to move on down the road but I'm
sure you that I stand in support
people in thank you Mr
president.
Thank you center was any further
debate senators.
We do have a floor amendment I'm
Senator I saw the deal presently
have to.
Indeed think we can get one
these vets to come to the zoo
between January and February.
Senator this president and the
Center then yes you know it's
veterinarians can conspire can
prescribe medication for humans
to.
This president center yes I'm I
am aware of that although.
normally do.
Expressly in January February
around the middle of Santa Fe
there's quite is you going on.
maybe we need to have them
checked.
the animals in Santa Fe from
wondering about too much.
Yep Mr president let me ask you
one question.
What what a veterinarian due to
there are some fish that are of
such size that the venture would
get into the water with the
fish.
Mr president centerman else
there other there's some fish
that arm fifth yes and so then
that are tiny and that can't be
taken out of the water and and
and are not in a large of water
for the veterinarian to get into
the water with the fish and in
those circumstances the
the question Senator Senator
many of us in mind of Santo
Domingo yields Mr president I I
would I would love it if you
would actually Senator Ingle to
the rescue Mr president the
has French car pennant.
And it also has a.
A breed of carpets that to no
one else has.
And he's trying to figure out
Ivey Soto Santo Domingo some
sorry Mr president at I don't
know where the good Senator came
up with that but if I had.
French carpet my house they be
fish sticks they be frozen so
exactly why we need this bill
because when the veterinary gets
them with the shark sometimes he
treats the shark and sometimes
he doesn't make it back out so
then we need to be able to get
another veterinarian in the
Is present you answer my
question.
This president the the centerman
knows sometimes it might be
just.
Pirtle Senator moving explain
them and then move Senate floor
amendment number one to house
bill fifty six.
See no objections senator Phil
the state I'd hate for them to
be left out of this if there
were the the situation did come
up that they needed the services
of a veterinarian why would we
limit or kind of blocked them
out there's a great soon
with the help me strike and
hopefully it's friendly thank
you.
Thank you center Pirtle Senator
Ivey Soto.
This president and Senator
Pirtle so.
I'm gonna say it's it's on from
at the moment.
What I'd like to what this
president and center portal what
I'd like for us to do is to make
sure that there is a process
that works in terms of the
next year that could include not
only the
The others is that are not
meshing crap accredited but
might also deal with some of the
little bit right now I think
that would be the best.
Center for privacy is where
we're debating senator member
number one anyone else wishing
to debate on the foreman.
really doesn't make sense why we
would limit it to those two zoos
if we're having outbreak of
animals whether reptiles or deer
or in a survey or what whatever
in this notion of will come back
next year I'm probably not going
to carry the bill Mr president
but we have an opportunity right
now to do it it's the right
thing to do and hopefully the
six and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the rules be
suspended the record show the
rules being called and all those
present voted the affirmative so
for those voting the negative I
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Steinborn voting now
center how to meal voting no
voting now Senator Pinto voting
no Senator Hickey voting no
Senator Lopez Sedillo Lopez
voting no Senator Tallman voting
no Senator Gonzales voting no
Lopez voting no Senator
Stefanics voting no Senator
Rodriguez voting no Senator cels
voting no Senator Ivey Soto
By a vote of fourteen the
affirmative twenty two in the
The Sierra.
Senator Munoz center
Ivey Soto reminded me of a
famous quote.
The city manager of Cincinnati
with similar working with city
council and.
Thank you senator Clemente
center for the.
I thank you very much Mr
president thank you Senator Ivey
remind everybody we did have you
know in our world famous bile
park in in the in Albuquerque we
have a world famous zoo there as
well and on January twenty I'm
sorry December twenty six you
the not but two weeks later
another beautiful elephant at
that facility jasmine about two
weeks later also passed we would
have been great that we've been
able to bring in some
and support thank you any
further debate centers.
Si no further debate Senator Ivy
Soto to close on the bill.
Thank you very much for this
negative by show of hands
Senator seats please more
voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative zero on the negative
house bill fifty six.
We're going on next to I believe
house bill sixty is that is
twice amended and that this
Senator Shendo Senator Shendo Mr
president Mr present real
Otherwise be counted as a vote
in the affirmative Senator
Shendo we announce your expert
witnesses.
Thank you Mr president the.
I just managed center the center
of the records show that all
See no objections Senator Shendo
to explain.
For a
explained bill elective the.
Of recognize or just to have my
minimum salary for a native
language teachers these teachers
are known as five twenty
certificate holders and occur to
The teaching of the languages as
a primary importance to all
tribes and pueblos after a long
history of attempted to raise
native languages to federal
government the state of New
the native languages as a medium
of instruction and our own New
Mexico's Indian Education Act of
two thousand three requires the
maintenance of native languages.
So it is critical that we
recruit and retain more native
language teachers and increase
access to language a little
language education in our public
schools.
We're sure that the webcast is
If I'm the only ones in I'm
ready.
Senator share we have a four.
Thank you Mr president will the
the country or just New Mexico.
This this particular of bill
speaks to a native tribal
languages in the state of New
Mexico.
Seattle or Mohawk or whatever
Mohican know the native
languages in New Mexico right
now are to you table care is to
or a hundred recognize native
languages and.
I didn't want to get into that
kind of thing so Mister
president
tribal level of by the the
tribal government they they will
have to establish their own
criteria to certify their own
native speakers within their own
any requirement that they be of
a licensed teacher or any other
kind of certificate or could
just be.
Anybody from the tribe public Mr
Mr president and senator if we
were going to teach of French or
German in a in a New Mexico
Public School the French teacher
Mr president are of curly of.
The our universities do not
teach a native language at it
So of Mister president senator.
Where would these be taught
would be taught anywhere New
Mexico could we expect somebody
There is a need.
They were students in jail they
needed it and then the that is a
very highly unlikely impossible.
So Mr president center I think
that's exactly my point
But in Albuquerque where you may
have all all of these languages
in very schools but you don't
have a population.
student and where do we get a
teacher to teach that one
student I'm just not sure how
that works clearly it works in
Central consolidated in SUNY it
V. T. will in Zuni that are tall
but it requires a critical mass
you know of students.
Yes Mr so the creek critical
mass I think Mr president was
the.
twelve fifteen students in a
particular.
A school that we're Navajo and
and wanted to see to learn
Navajo.
a Navajo instructor to come to
months on a high school.
And the local
The education authority will be
able to negotiate with the
school to make that happen.
So.
Perfect condition what Mr
president of right now some
teachers are paid as low as
twelve thousand a year.
But when if this bill passes
then they will be paid as a
Certainly not well maybe every
day but I doubt that it's an
everyday class but after this
passes we're going to pay them
Etcetera etcetera.
Mr president the.
If they came in at the level one
it would not include a seven
percent race.
So Mister president.
I am in favor of more people
speaking more languages
absolutely
But I just thought that was
polite when I went to Turkey I
certainly didn't learn Turkish
but I learned how to say please
and thank you and hello goodbye
and worst bathroom.
My Spanish has dramatically
decreased.
but once upon a time I could
carry on at least a reasonable.
So Mr president I learned how to
introduce myself in Navajo.
I can say please and thank you.
That that we have some cultural
links to what we are.
My concern here has nothing to
do with the teaching of the
languages it has to do with
Or in Gallup McKinley school
districts.
Navajo.
Probably should be part of the
curriculum all the way.
Who's who's teaching full time
all day every day
The same as you teach of this
particular language is the same
It's not the same as seven hours
a day for a week.
And so I think that's what my
issue is here it's not the
language is yes please in fact I
Everybody the languages of their
culture.
But fifty thousand dollars to
teach for a couple hours versus
the same price to teach all day
hours a day that the the
teacher.
Is it and I didn't see that.
Can you show me where that is
The Mr president and they only
So Mr president this is a.
Isn't really that long.
The department may issue a
native American language and
culture certificate to a person
proficient in innate of American
language and culture of the New
Mexico tribe or pueblo.
American language and culture
certificate shall be issued and
renewable.
In accordance with procedures
established by the department
based on agreement made with the
Shall be equal to the minimum
annual salary for a level two
licensed teachers so it's really
sixty thousand dollars not fifty
up Mr president that was amended
Mr president I'm I'm looking at
this thing with the.
The amendments in context.
licensing culture certificate
shall be equal to the minimum
annual salary of somebody.
Whether it's a level two or
level one.
It and I don't see I I could be
missing here but the what I'm
reading is the one in contexts
in.
What am I missing Mr president.
Your tier.
At level one at level one.
the Senate Education.
Senator soul thank you Mr
president I was the one that
wrote the amendment for this and
the amendment that we're talking
Okay Mister president and
senator.
So a full time teacher that
speaks Navajo yes.
With their net of backed
baccalaureate teachers so
says minimum salary.
It doesn't say pro rated to how
many hours you work Mr president
like to yield to a chair of a
instructional setting it is pro
rated for however many hours or
portion of a full time it would
be.
Oh oh okay so.
Mr president and.
So so Mister president and and
senator souls so that what
you're talking about is some
other section of law then that
says if I only work three
Is it how is that pro rated if
if I only teach three classes is
it do I get half of the salary
is are some of the pro.
Rating going on and.
six classes a day and they were
teaching three classes a day
that would be half of full time
and they would be getting twenty
five thousand dollars a quick
went because it would be half of
using things like three eight.
So Mister president that's and I
think I think you've I think now
I understand my concern wasn't
these the equivalent of somebody
paying they were paying somebody
for six or eight hours.
So so my last a line here Mister
president is.
so why would we not teach these
these languages at home.
Why why would we do it at school
instead of at home.
native language at home.
Of so I was able to speak
fluently but when I was at the
university Colorado my daughter
was there with me my son was
English but I taught my children
but you know it's very different
you know if you're away from the
everyday life of a village
and so for so you know we have
many students and parents or
even of folks that go on to work
you know all of jobs are off the
reservation so they don't have
face today and of are are in
need education act of two
thousand three does allow for us
learns payments or Navajo in the
classroom to go home and mom
doesn't speak it or speaks at.
The way I speak Spanglish.
you know it if there was a time
when our families and our
grandparents were told not to
teach not to speak our native
languages.
And so now those children are
coming back.
And one team you know the
language to raise their
children.
that their children now teaching
their parents.
It's awesome.
Because those parents were
denied under their control to
speak their native language and
I do want to make sure.
Of in in I don't think there's
anything in here that does that.
We do need to speak English.
point out as I will again.
It that we have a of okay
believe three thousand words
most metals in English.
Of all of us but we all do need
to be fluent in English.
And as I said I think.
It's good and we should all
strive to do things like that.
I just don't want anything we do
to take away from the need to
speak English.
In in fact most of the you can
you gonna is the official
English is the official language
of Uganda.
So I just want to make sure that
But I want to speak German.
So so I I think this is great I
think we ought to know languages
more than one language and in
languages trilingual we speak
this is a family speaks two
languages bilingual what do
speak somebody that speaks only
one language American.
In and I think we ought to see
It can be everything as long as
it's also English.
And in the end I do think that
it's important for the tribes
I am an American but I did not
lose Scotland.
I want all of us to be an
American but not lose.
so you can show up this payments
and I can show up at Scott.
And it's accepted throughout
this whole building and I think
we are.
So so more power to you I'm
gonna I'm going to support this
but I was trying to drill down
into how much it was going to
cost and at what point do you
have critical mass so that you
Senators.
This proven with the center
yield for just a few questions
Senator centennial Mr president
yes are you.
had some really good points that
confuse me of a more of the Mr
president center I'm just trying
to understand so you talk Mr
If they were it will be great.
So Mister president center going
back to the discussion center.
a school district had multiple
Dialects there they would need
one teacher per dialect as well
so what I understand this
Mr president if if you had
requests from the tribunal for
students in a four month more
that is yes and so we you could
have multiple teachers if they
only had one specific dialect
the served up that Mr presence
teacher you know how many
students you would have to have
in that class to make it
affordable to the district
missed present center.
Because of that but Mr president
The.
Senator Senator Mr president the
going back to the question for
Senator is is not based on
people you know I know my my
grandson takes a French class I
other classes those students are
taught that are taking those
classes.
Mr president center for us
getting to it's it's almost like
also be there only one class Mr
president center the for us
going with that and I'm just
trying to understand why we need
this bill I understand and.
Two thousand two the legislature
tribal language instructors
become certified in the state.
Mr president center can you give
me a little bit of history on
for we are with the and would
five twenty certificate holders
under that particular bill
Of these teachers are known as
of five twenty certificate
And seventeen I have and will
use with.
Okay Mister president right now
Going on right now of their
seventeen of total memorandum of
understanding between of.
certify how much they make
minimums and Max for the five
points.
It could be anywhere from
Hi this phone numbers on the
back to include come with.
Thank you for that this presents
center I'm with our
Analysis it shows a minimum of
Difference in of the.
Education and the times they've
been in class I'm I'm good with
that I was gonna Bill agency
presence Center on the
any idea.
Senator Shendo.
Maybe Mr president they all are
are you saying you need more
than the hundred eleven in the
school system or are they
sufficient or what is this new
bill doing that is different.
Mr president the if your
question is with these certain
individuals the eleven of the
Clarify agency presence Center
then the hundred level all level
ones is that correct they were
for that because now that
clarifies what I was trying to
understand I thought they were
already in the system and being
paid of the the thirty four of
forty but now they would all be
thank you senator because we're
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I I don't
need to Senator to yield I just
want to stand up and very
proud of representative Lente
and senator Shendo.
Of in the last couple of weeks
I've been able to meet with two
taught kids from twelve to from
kindergarten to twelfth grade
the total all language it's the
only place in the world where
you speak till law is that the
Navajo Nation and how they dealt
with COVID and he talked to me
about the importance of steeping
children in language and culture
So what this bill does is it
elevates the idea of teaching
native languages.
Yes we have eight in the state
program where they take elders
they pick their own teachers and
they going to the schools and we
need more of that what I'm
Representative now has really
talked to me about was the idea
that the language is what
grounds are native cultures
this is a perfect idea now when
we're coming out of the pandemic
when we've all been huddled up
in our homes when our Navajo
people have really tried to.
It's hard to be a teacher even
if you don't have a degree if
you're deciding you're going to
teach language in your culture
So this is elevating our native
teachers it's elevating our
native languages and it's about
time that we did this so I'm
you Mr president I too strong a
stand in strong support of this
bill I'm not going to repeat
what settlement of president pro
of seeing the world a way of
thinking and you lose you
potentially lose a culture and
this is a loss that we should
not even get close to in a multi
bill is a really important way
and a brilliant way actually to
not only preserve the language
but to help these students
I'm again I just I'm impressed
with the sponsors for developing
this for our state thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez we have
senator how to mail.
can agree with me as former
educators that it takes a lot to
get into a classroom and teach
but students learn so much more
people who have the same culture
as them and the same identity
and it's important that we save
a language before it dies and
it's too late I know that the
two pueblos within my district
Mr president thanks and have a
meal Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president I just
let the body know that you know
this legislation passed seven
This is their culture.
This is a language that was.
Targeted to be destroyed.
because this is their culture so
I stand in full support I want
to thank the sponsors for this
thank you Mr president.
for
All of the teachers who are
participating in teaching and
sharing of the cultures of their
are provided on going education
by the American Indian language
policy research and teacher
training center at the
university of New Mexico of the
happens through a process is
been in place for twenty years
so this is not something you Mr
president tribes is that the
assessment and evaluation
process that determines whether
standards have been met Mr
president is I would say it's
about time that we recognize and
Thank you Mr president good
evening good evening to all my
colleagues I too want to stand
in strong support of this
legislation.
legislation and that signage by
the governor will really show
reflection of how much the state
Representative
Respects its indigenous
Si no further debate.
Etcetera etcetera because of the
bill.
Mr president I move that the
house bill sixty us twice
please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
I think.
president and members of the
body thank you Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
one nineteen.
thank you Mr president house
bill one nineteen is a bill that
we actually passed I believe it
was in twenty twenty and then it
is one that was in the repeal
the public school capital
improvements act typically known
as S. B. nine monies for our
schools
and increases the calculation
districts are going to receive
additional distribution adjusted
to the public school capital
outlay at these two state
batches with that I stand for
questions thank you seven as
we're debating house bill one
that house bill one nineteen do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all the rules
and called and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
school district to appreciate
the additional capital funding
coming their way Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president Ms
consent we know that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous from that order
out there three bills here one
is the capital outlay that's
item one item two is the capital
project re authorization Center
Rick Rodriguez will do both of
those and then item number three
asset those get handed out now
what we'll do since we're
waiting for the printing is
we'll go to item three first I
just saw the bill is actually
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon's session
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
is no objection it is so ordered
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president that was so much fun
we'll do it again and having a
limb fifty nine AM I move we
adjourn until twelve or one PM
this afternoon session see no
objection it is so ordered Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the drill has been
read in full and approved
third reading of legislation and
ideal to Senator Stewart for
item number three on the Senate
supplemental counter number two
house bill thirty seven as
amended Senator Stewart.
been take it's now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
no objections sinister to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president this is a
community energy efficiency
development block grant act it's
six to improve utility
affordability reduce energy
of their income on utility bills
experts say that five percent is
what's affordable we have some
communities.
poverty rate of fifteen percent
or as I just said much more so
unfortunately New Mexico's
behind other states when it
comes to funding energy this is
a great program.
this is a local New Mexico
program where funds block grants
would go to local communities
and they would help low income.
would ask unanimous consent for
an expert witness Tammy feeble
corn who is a new city council
in Albuquerque and member of
sweet.
Welcome to the chamber.
unanimous consent to excuse
center diamond till she returns
the chamber hearing no
objections so ordered we do have
a floor amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Thank you Mr president so I move
us an informant amendment number
one to house bill thirty seven
is already amended.
and how we need to make sure
that we've.
They were doing the right thing
for for people in the
communities and so forth one of
the things that were.
The PNM anticipates rolling
brown outs and possibly black
out.
Throughout their service area.
Most of the people in this room
keep their lights on keep the
refrigerator's going.
It also takes care of medical
equipment specially home medical
equipment.
To keep energy going to your
home.
And it's just that simple.
It allows you all to continue to
Thank you senator Senator
Stewart.
Mr president this is an
unfriendly amendment has nothing
to do with the bill thank you
we're debating Center pharma
X. Mr president my count on here
is just gonna be abysmal now
it's going to be twenty five to
two.
At least expected thirteen or
fourteen.
within Albuquerque or Santa Fe
knows.
There is not enough electricity
available.
This is really the brown out
protection act.
That's what this is.
I think it's pretty
straightforward.
For you constituents.
That's all this is simple bill.
Power on power off this is the
switch.
move Senate floor member number
one to house bill thirty seven
as amended and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
shows the rules been called and
all those present voted in the
affirmative and I would just
Seven we're voting on Senate
foreman one if you were issued.
Vote no please raise your hand.
Senator Ortiz subpoena voting
now Senator Steinborn voting no
voting no Senator Sedillo Lopez
voting no Senator Tallman voting
no Senator Gonzales voting no
center for the a voting no
Senator Stewart voting now
no Senator Lopez voting now
Senator Rodriguez voting no
Senator fenics voting now
Senator cels voting no.
They're printing at level
thirteen the Fuhrman of twenty
two in the negative house Senate
floor member number one has
failed to pass Senate senator
Since this summer I've been seen
articles in the paper al PNM is
short on power in the PRC did
back to the taxpayers and the
ratepayers and saying oh extend
our power we're gonna have
rolling blackouts and we're not
gonna have a Dallas machines
rate on the open market for that
power in absorb the cost
and get through the the rolling
blackouts that are coming.
So PNM wants to be the power
market and save the people in
New Mexico but they chose not to
do that and and that's a PNM
issue and that's a great pair
and a customer issue that the
S. seven yes we are back on the
bill will have Senator Kernan
photo by Senator Woods on the
bill Senator Kernan thank you Mr
energy provider uses power from
other sources and so we do have
some wonderful wind farms and
yield so Mister Dale I'm happy
deal thank you Mr president
senator then pro tem um so the
weather recession piece where we
basically what this bill is
about the main purpose of it.
Mister Mister president yes it
it's a little bit more than that
using as much they don't become
homeless it's one of the main
reasons people become homeless
if they're low income they can't
local communities so they can
decide what they need to do we
think they'll take the low
president then approached him I
didn't notice and I'm just
looking at the at the analysis
and and basically there's
there's quite a bit of
rule making a requirement
out into twenty fifty and
looking at number four just
talking about a rules it's going
to.
All of these things so so the
PRC's going to create rules
which I think looking back up
Mr president Senator all of that
was amended out of the bill and
Henrik.
and they have a division exactly
for low income people and so
it's it's a block grant through
EMNRD of going to local
establish rules that will.
The required to to implement
this is that correct.
Mr.
energy and minerals that
correct.
But EMNRD will have some
rulemaking on how to administer
the grants.
Okay thank you very much Mr
president.
by senator William E. Scherer.
Senator to move in explain
imminent
Mr president I move Senate floor
amendment number one to house
Tax relying on tax information
and I really had a hard time
with that I just didn't like.
I think that once we start
page four line three for those
of you viewing this at home.
The median adjusted gross income
as defined in section sixty two
of the Internal Revenue Code of
nineteen eighty six.
Because I'm concerned about the
entire tax return thing out
there and who saying and who's
got it and what you're doing
with it.
published by the United States
Census bureau.
So that's that part.
Does not exceed two hundred
percent of the federal poverty.
But then it says there is a high
energy burden or limited access
to energy efficiency services as
And take the tax returns out of
it.
So there's a couple of things
here.
One.
And we wrote all of her bill is
let them figure out everything
using somebody's tax return.
And so that's what this is about
of Mr president let's take the
tax return out of this.
return what is referring to is.
The identification of low income
income so this is an unfriendly
amendment senators we're
debating Center for member
number one.
I
vote we had.
Let me read this one more time.
You want me to go back up here.
Underserved community means in
which is actually a line on your
New Mexico personal income tax
twenty to adjusted.
Gross income those words come
Sixty two of the Internal
Revenue Code of nineteen eighty
six the Internal Revenue Code
what are they do Mr president
does not state tax return it
gives all the legalese for tax
return.
And so what we're saying is oh
no Senator to since it doesn't
attorneys in here that would
point out that.
We often refer to law as opposed
to spelling out the law and so
Are not going to protect your
tax return.
We're gonna give it to anybody
which I find very intriguing
because Mr president.
allowed to New Mexico.
Anything about anybody's tax
even if it's aggregated.
So we can't do dynamic scoring
But for this thou shall give it.
That's what this really says.
We're not allowed to do
meaningful tax return because
our own tax and revenue
department will not share even
aggregated data.
They'll shall give the governor
the state.
The department shall shall give
it to the Department.
Of energy minerals and natural
I offered a way out of that it
was unfriendly.
Okay so Mister president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
score of twenty four to fifteen.
sixteen I'm sorry that all those
present voting the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands thank
amendment.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Steinborn voting now
center how to me a voting no.
Pena voting no Senator Pinto
voting now Senator Hickey voting
now Senator Stewart voting now
Senator the a Lopez only now
Senator Tallman voting no center
voting no Senator Rodriguez
voting no Senator Stefanics
voting no Senator schools voting
no Senator Lopez voting no.
we're Senators share.
Thank you Mr president so we're
going to turn off the lights
will be able to read the tax
returns anyway so it's all good
This is not amended that on page
twenty nine nineteen.
Through page twenty one line
three is that still in the bill.
Thank you Mr president I stand
to support this bill we heard
this in CENIC conservation and I
had some questions I had managed
communities the autonomy to work
on those issues the needs that
they see fit and since energy
and minerals had this program at
is nothing new to the Department
I in fact it's transferred
between Human Services
Department energy and minerals
and the MFA so I think that all
of these groups all of these
no further debate center store
to close on the bill.
Mr president I move that house
bill thirty seven as amended do
now pass and I ask unanimous
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand Senator Baca
voting no Senator Moores voting
no Senator Diamond voting no
senator Sanchez voting no
Senator Griggs voting no Senator
Ingle voting now Senator Pirtle
voting now Senator great as
voting no senator Byrd you wish
Senator Stewart you Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
senator to senator Wirth thank
you Mr president we're going to
go up to item number one on
Senate supplemental counter
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twelve with the emergency clause
on final passage has been taken
ask unanimous consent to have
two expert witnesses I have
Linda kee ho who most of us know
R. L. expert in capital outlay
and her assistant Sonya Snyder
statewide this includes our
individual allocations and also
the executives the bill
authorizes or appropriates eight
staff including the lists for
the projects it's my
understanding they're trying to
round it all up.
So and it is from the following
thirty million from the general
fund and one hundred and sixteen
point six million from other
state funds the funding in the
bill includes approximately four
four million is for projects
identified by the governor and
the house members and the Senate
members to address local and
regional projects statewide in
clause anyone wishing debate.
See no debate Senator Rodriguez
to close on the bill thank you
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senators tier seats please.
Senator seats.
Explain my vote.
Senate centerman also explains
about Senator Rodriguez thank
you Mr president Senator when
Austin center I'm sorry yes
so.
Mr president you know.
We have one point eight billion
dollars in on spring capital New
Mexico.
for the perfect example three
counties a city a village
thirteen chapter houses.
And well I want things to grow
So it works.
We know a lot of these projects
especially in the re off that's
coming for never gonna get
completed because of cost
overruns.
capital projects were done.
So what point are we gonna say
next year in the sixty day.
We're gonna fix some of these
Yes I have to wait.
Yes thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Seeing no objection I believe
that that's being handed out so
Senator Rodriguez and you can
just give us a moment and then
The.
Is that.
Senator Rodriguez.
with the emergency clause on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
objection Senator this to
explain thank you Mr president
years from various funds re
authorizations of capital outlay
projects range from changing the
administering agency or original
purpose of the project extending
contained in this bill do not
require new capacity and are a
nonrecurring expense to the
general fund and it's a
nonrecurring expense for
severance tax bonds or up for
three months after the reversion
date.
Mr president members of the
Senate thank you senator Munoz
Senate finance committees of
supercenter bill to thirteen
with emergency clause stimulus.
the wrong sheet so members if
you're looking for your re out
that's make sure we got it right
because I don't think we have
the real sheet on our desk
Mr maybe the good senator hold
bit.
Swamped here trying to get some
of the documents.
Okay.
Is the sergeant at arms are
getting the correct document
distributed.
Okay thank you.
They've asked us to wait a few
moments.
Mr president I I think some of
Those that stand in place for a
minute yes thank Senator center
place.
stand in place.
Thank you.
One forty seven.
You can just wait a moment
longer so the members will get
those at their desk thank you
they are now being distributed
Mister president thank you so
much for your patience.
Senator Rodriguez.
passage center if you can
explain the bill.
Thank you very much we are on
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill to
thirteen with the emergency
costs.
emergency clause we do have
debate sentiment us.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
president
I don't there's no debate or
questions for the good center
but I want members to look at
going to fly cargo in and out if
you look on the first page of
page one it'll show you that
that airports been sitting there
since twenty nineteen and
haven't used or encumber the
If we continue down this path.
Of not completing these
projects.
In eighty five and then extend
the time.
Six change agency or change
expanded purpose I changed
agencies or change a agency or
expended purchase an extended
time there I.
It can't wait anymore it's just
getting way too messy and it's
gonna get Messier and Messier
until the whole thing collapses
and you change extend the time.
We don't accomplish anything and
that's what STBs our capital
outlay for is to get projects
done.
don't think we should even
entertain a re off the bill
thank you Mr president yes yes
any further debate with senator
Morris the agency present are to
teased over here because you
look for page after page of
starting to all Bernalillo
county Albuquerque and I I.
I can't defend it Mr president I
just can't defend I'm looking at
like you guys are right we we
got to do something different
about this and I think you know
I'm gonna vote no adult twenty
two you're gonna join me but I'm
I'm just on my own little
and I can't in good conscience
with this money continue to sit
here
and so I I'm gonna vote no and
hopefully a couple of folks
renewable no and we sent a
message to some of these
much more needed and get this
money into our our communities
much faster so think about that
before I think sentences right
we need to be looking at this in
that will get the money in the
marketplace of these projects on
thanks Suazo present thanks
center more center diamond.
Thank you Mr president what the
outstanding balances of
allocated capital outlay.
One point five billion dollars
Mr president Senator Diamond it
over this this specific she by
projects I see from projects in
various older six years old
Senator and Mr president is that
is that about the oldest they
fourteen a few of those so it's
been a while some of those have
been re authorized I have to add
a little bit to that Mister
president senator and that in
the last two years we may not
want to use the last two years
that that agencies having card
but yes some of those are since
two thousand fourteen and and
are under contract there some
that have been encumbered it's
not as cut and dry as when you
continue sometimes the prices go
up now with COVID for example
the the price of materials a
transportation hasn't admitted
or the lack of transportation
has inhibited their ability to
the only one voting no here on
the floor Senator Moores but I
also think it's important the
legislator was a legislator
takes some responsibility of
this backlog of projects in fact
who share don't Hannah can kind
of see in real time how we can
make sure that our projects are
fully funded completely but as I
look through some of these
outlay requests for million
dollars and I see in many of
these this year's projects and
they only received two hundred
thousand dollars we are not
providing them the resources to
move forward and so I don't know
dollars it's a disservice to us
is Senators because we're not
fully funding our communities
and really ultimately it's a
disservice to New Mexico because
as we see today we're sitting
over a billion dollars in
know if of the chair finance or
the vice chair would like to
yield to this one but alas the
vice chair and she can seek out
the chair if he wants to answer
this one but Mr president so
ones that are about to expire
everyone there's a whole other
set of.
Projects that are sitting out
there is that right madam vice
chair Mister president yes
about this and and the chair of
finance but remember everybody
this is just things that are
about to expire there's another
two or three years worth of the
projects that are sitting out
everybody because if you don't
your money may go away thank
you.
Thanks for the US Senate bill
fall by Senator Kernan Senate
Bill thank you Mr president
much of it is actually bonded.
Fourteen million dollars one
million dollars that have not
been issued so far so only
fourteen of the one point
whatever has not been bond
edition so have this money
you're paying interest on is
what I want to find out for
want to thank.
Thank you senator Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield thank you Mr
president yes Senator Kernan I
will yield so Mister president
The.
Mr president yes Senator Kernan
guess when I receive my report
on my area the first thing I do
is pick up the phone and called
the to the city manager of the
the city of the mayor's office I
if we allocate dollars to
particular project we're given
the opportunity to track that
ourselves and so I would
recommend that everybody when
you receive that notification
think it's possible and I just I
think there are some counties
and cities and areas in the
state they do a very good job of
spending down their money and I
vamp this whole process let's be
careful that we don't punish
those areas that are very good
about spending their money and
finishing their projects making
our responsibility to keep an
eye on that and the make sure
when we allocate the dollars
that they're spending them in
spending them in the time frame
we have given them thank you.
president I move that let me get
this number here I move that the
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill to
thirteen with the emergency
we're voting.
Tier seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand Senator
Diamond voting no Senator Baca
voting now Senator Gallegos
voting now.
the emergency clause has passed
the Senate Senator Tallman would
you like to explain about.
Sierra limit let me close and
then we'll go to explain about.
Thank you Mr get this.
The system is broken I've been
saying that since the day one
and getting absolutely nowhere
This doesn't need tweeting and
needs a wholesale change.
The total revamping L. during
whether your project is in a
good is a bit of prioritized and
vetted is anybody scrutinize I
don't know how it the only thing
about this ridiculous that we
know money well spent so thank
you Mr chair that's all I have
thank thank you senator
explained about so
again I just want to circle back
County in Travis county we work
together very well and we do
that these projects I just think
it's really important for people
across the state.
that they're able to complete
the project you know I can't
imagine how it's done in
Bernalillo county was so many
legislators but I do think that
area to stay thank you.
Senator Ingle explained as well.
Thank you thank you for the most
present member of the Senate to
from cities and counties and
universities.
If you will try your very best
to make them pay for the
planning.
thousand dollars they haven't
even got the planned
Then it's gonna be a while
before the money gets spent they
don't really know what they're
and a half because the plan was
done.
I don't even know where they're
going to put the project if you
make them go through that
expensive part of paying for the
planning.
completed and done and I've
learned that over the period of
time on almost every project do
for cities or the street repair
anything else they've got to
Probably fifty percent of the
request should get thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle.
Senator Wirth.
Committee to whom is been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two thirty one has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that I do
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Joe's a savant as chair.
Move adoption committee report
miscellaneous from that order
business senator Wirth.
Sentiment us thank you Mr
president Senate finance is
going to run upstairs for a few
minutes and and and here that
five centimeters of you identify
which a bill that you will be
hearing.
Mr president Senate bill three
twenty one.
A two thirty one I'm sorry.
Mr president could be he gave me
the title off the it's one that
was just read out at a Judiciary
that we're going to go up and do
Senate finance Senate bill two
the my colleague the Senate
finance committee chairman know
how long the title is and this
I'm just saying that right now
Senator.
it's related crime that's
correct senator.
I see no objection.
Senate finance members will head
to committee.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so for the members
we're gonna go to Senate
supplemental counter number
three this the one item is house
it for item number one house
bill one thirty two as five
times amended we're on that that
order of business survey
legislation center Duhigg.
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objections Senator hate to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president.
So house bill one thirty two is
under from a hundred and seventy
five percent to thirty six
percent make sure that lenders
can't evade our state laws and
helps New Mexicans escape from
of five hundred dollars and
under which builds and
profitability for lenders and
insurers the folks who need
access to this kind of credit
will continue to have it while
here with me and she has been a
huge champion on this bill and
has gotten it.
Where we are now which is closer
than we've ever been before with
that Mr president will stand for
And thank you Mr president do
amendment so if somebody would
like to debate this give me
about ten seconds to run up
there.
Thank you Senator.
Members present by the way the
Lobos beat the number twenty two
team on in the nation tonight so
that's on a we're not
announcements but that's always
worth it.
Your site about that sort of
doing.
Senator.
Mr president Senator.
The amendment that was put on
today was really just something
to make sure that the data that
pledging for that we need that
that as we move forward with
this issue that that
that that amendment just fly to
the US small a loan industry
is all existing law that we have
that requires for reporting
under the small loan act that is
specific to the small lenders
And because they're federal
Thank you Mr presentar amendment
the reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill one thirty two
as amended amendment sponsored
objection Center Purnell to
explain at the moment this.
So miss present this ammendment
with the strike house floor
amendment number one districts
January first of twenty twenty
three this would just push it
out just a little bit give some
of these businesses a little bit
of time to adjust to the law
Thank you Mr president and to be
honest I need I need to take a
moment to fit to see.
The impact that the amendment
would have.
Small credit unions the that see
if they're actually giving these
loans and so I thought that was
important so that we have the
information that we need so that
Thank you Senator Pirtle
Senator.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that I. two
experts be allowed to join us on
the floor Karen Myers who is an
see no objections sergeant
Garcia please escort our expert
witnesses into the chamber.
Thank you that.
Senator Pirtle if you can
prepare another amendment.
You just do it that hand right
on the Senator just prepare
another amendment.
wanted to and then just put his
initials on their CP and then
handed down to implement a
rewrite that's correct is it a
venue floor amendment Senator
thirty two is five times amended
can separate we're gonna make
copies of that really quickly I
will come back.
Okay the.
I believe that the amendments
are getting handed out right now
I love doing amendment so much
that sometimes you to redo so
Senate I move Senate floor
amendment number one to house
bill one thirty two is five
times amended.
the reader and I'll have you
going explain it the reader to
read the amendment Senate floor
amendment number one to house
bill one thirty two as amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
Pirtle Senator Pirtle.
of this year and move it to
January one of next year so it
extends the implementation of
this act by six months thank you
senator Senator Duhigg.
Say no debate Senator Pirtle to
close on the amendment move
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill one thirty two
is five times amended as for
unanimous consent Senator venter
house bill one thirty two is now
six times amended Senator Pirtle
I believe or three for three on
the last three amendments even
proposed is that correct.
We're back on the bill.
Senator detailed certainly Mr
president.
Mr and sponsor center I was just
gonna ask you questions so I
have a construction company that
I work for in a lot of our.
that with your bill.
Do you think that the it will
harm them I I understand what
you're trying to do but I'm I
don't speak English are very
well would have a hard time
getting alone.
Senator.
making sure that those lenders
can't charge a hundred seventy
five percent interest and we're
specifically building and an
origination fee for the very
So Mister president center
you're not reducing loan
institutions here in the state
of and your bill are you forcing
brought up to the do not pay of
tax have employees here in New
Mexico in in the opposition part
of it they felt that they work
lenders would that be an option
for the misprision Center.
And Mister president senator so
and I wonder if you're you mean
them to our state usury laws so
those online lenders are going
to be subject to the exact same
our interest rate caps that
some names of online vendors
here but as we're on that
internet lenders I was wondering
if rocket mortgage quicken loans
new American loan people or
And Mr president senator I don't
know the answer to that on those
specific institutions right here
off the top of my head I will
no to that of the the lenders
that would be covered under this
that's why I brought up the
offshore lenders
when I pulled up offshore
lenders as other alternatives
for loans it brought up that
China investment Corp are
corporations and I'm trying to
think through because in the
discussion we had committees
somewhere thinking they're being
any idea for we would be pushed
out of other loan institutions
here in New Mexico Mr president
Senator Senator heck and Mister
not address offshore lenders in
general but I I would also know
again that we're under the
approach taken in this bill
specifically with that
those really small loans so that
so they do they they can
continue to operate here.
So Mister president center David
threats of being pushed out or
minimized in the state the
current.
Senator.
Mr president senator so so one
states that have lax regulations
around landing and allow for
incredibly high interest rates
and that those are the states
that the target because that is
elsewhere to other states so
that that aren't doing so but
for the folks who are not the
lender lenders who are not
predatory they will have
of what qualifies and why Lomax
would fall into that category
Senator.
Mr president Senator I think
that what qualifies as predatory
And I'm sorry Senator John no
it's not going to fall but
Mister president senator I I
think also what qualifies as
predatory lenders are the ones
whose business models are based
hundred and seventy five
percent.
Senator will miss prison Center
then can you explain to me that
are can you share me that as
your bill goes forward my
of loan institutions for quick
money with very little interest
or not the interest but no
collateral and no history will
senator I think that with the
way this bill structured.
Any that the any loan company
will be able to continue to
operate here an offer that
access to credit.
completely gives me the
confidence that you have but
being the Sanchez Bill I'm sure
you have a lot more
we always make mistakes here and
someone else pays for thank you.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
as amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senators tier seats please.
excuse the Senator serve on
this.
Nios Rodriguez by the end
Gonzalez Campos and career
Senate president unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
Diamond center chair Senator
Burt and Senator Woods Senator
personal call.
the amendment.
Senator.
Senator Wirth.
Mister president if there's a
drafting we've been informed by
the council service at there's a
drafting issue with the
place will still remain with
excusing those members who have
who are open committee.
Mr president Senator Lopez my
apologies I need one more member
Okay.
And now I know that sounds.
I.
Okay.
There.
On.
Amazing.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and
before I close
we want we need to do one more
amendment.
then have Senator as a sponsor.
For yeah.
Members are watching via webcast
our waited for as a new
We do have a floor amendment the
reader to read the amendment
Senate floor amendment number
thirty two is six times amended.
Sen objects in center part of
explain with that amendment as
so there was part of the
section that we.
Amended here so we need to
strike the house amendment in
order to make sure that it's
clean and that's what this does
thanks in part we are debating
Si no further debate center
permit closed on the amendment I
move Senate floor amendment
number two to house bill one
thirty two is six times amended
as for unanimous consent has
been a request for unanimous
seven times amended Senator
Arnold.
Thank you Mr president members
of the body we're back on the
bill seeing no further debate
amended do now pass me ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those and and all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting on negative by show
with.
Fewest of all now please raise
your hand.
Senator Baca voting no Senator
Moores voting now Senator Pirtle
voting no Senator Gallegos
I have out of nineteen the
fermented eight in the negative
house bill one thirty two or
issue Representative Herrera and
Anderson we're sitting here with
me
and Senator souls
the last fourteen years working
on this issue so thank you all
for get forgiveness cross the
finish line thank you senator
Hey we're gonna go to senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
finance committee to finish it
finish its work on the omnibus
crime bill and we are going to
hear that bill as the final bill
on the floor tonight so we are
everyone leave things on the
desk I don't think it'll be too
long will keep everyone in the
loop and I yield any members.
Sierra that order business
Wirth thank you Mr president I
appreciate that correction for
sure I guess we're on a roll
here tonight so the feeling good
about things now I appreciate
Recess is subject called the
chair.
