A lot of experience for this
position, um, scientists from
our very own state have been
warning us that we're facing a
future with 25% less freshwater
in the next 50 years.
And we're already seeing the
impacts of hotter and drier
conditions throughout the state.
The state engineer is New
Mexico's principal water manager
charged with guiding us through
these challenges, and I'm proud
to sponsor her.
She is a licensed professional
engineer, educated here in New
Mexico and has spent over 25
years working on water issues.
Our previous state engineer Mike
Hammond, who also was confirmed
by this committee, brought Liz
on board at the agency as a
senior advisor in 2023, and she
played a crucial role in
supporting water planning,
outreach, strategic initiatives
with the Office of the State
Engineer and the Interstate
Stream Commission.
I think all of us here know the
value of continuity and
constancy and positions like
this.
The governor's appointment of
Liz to the position of state
engineer is also historic. She
would be the first female state
engineer for our state.
It sends a powerful message that
this body and our governor
supports women in leadership and
it lets women and girls know
that there are equal
opportunities in engineering and
STEM fields. These are important
jobs, and we need to encourage
more women and girls to enter
these fields and perhaps if she
is appointed when she is
appointed, she could take on
some female interns.
To encourage them in the field.
And um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I will,
um, present uh Liz Anderson to
make her comments. Thank you.
Good morning.
Good morning, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you. Thank you for the
opportunity to introduce myself
today. Um, I know you have a
packed agenda and I appreciate
your time and we'll keep my
introduction brief. Um, my name
is Elizabeth Anderson. Um, most
people call me Liz. First, I
want to thank my sponsor,
Senator Stefaniks. I appreciate
it, Senator Stefanik's support
and concerted leadership on
water issues. It is also a true
honor to be designated as New
Mexico's first female state
engineer, and I want to thank.
Governor Luham Grisham for the
opportunity and for the
appointment. I've enjoyed
working with you this session
and look forward to getting to
know each of you more as we work
together to tackle New Mexico's
water challenges.
I'm so happy to have my family
here with me today. And I'm
thankful for the opportunity to
share this moment with them. My
husband Jeremy is also a water
engineer. We're getting ready to
celebrate our 20 year wedding
anniversary. Um, we have two
busy, lovely, thoughtful
daughters who are both in middle
school, also here, um, with
water engineers as parents, you
can imagine they hear a lot
about water issues.
If I'm not talking about water,
then I'm probably talking about
my kids. Natalie is an
incredible runner and Scarlett
is a beautiful dancer. They're
both excellent students, and we
are so incredibly proud of them.
We're also joined by my dad, Dan
Herrick, who's a retired
aerospace engineer and officer
in the US Air Force. My sister
Emily, my sister-in-law,
Stephanie, and my niece Simani.
I'm also very pleased that we
are joined here today by Mike
Hammond, my esteemed predecessor
in this role.
I'd like to share a little more
about me and my background, and
then to provide some thoughts on
my intentions as state engineer
and my vision for the agency. I
grew up in Albuquerque and
graduated from UNM with
bachelor's and master's degrees
in civil engineering, with a
focus on water resources,
environmental and environmental
engineering, while in school, I
interned at Sandia National
Laboratories working on water
conservation projects that
looked for ways to help the labs
conserve water while supporting
their mission. My graduate
research involved me
treatment, including bench scale
and pilot studies for municipal
water reuse, arsenic removal,
and brackish water treatment.
After graduating, I spent 11
years working as a consultant
for CH2M Hill, now Jacobs
engineers and worked my way up
to the role of water operations
leader for New Mexico and West
Texas. We built many of the
large water and wastewater
projects here in New Mexico,
including the surface water
treatment plants that provide
drinking water for both
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
I also worked on the conceptual
design for the eastern New
Mexico Rural Water System, now
under construction, and I'm very
familiar with water challenges
in that part of the state.
After having kids, I decided to
work closer to home and accepted
a job managing engineering,
design and construction projects
with the Albuquerque Burnley
County Water Utility Authority
at the Water Authority, I served
in a variety of roles that
helped me get a broad
perspective on utility
operations, strategic planning,
water conservation, public
outreach and education and water
rights Administration in my role
in my final role at the agency,
I served as the chief planning
officer where I managed water
resources, asset management and
engineering. In this role, I
helped found the San Juan trauma
contractors Association and
served as the first chair of
that organization. I also served
on the water, infrastructure and
policy task force before taking
on the role of state engineer, I
spent a year working as senior
advisor to our previous data
engineer Mike.
It's hard to believe. Oh wait,
oh, I'm a level 4 water operator
and a level 3 wastewater
operator. I'm not afraid to get
my hands dirty.
I love water engineering because
it's all about working with
people to find collaborative
solutions while working with our
precious water resources. It's
hard to believe that I've been
working in civil engineering for
25 years. It's gone by so fast,
and we've seen a lot of things
change in our water supplies
with the impacts of significant
drought that we've experienced
through that, throughout that
time period. I'm optimistic
about our opportunities to
improve water resources in New
Mexico, and I'm excited to take
on this new challenge as New
Mexico State engineer.
My goal is to help New Mexicans
move forward with policies,
programs and projects that
support our water future,
recognizing that we anticipate
25% less water in our rivers and
aquifers in the next 50 years,
and passionate about water
resources, building our water
workforce, educating the public
and on water issues and setting
up our beautiful state for our
resilient and sustainable
future, and tend to deliver on
the governor's water priorities
laid out in the 50-year water
action plan and build on the
excellent work that's been done
in recent years with the water.
Structure and policy task force,
we must ensure the future
generations of New Mexicans have
a secure water supply, resilient
watersheds, and thriving local
economies. The interagency
collaboration that's taking
place around implementing this
plan is something we've been, we
haven't seen in quite some time
and I'm invigorated by the
energy and expertise displayed
by my agency partners. I will
continue to operate the agency's
programs and a fair and reliable
way, resolving complex water
management decisions based on on
the.
the best available data and
science. I will prioritize
providing our staff with the
technical resources they need to
do their job well and
efficiently while making data
readily available to the public.
I appreciate the legislature
passing the Water Data Act and
their recognition of the need to
modernize our agency's resources
to make good science-based
decisions for water management
in our state. Also, the
importance of collaboration with
stakeholders and decision makers
when tackling our complex water
challenges cannot be
understated. I believe
everyone's voice deserves to be.
heard.
OK. The planning work currently
underway to revitalize. I'll
skip that part. The state the
role of state engineer is also
about being a strong advocate
for New Mexico's water interests
among the state, the other
states in the Colorado River and
Rio Grande basins. It's
important to me to be a good
neighbor to the states we share
stream systems with and most
importantly to stand up for New
Mexico's needs. I'll continue to
work working with the skilled
professionals on staff at the
office of the State Engineer and
Interstate stream commission to
maintain a competitive and
highly technical workforce
across the agency.
Thank you for your time today
and for considering my
appointment as state engineer. I
look forward to getting to know
all of you and want you to know
that my door is always open.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you, Liz. Now, we did have some
organized support, and I'm gonna
ask them to come forward.
They'll have a minute and a half
each to make comments, and I
call out your name. I'm gonna
need you to restate your name
for the record. So I'm gonna
call up and if you can do a
single file line behind Liz
Aaron Bulk.
Who's the Pecos Valley artists
and Conservation District, Eon
Chavez of the San Juan Water
Commission, Steve Chavez, Mesa
del Sol Managing partner, Bruce
Thompson, AAM A FCA board chair
and retired Regents professor
from UNM Civil Engineering and
water resources departments.
Good morning and just as a
reminder, restate your name.
Good morning, Chair and
committee. My name is Aaron
Bali.
I'm the superintendent of the
Pecos Valley Artesian
Conservancy District in Roswell.
I represent about 110,000
irrigated acres and over 100,000
constituents.
We stand in strong support of
Miss Anderson's appointment, uh.
I'd just point out that
Coupled with her extreme
intelligence, she is also very
creative, and I think that's
what the future of water
management is gonna demand. We
stand in strong support and
thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Erin Chavez and I'm the
executive director of the San
Juan Water Commission up in
Farmington, New Mexico. Our
organization deals with uh
municipal industrial supplies in
the county. We serve, uh, one of
our big projects is the Animus
La Plata project.
That serves the citizens of
Farmington, New Mexico, uh, we
are in strong support of Ms
Anderson. I have worked with her
for over 10 years through the
San Juan Choma project and the
other issues, the water planning
issues, and so therefore I we
strong we we support her and the
only, the only question I have
with her is, does she like red
or green chili, not sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the commission, I'm Bruce
Thompson. I'm a semi-retired
professor of civil engineering,
um, in the early 2000s, late
90s, uh, we hired a couple of
graduates, uh, undergraduate
students into our graduate
program, uh, a woman named
Elizabeth Herrick and a young
man named Jeremy Anderson, and
uh they took our classes, helped
on our research projects, course
worked very long hours in, in
the labs and of course,
you know, the consequences of uh
two graduate students working in
our labs, um, but I'm not here
to talk about Miss Anderson's
deep secrets rather to speak to
her qualifications for the
position of state engineer.
She's outstanding professional
experience. She's already um uh
summarize that and of course if
you're drinking water in
Albuquerque or in Santa Fe,
chances are it came through the
treatment plants that she helped
design and construct.
Um, she moved to the public
sector, worked with the
Albuquerque, Berlio County Water
Utility Authority and led their
planning effort for the
utility's 100 year plan. There
are very few organizations that
plan 100 years into the future,
but under Miss Anderson's uh uh
leadership.
Uh, she worked with federal,
state, local officials, water
engineers, and most importantly,
the public. It was a very
challenging uh exercise and
was an amazing project,
demonstrated her ability to work
with a diverse group of
stakeholders.
She has the reputation,
experience, and integrity to
lead the state in addressing our
water challenges, I strongly
urge you to support her
nomination. Thank you. Thank you
and Eric, are you speaking on
behalf of Steve Chaves today.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eric
Martinez I'm the registered
lobbyist for Mesa del Sol and on
behalf of Steve Chavez, who
couldn't make it the day he
delivered a message in support
of Miss Anderson, which states,
I've had the privilege of
collaborating with Elizabeth
during her 10 years as the chief
planning officer for the
Albuquerque Berlio County Water
Authority. Her expertise was
instrumental in developing a
comprehensive master water plan
form makes the doo to meet the
criteria of the state. She is a
great engineer and leader of the
outstanding choice for the state
engineer position.
Respectfully, Mr. Steve Chavez.
Thank you. Thank you, Eric. Now
I'm gonna go to members of, I
mean in the committee, is there
anyone in the committee in favor
of this country, raise your
hand.
Well you can raise your hand if
you want to for your mom.
OK. Any online?
And one online. And there was no
organized opposition, but I'm
gonna ask the committee. I'm in
the committee room, is there
anyone in the committee room in
opposition of this country.
none any online.
OK.
No, I'll now go to the
committee.
Unlock.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you, uh, Senator
Stefaniks for sponsoring.
Uh, Ms Anderson and, uh, Miss
Anderson, um,
Congratulations.
Nice to have your family here
with you.
It's nice to see, um.
How long have you been working
in the state engineer's office
or been affiliated uh with it.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Senator Black.
That I've been working within
the state engineer's office for
the last year and a half, a
little bit over a year and a
half now, and I took on the role
of the state engineer in August.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
How do you like it?
I like it.
Um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Anderson,
can you
So historically, has that, has
that been a civil engineer, PE,
uh, person historically that
position.
Yes, by statute, that's been,
it's been a PE for the last,
since it was me and, and by the
way, for those that don't know,
Mr. Chair and Miss Anderson,
getting a PE is very difficult,
um.
I went to an engineering school
and, and a lot of people just
decided to forego that. So
that's a big accomplishment to
have a PE, so very good. Uh,
real quick, tell me about, um,
Your thoughts on, I mean,
obviously, I, I would consider
you a water expert.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Anderson,
tell me about um if there's a
priority of mapping aquifers in
the state of New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, Senator Block, um,
there he is, um, there is no
doubt that we need to better
understand the aquifers
throughout the state, and
there's a funding right now was
supported through the governor's
50-year water action plan, and I
know and a lot of support moving
in that direction, which is
excellent. We absolutely need to
map our aquifers. 100% uh, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Anderson, because I
think we're way late to need on
mapping the aquifers. We haven't
done it for a long, long time.
And the, um,
Obviously, water in New Mexico
is probably, you know,
Definitely in the top 3
priorities uh for New Mexico and
natural resources because they
affect ranching, agriculture.
Uh, residential commercial real
estate.
Uh, and by the way, life. So I
think it's really important. I
would, um, I look forward to you
pushing for the mapping of
aquifers in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, lastly, Mr. Chair, Ms.
Anderson, um,
You said your dad is here, where
is he?
He's over there at the end of
the line of my family there in
row 3.
So your dad, Mr. Chair, and Miss
Anderson was an Air Force
officer.
That's correct.
Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Anderson, I
was an Air Force officer, and
depending on what he did in the
Air Force is going to depend on
my vote
What did your dad do in the Air
Force?
He, um, he designed laser optics
systems for missile defense.
That's it.
Yeah
Um, I'm sure there was more.
Most of the time he'd come home
at night and say if I told you
what I did today, I'd have to
kill you, so it's, I didn't hear
a lot of details.
Uh, well, we are a little bit
related, uh, Mr. Chair, Miss
Anderson. He did missile
defense, but I was a missile
launch officer for Minuteman 3
missiles, so um.
Appreciate your dad's service
for whatever the hell he did, I
have no idea.
And let's keep it that way. Um,
I think you're, um, resume is
extremely impressive, especially
the water background. I mean,
you got Sandy experience.
Um
Yeah, I, I don't know what else,
I don't know what else we could
ask for.
I really don't. So, um, I look
forward to supporting you on the
floor and you got my
Full confidence here, and I just
want to say congratulations. I
think this is gonna be um
Uh, water under the bridge for
you. No offense. So, uh, Mr.
Chair, Ms. Anderson, great job.
Thank you for stepping up to
serve your state, and congrats
to you and your family. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you for visiting with
all of us on this
congratulations appointment. I'm
gonna ask you a couple of
questions just from
conversations from water users,
um, in the transition between uh
our, our former state engineer
and the new one. Do you believe
that some basins are over
diverted or over allocated.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, um,
there's, there's no doubt we
have challenges in our, in our
basins uh with water supply, and
that's part of the, the efforts
that are under the right way
right now with Aqua for mapping.
It's, I can't say um for sure if
we're over
Over, um, extended in those
areas, but it's certainly a
concern and that's something
that we're all working on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Some of the options and what
seems to be a a belief that
there's over diversion is to buy
back water rights is an option,
and other areas though they're
automatically losing a
percentage of the water when
they apply to change purpose.
There's just automatically a
clawback of what would have been
a water rights. How, how do you
expect that you would address
that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, um,
that's part of the analysis
that's completed looking at the,
the hydrologic effects. So it is
part of the, the work that's
done when they make a transfer
of water. OK, thank you. And, in
your uh short time and hopefully
even more. Do you plan to see
most of the districts within
throughout New Mexico. I hope
that you have an opportunity to,
to get out and see, meet water
users and not just stay uh
office. is that your tip?
Senator Brant.
Absolutely. I've already been
out to um to at least 3 of the
district offices and met with
all the staff and then to a
number of the different A
districts and assea commissions
and trying to get out there as
much as possible and I fully
intend to continue to do that,
doing that. Thank you. I think
that's gonna be important, Mr.
Chair, as we know, and this is
from every state office
throughout, you know, there's,
there's difference of management
styles and people have different
experiences while owners based
on kind of the different
districts, um, some, you know,
we know that.
State statutes allows for water
leasing, but there are some
areas, some certain districts
that are not permitting that.
Uh, what are your, what are your
thoughts on that? And do you
intend to, to visit with all
those districts or what, what's
your general thought on water
leasing?
Uh, right now we have a
rulemaking ongoing for the water
use leasing Act and that's
something that is a priority to
be able to have more flexibility
for water users in the state.
Thank you. I think that's
important as well too. Uh, Mr.
Chairman, and there has been
extensions of time that have
been uh permitted in lieu of
proof of beneficial use in the
transition here, will those be
honored, Mister Chair, Senator
Brantly.
Can you restate the question?
I'm sorry. Some, some, some
people have had extensions of
time for for their water uses,
um, and I think there's some
concern that during the
transition, they just want to
know that whatever allowances
have been made with the former
management are going to be
honored going through, I would
assume that there would be,
there wouldn't be this drastic
call, but, but can they
guarantee that there will be
stability and certain uh
allowances that are, that have
been made right now.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, um,
I, I believe in smooth
transitions, and I think that's
what this is, uh, you know,
working closely with Mike Hammon
for the last year, um, and now
moving into this, this role with
the staff, really excellent,
excellent staff throughout the
agency. Um, I think that, that
the transitions that we're
making are gonna be just
consistent.
Mr. Chairman, and, and I do too.
And so for those that are
listening and have any concern,
and there always is in any
agency when there's a, when
there's a
shift in leadership, but I think
so too, and I'm, I'm very happy
to see Mike Cameron here today,
obviously supporting this. I
think you're going to be great
in this role if there's anything
we can do, um, as liaisons to
the people and water owners out
there, we're, we're happy to
help you on that. So
congratulations on this and I'm
happy to support you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Townsend, thank you.
Congratulations.
Yeah
look forward to your, to your
work.
Based on a year and a half of
experience, what's the biggest
challenge before the state
engineer's office.
Mr. Chair, Senator Townsend, I
think that the biggest challenge
we face as a state is drought
and the shortages that we're
beginning to experience, I think
that the um the effects of
drought are
A parent and um and New Mexicans
are used to dealing with less
water than a lot of places, so
we are ahead of, ahead of a lot
of places. I think we've done a
good job of creating structures
that are gonna allow us to um to
get through these dry periods.
Um, but, and I, and I also have
to say that the emphasis we put
on water in the state is, is
commendable and that the
recognition that people have for
the challenges that we face.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, um,
Another important.
Well, let me ask you this. I
know you have a piece of
legislation you're trying to
work through the legislature.
How's that going for you?
Mr. Chair, Senator Townsend, um,
we do have some legislation on
water theft enforcement, going
through the, the Senate right
now is Senate Bill 210 and the
House is House Bill 348 and um
and we need to get more momentum
to get those through. Those are
the most critical pieces of
legislation for the agency and
they, they what they do is they
improve our ability to, to um to
have penalties.
that we can keep people from
stealing water and have more
teeth in that.
So thank you for bringing that
up. I appreciate your support
with that effort as well.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, um,
I hope it does get traction. It
needs traction.
Because it's the right thing to
do.
Um, as
With any commodity as there's
less of it, the price continues
to escalate, and you're gonna
see that in in the Mexico.
And illegal diversion of water,
as you well know, is a topic
that I'm uh feel pretty strong
about.
And, and I, I hope you continue
to push that. I hope so.
I hope that bill gets traction
and it will be uh very
unfortunate if it doesn't, but
man, Madam Chair, Mr. Cha, thank
you very much. Congratulations.
I look forward to working with
you.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move
that we move Elizabeth
Anderson's confirmation to the
full Senate floor later on
today.
But there's been a motion for a
full Senate confirmation before
I go to the vote, I just wanted
to say thank you for always
being so responsive in my
district assisting with the
water crisis and Chama talking
about uh se with me. I truly
believe in your comment that
you'll stand up for New Mexico
and New Mexicans. And with that,
if I can have a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's Senator
Bergman's is excused. Senator
Block.
I
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart. Yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Yes.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 8 in favor, you
will be moving forward to a full
Senate confirmation leader this
morning. Congratulations.
We're gonna move to the next
item on our agenda, which is the
appointment of Melanie Kenderine
as energy, minerals and natural
resources department cabinet
secretary.
And we're gonna welcome you and
both senator Stewart, who's
serving as your Senate sponsor.
Good morning, Senator. And if I
can ask those who are leaving
the committee room, if you can
take your conversations out the
door so we can continue with our
confirmation.
Thank you.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
It is my pleasure today to
sponsor Melanie Kinderine to
serve as New Mexico's Secretary
of Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources.
His Kindraine has been serving
as the secretary designate for
emerd since last May, and has
already developed a substantial
track record in this capacity.
Under her leadership today,
energy, minerals and natural
resource department has, among
other things, launched its here
and her tax incentive and solar
for all programs. They have
received hundreds of millions of
dollars in federal support to
support New Mexico's clean and
affordable energy programs.
They have conceived of and
developed an effort to make New
Mexico leader in the energy
transition based on sound
analysis, data and
technological.
capabilities and limitations.
She has updated state park fees
for the first time in two
decades, and it's helped to
bolster the state's ability to
respond to fires by creating two
new hotshot crews. The members
hotshots and quarrel and the
Pecos River Hot Shots in Las
Vegas.
Uh, these accomplishments and
Ener are built on Miss
Kinderdine's significant
professional foundation. In
addition to setting up and
running the MIT Energy
initiative is Kinderdine served
at DOE for both.
Clinton terms and for the 2nd
Obama term in various high-level
capacities, including as energy
council, counselor to the
secretary and director of the
Office of Energy Policy and
Systems Analysis. During her
time at Department of Energy in
the Obama administration, she
was named by National Journal as
one of the top 5 most
influential people in energy
policy.
And 2020 in her capacity as
senior vice president at the
Energy Futures Initiative is
Kinderdi was named by Ally as
one of the top voices of energy
in the sustainable energy
category.
So importantly is Kinderine grew
up in New Mexico. She went to
San Antonito Elementary School
and High School and it's a
graduate of University of New
Mexico. She moved to Washington
when she was Congressman Bill
Richardson's legislative
director and chief of staff, and
did his innery committee work.
He accomplishments,
contributions to US and global
energy policies to alumni status
and her history is in New
Mexican, where factors in her
invitation to be the
commencement speaker at UNM in
2021. This Kinderine is bringing
this substantial experience
perspective and knowledge to her
current position as secretary
designate for New Mexico's
Department of Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources. I urge my
colleagues to support her
confirmation and
introduced to you Miss Melanie
Henderine.
Good morning.
Thank you, thank you so much,
Senator Stewart, and, and, uh,
um thank you all uh for the
opportunity and the honor to
appear for before you today.
It's also an honor to be here
representing our governor and
New Mexico's energy, minerals
and natural resources department
EMR, where I have been the
secretary designate since last
May, and that capacity I've been
working with an incredible team
of dedicated public servants to
protect, provide for, and
promote the state's clean.
conventional and mineral energy
resources, its parks and
forests, and a cleaner
environment.
Um, Senator Stewart already
already mentioned a little bit
about my um my growing up, um,
and my professional experience.
I, I did grow up in Sandia Park
on the east side of the Sandia
Mountains. It was very different
then. That was a long, long time
ago, um, when San Antonito
Elementary School was so small,
my 2nd and 3rd grade classes
were combined, and uh they
didn't have enough teachers. Um,
I spent my childhood riding
horses on.
Unquote the grant, that's what
we called it, was an old large
Spanish land grant that had open
trails. I am a child of a Sandia
National Lab scientist, Daddy
worked at Sandier for 442 years.
Uh, he's still a resident of New
Mexico. My husband is a
registered engineer in the
state, my son got his master's
degree at New Mexico Tech.
Uh, my family was gonna be
coming up on Friday, but they
couldn't come up today, so, uh,
the change of date was a
problem, but um they're here in
spirit.
Um, I tell you all this cause I
want you to know my New Mexico
roots and those of my family, my
love of New Mexico's mountains,
forests, and open spaces, and my
appreciation for both the
incredible history of our state
and the significant innovation
infrastructure within its
borders were only one of two
states that have 2 national
labs, and I hope to put that
innovation in infrastructure,
uh uh to work uh for the clean
energy transition.
I as as Senator Stewart said, I
left New Mexico and Bill
Richardson was elected to
Congress, uh, Bill was on the
House Energy and Commerce and
Interior Committees, um, I did
his energy work, I supervised
his staff that did his work on
public lands, bills,
legislation, established the
Elmalpaish, a national monument,
and he offered major amendments
to the reauthorization of the
Superfund Act, importantly, to
get Bills support.
for the whipland Withdrawal Act,
the New Mexico congressional
delegation supported Bill's
proposal to build a new road so
that nuclear waste going from
Los Alamos to Whip would not
have to go through downtown
Santa Fe, and that's the Santa
Fe bypass road that we, I think
it should be renamed the Bill
Richardson Highway, cause Bill
did that and um this work gave
me a start in understanding
energy and the associated
infrastructure needs and uses my
strong commitment.
to a cleaner environment, a deep
dive into nuclear waste over
which Emner has some
jurisdiction, transportation,
and ongoing support for New
Mexico's history and its
beautiful historic spaces.
After marrying Bill's best
friend from college, living in
New York City and and working on
the 1992 Clinton campaign as its
east coast celebrity scheduler,
that was a very weird time in my
life. I went to work at the US
Department of Energy for almost
the entire Clinton
administration.
I provided support for
environmental legislation such
as amendments to the Clean Air
Act and secret O'Leary put me in
charge of an effort to save the
Department of Energy when it was
targeted for elimination.
I also spent a great deal of
time working on energy security
issues with a focus on expanding
the strategic petroleum reserve
and creating a Northeast home
heating oil reserve, heating oil
was huge in the Northeast at the
time and, and they ran into some
problems.
The nation's energy security
priorities are still an
important issue for the United
States, and I think that New
Mexico's critical role in this
arena is not fully appreciated.
Let me give you an example. In
the winter of 2021, 2022 after
Russia's invasion of Ukraine,
Europe lost 22 billion cubic
meters of Russian gas, the US
replaced 19 billion cubic meters
of that lost gas with its LNG
exports.
Which included via the Permian
Basin significant amounts of New
Mexico's natural gas, as the
nation's 4th largest market of
natural gas producer in Mexico's
role in national and global
energy security needs energy
security needs to be fully
understood, analyzed, and
managed in the nation's energy
policies and the energy
transition going forward.
Another critical issue that I
worked on in the Clinton
administration and important to
our state.
The transfer of DOE's naval oil
shale reserve back to the
northern Ute tribe.
When Richardson was energy
secretary, he was my 3rd Energy
Secretary, Congress passed a law
allowing DOE to transfer its
naval oil shale reserves, those
were artifacts of World War One.
Um, to the interior department
for future management. I stopped
our fossil energy office from
doing so, went to Secretary
Richardson, and we discovered
that the reserve was a doughnut
hole in the middle of the
northern Ute reservation. We
decided to return the land to
the Utes. It was the largest
lower 48 land transfer back to
Native Americans in over 100
years. The ceremony making the
northern youths reservation hole
again was one of the most
rewarding things I've ever done.
in my, uh, many years of
service.
It underscored the importance
and the value of working with
our native peoples on a range of
issues, and I look forward to
opportunities for doing so in my
capacity as eminent secretary.
I left UE at the end of the
Clinton administration and was
offered a job as a vice
president of the Gas Technology
Institute, I called Bill
Richardson. He was always my
mentor and counselor and ask him
if I should take the job and his
memorable response was gas,
green, good.
Besides telling you something
about how Bill Fox 3 G's, OK?
Um, it underscores that in 2001,
natural gas was considered very,
very green. His reason for the 3
G's and the green remark is
supported by key data from the
US Energy Information
Administration, between 2005 and
2020, the US led the world in
CO2 emissions reductions.
Over roughly the same period
2006 to 22021, 61% of those
reductions in the power sector
were from coal to natural gas
fuel switching, the other 39%
was renewable generation, these
are key data that would guide
the clean energy transition
going forward.
Um, uh, I'm going to, uh, I did
set up a while uh at UTI a uh a
unconventional gas R&D program,
the first place I went was to
New Mexico Tech, uh, Dan Lopez,
then the president of New Mexico
Tech, uh was the chairman of my
company's board for many, many
years, um, and, uh, and I think
that we and San Die Los Alamos
were members of the uh research
consortium that I put together,
and it was essential for enhance
US energy security, um, and the
US is now the number one natural
gas producer in the world.
We also now understand the
near-term significant warming
potential of methane, um, and uh
I went to, uh, COP 24 of Paul
and I told the industry in one
of my speeches there just
capture your blank blank. I
didn't say blank blank. I said
to capture your blank white
methane. We have technologies to
do so, um, we should do that.
Um, I sat up and ran the MIT
Energy initiative, um, I worked
with uh the uh secretary
ceremony he became the Secretary
of Energy in the 2nd Obama term.
I went back to DOE on the
important thing I did there, uh,
one of the most important was
established mission innovation
where 26 countries in the world
decided agreed to double their
spending on clean energy. Um, I
also set up and ran the uh the
uh DOE energy policy and systems
analysis and did a quadrennial
energy review which were want to
do.
something like that at Emner.
Um, after we left the Obama
administration, Secretary Monis
nice and sat up and ran the
energy futures initiative a not
for profit think tank, um, uh,
that, uh, uh, analyzes a deep
Uh, decarbonization of energy
systems and but is unbiased and
uses technically based analysis.
I left EFI to return to New
Mexico and give back to the
state that gave so much to me as
eminent secretary designate and
with your support its secretary.
I'm working on and will continue
to work to put this very long
history in the energy and
natural resources based work
from my home state. Thank you
for this opportunity again. I
look forward to your questions.
Thank you for that. So for those
of you who are new to the
committee, we do 15 minutes of
sponsor introduction and the
contrary to make a statement,
then we go to organize support
and organized opposition in the
essence of time, we have several
who signed up. I'm only gonna
call one up because of the time,
um, is Mark Murphy in the room?
Jason Sinel.
Jason, I'm gonna give you a
minute and a half, which will
take us to the time, and then
I'll read out the others who are
here. You'll be the only to make
comments at this time. Terrific.
Thank you very much, um, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, my name is
Jason Sandell and I'm in the
energy industry and from
Farmington. I stand before you
today in full support of Miss
Melody Kinderine as Secretary of
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, Miss
Kinderine is truly an
exceptional person to be
assuming the.
position at first became
acquainted with Melanie when she
was a principal at Energy
Futures Initiative. This was, of
course, after she was
legislative director for the
late Congressman Bill
Richardson, and several stints
as senior advisor at the US
Department of Energy.
I was a participant with a
project named the Roosevelt
Project. This was a research
project focused on providing
research and solutions for
coal-affected communities like
mine. This was the first time
that I'm aware of where someone
was truly caring and concerned
for our community that had
experienced devastating impacts
from energy transition policies.
This is not a commentary on
those policies per se, rather a
commentary on a person who had
the power and authority to make
a difference for small town New
Mexico.
Research was conducted and
solutions offered whereby our
community was listened to and
I'd even say hurt. These are the
qualities that one should expect
from our cabinet secretaries. It
is with great honor that I stand
in support of Melanie Kinderine
as Secretary of Ener because she
cares about New Mexico. She's an
expert in energy-related issues,
and she simply gets how
important energy and energy
policy is to our state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you. And so just for the
record to state, they're not
going to come up to speak
because of time, but we had Jim
just Jordans.
We had Mark Murphy, Tauri Yamada
and Jeremy Rutherford. Now we
didn't have any organized
opposition, but I'm gonna go to
the committee room and see by a
show of hands how many of you
are in support of this country.
10 and the online.
none, any in opposition by a
show of hands.
3, any online?
thing, man. I'll now go to
members of the committee.
And 2 on line, 3 in the room and
2 online. I'll, you need to sign
up to speak and so there wasn't
any organized opposition signed
up.
Members of the committee,
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, and senator for bringing
forward this candidate, and
thank you, Miss uh Kendraine for
coming around to meet and talk
about um
Your goals for the department,
your department handles many
different things. So, uh, first
of all, I recognize your, your
great experience in uh DC in the
East Coast.
But in terms of the um
Energy futures initiative that
you were involved with.
What besides natural gas.
some of your initiatives or uh
projects.
Sorry. We uh did major, major
analysis of the role of nuclear
in clean energy, uh,
Uh, I'm sorry, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chair, sorry, I
I'm used to DC sorry um
the uh the um
We did Future of Nuclear.
We did the future of the
electric grid, uh, very, very
focused on, we did a future of
renewable study.
Uh, we actually did major, major
analyses of energy jobs.
And, and, uh, and so we did
analyses across the board. We
didn't do, uh, we didn't do
future coal, um, uh, uh, or
future of oil, uh, but future of
natural gas, future of
renewables, future of the
electric grid and um and uh and
study of energy jobs were just
some of the things that we did,
and I actually did hydrogen as
well, uh, both blue and green
hydrogen analysis of that.
And um and so many, many
different studies in almost all
aspects, including renewables
and clean energy and uh
CCS, etc. etc.
So, um, Mr. Chairman, chair
Senator and Miss Kinderine, uh,
as I mentioned, your department
does many, many different
things, and
Over the past few years, um, the
water and Natural Resources
Committee has had reports of
Non-movement.
On the Rio Grande Trail.
Uh, from
The top of the state to the
bottom of the state. And we are
very concerned of your
department has been handed this
responsibility, um, sometimes we
think that the um
Responsibilities of the staff
don't lend themselves to getting
the work done that they have to
do and doing that commission.
So can you speak to whatever has
been done?
Currently this year,
this past year and Mr. Chair and
Madam Chair, um, what I have
done, uh, just so you know, is
put my special assistant.
Uh, uh, in charge of working on
Rio Grande Trail, and he is
devoting a very, very
significant amount of time uh to
that effort, and so we are, we
are pushing hard, pushing
forward. I have put a person
designated a single person who
is now responsible for that, and
I totally agree with your uh
your points we need to expedite
it and it's hugely important and
highly valuable.
So, Mr. Chair, um, Madam Chair,
Senator Ms. Kenderine, the uh
During this session, I carried a
bill for the state forester and
I know Senator Wirth has been
involved with the fair plan, but
what is your role in working on
wildfire plans for the state.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, and, uh, Senator
Stefaniks, uh, we are deeply,
deeply focused on getting uh
additional support and thank
you, thank you so much uh for
supporting the state forestry,
um, we are, are, uh, working to
get an additional, I believe,
$20 million for uh state
forestry to do some some
Uh, management of uh of uh homes
and forests and seeding, uh,
seeding forest, etc. etc. and uh
and so, and I've been working
very, very closely with the uh
state uh state insurance and
then the insurance commissioner,
uh, Alice Cain and I meet on a
regular basis to talk about what
we can do to both diminish the
for the uh fire risk and, and
ensure that
can continue to get insurance.
For the homeowners and and
businesses in New Mexico, so, so
very focused on, on both of
those issues. So, Mr. Chair, I
could ask many more questions,
but I would like to let my
colleagues weigh in. Thank you
so much. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um, skins are dying.
Based on your experience.
Um, in inner, what are the?
What is this single?
Most significant challenge for
the department.
How do you intend to address it.
Um, the, uh, I look at, I'm
sorry, madam chair and, and, um,
Mr. Chairman, um, I look at and
and Senator Townsend, I look at
The role of Mner in kind of a
interesting way. I actually
think it's, it's titled is
redundant Energy, minerals and
Natural Resources are energy and
minerals are natural resources,
and so how we manage those
natural resources, I think, is
where I am focusing all of my
attention and and how to, how to
find the cross-cutting issues,
um,
for fairly disparate divisions
and, and what I am, uh, focused
on and kind of 3 large areas and
where they intersect, which is
energy affordability, hugely
important for the state of New
Mexico, um, I don't think people
understand or appreciate our
electricity prices for the
industrial sector are almost 25%
lower than the national average.
So affordability is hugely
important. How do we ensure
affordable
Uh, secure. I mentioned energy
security is is another huge
issue, um, where, where uh New
Mexico is playing a critical
role, uh, but electricity and,
and uh our oil and gas are all
all also very important for our
own energy security in New
Mexico, uh, but important for
the world, and then a clean
energy transition. So those
three areas of focus and how
they intersect is where we are
working.
uh with the different divisions
and uh and uh and developing,
we're gonna be doing
cross-cutting analysis in those
areas, so it's really
affordability, reliability and
uh and clean.
Mr. Chair, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, thank you for that. I
think um
I think, making sure.
That New Mexicans have the
availability of affordable
power.
Energy.
Not necessarily electric, but
energy.
is critical to us overcoming
many of the shortfalls that we
That we know we have.
I was feeling real comfortable
with your appointment until I
saw Jason stand up, and then
that cause
I'm kidding you. I, I, he's a
good friend of mine, but uh I
wasn't gonna let you get by with
at least digging in just a
little bit.
Madam chair, um,
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I think
your focus on New Mexico must
remain.
Did a love.
To affordability and
availability.
And as long as you keep that.
as on, on the front end of your
Of your sphere.
I look forward to working with
you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doig. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Ms. Kenardine. Um, New Mexico.
Has has gotten uh 16 $156
million solar for all award. And
and administers that program.
We have a lot of really good
local solar companies, uh,
operating in the state.
We also have uh some really
shady ones, uh, that are
primarily from out of state. Um,
but they are operating here.
They are.
Uh, abusive to consumers, um,
And so, one of the, so, uh,
Vivant, uh, which you might
recall the AG had a
A suit against a couple of years
ago, they're still functioning
here. They're just called Sunun
now.
They're still functioning here,
they're still doing the same bad
practices. Um, so,
Will you commit to not giving.
These, any of these funds to
companies like Sun Run, who
there is a
A documented history of them
abusing consumers.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
um, I will commit to ensuring in
every way, shape or form that we
maximize the value of that tour
for all program, it's $156
million for um for uh low income
people, I will do everything in
my power to ensure that those
are administered and go to uh
contractors who have a sound
reputation.
And not bad reputations, so.
Mr. Chair, Senator Miss
Kinderine, I appreciate that,
um, and I, I hope that there
will be a
That that baked into that
process. We'll be looking at
those reputations and looking
at, uh, just because they have a
new name now. Uh, if their bad
reputation was just under their
old name, um, that they should
not get a pass, simply because
they have changed their name to.
to try to avoid the reputation
they have created.
But thank you very much. You
have an amazing, uh,
resume. I really appreciated you
coming in and speaking with me
before session started at my
office. Um,
And I look forward to to working
with you in the future. Thanks.
Thank you, Senator Bergman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good
to see you. Thank you also for
coming to my office before this
to discuss your role and your
vision for the department, but I
was just wondering if you could
elaborate a little more on any
plans you have to work with
other state agencies, local
governments and tribal entities.
Uh, to address resource
management and renewable
energies.
Um, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, uh, it only took me 4
members to get that right, OK,
Madam chair and, and, uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, something that,
that, and I really appreciate
the LFC support and and the the
support of many members of the
legislature.
That we are uh working on right
now and we just got um about 10
RFPs. They're all 200 pages long
and I have to read them this
week, OK, so, uh, as soon as I
leave here, I'm gonna be reading
to do a New Mexico version of
the quadrinnal Energy Review.
Which I ran my office ran, did
the analysis when I was at DOE
and it was 22 agencies of the
federal government and all of
the agencies with interest in
the portfolio that we were
talking about, and we want to do
something we are going to do
something like that for New
Mexico. I think New Mexico is a
perfect example of what could be
done in that regard, and because
we have huge conventional energy
resources, we
have huge clean energy
resources, and, and a hugely,
hugely how we manage all of that
can be an example for the
country and for the world, quite
frankly, parts of the Middle
East, you know, where they Saudi
Arabia has one product, oil, OK,
and how the transition is going
to be very, very important, and
I think we can be an example of
doing that. So we'll be working
with 8 or 9 agencies in that
regard.
Getting all of the inputs
looking at the cross-cutting
issues I described earlier,
affordability, reliability,
clean energy, looking at all of
those cross-cutting issues, um,
we will also be working with the
tribes for obvious reasons, it's
hugely important to how, how,
um, how we, uh, work with them
and manage their specific
interests, and that will be a
huge part of that effort as
well, and um and uh so that's
That's an example of what I
think we can and should be do
and should be doing uh to work
together and to advance those
objectives for the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you, that's all.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
That's, uh,
um, I moved, uh, Senate rules.
A move
Yeah, only me and enter.
Move forward to the Senate for
appointment.
Thank you. There's been a motion
to move you forward for a full
Senate confirmation before I
take that I have two letters I
filled to mention that came in
in your support. You had a
letter sent in from Ernest
Moniz, who's the 13th US
Secretary of Energy and
currently a professor of physics
and engineering systems at MIT
and the second letter was sent
in from C. Michael Ming, the
former Oklahoma Secretary of
Energy. And so with that, if I
can have a roll call.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos is excused.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doha.
With a vote of 8 in favor of
your confirmation, we will see
you later this morning for a
full Senate confirmation.
I'm gonna have the gavel back
over to our madam chair, who
will continue on with the
agenda.
All right, we're gonna go to HB
143.
representative, come on up.
Madam Chair, um, is there, OK,
do we have a bill with
amendments in context or should
there be an amendment?
Also included
So, Senator, I know that there
were have been amendments that
have been put on this bill
before it got to us, right? And
so you're right, I don't see in
our,
in our
so all that's good we can get
copies of those.
Because in reading the analysis
and reading about the house
floor amendment and the
committee amendment, I got a
little confused, so I would like
to be clear about what we have.
Thank you. Yeah, absolutely, we
should always have to have
amendments in our, not our ring,
not no.
Go ahead.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
committee, uh appreciate being
in front of Senate rules this
morning. Uh, my name is
Representative Sarah Silva, uh,
sponsor of House Bill 143 and um
my co-sponsor, Senator Jeff
Steinborn, um, and so,
I want to just give an overview
of House Bill 143, and then we
can talk about the amendments if
that is helpful. Um, so I'll
just give a brief overview. So
House Bill 143 would modernize
our state's lobbying reporting
system in order to give
legislators, constituents, and
other stakeholders a full
picture of what's happening and
who is shaping bills and
defining the playing field
during each legislative session.
Transparency enables New
Mexicans to understand how their
government works.
works and operates and this bill
would enhance public oversight
and democratic engagement. Um,
as mentioned, we also have an
amendment which we are ready to
discuss at the pleasure of the
chair and committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee, appreciate you
hearing this bill very much. I
appreciate you hearing that
expeditiously is that, uh, Madam
Chair, committee, this is from
my viewpoint, an incredibly
important bill, um, and I feel
that way. I felt this way for my
first day serving to now, uh,
where we really don't always
know, um, who is involved in
shaping legislation one way or
another.
About 20 states require the
transparency being proposed to
you today. This is not novel.
We're not the first one,
but, but it's just important in
New Mexico, which currently is
rated as having a D nationally
and lobbying transparency
because we don't require this
type of disclosure, um, I think
it'll be really beneficial for
us as elected officials in the
decisions we make, it'll be
helpful to constituents to
understand.
Who is behind any given bill one
way or another, and, and
ultimately help the media also
be able to report to the state
about these bills so that we
make sure we get it right here.
I just want to say, Madam Chair,
just for everyone's clarity,
this is really an equal
opportunity bill. It affects the
environmental organization that
has to hire a lobbyist to the
oil industry lobbyists. It, it's
not anybody who has to hire a
lobbyist, uh, basically has to
file this report. The citizen
advocate who comes up here for
the day.
does not have to file this
report. It's very um technical
in in Mexico lobbyist regulation
Act, who is a lobbyist and who
is not, and what constitutes
lobbying, and that, that those
are all things that trigger,
would trigger this new um
filing. So that man, I'm sure I
know we're happy to answer
questions and of course, speak
to the amendment when you're
ready.
Great, thanks. Well, uh, I'll go
ahead and, uh, move the
amendment for the purposes of
discussion. Is there any
objection to that motion?
Uh, before we get to that, I do
have 2 people signed up in
support, Hannah Burling from
League of Women Voters and
Amelia Burrell.
uh from the state ethics
commission. You guys are very
efficient with your time, so if
you all wanna come up, uh, you
can go ahead for up to 3
minutes.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Hannah Burling.
I'm the co-president of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico, the league stands in
strong support of this bill. We
believe that transparency has to
be a part of the political
process, and this includes.
Fair and consistent enforcement
of
Campaign finance, gift and
contribution reporting laws and
limits on those gifting
contributions.
We urge the committee to give
this bill a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Amelia Berly, and I'm
the deputy director of the state
ethics Commission.
First, I'd like to thank the
sponsors of this bill for
bringing forward legislation
that is both thoughtful.
And important to strengthening
transparency in the legislative
process.
Each year, the state ethics
commission composed of 3
Democrats, 3 Republicans, and
one independent set legislative
priorities to strengthen in
Mexico's ethics laws.
This year, in a unanimous
bipartisan decision, the
commission made lobbyist
transparency a top priority.
Lobbyists play an important role
in the legislative process.
Providing lawmakers with
valuable insights and ensuring
diverse perspectives are
represented.
The core of House Bill 143 does
not seek to limit or restrict
that role in any way.
Rather, it affirms that
transparency is fundamental to
maintaining public trust in
government.
The disclosures proposed in
House Bill 143 are reasonable
and necessary to promote
accountability while respecting
the important contributions
lobbyists make.
For these reasons, we
respectfully urge the committee
to pass House Bill 143.
Thank you. We did not have
anyone sign up in opposition on
this. Uh, so we will
Representative for you.
I didn't know.
So
Representative, yeah, we usually
are pretty strict about it, but
you are a member of the
legislature. Go, go ahead for up
to 3 minutes. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
as a New Mexican, I'm here today
because I believe in good
government government and good
governance. Um, I wish that
after the years I've spent here,
many as an advocate and now 6 in
the body that I could believe
that what we do here happens in
in light and in transparency.
Too often it doesn't. What sat
with me the last few days is
that I really
appreciate the intention of this
bill, and in many ways I went, I
went and and wished that it
would go further, um, just today
in our tax committee, we voted
on a bill where two members of
the committee who have direct
financial interest in the piece
of legislation we are
considering took votes. I think
an incredible amendment to this
bill would be that us as members
of the body, if we had our
spouse or ourselves, um, with a
financial interest in the
legislation we are considering
would have to at least disclose.
That since recusal is not
something our body is used to or
seems to practice. So again, I
wanted to appreciate the
long-standing work of Senator
Steinborn and our newcoming
freshman for continuing these
conversations and making sure
we're building a government that
New Mexicans deserve. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. As I mentioned, there
was no one signed up in
opposition and so members, you
have the amendment in front of
you, um, this is language from
the bill that we passed
unanimously out of this
committee, Senate Bill 248
previously. So
Usually I would get longer
amendments like this to you all,
24 hours ahead of time, but
since we have already heard that
everything that's in here and
pass that unanimously, that's
why you did not see it
previously, but members of the
committee.
No
Yeah.
Yes, so. So, um, madam chair
to the amendments has strike
call items of house for
amendment number 1. I would
really like to know what those
are and, and the amendments in
context doesn't do that.
Right, so everyone should have
the amendments in context, and
we have not yet adopted the
amendment. This is, we've only
adopted it for the purposes of
discussion. So, representative,
do you wanna tell us what we'd
be striking with us. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair and committee,
uh, Senator Protem, so the
amendment also, as you stated,
removed house floor amendment
one, the House floor amendment,
uh, needs to be removed because
it, it doesn't track with Senate
Bill 248. Uh, there are
multiple, uh, instances.
Where, um, where it doesn't
track. So, um, one is it
requires less disclosure of
expenditures made by lobbyists
than Senate Bill 248 would and
uh also restricts activity and
expenses uh in different ways,
but in conflicting ways, then
Senate Bill 248. Uh, so, neither
the new amendments or HB 143
seek to restrict activity, um.
And, um, the house floor
amendment does, and so, uh, I
don't know if my co-sponsor
wants to add to that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Yeah, Madam Chair,
particularly the part about not
tracking with Senate Bill 248.
If you look at Senate Bill 248,
that is also about disclosure.
It's disclosure of money being
spent on expenditures in this
case, lessen $50. It's $100 and
then this was an amendment made
in this committee, Madam Chair,
um, the Senate Bill 248 defines
the, the um details of the
disclosure that has to be made,
they find beneficial party, a
few other definitions, and this
house floor amendment, what it
does is it keeps basically the
current language in law, and so
those two things don't track.
248, which we are proposing add
is better disclosure. It's a
bill that this committee's
passed, the House floor
amendment is old language, so
they simply conflict with one
another. Um, so that's the main
issue why the
War amendment needs to be
removed. Of course, there's that
other provision in there as
well, which restricts lobbying
activity, which is as we, you
know, heard from the
representative, there's lots of
other areas of disclosure and
transparency we can look at that
aren't part of this bill, and
that's one of them, I'm sure.
So my chair is the what you've
passed out as the amendments in
context part of the amendment or
not? So, so Senator, the um
So the only other amendment that
was made was in House Judiciary,
uh, and you, you'll see that on
page 2.
And the first part of page 3 on
the amendments and context, the
House floor amendment is
everything that comes is that
whole section 2. It's everything
that comes after. So the House
Judiciary Committee amendment,
which essentially says,
You have to file file within 48
hours, stay in your position on
the bill, um, and if it changes,
uh, that stays in everything
else would come out with this
amendment and instead what we
saw in Senate bill.
248 would go in.
All right, so we shouldn't
really look at this if we're
trying to determine the
amendment because this amendment
is not part of it. That was my
question. OK, thank you.
Uh, on the list, I have a nurse
theonics and then Senator
Townsend. OK, so to clarify,
Madam Chair,
In the bill with the amendments
in context.
You're saying that the entire
Section 2.
And 3.
And I don't know if the section
4.
are all uh house floor
amendments.
Uh, so, Senator, yes, I think
the only difference it's making
in that other section 4 is, is,
was changing the number of the
section. So it's everything that
we see from where it says
section 2 on page 3.
Until page 10.
that highlighted language.
OK, so I do have discussion on
that, um,
I believe that part of the house
floor amendment dealt with not
providing meals.
And
I think that's a good thing.
And we have um we're wanting to
regulate lobbyists more and have
some disclosure. I don't have a
problem with that. People think
I have a, a conflict of interest
because I'm married to a
lobbyist, but
If she is to do more reporting,
so be it.
Um, but I do think that if we're
not gonna have contributions
made to us.
Then we should not be expecting.
Our lobbyists to be paying for.
Evening meals.
Meals in committee.
Um
So I, there is a part of the
House floor amendment that I do
agree with, so that's my only
comment. Thank you.
Is there additional since we're,
we're on the amendment, is there
a debate on the amendments so
your accounted.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, welcome.
Um
With
With the amendment of the bill,
I mean, we were first told this
was identical to the
The bill that we passed here the
other day.
What is different?
And what you're proposing versus
what we asked the other day,
generally.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend, that's a great
question. So what is new aside
from the house floor amendment
that was made is House Bill 143
would include an additional
activity report for lobbyists.
Uh, so this would be a brand new
report that they would have to
uh name uh who their employer
is, and any positions taken on
legislation that they're working
on, either supporting opposing.
or monitoring, uh, they would
have 48 hours to update any
position change. So if they're
um support went to from a
support to an opposition of a
certain piece of legislation, it
would have 48 hours to update.
Um, this is more so that we can
see again the lifespan of a
bill, and that's the new part
that you, that this body has not
seen, um, that is the original
part of House Bill 143.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator. So, Madam Chair and
Representative Senator, do you
believe that, I mean, in the
heat of the battle, like we are
right now in the last 12 days.
Do you think any one of us is
going to look at that and say,
oh, I'm gonna change my position
based on, I mean, we're going
too fast, we're still on the
amendment isn't that what is in
the amendment? No, senator,
that's what's in the, the,
that's what's in the film
itself, that's, that's not dealt
with that.
I'll be ready for you when
we'll, we'll get back to you, I
promise. Any, any other debate
on the amendment. OK. Uh,
Is there an objection to
adopting the amendment.
I.
Oh
All right.
Yeah.
OK, then, then let's do a roll
call me.
Senator Bergmann's, yes.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos, Senator
Gallegos' excused. Senator
Lopez, Senator Lopez is excused.
Senator Stefaniks, Senator
Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Doig.
Yes, with a typo.
Yes, with a ti vote that
amendment is not adopted.
So we are back on the bill now.
I'll go back to you.
Thank you, my chair.
We got
A mess. I'm trying to figure out
where are we right now? And what
is the difference between this
bill without the amendments and
248 in Europe in
As, as
As the sponsor, but it's a
difference and do you still
support it? Yeah. Thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
um,
So,
First of all, this is what my
first bill, uh, and so I'm
learning a lot. And what I will
say is the difference between
what uh the amendment that did
not pass means that Senate Bill
248 is not part of the
conversation anymore and so now
what's left is House Bill 143,
the lobbyist activity report,
where a lobbyist would have to
name their position on a bill,
um, whether, whether they're in
support opposition or um
monitoring a bill.
And it also includes the house
floor amendment that was placed
on the house floor. And so
that's what we're looking at is
we're just looking now at the um
House Bill 143 with amendments
in context.
And if I could add to it.
Um, the House for amendment just
for clarity when, and I've read
it like 5 times. I called the
dep, I called legislative
council today as well to ask
them to read it. I read the FIR.
The minority, the majority view
reading that amendment, is it
actually doesn't ban lobbyist
males during the session. It
actually caps it at $50 per day
per legislator.
So
That's what is now part of this
bill is just a cap of $50 per
meal per legislator, which we
don't think is a serious cap.
I'm not sure what the intent of
the amendment is. Now that's now
still part of this bill, um, but
anyway, and then of course, uh,
just maintaining the existing
language of um the law except
changing that threshold down to
$50 instead of $100.
Madam Chair and Senator, um,
This is kind of off topic, but I
think it's important.
248 and appears to be something
That you might support more than
the bill.
That we have today without the
amendments, is that right? I'm
trying to figure out where
you're at. One of you is going
this way and the other's going
the other way. I'm trying to.
I'm trying to figure out what,
what's for us,
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
um, so I introduced House Bill
143 on the House side. I
completely support that bill,
even without Senate Bill 248. I
think it's still makes progress
on transparency in the state of
New Mexico, um, we rank 40th in
transparency, and I think this
is a good way to look at the
lifespan of a bill, um, and so I
support House Bill 140.
3. I do have questions about the
floor amendment as it doesn't
cap, um, it doesn't restrict
expenses or expenditures paid by
lobbyists to legislators during
the legislative session. Um,
what it does is it does cap it
as Senator Steinborn has said at
$50 per day per legislator. And
so for me, there's um some
confusion about
How, um, what this is actually
restricting. And my original
bill, House Bill 143 was not
intended to restrict lobbyist
activity. It was merely to shed
more light on it. So that,
that's where, where I stand in
terms of the House floor
amendment and the original House
Bill 143, Senator and Madam
Chair, thank you.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
need to read a little bit of may
want to come back, but I don't
wanna read a little bit before I
ask anything else.
Appreciate it. You picked a real
doozy for your first one. Didn't
I though, Madam Chair, senator.
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Steinborn, I just want
to clarify something you said.
I'm looking at page 5.
The amendments in context.
Section one right in the middle
of the page. It says this is in
regards to the $50 cap that you
said was every single day.
And that that really wasn't
moving the needle, but here it
says the cumulative total of all
individuals' expenses of less
than $50. Um, this is saying
during the covered reporting
period. Yeah and in our FIR it
is saying the prohibited period
of the $50 begins January 1,
prior to any regular session.
With an ending date, um.
The adjournment of the regular
or special session. So how, what
am I reading incorrectly here?
Would you say it's a $50 daily
cap, and I'm reading it as a $50
session cap. Madam Chair, the
amendment in context is not
updated. It does not include the
House floor Amendment.
So what you needed, you sure the
one I'm looking at does not, so
I apologize.
Oh, OK. And, and Senator,
you're, you're, you're the
prohibited period is for
campaign contributions. These
are campaign contributions.
These are lobbying expenses, uh,
but, but the prohibited period
would not apply to that. The
prohibitive period still covers
says in the bill that we passed
through here that was Worth and
Senator Bre Bergman's,
uh, bill that it's in the
campaign reporting Act that it
would say lobbyists can't give
campaign.
contributions during each
period.
Yeah, Madam Chairman, I would
direct you then to the FIR that
is clearly stating that this is
the $50 cap. Senator Brinley. If
you look at the bottom of page 3
of the amendments in context and
then the top of page 4.
That's the part that caps the
Amos spent. Thank you, Senator
Bregman. So how does that, Madam
Chair, reconcile with the middle
of page 5. What am I looking on
there when it lists.
I, I just wanna
just want to try to answer it,
um.
It's just the way that you read
it, I mean, um, in an amount.
Just the way that it was read,
Madam Chair, and I interpreted
it to mean, I, I think I maybe
they're trying to ban it, but it
sounds like they're saying.
That, uh, or the prohibited
period and for the period after
that it's capped at $50 per
recipient per day, and I.
You can kind of read it another
way because of where that
comment is, but I called
Legislative council literally
this morning, and I said, I want
you to read this and I want you
to tell me your impression.
Uh, does this
$50 per day.
Include the prohibited period or
outside of it, and they read it
as including it. That's how I
read it. When you look at the
FIR, which has been updated, I
don't know if it was the ethics
commissioner or the Secretary of
State, they also have the same
analysis that this cap applies
during the session. So I'm just
saying it is, in my opinion, not
a clear amendment. That's the
way I read it. If it was clear,
it would be clearer to me and
everyone else, but
It's not Senator, you're asking
about those changes on page 5.
So right now, if you spend under
$100 you don't have to itemize
everything in your reporting.
All these changes on page 5 do
is lower that amount to 50.
So if you spend under $50 you
wouldn't have to itemize that
everything if it's over $50 you
would, but that is, that is
separate from that $50 cap that
we're seeing on, uh
Ages 3 and 4.
Thank you, Madam Chair, this
would be a question directly for
you as an attorney. Do you read
it?
I, now I understand that this
is, this is for the recording
for uh lobbyists only and I
understand your intent was just
for kind of transparency and
disclosure, but now we're
actually changing what they can
do. Do you, madam chair, read
with the language on the top of
page 4 of $50 daily cap. Is that
how you read this amendment?
So I, uh, Senator,
I read, I read this section, so,
so starting at the bottom of
page 3. I read this to mean that
during a prohibited period,
which means when we're in
session, they can't, they can't
make los would not be able to
make expenditures on any of
these things, gifts, food,
beverages, or entertainment
outside of session, there would
be that $50 cap for recipient
per day.
Thank you.
chair and Senator Brantley. I
also just want to name that the
floor amendment, um, I did
accept as friendly and upon
further review, there is just
more confusion and so at the
pleasure of the committee, I
would request that um that
amendment be taken out of House
Bill 143.
Center and, and, and
representative, I think we
already took that vote when
voting on, on the amendment that
was offered. Um.
Uh, Senator Sonics. So, Madam
Chair, I'd like your
interpretation, like Senator
Brantley, on that page 5.
Uh, item one in the middle of
the page, the cumulative total.
Of all individual expenditures
of less than 50. How are you
interpreting that because we
could have
I don't know how many Starbucks
coffees.
But if it was cumulative, it
would get to 50.
In one week
And, and Senator, um, it could,
so, so the way that I understand
lobbyists are treating that now
is that there is that as a per
person.
Uh, uh, cap. So, and, and we
have Lindsay Bachmann from
Secretary of State's office
here, and perhaps you can, can
speak on this. But I think the
way it's treated now is
If I have spent less than $100
on Senator Harramio. I don't
have to itemize that less than
$100 on Senator Stewart. I don't
have to itemize that. It is, it
is not cumulative for all of
your spending in the whole
session on everyone.
No manicure the cumulative is a
new concept for this.
Senator, no, no, that's, that,
that has been in there for it's
just the amount
they're just low
lowering the threshold there.
Probably because of the $50.
cap, which also kind of means
nothing will be itemized. So
manure, um, I would like to ask
the Secretary of State's office
then.
How many lobbyists do.
Report
The cumulative.
Of like me, you know, somebody's
giving me candy. Somebody is
giving me chocolate. Somebody's
giving me a lunch one day.
Somebody's giving me a coffee.
Do lobbyists currently report
that?
Up to $100?
I would be very surprised.
That's why I'm asking if that
really occurs.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, if I'm, um,
understanding your question
correctly, do you lobbyists
report accumulative total or an
individual, yes, they do.
No. Um, Madam Chair.
We would you just give me an
example of what they might list.
Let's say it's Senator
Steinborn. So, what kinds of
things would you see?
Madam chair members of the
committee, so pursuant to state
statute, they separate them into
different categories so they
could say I spent $100 on mills
and beverages, um, for my
lobbying activity for
the dogs.
So it wouldn't be madam chair
something like uh 6 coffees, 3
lunches.
To
Breakfasts, it wouldn't be
something like that.
It would just be I spent a
cumulative of $100 for this
person.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, as long as they're
meeting their statutory
obligation of reporting the
categories, I think it varies. I
think there's some lobbyists
certainly that go above and
beyond and more report in great
detail and others who will who
will stick to the categories
required by statute.
Thank you for explaining that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Other members.
Center block.
Did you want to be on the list?
I'm, I'm sorry, I couldn't hear
you.
had you asked to be on the list?
Did you whenever you're ready,
go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um,
Senator Representative, welcome.
I, I just wanna make sure I
understand this when I'm looking
at the
updated version on the website
here on page 7.
Thank you.
Are, are you, is there an
additional requirement now?
To
Require the lobbyists.
To report to the state
government.
The position taken on a
particular bill or issue.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
uh, House Bill 143, um, as it
was originally written, does
require that and still does. So
it would require a lobbyist to
file a new activity report that
names their positions on
specific bills that that they
are working on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
representative.
And when they
When they have to send these
reports into the Secretary of
State. What's the timeline on
that?
Madam Chair, Senator Block, the
timeline would be um at the
beginning of the session or at
the beginning of our lobbying
activity begins, um, and then
that those rules would be
promulgated by the Secretary of
State, and then uh they would
have a 48 hour reporting period
if their position ever changes.
So some lobbyists might only
have to fill out this report
once and if their position never
changes or if they're working
on, um, only a handful of items.
And so, and then some would have
a 48 hour period to update that
report if those positions change
at any point, um, and then the
um supplemental, so the
additional piece is if once the
period for the legislative
session has ended.
But a lobbyist will lobby, say,
the governor.
For a bill to be signed or not
signed, there's an additional
supplemental period if a
lobbyist engages within that
period of time, um, but if they
don't, then there's no uh
additional reporting to, to
make. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So,
If, if a small business
In Rio Rancho.
Just say uh
Whip whiptail Restaurant.
Right, for some reason, whiptail
restaurants hires a uh a
lobbyist to
Represent their interests on
Taxes, family medical leave.
Whatever.
Is, is there, is the
restaurant's name in that report
from the lobbyists.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, uh,
yes, if they're employing that
lobbyist, um, and they're
required to do that now with
expenses, so a lobbyist who
registers with the Secretary of
State would also have to name
the employer and the employer
also currently registers with
the Secretary of State to say,
yes, I've hired a lobbyist to
work um during the round during
the legislative session and I
apologize, sir. I just want to
add to that an important trigger
here. It's not just that they've
hired lobbyists, it's when the
ing activity commences. And so
once they legally crossed that
line of lobbying, and that is
defined in the lobbyist
regulation Act, where they are
trying to influence policy at
that moment they then are under
a 48 hour requirement to
disclose that they have now
lobbied that bill.
With the disclosure that um
representative Selwyn mentioned.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So,
Let me make sure I understand
that.
So Whiptail Restaurant hires a
lobbyist. That particular
lobbyist or lobbying firm.
Uh, goes around to different
Reps or senators saying,
Hey, uh, one of my clients does
not want you to vote for paid
family medical leave or a tax
increase, whatever it is.
They would have to file.
A report stating what they're
lobbying the position that they
are taking to include the
business as well, correct?
Madam Chair and Senator Block,
yes, that's correct. OK. So,
Madam Chair, in, in uh Senator
Representative.
I, I think some businesses would
be a little bit scared about
that because of just politics
and how nasty it can be and, and
when it comes to retribution. I
mean, I'm with you on the, on
the, um,
You know, shining sunlight and
lobby activities. I get that,
but for me, this bill,
Why does the government, the
state government need to know
what a small business
restaurant, Madam Chair and
Senators representative. Why do
they need to know what political
positions they're taking.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, um,
I'm unclear about how many small
businesses, small restaurants
are hiring lobbyists, um, for
the legislature and I do know
that currently, um, anyone can
go on the secretary of state's
website and look up who is
employing lobbyists. And so
that's already practice for the
Secretary of State's office, um,
what I'm asking for is not so
much surveillance.
a lobbyist or surveilling an
employer that hires a lobbyist.
What I wanted to do with this
bill was to look at who is
influencing the life of this
bill at any given moment, and
giving us information as
legislators, um, also more
importantly, as a freshman
legislator, it was very hard to
make heads or tails of which
bills were coming in front of me
in committee. And so I think a
tool like this would be very
helpful, um, and so, uh, and I
understand the
The Fear Factor too, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator Block, and I do
believe that having additional
transparency um for all the
people who have so much more
organized knowledge and money
and ideas, which lobbyists do
have. They have an incredible
amount of uh organized ideas,
money, and, um, and knowledge
and relationships here that I
wanted to shed additional.
light on on that influence, um,
because it's really helpful for
us as legislators um to have
that much organized ideas,
power, money, uh, and
relationships, but it, it
behooves us to shed some more
light on it. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative, I
respectfully disagree because
I've had small businesses talk
to me that have been what they
feel targeted with the state
coming down and doing
inspections or or whatever.
This, uh, and again, I, I, I
don't, I don't
think maybe I just didn't hear
it right, but there's no
compelling reason why the state
should know why a small
business, whether they're part
of the restaurant association or
whatever, the state should know
their political positions at all
because of the fear factor.
I've, I've heard it many times,
uh, talking about, well, I, I
can't donate to this campaign or
that campaign because, you know,
I'm afraid there's gonna be some
something coming back against
me, and, you know, listen, we,
we, we
You got to respect the privacy
of, of businesses and what their
political positions are, whether
they're conservative or liberal.
I, I don't really care. Um, and
forcing lobbyists to do this to
Say, I'm representing these
people and this is their
political position, that, that
really puts them right in the
crosshairs of of things that
could happen to them, which is
why
I, I, I can't support this bill.
It's a privacy issue for me,
and uh people are going to be
scared.
And they're not gonna want to
participate because they don't
want their name known up at the
state for whatever their
political positions are left or
right, so thank you for bringing
the bill. I'm sorry, I, I can't
support this. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator Berkins.
Thank you, Madam chair. Thank
you, Senator and Representative.
Could you just describe for me.
A little bit
How there are new report will
work?
Um, Senator, Madam Chair,
Senator, absolutely, um, the,
the key thing here is that
within 48 hours of lobbying
commencing.
They will have to file a
lobbying activity report.
So
You know, by law, the only
people that will have to file
this report are people who are
actually considered lobbyists,
which by law are defined as
people who are compensated to be
lobbyists. So, whatever
Nonprofit or corporation hires
them and we have people on every
stripe who are up here have to
be registered as lobbyists. Once
they lobby on an issue, on a
piece of legislation, then they
are required to then file this
report within 48 hours in a
manner really prescribed by the
Secretary of State. So if this
bill were to pass the Secretary
of State would come up with
rules on how exactly that filing
would be online, probably, uh,
but, um,
That will be defined exactly
like the format, but it will be
within 48 hours of the lobbying
commencing.
Thank you. And so for the part
where they lobbyist would be
required to update their
position on change legislation.
Would that be within a new
report? Would it be like a line
item within the report just
being used to the CIS system.
I'm wondering how, how it'll
work. And I don't know if that's
a better question for the
Secretary of State's office.
Well, I, I'll take a first. They
would have to update their if
they only have to file once if
their position is the same
position throughout the whole
session.
They do have to update it if
their position changes, and I
realize that can happen within a
24 hour period. See if this may
or may not be updated here
before too long, but uh if
Lindsay wants to answer it, I, I
would.
Madam Chair, Senator, it's a
great question, um, and it
certainly is a timely one, as
many of you know, we are looking
um for funds in our budget
requests this year to explore
new ways, um, to have folks, uh,
report, perhaps for a new
system, perhaps through it um
enhancements to the existing
system, but, um, and part of
that request, um, and the
development related to any work
um, that after we receive those
funds, hopefully, um, after the
legislative session, um, would
be inclusive of any sort of new
legislation that was passed,
should this bill passed today
would be inclusive of that. It
would be online reporting. Um,
there is a requirement in the
bill for it to um also be posted
to uh build pages, which is a
website that's run by
legislative council services, so
we would coordinate with them,
make that. Thank you. And that
was my next question also, but,
I mean,
In subsection E where it says
the lobbying lobbying activity
report will be posted on the NML
website.
That's interesting, and I'm sure
that council services can make
that happen.
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
I'm sure they can as well, and
we also, we also have a delayed
implementation of the day of the
of the legislation so it would
take effect January 1st, 2027.
So that way we give everybody
technologically time to develop.
Thank you. And then just going
back to what we were discussing
earlier.
I would still like to, I'll,
I'll make a motion to strike the
House floor Amendment.
To house Bill 143.
All right. Is there a discussion
on that amendment?
So, so Senator we that died on
the tie, so that amendment was
not adopted, and so this would
be, this would be
So, and I'll, I'll know for
everyone here, so the rest of
this amendment is language we
all already, we voted on
unanimously already.
Um
So I'm not sure why the rest of
it would be objectionable, but
if
But, but the motion is just to,
to strike the house for number
one.
Is there any discussion on that
amendment?
Is there objection to adopting
that amendment.
OK, please show Senator Townsend
objecting that amendment is
adopted.
ones you saw before.
Thank you, Madam chair, um,
I think that's all. It's a good
bill and thank you for bringing
it.
Senator Braley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator and
Representative. It's nice to
meet you and see you here.
Um, I appreciate your intent of
this bill for transparency, but
would you agree that maybe
there's a responsibility on
legislators. You said you want
to see, quote, who is
influencing the bills we
propose. If, if there was a
responsibility for legislators
to disclose who asked them to
carry this bill, which lobbyists
were involved in the drafting of
this bill. Um that is
transparency at its greatest,
and instead of having a bunch of
different lobbyists have to come
together.
report that
Couldn't a sponsor of every bill
you could click on the in a
ledges page, and we could
disclose the lobbying groups who
have asked us to uh either to
report who opposed or supported
seems like it'd be a much more
transparent and cleaner effort
when to, to do so. Why are we
putting all of the burden on
lobbyists and, and I say that
because who's gonna monitor
that?
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
thank you for that question. Um,
so I'm gonna take this in pieces
and then invite my co-sponsor to
add to it. So one is when we ask
a lobbyist for more
transparency. Right now in the
state of New Mexico, this is the
area that needs to be beefed up
more, um, just as we heard the
ethics commission say, um, from
a bipartisan committee, um, from
the commission
the lobbyists transparency piece
for New Mexico does need to be
um built out more. And so that
was the intent of this bill, um,
and for transparency's sake,
Senator Steinborn asked me to
help carry this bill on the
house. I was not asked by
anybody else to carry it, um,
and, uh, and so that's why we
wanted to start with building
out and strengthening the
lobbyist reporting, uh, for the
Secretary of State's office.
And so, um, that's the why, and
I think to your other point,
like why not ask legislators to
do similar, um, I would be open
to a separate piece of
legislation that would do that
and quite frankly, as someone
who still works full time and is
up here, um, lobbyists are paid
to be up here full time all the
time, and this is part of their
duties just like me as a small
business owner, uh, part of my
requirement is to file my GRT um
as as a manner described by tax.
Rev department and so, um, and
so that's a choice that I made
to fill out that paperwork, um,
and I don't get paid to be here
like all of us, um, so I think
putting the additional work
burden on people who are working
full time while still dedicating
and sacrificing time to be up
here, um, it's something that I
would consider, but I, I would
also see challenging personally,
um, and like I said, I wouldn't
turn away from that additional
transparency as well.
Well, Senator,
Madam, I just want to add that
this bill includes the drafting
of legislation.
It specifically includes if
you're involved in helping
create a piece of legislation
that is introduced, which is
language that's in here, then
you have to report that as well.
So if you were part of the
genesis of a bill, you have to
report a bill that's been
introduced, not a bill that's
not been introduced, and you
have to report that. Thank you,
Madam Chair and sponsors, but it
has to be disclosed by lobbyists
instead of legislators, and I
would say that there is a void
and transparency among
legislators, even more of the
void among lobbyists.
For the most part, we know we
most lobbying organizations and
lobbyists stand on an issue. I
think you could argue that you
don't know the intent often
behind legislation that's been
introduced by a legislator, and
so putting the burden back among
legislators seems to streamline
the process and, and I'll have
to respectfully disagree with
you, uh, whether I'm paid or
not, it's my responsibility to
be quite transparent with my
voters within districts and
throughout New Mexico on who is
influencing my vote and
specifically who
was influencing my legislation.
I just think that that may be a
cleaner process is for
legislators to be more
transparent in this, because
there's a lot, a lot of
loopholes for lobbyists to get
around, even with this bill is
my concern, and I join you on
wanting the transparency. So uh
my desire is to see exactly what
you're seeking. I'm afraid that
as we get into the details, this
isn't gonna do it.
My next biggest concern is that
lobbyists then would have to
re-report when they change their
position. That disincentivizes
lobbyists from being flexible
and often I'm gonna tell you in
the middle of committee based on
an amendment, I will flip my
position. You want that. You
want us to be flexible and
nimble, and you want that
cohesiveness and collaboration
to come together, where if you
give a little and take a little,
we, we create better policies in
front of us. What
What concerns me about putting
greater responsibilities on a
lobbyist is is disincentivizing
them from changing their
position as we all just get
stuck in the mud.
And that they don't agree to
become more flexible in creating
better policy. Um, for that, I
have some pretty good great
concerns over that. The reality
is, is that your intent of where
I think this is going. I'm still
very supportive of it, so I'm
completely torn on this. I will
listen to, to continue debate,
Madam Chairman.
All right. Um, before I go to
Senator Townsend for a second
time, are there other members
who have not yet spoken who wish
to, on the bell, Senator
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I just wanna clear up something
that I've read in the FIR.
Uh, which the last paragraph
says that the house floor
amendment.
Allows lobbyists or lobbyist
employers to make contributions
in compliance with the campaign
reporting Act during a reporting
period which would conflict with
the original statue.
So
It really allows that allow
reporting contributions during
the current reporting period
that's prohibited Madam Chair,
that was also kind of an
awkwardly worded thing in that
amendment because
His contributions aren't allowed
during prohibit. Well, they
actually are allowed if you
don't solicit them less we've
changed the law, which is a real
weakness in our law. But having
said that, we just removed the
House floor amendment, so it's
no longer part of the bill.
Right. But I was amazed to read
that the house for Amendment
allowed that during the
reporting period.
So, thank you man.
And before I go to Senator
Townsend for a second time,
folks who are here on the other
bills, we're not going to get to
them today. They're all gonna be
rolled to Wednesday because
we're on.
the, on the floor in about 10
minutes. Senator Townsend. Thank
you and I, again, thank you,
representatives for
Bring your bill forward.
I have more questions and I have
answers about this bill. I,
that's my problem because
I think of a lobbyist.
That represents
An organization that has 25
members.
And 13 of them wanted to do one
thing, 12 of them wanted to do
something else.
And so they're going to make a
report that says I was
instrumental in drafting this
piece of legislation, or I was
instrumental in doing this, but
12 of them weren't.
13 were, how do we, how do we
get any clarity out of this. I
mean, that just seems a little
bit wonky to me. I, I, I, I'm
all in. There was this bill was
before the House one time years
ago.
And I got frustrated with it. I
had an amendment that said just
outlaw lobbyists from the
building.
Just get him out of here. You
know, maybe we're better, but
then I get to thinking, I, I
have seen, um, I mean, today, we
have
Cabinet-level people.
Texting the chair, lobbying a
bill.
Do they, are they, do they have
reporting requirements?
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
uh, no, the lobbyist regulation
Act, um, is very clear about
who's a lobbyist and who is not,
and so if there are state.
Um, state agencies that are here
to work on behalf of certain
legislation they're not
considered lobbyists. that's my
real.
I'm all in on transparency. I
always have been.
This particular piece of
legislation, I think, puts the
thumb on the scale.
And, and empowers.
Um, state agencies to become
more effective lobbyists.
And because lobbyists are going
to be in conflict that sometimes
with state agencies, and that
It's gonna
That's gonna cause problems. I,
uh, I hear you. I'm all in on
transparency. I think this
Has written is gonna cause more
problems, uh, and maybe more.
Oh
More issues than we might think,
so I appreciate it. Thank you
very much.
you.
Anyone else? All right.
So, um,
So I think there was some
confusion the first time we
voted on this amendment. Uh, so
I just wanna see, is there any
appetite the
We've already done the first
thing that was on this
amendment, which was to strike
the floor amendment number one.
The rest of it is language that
everyone on this committee,
other than Senator Stefaniks,
who was excused that day, as
voted for before. Is there an
appetite on the committee too,
to include that language at this
point?
We will skip the that vote.
If there is not.
But center's honics.
OK, then.
I won't waste folks' time.
Um, what is the will of the
comit?
Manager move to pass
as amended.
We have a motion for a due pass
as amended. Let's do a roll call
vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Duhig, yes, with 6 in
favor, you have a few passes and
oh, I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry.
Gallegos.
So with 6 in favor, you have a
Du Pasosended. Senator
Steinborn, I don't think we can
do your next bill in 5 minutes,
unless our ranking number thinks
we can.
That is the thank you.
Thank you.
It, yeah, pass the house
unanimously, so that your
colleagues are in the other
chamber, I don't think had any
problem with it. If we can get
that knocked out, let's do so.
OK, then let's do
house Bill 140. No.
Let's, let's go ahead and do,
let's do hospital 1 for you
real,
real quickly.
Adam Chair,
I hope uh I hope the environment
department's here. Good morning,
Madam Chair. Thank you for the
opportunity to present 140. The
bill creates certainty for New
Mexico businesses and regulators
regarding management of
hazardous waste, HB 140 does
this by clarifying the law.
Until the US Department of
Defense challenged the law over
PAS, there was no confusion. For
decades, businesses and
regulators worked together under
existing law, and generally
agreed that toxic chemicals like
those that cause cancer must be
cleaned up once released.
into the environment. Uh, the
the uh environment secretary can
explain the issue in greater
detail, not that we have time,
but in the heart of the matter
is whether toxic chemicals that
cause harm to people in our
environment are regulated by the
Environment department, um, with
that, I'm, I'm just going to,
uh, and stop her and uh let
secretary, uh, you can talk
yourself out of a bill
sometimes, so I, I would suggest
that unless there's anything
critical to add, we go to the
committee.
Uh.
Members of the committee.
That are hard ma'am.
Madam Cha move a do pass.
All right, we'll get to that
motion in just a moment. So our
towns.
today.
Sorry, Madam Chair, and uh
Senator, yes, they have all
gotten to the point of being
neutral or insupport of it, and
I've personally spoken with
Missy Jim Winchester and uh Ben
Shepard about it.
OK.
I
I
Pretty important piece of
legislation to a lot of people,
Madam Chair, I, um,
If I didn't, if I had known.
If I, if I had not known exactly
that, I would, I would hold back
on that. I would, I would ask
you to roll it and let me do
some work, absent that, I'm
gonna vote against it, and I'll
see you on the floor, Madam
Chair wants House Bill 143 goes
into effect. You'll know that
information. Yeah. I, I always
trust you.
We are on a motion for due pass.
Let's do a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantley, so Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stephanics.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Doha, yes, with 5 in
