So Jamie, if you can come on up.
Oh
Yes.
Good morning, Senator.
Good morning, committee. Um,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, members.
I have the honor today to
present Amy Simpson, Amy
Martinez Simpson, correct,
correct.
Jamie is joined here this
morning with
Her daughters, Jordan and
Cameron.
Smiling over there to the right.
And um,
Mr. Chair, um,
Jamie is
A nominee for the border regions
for the New Mexico School of
applying visually impaired in
Almaorta.
She has
A long and distinguished career.
Uh, she is an alumni of the
School of the Pine.
She worked in uh Austin, uh most
recently.
Um, was the recipient.
Of the, um,
Uh, Milton Samuelson Award, is
that right? Yeah.
I looked that up and um it comes
with big accolades for her
ability to place
Um
People that are visually
impaired, um, and the jobs where
one of her
Biggest, uh, and most successful
goals and career achievements
has been placing
People who are visually impaired
in the workplace, where about
70% of those people are
currently unemployed.
The,
I'm the community is.
Very delighted to have her in
the community.
She and her husband, David, is
that Wayne
our, our, um,
Members of the community and,
and I think um
She is a perfect appointee for
the border regions there at the
school, and
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, with
that, I want to give her the
opportunity to introduce
herself.
Thank you. Good morning and
welcome to the committee.
Good morning and thank you, uh,
Madam Chair.
Senator Townsend, committee
members. Uh, my name is Jamie
Simpson. I do reside in El
Gordo, New Mexico. Uh, my
current position is director of
the Orientation Center with the
commission for the Blind of New
Mexico?
They've been in that position
for just over 2 years now, and
as was mentioned, I did work in
Austin, Texas.
Um, my career there spanned over
20 years working in vocational
rehabilitation with blind and
visually impaired individuals.
I served in many roles, which
did include helping to play
spinning visually impaired
adults.
And uh jobs in the uh
competitive integrated
employment area.
Uh, I am a blind individual, uh,
alumni of New Mexico School for
the Blind and visually impaired.
Um, I am eager to serve and work
alongside the regions.
Uh, to continue moving forward,
the programs and opportunities
provided through the school.
I've served as a mentor for
blind individuals, it was well
as parents and families of blind
individuals.
Uh, I've been extremely active
in my community, uh, getting
more active in the community of
Alamogordo in my short time
there, uh, but when living in
Austin, Texas, I was a big
advocate not only for blind
people, but also served in other
roles, um,
career-wise and um also outside
of my career, such as serving
with the North Austin Optimist
Club.
I served as a board member there
for about 8 years.
Uh, and again, I look forward to
serving in this wonderful
community. Uh, my background
does include a bachelor's degree
from New Mexico State
University.
And a master's in rehabilitation
counseling from Texas Tech
University.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. And with
that, we have organized support.
We have a speaker who's here in
your favor, and I'm gonna ask
Superintendent Doctor Heather
Miller to come up. You'll have 2
minutes to speak.
Before I go to the committee.
Good morning, Doctor Miller.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chair and members. I just
want to take a quick moment to
advocate for Jamie Simpson to be
appointed to our board.
The commitment she's given to
people in the blind community
has been amazing and she'd be an
absolute asset to our board our
lived experiences and of course
her career experiences that she
described will just be
invaluable to the things that we
are doing at NMSBVI and help us
continue to grow and just become
better at supporting our
students and the things that we
do in New Mexico, um, she
absolutely would just be a gift
to us, so I would.
Encouraged that you, um,
consider her appointment today.
Thank you.
Thank you, Doctor Miller. I'm
now gonna go to members in the
committee room by a show of
hands, is there anybody here in
support of this country?
you can raise your hand for your
mom too.
7
Any online
No.
Going back to the committee
room, anyone in opposition of
this country?
ing none, any online.
I want to now go to entertaining
questions from the committee.
Senator Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, senator and Miss Simpson,
um,
You know, we've, we've heard a
lot about the school for the
deaf in this committee, but we
have not heard nearly as much
about the school for the blind,
so I would, I'd be curious just
to, to hear more about it from
you and, and what your, your
plans are.
Well, as uh an alum of the
school, I know the services that
I received while being there,
I've also kept up over the years
with the new programs that have
been implemented at the school,
um, such as the post-secondary
program and various other
programs.
Um, the school serves blind
students, uh, starting at birth,
um, there's a lot of outreach
that occurs.
From the School for the Blind as
well as their uh preschool
campus in Albuquerque and main
campus, uh, residential and
Almogordo. Um, my goal is to
continue to help serve uh the
students and families who
receive services from the school
and to continue to move programs
uh into the future. I
wholeheartedly believe in
advocacy, uh, accessibility and
equality for all persons with
disabilities and my focus.
been on uh individuals who are
blind.
Thank you so much and, and Mr.
Chairman Simpson, um,
You used a phrase in your
introduction, uh, competitive
integrative employment.
Uh, can you, can you describe
that for us? What that means?
Uh yes. Uh, thank you for the
question. Competitive
integrative employment,
essentially means that our goal
is to provide uh skills and
training necessary and education
for persons who are blind to be
able to be successful in the
workforce in whatever uh career
or job they would like to be in,
uh, basically being competitive
with our sighted counterparts.
Thank you. I, I appreciate you
explaining that.
What is, do you think there is
there more that we could be
doing here as a legislature to
To uh to support uh things like
competitive integrated.
Uh, yes, thank you for your
question. I believe that overall
it would be incredibly helpful
for our legislature to continue
to support uh our endeavors
towards equality, uh, recently
we have been advocating for um
Uh
Blind Americans back to work at
uh to have accessible websites
and also to have accessible
medical equipment. Those are
just three of the top things
we've been advocating for on a
state and national level, I
would ask for full support of
that and of course, uh fully
equality in education in terms
of accessibility and opportunity
for all students.
OK. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Senator Black.
Senator Black
Yeah.
Thanks for reminding me,
Senator, but Senator Townsend
loves that cause his Artesia
bulldogs beat my sun Devils.
Uh, sorry, Mr. Chair, I didn't
know if you knew, um, I just saw
the paper. Um,
congratulations, um, thank you,
Mr. Chair and congratulations.
You know, I, I looked at the,
the school real quick and I was,
I see there's residential life
in Alamogordo. Is that, is that
correct? That's correct. And
what are, what are the ages of
the uh students, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, that are residing there.
The agents of um the students
residing.
8
to 22. Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, ma'am, are they all
from New Mexico?
Yes.
So the other thing the school uh
like um
The Madam Chair talked about we
heard from the deaf earlier and
just uh some really interesting
things on that school and just
curious what, what type of like
activities when it comes to uh
sports or anything like that, do
we, do you guys have for the
students there, physical fitness
type things.
Yes. Thank you for your
question, Senator. Um, the
school does offer a variety of
activities for the students, uh,
to include, of course, the uh
required physical education
courses as well as um uh
athletics, uh, one of the
activities in athletics that the
school provides opportunity for
the students is called goal.
Boba is a sport specifically
designed for blind individuals,
and we're very proud to say that
the students uh won the
championship in a big goal
tournament just this year.
Um, there are other activities
that the school provides, uh,
such as swimming, uh, they have
participated in in some downhill
skiing, uh, and activities as
such. Awesome, well, thank,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
um, but the website didn't,
didn't show any of that, so I
was kind of curious that's
pretty impressive that uh they
get to do those activities, and
then, um, lastly,
Um, what type of like outreach
do you do, Mr. Chair, and uh
Ma'am, when it comes to the, the
alumni to talk to them about
some of the issues that
Um, maybe the school could do
better or is doing very well.
Uh, as an alum, uh, thank you
for your question and as an alum
and as an individual who's blind
and knowing uh what I know
firsthand from the services I
received. I'm a huge advocate
for the school.
Uh, I have mentored both
students and parents about
services that they can receive
uh from the school for the
blind.
Um, I also am an advocate with
um the National Federation of
the Blind, where we advocate
for, again, uh, equality and
accessibility for blind
individuals.
Uh, so we're always looking to
see, you know, what
What is current, where can we go
and how can we continue to
improve the programs that we
have and implement new programs.
as necessary and that will bring
benefit to the students. Thank
you for that and uh Mr. Chair,
last question, if there's one
thing that you could fix at the
school.
What would that be?
Uh.
One thing that I could fix up
the school. Yes, thank you for
your question. I think that um.
I think that one thing that I
would like to see more of at the
school is, I mean, this students
participate more within the
community that they're in in El
Gordo and at their home
residential.
area.
Thank you so much. I look
forward to supporting you. I
look forward to you getting
confirmed on the floor. Thank
you again. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I was
waiting for her to say she would
like some more of your capital
outlay to help to the. That's
exactly what I thought. I
thought she's gonna go there you
want to redo your answer?
Thank
you, Senator, Senator Gayos, I
see you're busy, um, but I'll
take some time while you're
there. Now, although she's not
from Espanilla senator. She's
from northern New Mexico. She's
from Tierra Maria. She's a true
nortenia. So my question relates
to you being from northern New
Mexico. What type of services
are provided for families when
we bring students from northern
New Mexico down to southern New
Mexico.
The service is provided.
Thank you for your question,
Senator. Uh,
The services provided from or
for
I would say not just for
northern New Mexico, but for uh
all students and families
receiving services across the
state.
Um, you know, they provide
various opportunities for
learning uh skills specific to
blindness, uh, as well as
education. Uh, there are
outreach services uh for
families who maybe aren't at the
point where they are ready to
have their child go to the
residential campus or maybe
they've chosen to stay within
the public school system,
outreach services are available
throughout.
OK, so, so full service for the
entire family. That's good to
know. Um, and with that, I'm
going to yield to Senator
Geigos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator.
Um
I'm, I'm actually happy to
support your, uh, being part of
the school of blind. I do have a
few questions. I did not know
you're from TA, uh, so I, I've
actually pushed cattle uh east
of TA and on the land grant
properties all the way down to
the waterfall at um.
Uh, Sleeping giant in, in terms
of fishing there, but um I like
that you're from Northern
Mexico, but I do have, I've
actually been to the school for
the blind, um, by
Colleague right here is brand
new, but uh we've had some
really good meetings
there in now the facility,
beautiful facility. I love what
they do. I did want to tell you
I love that your family's here.
We've got a beautiful family. I
love that they're supporting
their mama, but, uh, one of the
questions I have is, um,
Uh, first off is what, what does
the school for blind do for the
visibly impaired elderly. Do we
have any programs for those that
aren't in the facility that are
elderly or are they allowed we'd
heard earlier the ages, uh, that
the school has. Do we do
anything off-site for the
elderly that visually
handicapped or impaired.
Our school uh provides services
to um birth through 22, so
education age.
Um, however, there are services
within the state of New Mexico
through the New Mexico
Commission for the Blind, where
we do provide services for um
Older blind individuals, yes.
Well thank you for that. Uh,
just wanna make sure we have
Full service, uh, you know, for
those that are in need, did have
a question, um, Mr. Chair and
senator and
Uh, Miss Simpson, uh, and it
goes to your
Care application. It says you're
Orientation Center director,
could you tell me what that is
and if it participates with the
school for the blind or if it's
offshore or different facility.
Yes, thank you for your
question, Senator. Uh, I am the
orientation center director with
the New Mexico commission for
the Blind, and we are a
comprehensive blindness skills
training center.
We provide training and
blindness skills, primarily to
adults.
Um, our goal is to give them
skills and opportunities so they
can go out and be successful in
life.
Um
We, of course, are a service
within the commission for the
blind. We also provide services
to uh students within the
pre-employment transition
services. Many of those
students, uh, that we work with
also receive services and likely
attend school at the New Mexico
School for the Blind and
visually impaired. So yes, we
have a strong partnership with
the school and the commission.
Well, thank you for that and my
lunch is just more of common and
look in your resume.
I've recently had to
Reign my resume for work, and I
was very impressed and, and
looking at your achievement
awards, uh, I just really liked
the idea that he started out as
a student. They're gonna come
full circle as regent. It ought
to be a highlight.
The for the school for the blind
that you are there, because
seeing what you're capable of
and what you've accomplished,
for me, not having another
handicap, I am very, very
impressed with you, and I will
stand in support for you on the
floor, but put that all you'll
thank you, Mr.
Thank you. And before I go to
the will of the committee, I
want to, I want to echo what
Senator Geigo said. I was
impressed by your resume. I'm
happy that you came back to New
Mexico to give back to a school
that means so much to you when
you're invested in a school and
you truly care about the place
that helped raise you. uh I
think all of us who, who are in
our towns where we went to high
school can agree that we only
want what's best for the
institution that helps make us
the leaders that we are. And
with that, what's the will of
the committee?
And do, Mister Chair, I move
that we move, uh, Jamie Anne
Simpson forward to the full
Senate for confirmation as a
regent for the New Mexico School
for the Blind and Visually
Impaired. Thank you, Senator.
There's been a motion to move
you forward for a full Senate
confirmation. I'm gonna ask for
a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman, yes.
Cender block
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantley is excused. Senator
Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefanis is excused.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
By a vote of 6 in favor of your
confirmation, you'll be moving
forward to a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Congratulations to you.
We're gonna move on to the next
item on the agenda, which is the
reappointment of Agnes Josephine
Vallejos to the New Mexico
School of the Blind and visually
impaired, and I'm gonna call up
our good friend Senator Charlie.
Good morning, Senator.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, committee. Right. OK.
Um, I am so honored. This is my
first sponsorship for uh an
appointment and I actually met
Agnes while I was door knocking,
um, campaigning in my, my, what
would later become my district.
um, upon knocking on Agnes's
door, I was quickly invited
inside of her home, um, and she
immediately began sharing with
me the needs of the New Mexico
School for the Blind.
It was clear to me then that
Agnes was an advocate and
passionate stewart, um, she was
not gonna let an opportunity
pass her by to talk about the
school that she loves. And
before I left her home after I
had met her beautiful family. I
had a standing invitation to
come down and visit the school.
Um, I understood more about the
school and its mission and
walked away knowing that the New
Mexico School for the Blind had
a strong advocate.
Um
This is a reappointment. Agnes
has been with the school for the
blind since 2017, and served as,
um, not only a board of regent
but as president and a vice
president of the Board of
Regents, um, her resume is not
only extensive and reflective of
her leadership skills, but it
reflects her commitment to
public safety and public
service, and carrying about some
of the most important issues
facing New Mexico today. And
with that, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, I'd like to invite Agnes
to share some words.
Thank you. Good morning. Good
morning, Madam Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
thank you for the opportunity to
appear today.
Thank you, Senator Charlie, for
sponsoring my reappointment to
the New Mexico School for the
Blind and Visually Impaired
Board of Regents.
Um, sorry, I'm gonna read this,
but it's been an honor to serve
on the Board of Regents for
NMSBBI. NMSBBI is a special
place.
When our daughter was referred
to the early childhood program
at NMSBBI. Her neurologist told
us that the school was one of
the best schools in the country.
And he wasn't exaggerating. This
school is a leader in the
country. Our staff presents at
national conferences on the
innovations that they are
developing at our school, and
they work with researchers from
around the country, but not only
do we have a national presence,
but we're also international as
that we work through you and I,
um, on a, on a project with uh
Russia with um the naked Heart
Foundation, where, um, our
physical therapist helps.
teach the folks in Russia how to
work with kids with multiple
disabilities, including visual
impairment.
Since my first appointment to
the board, we have navigated the
transition of 3 superintendents.
Linda Lyle served as the
superintendent for 10 years,
though her career at Nimus BBI
spanned many more years. Linda
is a bit of an icon in the blind
space, and finding her
replacement we knew was not
going to be easy, but the
regents did find a successor in
Patricia Beecher, who many of
you may know.
Um, among Patricia's many, um,
our superintendent Beecher's,
um, accomplishments, she
skillfully and thoughtfully
guided the school through the
COVID pandemic.
For sure and steady leadership
kept the kids in and staff safe,
but also provided an environment
where her staff could innovate
ways to um to educate blind
children virtually.
gonna let that sink in for a
minute.
We're educating blind children
over Zoom.
We had to get super creative and
they did an amazing job.
One of my favorite memories of
uh Superintendent Beecher, who
is a very hands-on, um,
superintendent was watching her
join the kids in a game of gold
ball.
Um, so we'll talk a little bit
about goal cause it is an
amazing thing. So, um, I was
president of the board as we
conducted the search and
completed the hiring of
Superintendent Miller after
Superintendent Beecher retired.
I leaned on my years of
experience in management to
guide the board's search for a
new superintendent and work to
improve on processes that would
that had previously been
established. Superintendent
Miller is bringing her expertise
in her own brand of leadership
to her new role, and were very
excited about the future. I
bring this up because what's
important to note here
is that all three of these
leaders were internal
promotions.
We conducted wide national
searches, you know, but found
that our homegrown talent are
the people who are best suited
to lead the way.
Because they understand New
Mexico.
And andimus BBI has been growing
talent for years. Through our
personnel prep program, we work
with NMSU visual impairment
Program on developing the next
generation of teachers of the
visually impaired and
orientation and mobility
instructors are outreach
department travels across the
state, working with local school
districts to ensure that their
teachers have what they need to
serve blind and visually
impaired students. We provide
technology resources, raille
transcription, ongoing training,
assistance with individualized
educational plans.
And much more. We want every
student who is blind or visually
impaired to receive the
education that they deserve.
And we start at the beginning
through our birth to 3 program,
the staff at NMSB NMSBVI
identify children and families
who need our support, and we
start as early as possible.
This support continues to the
child's educational journey,
whether that child comes to one
of our campuses or stays in
their home district.
When Jeroline graduated, my
daughter graduated from
kindergarten in Albuquerque. I,
like many parents before wished
that we had, that the school had
a first grade.
When she went to first grade, I
wish the school had a 2nd grade.
So you get the point. I just
wish that we could expand that,
the ECP and every parent that
I've met says feels the same
way. And so after many, many
years of advocacy, I'm so
excited to say through a
partnership with the state land
Office and the city of
Albuquerque, where we're we're
working on design, the design
phase of the expansion of the
early childhood program.
Um
The staff embraced the thought
that all New Mexican children
living with blindness or visual
impairment can accomplish
amazing things. I joined
NMSBBI's Foundation board many,
many years ago because I wanted
to give back to the place that
taught me how to advocate for my
child.
Being a regent has been a rare
privilege for me. I hope that my
service is worthy of the courage
of our students and the
dedication of our staff.
And I would just tell you that
not only did our goal
tournament, go team when our
homecoming tournament, but they
actually had an undefeated
season, so gold golden bears.
Thank you so much.
And so we do have some organized
support for you. I'm also gonna,
I'm gonna call up again
Superintendent Doctor Heather
Miller speak on your behalf and
although I stated your name, if
you can restate it for the
record.
Um, Mr. Chair, Mrs. Chad
members, I'm Heather Miller,
Superintendent of New Mexico
School for the Blind and
visually impaired, and I
appreciate the opportunity today
to speak in support of Regent
Baejos, um, as you have heard,
she is an incredibly passionate
and eloquent advocate for our
school. Um, she brings to every
meeting with her a very kind and
thoughtful approach, which is
very helpful as we work through
any kind of difficult manners,
especially, um, she, her life
experience with her child, uh,
with visual.
experiments and her career
experience.
Makes her incredibly
knowledgeable and guides us
through those really important
conversations of policy and
fiscal making decisions and so
she just has been a powerful
presence for us and we
absolutely would be honored to
have her continue to serve with
us. Thank you.
Thank you, Doctor Miller. I'm
not gonna go to those in the
committee room by a show of
hands who's in favor of this
reappointment?
67, any online?
Not online, and in opposition in
the committee room for the
reappointment.
not any online.
I'll now entertain questions
from the committee.
That are black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um,
Congratulations on your
appointment and uh thank you,
Senator Charlie, for sponsoring
her. What a, what a cool story
how you met and look at you now.
That's pretty neat.
You know, I'm, I'm looking
through your resume, and the one
thing that I've, I've seen that
I don't think I've seen with
other resumes in here is your,
your project management
certification. I, I think that's
That's pretty impressive, uh,
especially in my line of work,
we look for that a lot.
And looking at your, your
leadership and your experience,
um.
Managing large
Uh, large departments so large
programs. I really like your
strategic planning and your
project management experience as
the
Strategic program manager, I
think that's uh extremely key.
Help the university do strategic
planning, which is critical.
For success
And then you got a grab bag of
stuff that really kind of fills
out the whole person concept.
Um, that I liked with the social
services, which I really feel is
a really great fit for this
particular, uh, school.
As well as
Um
Working with uh nonprofits, the
American Heart Association, and
Mexico Parkinson's Disease
Coalition, um, retreat
Healthcare.
Uh, executive director of the
Alzheimer's Association, you
have that well-rounded
background.
Uh, that I think is gonna be
extremely valuable to the
school.
You know, the NBA that ties
right into the project
management. So,
Um
Very impressive resume, really
uh enjoyed listening to your
opening statement and uh look
forward to supporting you. And I
guess I'll ask you the same
question I asked.
The previous uh person is
And don't, don't give the answer
that the chair gave.
Um
If there's one thing you could
fix.
In the school.
What would it be?
Adam chair, um, Senator Black,
thank you for that question.
Thank you for your kind words. I
appreciate that very much. Um,
you know, the, the school has
many needs. Um, we've been
working, um, diligently through
our capital improvement
programs, you know, it's capital
improvement program to refurbish
and replace aging buildings and
um so the camp is down in
Almogordo is, is beautiful and
it's amazing and everyone needs
to come, but it is an
Alamogordo.
And it is, it's a hike to get to
Alen Gordo to, um, especially if
you're, your son or daughter
lives in northern New Mexico,
so, um, so this, the expansion
of the early childhood program,
um, I think is critical not to
compete with APS, not to, um,
you know, but to give those
children that start in the the
early childhood program and
graduate from kindergarten, that
opportunity to continue working
on skills that are designed
specifically for blind children
as they
Make their next step. Um, I feel
like, and I don't necessarily
have the data on it, but I think
anecdotally I can say we, we
sometimes
We, we can't tether those kids
sometimes when they leave the
kindergarten into elementary
school, and they can come back
to our residential campus in 3rd
grade, you know, or 5th grade.
Um
Uh, but those two years are, are
kind of critical, um, I, I know
families who've said we're just
gonna homeschool our kid and
they might maybe not getting all
of the, you know, the enrichment
and all of the specialized
services that the school and and
the programs can provide, so I
would, you know, I think the
expansion of the early childhood
program is really critical.
Um, if you ask, um, my partner
Carlos, um, he will tell you
that we need larger changing
rooms at the school.
So, um, shout out to Carlos
because he tells me every board
meeting you need to advocate for
larger changing rooms in the
school cause we have kids like
my daughter who are multiply,
uh, you know, have multiple
impairments. She doesn't walk,
she doesn't, um,
She doesn't talk, um, and she's
fully dependent and so and she's
17, so, um, I, I was following
House Bill 40, um, I hope it
passed, but that that was the
bill for uh, you know, adult
changing tables and and public
um places and I would fully
endorse that because it is hard.
So, um, I think that early
childhood expansion is really
key.
OK, thank you. Just a couple of
uh uh Mr. Chair, just a couple
of quick questions, uh, ma'am,
is how many students are there?
Um, I think, um, I don't have
the senses in front of me.
60, yeah.
So we have 60 at the ECP and 40
on our main campus uh early
childhood program, so that's the
early childhood program in
kindergarten here in Albuquer in
Albuquerque, um, and, and that's
what's interesting to me is that
we often have the higher level,
the higher number at the ECP
than we do on the residential
campus, because I can tell you
from personal experience, and I
don't know what um Jamie's, you
know, parents' experience was,
but it is
It's a, it's a heart wrencher to
send your young students.
Away, um, to a residential
campus, but knowing that that is
the best place for them to get
the enrichment and and all of
the other things that the school
provides, you know, you have
that balance of how, how do we
do that? And so that's part of
my mission as a regent is to
make sure that the school is
always safe and always, you
know, we're always thinking
about the commitment that
families make when they let
their have their child come, be
a residential student, um, but
we see the numbers.
with. OK. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And when
it comes to like funding for
tuition, uh, the students get
some type of state grants or
federal grants to help with
tuition. So, so like this go
for, um, I'm sorry, madam chair,
Mr. Chair, Senator Black, um, I
told Jamie earlier, don't worry,
you'll forget to do that, and
there, there you go. I forgot to
do that her a book,
um, the, this Mexico school for
the blind, um, and, uh, visually
impaired is a constitutional
school, like the school for the
deaf. So we get
um, money through the um the
land grant.
Um, and we also get a state
appropriation, um, to help, uh,
you know, for as part of our
revenue, um, we have some other
revenue streams through Medicaid
and things like that, but it is
free, you know, so it's free to
the students, of course, for
their families, um, it's pretty
inclusive.
You know, um, because they are
residential students, there's
not another fee for the, the
children. So it's, it's funded
differently, um, we've, we've
appreciated the support of the
legislature as we think about
things like teacher raises that
go through PED because our
funding actually goes through
AED and so um sometimes those
mandates are become sort of
unfunded mandates for us, you
know, we have to find, you know,
figure out how to get
The funding through the um
state, you know, through the
state appropriation, that's
different than maybe what how it
would work for PED. OK, then
lastly, uh thank you for that
answer, Mr. Chair. Um, lastly,
you have an Air Force base down.
Uh, Holiman.
And I know, um, community
relations are extremely
important between the base and
the community. Does the base do
any type of activities,
volunteer work, um, with your
school. Uh, madam and Mr. Chair
and, and Senatoro, yes, um,
actually, uh, one of our, our
neat um success stories um of
last year, uh, and it, so I'm
sorry, I'm a little bit of a
storyteller, but if a student,
his name is Angel, and Angel um
wanted to
become um a landscape architect,
didn't want to become a
landscaper. He wants to be a
landscape architect, so I
appreciate that, you know, how
he wanted to do that. He brought
to one of our, our regent board
of Regents, um, a tactile map
that he had made of an area on
the campus that he wanted to
turn into a sensory garden, and
so he built this tactile map
that had you know, um,
A way to feel and for us to
visualize, you know, what this
garden would look like, um, one
of my colleagues on the board
who is, who is blind and a
previous teacher said that the
skill that he had done in, you
know, that he'd exhibited in in
creating this map was, you know,
kind of off the charts, um, and
so we worked with Hallman to
come and help um make his
sensory garden a reality. They
came and help us move dirt. They
helped us plant the thing, you
know, all of build that.
The pergola and um and it's a
beautiful place, so when you
come and see it, we'll take you
by the sensory garden, you can
see Angel um Angel started the
program and his um his friend
Hector was the one that sought
to completion, um, but it's a
beautiful place that was
designed by the kids, but we had
Holloman out to help us.
Get it over the finish line.
Well, Mr. Chair, um,
Agnes, I, I got to tell you two
impressive nominees.
You guys should fly right.
Yeah, start, start getting to
work, will you?
Fair enough.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'am
chair, Senator.
I, I'm gonna go down a little
different.
A you
your resume of impressive and
that
speaks for itself, but something
you said.
Um
In their opening statement.
Um, uh,
My ear, and it was that
Based on your.
personal experience.
with your daughter, I believe
you.
So the need of the facility.
the benefits.
Of this facility.
That to me.
Speaks probably more profound
than
Then abroad.
robust resume. And I'd like you
to speak on that. What, what
were the benefits to your family
and to your child.
And
Based on that, why do you
support the facility.
Medicare, uh, Mr. Terror at
Senator Townsend, um, I'll try
to do this without crying. Um,
so our, our daughter Jalyn, um,
suffered a traumatic brain
injury when she was 4 months
old. Um, she's biologically, um,
Carlos's granddaughter, um, but
we adopted her, um, after her
accident, um, she, we became
treatment foster parents so that
we could take care of her, um.
Um, I will just tell you the
Who he is, um, when Jely um had
her accident, um, they did not
think that she would survive.
And um we had to say our
goodbyes and Carlos spent his
time with her. We did, you know,
on our own and he spent some
time with her and he said, you
know, Jar, if you decide to
stick around, I promise I will
take care of you.
And she stuck around. So we take
care of her.
Um, when we started with our
early intervention, um,
services, uh, to, um, Lavida
Felicidad, which is in our
community. They introduced us to
the um outreach outreach person
with the um
I, I won't stop, I promise.
Um, when, when we started with
early intervention um through
Lavita Felicidad we were
introduced to um an outreach
person from the Mexico School
for the Blind, and she
recommended that we look at the
early childhood program, um, and
we did, we went and we toured,
um, again, you know, I used,
used to joke that I cried two
times, um, when I took Derin to
school the first day, and then
the last day when I had to
Leave that school because what
not only did they show us, um,
did not only did they have all
of the things, physical therapy,
speech therapy, you know,
occupational therapy side by
side with the the visual
impairment instruction, and, um,
you know, just amazing early
childhood, um, things happening
and, and activities and an
amazing campus and all of those
things, but the, the most
important thing they they taught
us was that Jeroly has
potential, that she
Um, even though she is um has
severe disabilities, she can
accomplish things and she can
learn and um they evangelized
us. They, they helped us to see
that, see her potential. Um, and
And like I said, I really wanted
a first grade and I didn't know
how to get a first grade except
by joining the foundation, uh,
the New Mexico uh the um NMSBBI
Foundation and fundraise our way
into it, you know, we're not
gonna fundraise our way into
building them, but, but we just
kept advocating and and
advocating. um I can tell you,
um,
Gerly started as a residential
campus, as I mentioned, it
wasn't an easy decision for us
because she cannot speak.
Um, and she's incredibly
vulnerable, um,
And
And there's not a place.
That we could, would ever
consider leaving her, but the
school for the blind, um, we, we
trust them. We, um,
We have a working relationship
with them, um, and, and I think
every, you know, as, as much as
parents want to be involved,
they can be involved um on the
campus and but the the the staff
were just amazing, um, so, so
now she's in high school and um
She had to miss a year for some
health concerns, um, where we
had to homeschool her but she's
back um for her junior year at
the, at the um campus and we
just had an IEP and I will just
share this. Um, we had an IP
that probably went
I don't know, 2.5 hours because
we had to go through all of the
things, and we're really
concerned about um her nutrition
because she's on a feeding tube
and how do we, you know, help
her with that. And at the end of
that meeting, um, 5 different
people came up to me and said,
Can I talk to you about this
kind of, you know, and started
making recommendations about
different kinds of foods and
different, they just took an
extra, we had just met for 2.5
hours and they were willing to
stay for another 30 minutes to
help me and Carlos think
through.
How best to take care of Daly,
so, um,
You know, I, I think that um.
It, it is an amazing, it is an
amazing place.
I don't really know what what
we're gonna do when she turns
18.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Madam chair, Senator,
I um.
Based on that.
I'm pretty confident you'll
figure it out.
So
I think uh
That
Really, to me, speaks more
profoundly.
About the value of
About toility. I've been
Um
Been involved or cognizant or
had been in it since high
school.
So
It's um, I have seen the
The life-changing.
Mission that that they're
successful that.
And so, it's a, it's a great
facility, um,
To Senator blocks comment about
Holloman.
Um
And my time serving.
Um, and being involved in Alma
Gorda.
Um, there's a fellow at, at, at
Homan, um.
Rosalus Colonel Rosales, who is
um
There
is by swing, uh, slick resolis
is his call signs, but he goes
by, but he's out in the
community every day.
And I
I would bet, um, almost anything
that you guys needed something,
um, that'd be there in a
heartbeat because that's what
they do.
Um, I'm looking for the one, the
altus Award.
Last year, uh, as a sign of its
commitment to the community, and
it's a long-standing
relationship that works really
good. So, I know they're
partners and um I appreciate
your
Being willing to serve.
It's easy to understand why. I
look forward to supporting out
for. Thank you.
Thank you. Some, some guy was.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Chair
and Senator, uh, Angus Love your
storytelling.
Uh, I
I see there's a lot, there's a
lot of value, but it's personal
to you.
It, it brings those tears, but
it gives us a reality check on
the value of the institution.
Uh, I was gonna start out by
asking you to change your V and
Jerry and your last name to G,
so I could take credit for you,
uh, but, uh, knowing, you know,
your history, uh, my colleague
here was talking about all your,
everything you've done, uh, but
in the discussion, you talked
about IEPs, and I was gonna ask
you, so I've been on school
board for 23 years in unit. And
so I was wondering
Mr.
Agnes on
K3 K12. Do you guys get funding?
For your students.
the state through just education
through PD I'm, um, I guess I'm
trying to figure out why you're
separate from and or if you
didn't have any in other areas.
I know right now we're talking
about Albuquerque and Almor, but
I would think we'd have visually
handicapped and almost every
community, not severely.
But
Having some kind of visual
handicap. I'm just wondering how
that all interacts with
But you guys do with PET.
Madam Chair, um, Mr. Tay
Senator, um, Gallegos, um, I
will, I will start by saying,
um,
Probably 4 times out of 10,
people call me Gallego, so yeah,
you know, um, yeah.
Um, so the, so the funding is
tricky, right? Because, because
we are a constitutional school
and we get the the appropriation
from the land grant, the land
grant permanent fund and from
the state appropriation, we
still have to abide by PED
rules, but we don't get PED
funding and help me from not
getting that correct. Um,
You know, so, so what?
One of the things that is um
remarkable about the staff at
the school is that, you know, we
have a $2022 million.22 million
dollars budget, um, and they
squeeze every penny out of that,
but with that money, it's not
just about the instruction at at
the Alamogordo campus or the
ECP. It is about the outreach
services, so we do low vision
clinics where we're out in the
community and we're working with
um up
op t ome tri s t s in the
community to help identify kids,
help them, you know, get the
proper eyeglasses and, you know,
doing all of those things. It's
about um um the the so on our
campus about the expanded core
curriculum, which is about
teaching kids how to live
independently, so they're
teaching them, you, you know,
they're getting, you know, we
just had a homecoming in the
fall. It's things like helping
them get dresses and you know,
and, and suits and teaching them
how to dance and how to
socialize so that when the other
schools come in for homecoming,
they can socialize and they know
how to, how to interact with
other people, you know, other,
other children, and they can
have those kind of normal.
you know, high school
experiences or um you know,
childhood experiences, um, and
so we have to make all of those,
those things work out of that
budget, which and we are
everywhere. We joke sometimes
that our, our board meetings, we
get a mileage, um, it would log
on all of our vehicles and our
itinerant staff, the folks that
are going out to to TA and that
are going to gallop and and to
Farmington to identify kids and
to work with school district.
because again, it is hard to
send your child so far away
sometimes, but we want those
children, you know, so we have
our IRC does raille
transcription, so we have to do
all of that with that budget
that we have. Sometimes people
think it's a lot, and we don't
have that many children, but we
have all the children. We have
all the New Mexican children who
are blind and visually impaired,
there are children and we have
to reach them, and we have to
help them get the education that
they, they so richly deserve,
right?
And we have to do that on that
money.
Mister chairman turned center
and Agnes I appreciate that
because I was one my missing
link. I just know that we have
kids that are elsewhere that
need care, and I love that you
call your children. I'm gonna
finish with this sort of little
story, uh, in, and for what you
do for us, and I don't know that
my colleagues realize this. I
was, uh, about to speak in
Dallas at a Holocaust museum at
102 year old Holocaust survivor
Amy tour of the facility.
Uh, afterwards, not my fault,
but later she passed away, but
in 3 years old. Uh, I sent a, a
letter. Her daughter was born
blind.
And she lives in Houston. I sent
a letter from the legislature in
my uh title at that time I state
rep.
But I sent it to y'all.
And you got realize.
So I sent it to her synagogue.
And they had in one of the
services they wanted her to read
this letter. She had no clue
what it was.
But when you got done, she
called me crying, as she said
that was the first time she'd
ever had someone send her a
letter in braille.
And it wasn't anything I did. I
just had the idea, could you
guys put that in a text that she
could read, so she read to her
synagogue, and she went through
the ladder to the bottom and
found out it was for her.
But it was in her format.
Not my fault.
Can you guys send us stuff we,
we get stuff every year, that's
realized and until you have that
need,
You don't realize how important
it is, because
I we read way more than I ever
wanted, but that's because I'm
blessed I have that.
To think through how you guys
have to put everything in their
meat in their base and their
what their lives need.
Is, is a huge.
Ordeal for the state. So I
wanted to finish with that and
just thank y'all because I don't
know very many of the
legislators ever use that.
That's the only time I've ever
needed it, but the school has
stepped out.
And fulfilled my need.
The blessed lady.
In Houston, so I, I will stand
in support for you. I love what
you guys do. I see the needs
statewide. I'm glad you
explained that, because it's not
just um go and Albuquerque.
This affects all our children
that have that need.
So we want to fulfill that, so I
definitely supported the two Yos
going forward because it's
important for this state.
Thank you, Senator. That was a
powerful way to end.
Senator Du hit.
Mr. Chan, that we advance Agnes,
Josephine Vallejos, not
Gallegos, uh, forward to the
full Senate for confirmation for
as a regent for the Mexico
School for the Blind and Visual
Repair. Thank you, Senator.
There's been a motion to move
you forward for a full Senate
confirmation. Before I do that,
I'm very impressed by not only
your resume but more by just
hearing you speak. And so
Senator Black always teases that
I always have to highlight when
all good things come through us.
la Her mother's a proud alumnus
of Espanola High School.
So with that, if I could have a
roll call.
Senator Bergmans.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
This check, can I reconsider my
vote. I did no shit from this
point, and she's almost all
almost high school grad, but her
mom is an espaola gran. Oh, what
that is, yes.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Harraon. Yes.
Senator Duhig.
By a vote of 7 in favor, you'll
be moving forward to a full
Senate confirmation later this
morning. Congratulations.
We're gonna go on to the next
item on our agenda, which is the
appointment of our friend,
Senator Stephen Paul Neville to
the Western New Mexico
University Board of Regents, and
I'm going to call up Senator
Lanier.
Good to see you again, Senator
Lanai. Good morning. We're ready
when you are.
Good morning, Chairman. Good
morning, commission.
Um, our committee.
I, I don't, I don't even know
how to start to introduce this,
the guy that everybody in the
room already knows.
So, you know, I've got all kinds
of stuff that I could say about
him, so I'll try to keep it
brief. Um, I still call him
Senator Neville because he is my
senator and he was my city
councilman and
The city of Aztec.
He was my county commissioner.
And
Just pretty much somebody I've
been looking up to for pretty
much my whole life. Um, might be
the reason that I'm here today.
I'm not sure.
But, uh,
Senator Neville, I was blessed
to teach two of his 3 children,
and I might have had his son,
but I was so new to teaching,
I'm not sure I remember any of
those students. It was kind of a
blur.
But, um, I can go on and on
about.
Senator Neville, you all know
that he is a, a born leader, um,
everything that he has touched,
he is risen to the top, whether
it be from going to school at
New Mexico State.
And ended up being uh
A leader of the the student
government.
That's one of his starts, and he
went on to
Be the chairman of the county
commission and just anything
that he has touched, he has, uh,
Went to the top and become a
leader. And I think that's why
this nomination is so important
for Western New Mexico because
as all of you know, there's some
problems down there, and this is
the perfect individual to go in
there and lead them back to
where they need to be.
And so it is, I don't want to
take up a lot of time cause I
know you're gonna have a lot of
questions, um.
So it is my great pleasure to
introduce to you that already
know him.
Senator Steve Neville. Thank
you.
Good morning, Senator. Good to
see you.
If I can get you to just turn
your mic on. Oh sorry. He's been
out a while. I been out a while
this technology is really hard
on me, Mr. Chair. Um, and I
noticed you got new chairs. I
mean, that, that, that's pretty
cool, yeah, uh.
As soon as I leave, you improve
the place,
uh, it's probably a good thing
that Senator Lanier didn't know
my son. He was not quite as uh
As a tame as my daughters were,
so it's probably a good thing,
um, I had good daughters, they
went on to be very successful.
My son is as well.
And I, it came about because of
education and education I've got
one daughter's an attorney and
the other one's a professor, my
son's a contractor, uh, so my
interest in education is, is
very deep and, and, uh,
I've been involved in a lot of
things, including uh working at
New Mexico State University for
a couple of years, that's a long
time ago.
Uh, I've been involved with San
Juan College and a lot of
capacities. They even asked me
to be their keynote speaker this
last graduation a year ago.
So I have a deep investment in
education and believe that
Western uh should be at the top
of the heap. Um, I always
thought it was pretty well, uh,
but a little over a year ago, I
was sitting in an LFC committee
meeting, and Senator uh Saakoro
Hemphill began to quiz the then
president about some of the
things that were going on and uh
I was kind of about half asleep,
you know how LFC committees go,
they're about 5 days long and
89.
10 hour days and uh so I wasn't
paying that much attention until
things kind of got a little
heated and I realized that we
might have some issues there and
uh
I was concerned about it, uh, at
first I thought, well, maybe
it's just not such a big deal
it'll go away, but it over a
year later, it didn't go away
and things even got where it
involved the border regents and
so I became very concerned along
with the rest of the state about
what's going on at that
institution.
Um, I would tell you that what
happened is I, last fall, I
asked the governor, I said, if
you ever have a an Aggie Regent
slot. I'd like to be, you know,
I'd like to show my hat in the
ring.
And um I was off on a fishing
trip while you guys were
pounding the the streets around
here doing um legislative stuff.
I'm down in Mexico on a deep sea
fishing trip, and the governor
calls me and said, uh, got a
Regent slot for you. I said, Oh
yeah, that sounds good. Thinking
maybe we're talking Aggie and uh
she says, but it's not New
Mexico State. I said, oh yeah,
and I pretty well knew at that
point what it was because we
just had the resignations of all
the regents at uh at Western.
And uh
My first thought was, well, I'm
not sure I want to do that, but
my second thought is, is that
San Jun College, which is very
near and dear to my heart, is
very involved with Western
University Western New Mexico
University.
And that's something that uh I
felt that I needed to make sure
that that continued, that it
improved and maybe even
expanded. Uh, we have a program
called Teach Up at at San Juan
College. That's how we train our
teachers and in many cases up
there and get uh dedicated
educators like Senator Linnier
was in his era, and we do that
by having them do 2 years of San
Juan College, and then the
second two years in place in San
Juan College.
hosted through Western
University. So I had a selfish
interest in in trying to make
sure that Western can succeeded
and continued.
And I wanted to make sure that
uh if, if it did what it, that
they were able to do what they
needed to do to get things back
on track.
There will be a lot of the work
the 1st 6 months for sure,
trying to figure out, I don't
know what's wrong with Western
University. I've got to go,
that's one of the first things I
got to figure out.
They've got the House Bill 2
says they've got a $65 million
appropriation there, it says
that there's 4500 students
there.
Uh, it's, I know the colors are
purple and gold. I know that the
Mustangs with their mascot. I
know a lot of things that
probably don't mean a lot when
it comes to how the university
runs, but I do know a lot about
universities having worked in
New Mexico State, having been
directly involved in San Juan
College.
Uh, you guys know me, I won't
sit here and rate you with a lot
of my resume or what's uh.
But, uh, I mean, it's all on
paper, you can read it for
yourself, but uh, and I won't
take a lot of your time. I'll
just stand for your questions
and I'll just call it, call it
good at that. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Now we do have some
organized support to people who
signed up to speak on your
behalf. I'm gonna call them
forward of Scott's Ganlin.
OK. And let's just see maybe if
Doctor Tony Pendergrass is via
Zoom.
Doctor Pendergrass, you have a
couple of minutes. Good morning.
Good morning.
And everyone we can hear you.
OK, great.
Um, I would like to share a
little bit about um
Mr. Neville, former senator, um,
Madam Chair Duig and members of
the Senate Rules Committee.
My name is Doctor Tony Hopper
Pendergrass, and I am the
president of San Juan College.
I have served as the president
of San Juan College for nearly
13 years.
Mr. Neville and I are both from
Aztec and we're both alumni of
New Mexico State University.
Mr. Neville began his academic
journey in New Mexico State
University, earning his
bachelor of science degree in
agronomy and genetics.
And then he earned a master's
degree in agricultural economics
and animal science. I also have
a master's degree in
agricultural economics.
Mr. Neville has a long history
of public service and community
involvement.
As all of you know, he served as
the New Mexico District 2 state
senator for the past 20 years.
He has contributed significantly
to legislative bodies and
committees and is held important
leadership positions.
Including Senate Republican
caucus chair.
New Mexico association of
Counties president.
And he was the national chairman
of the Energy Council.
He is, he as, as was mentioned
previously, he also served as
the San Juan County commissioner
for 7 years and he was the
chairman twice.
And he has had a long
Successful career in the real
estate appraisal business.
He has been a tremendous
supporter and strong advocate
for San Juan College.
He will be an extraordinary
regent of western New Mexico
University and I personally
cannot think of a better
candidate for this very
important position.
Thank you.
Thank you so much and Scott
Scanlon has just come in. Scott,
you'll have a couple of minutes
to speak on behalf of this
appointment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Chair, um, Scott Scanlon,
register lobbyist for uh San
Juan County and City of
Farmington and Bloomfield
irrigation District and several
other communities up in in San
Juan County and for a number of
years had the the pleasure and
opportunity to work with
Senator.
Uh, Neville, uh, and we all know
him, really a good guy.
And uh his word is his bond, and
um,
Uh, we miss him, I think, uh,
here in the legislature right
now, but uh I really commend the
governor because if somebody can
fix a problem, it's this guy
right here, so, um, and I
encourage you to uh uh to to
move along.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we also have
the former uh representative
from uh Farmington, um,
Representative Tom Taylor, if
you would let him know, say a
few words too.
So we do organize support
typically, but I'll let you come
up and and say a couple of, a
couple of minutes if you'd like.
What's
Pleasure, pleasure to be here
today, you know, uh,
I spent 16 years. I went
downstairs and uh
Miss it, uh.
But it finally gets to a point
where your family wonders where
you went.
Anyway, uh,
You know, our, uh, college
institution there in Farmington
has been
An amazing addition to our
community, um.
We're a little bit unique, um,
because, uh, of our location in
the state, remote.
Uh, and near the other states, I
always tell people I'm from the
state of Asunimco.
Uh, because our economic region
is all.
Uh
In Utah, Arizona and Colorado as
well.
And so we, we have some unique
issues up there, but Sanin
College made such a major role.
For that entire region, and uh
Just done an outstanding job of
Creating a workforce for so many
different things in the area.
And uh very worthwhile.
Thank you so much for your
comments. I'm gonna ask, uh,
those in the committee room by a
show of hands, who's in favor of
this country.
4.
Any online
And one online.
Any in opposition in the
committee room of this country.
There was almost one who's your
Senate sponsor, Sigmund any
online
that I'm gonna start with
questions from the committee,
and I'll start with Senator
Stephen.
Thank you, Mister Chair, Madam
Chair, and uh senator for
presenting this senator. But
first of all, I'd like to thank
the representative and the
senator for their uh service
here at the legislature. Uh,
Senator Novell and I sat on the,
um, and I always slaughter his
name, try to make it French, I
try to make it Spanish. I try to
make it everything.
Um, but we sat together on
conservation and I really
appreciated uh your comments,
your work with the sodium water
conservation districts and being
very involved in uh the topic of
the day, and uh your legacy will
be the Legacy Fund, and I really
appreciate it. I do believe, uh,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, that,
uh,
Senator Novell will bring
quite, not just a level head,
but a scrutiny to his position
as a regent. And I think that um
Your reputation and your
experience, but also your
forthrightness will really lend
itself to
Moving the university back on
track to being a great
university. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator.
Center. Thank you. um, for
putting
yourself.
I, I know you have other draws
on your life, and I, I, I really
do appreciate. I think with the
accolades been spoken today, you
have no more than 30 days to
solve all the problems down
there and we'll expect it, we'll
expect it to be top-notch and
running hard and quite frankly,
I think you're gonna get there
in short order. And uh I think
you're being added to them mix
down there is a good thing, and
it's good for, it's good for all
of us in New Mexico, so I look
forward to supporting you. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Sandig.
Thank you. Um, yeah, no, I'm
all, all echo the comments of,
of our colleagues. I think you
are, you are a great pick, and I
always really appreciate your,
your thoughtful approach uh to
issues.
Uh, here in the Senate.
Um
And I heard you say,
That you need to figure out.
What's wrong, uh, down there.
Uh, so I don't
I don't necessarily, I'm not
asking you to uh lay out your
plan for what you're gonna do
sitting here today because, uh,
I understand that, but
But I guess what is the plan for
figuring out what's wrong, um,
especially, especially given
that you are, you're not down in
Silver City.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman Senator, uh, my,
um,
Uh, first approach I think would
be to, to get in touch with like
uh the attorney General, the
auditor to find out their
findings and what were they're
coming from. They've been
involved where I haven't been.
I've been reading the newspaper
like all of us have, and that's
more or less the extent of what
I know. The uh
Next thing would be uh I've got
a couple other associates that
need to come on board to
understand in the there
hopefully in the near future
and, and we certainly need to
get together and meet and talk
and discuss what needs to
happen.
Fairly short order, you've got
to come up with the president
and certainly we've got to have
an acting president on board
designated officially anyway,
and then we've got to have a
president presidential search
process needs to be started, uh,
I think it's required that we do
a national search, so we need to
probably get, get that going,
uh, then it, it
If necessary, I would be very
much in favor of some kind of a
forensic audit. Uh, I think that
might be something that would be
appropriate, whether
irregardless of what the uh
state auditors come up with, it
might be appropriate to go a
little further and and dig in a
little deeper and find out a
little bit more about what's
going on. My impression, I
think, uh, up until things
happened a year ago, a little
over a year ago, was that
Western was doing pretty well,
and uh maybe from an academic
stand standpoint it was. I don't
know about the financial side,
we need to look at that.
I would hope that there's
nothing more than what we
already know that that comes out
of it, but I think we need to
assure the public that that's uh
that the case is uh Western is
good or if it isn't good, then
we'll fix it. And so some of
those kind of things need to be
approached initially. I've got
to get down on myself and, and
meet some people, some of the
faculty leaders are going to get
down and uh talk to their
administrators, that's gonna
have to happen in fairly short
order, how that proceeds all
the, if, if uh I assume that
we're gonna
have to, um, if it doesn't
happen real quick, I think I'll
be contacting the administration
down there and trying to set up
some, some meetings and and
travel down and start talking.
Thank you. And, and I don't
know, and this, this might have
been in the news and, and I just
missed it, but we had heard that
when
When President Shepard was
or resigned as president.
Uh, and then he was given a, a
teaching contract. Is that
contract still in I mean is are
there plans in place? It was a
$200,000 per year, 5 year
contract that could be taught
online, so he wouldn't
necessarily have to be on
campus, he could be elsewhere,
so, uh, those are the kind of
things that I think need to be
investigated if, if, if nobody
takes his class, do we still
have to pay? Uh, there's
questions like that that need to
be addressed in the uh
I think we need to analyze uh
what the source and the what the
idea of those dollars were for,
and, and why we do that. Uh
there's a lot we don't know
here, uh, background
information. I don't know the
answers. I'd like to say I got
it all figured out, but I don't.
Well, I, I appreciate your
willingness to, to jump in and
try to figure it out. We will
be, uh, confirming the, the
other folks whose names have
been sent out to us on Monday.
So hopefully we'll have you all.
You all can get started uh as
soon as you're able. Um
And I don't know.
And, and I think there's a lot
of, there have been a lot of
Rumors that I have heard about.
Things going down, going on at
Western. I don't know what is,
what is rumor and what is real,
uh, or how much of, of it was
specific to
To Mr. Shepherd or not.
But I, I feel like I heard a lot
about just kind of a
A culture of
kind of retribution.
When people
We're not falling in line with
things, um, but I hope that that
is, that is something that also
changes down there, uh, to the
extent that that that has
continued. Um, but otherwise,
thank you. I
I don't know.
I had been in your position, and
I got that call asking to do
this. I don't know if I would
have said yes, so I am grateful
that, that, that you are, that
you're, your long tradition of,
of public service is continuing
in this area. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, before I ask
for a motion, I just want to say
I was happy to see Senator when
your name came through, being
able to serve with you for 4
years, you're a man of true
character. And so to fill this
role is one that's gonna be
important with your type of
leadership, your servitude
leader who rolls up your
sleeves, and that's exactly
what's gonna need to happen at
Western University, and so I
don't have questions because
I've worked with you and I trust
you that you're going to do the
right thing. I know that you can
always count on us when you need
our help.
And with that, if I can
entertain emotion, Senator
Stephanics. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, I moved the
appointment of Stephen Paul
Neville to the western New
Mexico University Board of
Regents.
There's been a motion to move
forward to a full Senate
confirmation and with that
senator, I would ask for a full,
uh, roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's. Yes, for my
former Moriarty High School
alumni.
Senator Block, Senator Block is
excused. Senator Brantley,
Senator Brantley is excused.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
With a vote of 6 in favor,
Senator, you'll be moving
forward for a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Congratulations.
I'm gonna have the gavel over
back to our madam chairwoman for
the remainder of the agenda.
We're gonna move on to House
Bill 84, Representative Chavez,
come on up.
And representative, I, I believe
we have 2
there's 2 amendments on your
bill, but why don't you go ahead
and and do your, your initial
presentation and then we'll,
we'll do the amendments, uh,
after that. Thank you, um, Madam
Chair, I'm gonna be um brief in
terms of my introduction, and
I'm also um after I'm done, ask
my expert witness to um
introduce himself and um also
add some brief comments as well.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, House Bill 84, the
Employee Free Speech Act
protects employees from employer
sponsored meetings for the
purposes of presenting the
employer's opinion or views on
political matters. These
meetings are sometimes referred
to as captive audience meetings
while the employer may invite
employees to attend such
meetings, the Act prohibits
retaliation or threats of
retaliation against employees
who refused to attend or listen
to the employer's opinion
concerning those political
matters. Employers who violate
the act.
are liable to the employee for
specified damages. I also want
to point out that 11 other
states have passed, um, this
type of legislation, the most
recent is Ohio and uh Alaska
actually passed it on a ballot
referendum. And with that, Madam
Chair, I'd like to um ask my
expert witness to introduce
himself.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you for having me
today, James Montalbano. I'm an
attorney at Utz and Valdez in
Albuquerque, um, thank you for
having me today. Uh, just a few
things to point out, uh, I, I,
I, I like to just clarify off
the top what this does do and
what it does not do. Uh, it does
not prohibit any speech by an
employer.
Um, what it does do is it
prohibits that employer.
From retaliating against any
employee who exercises their
right not to listen to that
speech. Uh, as was pointed out,
this is uh consistent with uh
many other states that have
this, um, there are matters, uh,
that are defined as what cannot
be uh required of an employee to
attend a meeting, broadly, there
are 4 categories. One is you
can't have a meeting about
elections. One is second is
political parties, 3rd is.
attempts to influence, uh,
ongoing proposals to change
legislation rules or
regulations. Uh, the fourth
category has some parts to it.
It's the decision to join or
support.
A political party, a political
organization, a civic
organization, community
organization, fraternal
organization, or labor
organization.
Those are the political matters
that are at issue here. And, and
I won't go into the details, but
there are exceptions, kind of
common sense, exceptions, such
as if you're running a political
campaign and you have employees,
obviously you wouldn't be
restricted from having them
attend such meetings and hearing
such speech.
Uh, I just want to point out
that it is consistent, uh, on
several levels, uh, the
language, uh, constitutionally
is consistent with the National
Labor Relations Board, which
decided in the Amazon case last
year, which reaffirmed a
previous case, the right to be
free in the workplace from
forced speech.
Uh, it's consistent with the
Supreme Court of the United
States, uh, Frisbee versus
Schultz in 1988, uh, said that
the First Amendment permits
government to prohibit offensive
speech as intrusive.
When the captive audience cannot
avoid objectionable speech.
Lehman versus Shaker Heights in
1974, similarly said that while
you have a right to express
views to those who wish to
listen, there's no right to
force the message on an audience
incapable of declining to hear
it.
And so, um, it's also consistent
with state law, um, as some of
the agency uh reports point out,
uh, 1-20-13 says you can't
punish an employee for their
political views or their voting
activities, uh, and 10-16-3.1,
which implies to public
employees, which and employers
which this bill does not, but
it's consistent with that, which
says you can't coerce public
employees.
If, for instance, they don't
contribute money to a campaign
or vote a certain way or attend
a fundraiser, those sorts of
things. So it is entirely um
consistent if there seems to be
a trend, uh, across the country,
uh, to protect, uh, free speech
in the workplace, and so I would
stand for any question. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you. We do have
people signed up and support and
opposition, uh, I'm going to
call the folks who have signed
up and support if you all can
line up. Andrew Palmer, Whitney
Holland, Carter Bundy, John
Lipshitz, uh, and you can each
go ahead for up to 2 minutes.
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Andrew
Palmer. I'm the secretary
treasurer, principal officers of
Teamsters for local 492.
I represent
truck drivers and warehouse
workers throughout the state of
New Mexico.
We stand in support of this bill
as we believe it will provide
protections that our members
greatly need.
And we would appreciate any
support from the committee.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Whitney Holland,
president of the American
Federation of Teachers New
Mexico, a union in New Mexico
representing over 20,000
hardworking educators. Right
now, workers in New Mexico can
be forced into closed-door
meetings where they are
pressured, intimidated, and even
misled. No worker should fear
retaliation, refusing to listen
to their employer's political or
anti-union agenda. While the
National Labor Relations Board
recently ruled against mandatory
captive audience meetings. We
know how fragile federal labor
protections can be. The next
executive order.
erase these gains overnight.
That's why we're asking our
state to step up and ensure
workers have the right to make
their own choices. I urge you to
pass this bill and stand with
workers who power our
communities. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
Asks me, We want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this, um,
an unusual thing happened on the
house floor and amendment that
hadn't been brought up in
committee previously, uh, was
brought up on the House floor
and um there was a group of, of
legislators who weren't going to
vote for the bill unless that
amendment was put on, uh,
Some people ran out the clock,
and as a result, the sponsor had
to commit publicly on the floor
to supporting, um, an amendment
to remove the public sector, the
state and its political
subdivisions. That obviously
affects our members greatly. We
love this bill, um, and we were
very saddened, uh, to be removed
from it. Most of all, I think we
were saddened that there wasn't
public debate on it. Um, casting
no aspersions on the people who
brought that amendment sort of
quietly to the floor. Um, it's
really not good policy.
to have that happen. Having said
that, uh, we believe very
strongly that for our private
sector, sisters and brothers,
this is an important piece of
legislation, so we will stand in
full support of this, even if
the amendment is on. And we also
deeply respect the sponsor.
Um, for making that hard
decision, and we know that the
most important thing we all have
up here is our integrity and our
credibility. And so we know that
this is something that she has
to put on, even though it
probably pains her deeply as
well as it does, does us, but we
hope that you'll adopt the
amendments and that you'll still
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, representing over
35,000 workers throughout the
state, both in the private and
public sector.
We all stand in strong
solidarity with each other on
this bill and as Mr. Bundy just
said, although it does look
likely that public sector
workers may get stripped out of
this. We are all in solidarity
standing behind this bell. Uh,
there are just two things that I
think I should just mention that
might not have been mentioned
before. One is, um, this, this
measure is not being brought up
as a um it's a, a preventative
measure, uh, something to
prevent something that isn't
happening.
This is currently happening in
work, in workplaces. There are
employers that are taking action
against employees who are
unwilling to go to meetings that
do not affect their work, and
that is wrong. And so we
desperately need this bill to
prevent that from happening. The
second thing just to mention,
nothing in this measure prevents
employers from holding any
meeting that they want. They can
have whatever meaning that they
want in their workplace and.
And, and they could do that
openly. They just can't force
employees to attend some of
them. And so please keep this in
mind when you're making your
decision. We strongly urge you
to support this measure. Thank
you.
Thank you, and we had signed up
in opposition, Mark Allen with
New Mexico Counties.
This Corian, are you filling in
for Mr. Allen?
OK, go ahead for up to 2
minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Catherine
Crociatta with the New Mexico
counties, um, I was just going
to stand and and thank the
sponsor for um attempting an
amendment that was forthcoming,
but um since the comment was
made about um what was done on
the floor. I just would like to
add that the counties did
communicate with the proponents
of the bill and the people in
the room about the amendment
that was mentioned, um, and that
was rejected, um, however, it
wasn't discussed and how.
Judiciary, it was brought up to
the proponents as a concern, the
counties believe that public
employees are protected by the
First Amendment and the Hatch
Act, and that's why the request
was made to remove public
employers.
Before House Judiciary
Committee. I just wanted to
clarify that, but we do thank
the sponsor for speaking with us
and um and for committing to
make the amendment on the House
floor. Thank you.
Thank
you. All right. We're gonna go
to members of the committee.
And actually, before we do that,
why don't
We do have 2.
Amendments, uh, that I think are
clips to everyone's analysis.
So, let's go ahead and, and deal
with those before we go to
discussion. I will move the
First Amendment, which is 95.1.
Which I believe representative,
correct me if I'm wrong, but I
believe this is the amendment
that we're, we've been hearing
about this morning, correct? I'm
curious it is.
All right. And so this would
take take out public employers,
employee, employers from
From this belt.
But I'm sure that's correct.
All right. Is there a discussion
on that amendment?
I'd like to.
Sure, go ahead.
And so it's on page 2, line 1.
It looks like after that first,
that use of including there
It's inserting or a person
acting in the interest of an
employer in relation to an
employee, employer does not
include.
And then the language that would
follow of what an employer does
not include would be uh the
state or political subdivision
of the state or person acting in
the interest. Oh, and then it's
taking that language that would
otherwise be repeated or person
acting in the interest of an
employer in relation to an
employee is being taken out
since we have moved that up.
After the word including.
Madam Cha, a little confused
still. So, um,
Can you tell me again the intent
of your, I understand it's to
restore.
Um, the bill before the floor
amendment, but I think the
language is confusing me.
When Senator, I think that no,
no floor amendment actually
happened. I think they ran out
of time, so there was a
commitment to putting on an
amendment that would exclude
public employers that the state
or any political subdivision of
the state.
From, uh, this bill. And so I
think that is what is happening
here based on that commitment
that was made on the floor.
So, Madam Chair, could you tell
me why we would want to do that.
I mean, the rationale for doing
that, besides a commitment from
the
and the sponsor.
of the representative, I don't
know if you want to take a stab
at that or, or, or, or I can.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, committee
members, um, in all frankness,
we would have lost the bill on
the floor, if this had not been
done.
We did not have any um no one
communicated with me, um, in
terms of the concern other than
someone, the lobbyists from the
county to stand up and basically
say they were opposed to it. I
think that there was some um
Confusion as to whether or not I
had been communicated with. I
had not been communicated with
until this issue came up on the
floor.
And so, um, in the interest of
Protecting at least some of the
workers, uh, private sector
workers specifically, um, we
agreed to do that.
OK, I'm gonna vote against the
amendment. Thank you.
Additional discussion on the
amendment.
Yeah
Um, I'll say, you know,
I, I don't love the amendment.
Uh, I absolutely understand why
you, you committed to it. Um,
and I am, I am also a sponsor on
this bill and
And I will, I will follow your
lead on it, uh.
But, but no, I don't think why I
don't think it makes much sense
for us to say.
Uh, private employers can't
retaliate against their workers,
uh, for not attending political
meetings that they have want
them that, uh, but, but public
ones.
Potentially can. And I don't
know that the First Amendment
and the Hatch Act provides
protection from that. I know
that's the county's position. I,
I don't necessarily agree with
it. And, and Madam, um, chair,
if I can add to that. I, I, I
don't, um,
There weren't necessarily any
examples that the county brought
up, that this would be an issue.
Um, so I just, I also wanted to
say that as well.
Right, it's, there's no other uh
discussion on the amendment.
Let's do a roll call vote on the
95.1 amendment.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos is excused.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend.
we're, we're voting to.
Right, right. Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
Yes, and on a Taebo with that
amendment is not adopted.
Um, so let's go to the next
amendment, which is 50.1.
And uh and members, I'm, I'm
offering this amendment, um,
This, this is what this is
essentially doing is on page 2
lines 24 and 25.
I
This language is, is a little
broad, uh, talking about what
What, uh,
What an employee would
Could, could refuse to to listen
to, uh, without any fear of
retaliation, that really
No in employee should ever be
forced to listen to political,
uh, matters and be retaliated
against for not doing so. I
think just just as a, a general
rule that should be true, but
the language that's in here
about about communications and
and the electronic
communications, um, I think it's
a little broad. I think it'll
create problems for us in Senate
Judiciary. So what this
amendment would do, would take
that out.
And so the effect of that,
Is that section 3 would say, uh,
you can't take retaliatory
action, uh, against an employee
because of their refusal to
attend a meeting with the
employer, the employer's agent,
representative or designee to
communicate political matters.
So really getting to those those
meetings specifically. The
amendment also takes out the
words employer sponsored. I find
that meeting. So if it is, if it
is any, if I, if I say,
If
Heramio is my employee, and, uh,
the ACLU is putting on a meeting
to about an issue, a political
issue that I really support and
I say,
harm me out, if you don't go to
this meeting with me, uh, you're
getting fired. You're getting
demoted. That would be unlawful
under this bill with, with this
amendment.
I was there discussion on this
amendment.
Senator Townsend.
I want to make
Sure.
But you
I mean
Given your word up here is
pretty important.
And, and, and I, you and I both
know that.
You
Uh, agreeing to amendment.
Um
That amendment.
Although may not agree with
people in the in the
The rostrum today.
I just, I, I wanted to make sure
where you were at on that and
what your, what your feelings
were, um,
I read this bill in a couple of
different ways. I've got
reservations about it.
Having employed people for
And directed people for many
years, um.
That interpretation and how you
view what is to be said is is.
Something that's in.
employer is very important.
Sometimes it's, it can be
perceived one way when it's not
meant that way. And I think that
protection has to be there.
Um
represent a very.
Very bluntly.
Um
Are you more or less uh
satisfied that the amendment's
not on and should we
Should we
Try to uphold your words. That's
what I'm trying to figure out.
So I think you're back on the,
the, the other amendment, right?
I am, but I, I think it's, I
think it's important, and I just
wanted to make sure.
Um
That the representative had
Have the ability to impose her
will or her thoughts on it, and
maybe not co-sponsored, just,
how does it where are you at on
this bill as it stands today.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I will.
Senator, I'm sorry, forgot where
I was. Um, I will try to answer
your question with regard to the
First Amendment, um, I believe
that I kept my word in terms of
putting the amendment on. I
brought it before this
committee, the committee
definitely has the opportunity
to accept or reject that
amendment, and that will be my
explanation when I go back.
Um, so I don't know if that
answered your question. It does
fair enough. Thank you very
much. And, and just for the
members of the committee, I, I
want to make clear that the 2nd
Amendment that we're on has
nothing to do with anything that
that happened on the floor. Um,
All this amendment really is
about is helping this bill to
get through judiciary.
Uh, rather than, than dying on
the vine.
And so is there, is there
additional discussion on this
2nd Amendment 90 yeah, Tonic.
OK.
Um, so is there
Let's go ahead.
Right, we're gonna do that.
Let's go ahead and do a roll
call vote on the amendment.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantley is excused. Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos is excused.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused.
Senator Townsend.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator Dole.
Yes, and on a Tabo that
amendment is not adopted. So we
are back on the bill, not a
member.
members of the committee.
That are down.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
representative, good to see you
again.
Um
This bill to me puts employers
Me
As you indicated in your opening
statement that this bill
prevented.
Retaliation, period.
What about attending the
meeting?
I mean, that
Does it prevent an employee from
even attending a meeting that
they perceive as being
political.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'm gonna make some comments and
I'm gonna ask my um expert
witness to make some comments.
So this um this act does not
this bill does not prevent any
kind of communication,
work-related communication
between an employer and then and
their employee. Would it
prevents is um political um
political statements, meetings
about, for example, um, say the
employer wanted all of their
employees to become engaged.
in a political campaign. That's
not part of their work.
Um, so at that moment that
employee has the right under
this legislation, Madam Chair
represented Senator um to leave
that meeting and go back to do
whatever work they were doing
before the meeting started. So
I'm gonna let my um expert
witness also comment on that.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
um,
I think it's important to keep
in mind that no, it, it doesn't
prevent anybody from going to a
meeting. Uh, it doesn't, uh,
prevent anyone from objecting to
going to a meeting, um, and
I think there are some clear
exceptions in the in the bill,
uh, in, in particular, one that
says in uh information that's
necessary for the employee to
perform their job duties. Uh, so
I think that would be one of the
important exceptions that would
require someone to attend a
meeting like that, but
generally, like I said,
consistent with uh First
Amendment law, uh, you can't,
you can't force someone to
listen to your speech, your
political speech, and I think
it's well defined what political
matters are.
in the bill.
So, Madam Chair, uh
Representative.
If you had, if you were working
for a
organization that company that
buzz involved in
of public relations.
And that
Many employee employers are.
And that employee had a client.
That, um,
Represented a
Canada, of one party or the
other, and I was of the other
party.
And my job was to promote this.
Canada
In his candidacy or in the
efforts that he or she was
working on.
They did not
Meet my
My personal beliefs.
That employers should have the
right for that employee to.
To ask that employee to attend
and promote those.
Belief, do you agree?
Uh bed chair, senator. I think
again that might fall under the
exception I just mentioned,
which it sounds like if that's a
part of their job, then they
would be asked to do that, um,
but I don't.
I don't know why someone of one
political view would, would work
for a PR firm that represents
folks from a different political
view, that would be a choice
that an individual makes, and
it's not that um that that
could be presented to the
employee, uh, as a, um,
In a meeting, but it wouldn't,
you couldn't force that person
to do it unless it was necessary
for them to carry out their job.
Madam chair, um, representative,
why don't you spend a minute and
go through, as you understand
and are presenting today what
those exceptions are.
Madam Chair, um, Senator
Townsend, um, just to go briefly
through the exceptions, um, it's
information required by law.
The one I mentioned about
required to perform your job
duties. Um,
Oh.
Yes, it's um.
It's uh starts on page 3, line
15.
Nothing in the act shall
prohibit and then it lists.
Um, 6, I think an amendment made
at 7.
Um, so the first one is
information required by law. If
you're required by law to inform
your employees of something, you
can have a meeting and inform
them of that law. The second one
is the one I've just gone over.
Um, the third one talks about uh
college coursework or academic
programs.
Uh, which is another one of
those common sense things.
Uh, religious activity number 4
on the next page is religious
entity, um, carrying out its
mission.
Number 5 is casual conversations
among employees.
Um, number 6 is a conversation
that only involves managers and
supervisors.
And uh I believe there was an
amendment number 7 that talks
about a political organization
like a a campaign.
Um, which is one of the more
obvious, uh,
Helpful exceptions.
Thank you.
So
Madam Chair and um
Representative.
What was the
No
this piece of legislation
originate. I mean, what was the
driving force for it, I mean,
NLRB has been around for years
and years and years.
Many of the labor organizations
have been around.
Where did it come from?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend, uh, as you know, this,
this has been very commonly
brought up in the realm of the
National Labor Relations Board
and the National Labor Relations
Act, that law can change back
and forth, uh, they call him
captive audience meetings, uh,
those tend to be
Not allowed, and but, but
sometimes it goes back and forth
and the board reverses itself,
so that's not entirely
consistent, um, but I, I believe
the origins of this are on the
ground, the need that come from
employees who say, I'm being
brought into meetings that are
coercive, uh, and that just
seems to violate my First
Amendment rights. And I think
that it's, it's kind of a
natural, uh, groundswell that
came from employees.
And Madam Chair, um,
representative.
It would appear to me.
Yeah, it's
So subjective.
That
The way that I view a meeting.
I mean, it's not uncommon in in
the world of employee-employer
relations that if an employee
gets disgruntled, he gets, you
know, uh, employer makes a
political
Donation contribution, support
that it differs. I mean, I, I
I've seen that time and time
again between first line
supervisors and employees that
They differ politically. I mean,
that's cool. That's the way it's
supposed to be.
It would appear to me that we
just opened the door to say
anything that happens subsequent
to that meeting.
That and employee could then
say, well,
That's just because I differed
with them politically.
That didn't have anything to do
with my job performance.
It was
It was just political.
How do you keep that from, how
do you prevent that from
happening. I think it's good
public policy.
It would have a balance, and
where I'm trying to find out
where the balance is in this
field. I mean, one is saying it
is political.
Yeah, there may not say it
isn't. How do we keep that?
How do we keep that?
from happening. Madam Chair,
Senator Townsend, I, I think
that's um
That works itself out in the
workplace and also if somebody
brings a complaint, um, the, the
person bringing the complaint
would have the burden of proof
and would have to show that. And
so, you can't just bring a
frivolous complaint and say, um,
somebody casually mentioned the
president or a senator in a
meeting and I took offense at
that. Um, there, there would be,
uh, the requirements to, to
prove your, your case that this
was a political meeting and that
you were
forced to attend. So, um, that's
just something like, just like
any form of discrimination in
the workplace, uh, there's a
balance and it works itself out,
um, not only in the workplace
through any sort of grievance
process, but also in the courts.
Madam Chair, um,
as this bill's laid out, it
leaves it to the court to decide
punitive damages, is that
correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, that is correct. That
would be the purview of a jury
here.
Uh factfinder.
And Ma Chery and uh
representative uh sir.
The
burden of proof for this type of
lawsuit.
Um, if you were a
Large
Corporation and had
Um
50 people that attended a
meeting that that an employer
required him to go.
Would that be
50 separate
Um
Potential lawsuits, or is that,
does that make it a single
lawsuit.
How, how does that work?
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
uh, I think it would depend on
the circumstances, but you
certainly could either have
separate lawsuits or there might
be some sort of call for a
collective action.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir.
under arm. Madame Cherry move a
do pass?
All right. Let's do a roll call
vote.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Brantley is excused. Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara meal.
Senator Doha.
Yes with foreign favor and 3
toes, you have a dopans,
