And his is recommending that it
is german so that was on the
list sent out on friday as a
question mark we've moved.
The.
But any questions on that in
questions on any of the
children.
The.
Buddy away manager and move
adoption of the south committee
recommend.
The message agenda which is to
be any opposition to that motion
that seeing none to remain
intermediate messages are to
remain and any other business
coming before committees
committee sinner surrounders.
Watched every bit of it now put
my microphone
center period thank you madam
chair i'm just so happy we rush
rules to get here to take care
of the business so swiftly and
quickly.
The other comments right we are
happy birthday matter late.
