Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez here
Senator sure.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
archbishop John C. Wester
archdiocese of Santa Fe.
And we also ask Miss remain
standing for the pledge
allegiance to be that today by
Let us pray.
That you've called us once again
to new life in you.
Our praise adds nothing to
you're greatness but makes us
grow in your love and for this
favorably upon us this day and
that you bless this Senate as it
serves the public good and
reserves the good order in our
state of New Mexico.
reflect the truth revealed in
your holy will.
Touch their hearts that they may
show compassion and respect to
each other and to those they
have been elected to serve.
our profound need for your grace
and love help these honorable
men and women to rise above any
differences they may have had to
unselfish public service and the
piece of knowing that they have
been true to their beliefs.
May they be faithful to our
state's constitution and give
light of the nation's ilumin
those who are trapped in
ignorance and prejudice warm
those who struggle to love
forgive those who have send a
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico and support them all the
day through they always do
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the Z. as
visiting in the gallery and
through webcast to begin today
I'll start off with senator
Peter Wirth to get us going
thank you Mr president good
archbishop John Wester for being
here
you bless us and grace us with
your presence and I think your
words this morning were
minutes at this point but thank
you we really appreciate it so a
couple of announcements other
fronts
We will have dinner tonight for
Also we have a.
A member of our staff up front a
jury Misia's has a birthday
Putting him on the spot ideal to
animus consent to allow cameras
on the floor only.
See no objections cameras are to
be allowed only on the floor
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president and then unanimous
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president for all
the senators on your desk you
have of a gift from the Fort
removed from that area back of
more than a hundred years ago
were resettled into the fort
sill area but they're now mmhm
a recognized tribes within the
the kilo between Los crucis and
Deming and so very much are part
of the New Mexico landscape the
legislature and if you'll help
me and thanking them for the
Thank you senator souls any
further announcements Senators.
the work done up front on the
table and then just so everyone
knows we're waiting for a
committee report to come down on
a house bill from Senate
Judiciary which is the crime
house joint resolution one a a
public assistance for household
services a constitutional
amendment I'm gonna do that.
As things comes down we have a
conference.
Committee report that I believe
is being signed with respect to
house bill two we need to get
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the duly enrolled in
engrossed copies of Senate bill
one and Senate floor substitute
for Senate bill thirty nine have
message from the house has been
received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house government
elections and Indian Affairs
journal show that the message
from the house has been received
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred in the Senate
amendments to house bill one
thirty five as amended by the
that the house has refused to
recede to house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bills two and three as
amended by the Senate it has
appointed the following
Armstrong respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk gentle show the message
from the house has been received
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
McCutchen chief clerk and it
just so that the message from
the house is been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate bill four as
amended by the Senate and Senate
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms consent we go about
our business committee reports
on that order business committee
reports the reader to read the
report.
respectfully submitted William
P. souls chair Senators souls I
move adoption the committee
report have a motion to that the
committee report any objection.
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read
the legislation.
Senate memorial thirty two
introduced by senator our meal a
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not refer to
committing to be placed on the
president's table.
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
county officials House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to nineteen.
House Bill to nineteen having
been read twice by title is or
consent would go back to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous or on that order
business announces miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so as I mentioned
And then Senator Padilla I think
you have item number twenty four
we'll do that as number two and
then we'll go right back up to
number thirteen and work our way
down.
Wirth thank you Mr president us
Ms.
Just give me one second.
replacing house joint resolution
one as amended on final passage
been taken is now subject debate
amendment for substitution see
no objections were to explain
clause it amends article nine
section fourteen to remove the
prohibition of using state funds
for private budget.
If passed it would allow the
state to provide essential
any legislation would be
required to pass through the
legislative process are the
amendment would need to be
approved by the voters at the
next regular election in
Thank you Mr president.
This ammendment dish.
Resolution.
question and as the bill worked
as the joint resolution worked
its way through the committee
process the two sponsors
Representative Chandler
to COVID namely tribal members
having to haul water to wash
their hands comment kind of
highlighted.
The challenges with
when you don't have
refrigeration.
and to see something I've also
seen he testified about the
the internet is
I think it just highlighted the
fact that are anti donation
clause prevents connection that
help.
Communities with essential
services of that nature.
Senator Woods
thank you Mr president.
That when I bring project
forward to.
Shovel ready projects that'll do
a damn thing they say oh no no
no.
We don't want to do that and
that's to the very rural
communities Mr Chairman the
president so sorry.
So Senator Woods I certainly
Company K. Carson electric it
actually has done a good job of
getting that internet out to the
rural folks the challenges that
lasts distance across private
connections again getting the
infrastructure in place is a
challenge I'm not.
A line that at all this bill
doesn't change the challenge
purposes which currently they
can't be and again we would
define exactly how that would
work by legislation if this were
to pass.
Okay good right in on those
words.
Would you further explain what
you're talking about on private
land Mr president Senator Wirth
that doesn't have hook up for
water on that infrastructure can
get put in but the final
connection requires resources to
be able to connect that water
Would allow for state dollars to
be able to make that final link
under whatever parameters and
limitations we put in place in
this chamber right now the anti
exactly what on those services
who who when we say we're going
to use state dollars are now is
the state going to maintain
Would determine that but.
Less of.
In a utility like a and electric
far as lines and poles said they
they ask for that to be paid for
up front are they asked for that
to be paid for on a contract
added to a minimum.
Whatever I'm I'm assuming roads
Maybe I'm getting too big a
detail for you.
Mr president.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president first unanimous
consent to have Representative
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president of center which I
think you've hit the nail on the
head again all we would need in
statute if we decide to.
as an example I'll tell you with
kit cars and I have some
experience myself
they do they have for done the
the job with the rules your
internet that I I wish all the
on the easement that existed and
it was the connection from the.
Box into the house that we had
that would look like and how
that would work without this
legislation.
Basically many folks in a and
representative Allison I
that final connection this would
give them that option.
Etcetera what's
Just one other scenario I'd like
As you know there still some
private land dotted out in our
force lands.
Access to it's very tough.
Could you envision may
requesting internet water and
sewer to that particular spot
certainly I would envision you I
mean any any citizen that and
that position could make the
request I don't think this
constitutional then we would
providing internet hook ups and
all use kit Carson again because
they've really done a good job
of accessing their whole service
area and if you live in that
Piece of land if we were to pass
this depending on how we define
the statute there would be an
option for the state to provide
the additional system this
set them one last question.
This proposal.
Would make it a right.
To.
to an individual regardless.
Color creed national origin any
of that.
Financial status any other
thing.
So Mister president no it's not
a it's not a right just in the
same way the other existing
exemptions to the anti donation
clause for economic development
State taking private land and
state pill payments.
You know and if the state makes
a decision to pass legislation.
You could greater right where
they would get a reimbursement
could we do something like that
in legislation with this if this
were to pass I think that that's
authorized us to have the
discussion.
And so without this we can't
address.
The water issues the electricity
issues that representative
I think I'll quit thank you Mr
president we do have a floor
amendment.
The reader to read the amendment
Move Senate floor amendment
number one to H. A. house joint
resolution one as amended.
St objection senator Phil
explained what that amendment
kinda hamstrings the the
legislature and says you shall
past this legislation where I
think the intent of the
legislation is to be permissive
permissive to the legislature as
opposed to holding us to a
standard where with the shell
it's as you will provide for all
of these things where if it says
put in standards for protecting
the public money and so to allow
a little bit of flexibility for
the legislature thank you Mr
president think centre Pirtle
centers we're debating Center
friendly here today but but I
will say I certainly understand
the argument that's been made
but given where we are at this
That as we as Senator Ivy Soto
very Kirk uh correctly stated
the rules committee you know
there's some logic to this I'm
not denying it I just think
Senator.
I'm thank you Mr president so
just just a comment I understand
the argument that if we do it
Senator Wirth so Mister
president we had this discussion
the rules committee again
there's a logic to this
ammendment I don't think this
ammendment is needed and I can
be more specific because I think
resources for the purpose of
providing essential services
clearly that's not a mandate up
front so I already think we've
addressed the issue that Center
portals trying to address.
Mr president I Mr.
I see what you're reading here
or had that up there but
Should not guard rails.
The legislative I think that.
This is pretty open the entire
water and electricity to folks
homes
I I can see how we can
absolutely set up a right.
So that everybody that built a
And so that's why I'm thinking
that we need to think this
through and and I think the
NMAA.
Makes that clear that would
cause could also be a may not
Thank you senator Senator you
thank debating or somewhere so I
just wanted to if the sponsor
would.
Would acknowledge or do right I
don't know even address the idea
broadband must be delivered to
their house when they build a
house wherever they build a
house where they can afford it
or not that's why I think that
may which could also mean may
again I don't think this creates
any right here and obviously
what we have implementing
legislation where we're going to
discuss exactly how it would
work Mr present I would be able
Thank you Mr president
colleagues so the the shall on
page six line tem.
Modifies to different clauses.
modifies include safeguards to
protect public money.
And other public resources used
for the purposes authorizing the
subsection.
For safeguards to protect public
money and other public resources
used for the purposes authorized
in the section.
Changing the child may means
I I hear what the what the
proponents of the amendment.
Whether coming from on the first
clause.
But but really the the
Senator Wirth.
Mr present everything he said
Sen.
Thank you Mr president I shall
stop.
I think maybe a small change
this amendment and and I'll work
on that of what would actually
fix that issue that
because it might have to go back
for the current setting that's
the that's the procedure that's
the way the that's why things
work.
We should never not accept an
the committee process on the
other side.
But a concurrence vote is not
it's not that big of a deal it
really doesn't take that much
raised very well that we're
going to allow a piece
legislation that may or may not
be.
the best.
and just write a law that
changes the US this is a
constitutional amendment.
This goes to the voters to be
voted on by the voters.
And explain to them the opes we
screwed up can you fix it.
Instead of us looking at it and
fixing it now.
That is specially is is a
constitutional amendment I mean
I think we need to think about
the seriousness of this piece of
legislation.
chamber and we had to come back
and fix.
Because of unintended
consequences or something that
we messed or something that the
But there are some language in
here that that that we can make
better.
So that our constitution has the
best language possible.
So I I just the chamber to
reject that argument looks at
amendments on their merits of
the amendment not on whether has
to go back to the other chamber
this change the US constitution.
But it's still changed our
constitution it's terms what we
can and cannot do as a
legislature.
None of them ever made it to the
voters by the way.
The only ones ever gotten a
hearing in the committee.
have to concur.
I think it's a huge mistake by
us and I I just don't think it's
the path that we want to go down
as a Senate.
midnight and judiciary we met
and we've had this conversation
more than that we reject the
notion that we can amend house
bill's latest and late in the
session last night at midnight
order to be seen it here on the
floor later on in this so by the
time we get done with that house
bill and it goes back over there
it's pretty much much later in
we're working on legislation on
a house bill from amended the
heck out of it they're doing the
same thing was Senate bills home
and stuff another seven on that
our work on the bills are we're
late because of our member
Senator Wirth
What are your I think it's more
there are certain third year
thing about solo in seconds you
remember Senators
there's consensus we got it done
the password here just reform on
our noon on the last day.
when we want to so there's no
there's no reason not to fix
this right now Mr president.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
I
no further debate on the
amendment.
Etcetera purva close on the
has been withdrawn I believe
Senator Pirtle that there's
another member that's been
handed out but it's sponsored by
Senator Brandt before we go to
your amendment we'll go to
Senate floor amendment number
one to house joint resolution
one as amended amendment
sponsored by Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt to moving
explained MMS.
The six hours of House Judiciary
yesterday so.
See no objections Senator Brandt
to move to explain the amendment
members of the body this
clause that would just make sure
that anything that is done in
that affecting legislation that
would give money in a way we've
never done before in the state
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so again
this two thirds requirements and
none of the other exceptions
that are outlined in this
think is necessary so it's not a
from the amendment.
Seven as we're debating Center
farm number one anyone wishing
to debate.
Mr president and and centers I I
understand why this is in a
friendly amendment but I I do
of.
Thanks very important you know
never done this is to provide
state funds.
In this kind of way and I think
it's very important that it's
whoever's in the majority of
being able to just put this
money wherever they want to.
we need safeguards the taxpayers
money it's not our money it's
the minority and unless I get a
supermajority.
To make sure that the taxpayers
money safeguard I think that
it's very important for that
resolution one as amended and
asks for a show of hands.
Senator Stewart voting tier
seats.
I just want to make sure Senator
Senator Steinborn voting no
Senator had a meal voting no.
Senator Cervantes voting no
Senator Hickey voting no Senator
Tallman voting no Senator
Gonzales voting no Senator
Padilla voting no Senator Duhigg
Ivey Soto voting no Senator
Rodriguez voting now Senator
Hamblen voting no.
By a vote.
Thirteen affirmative twenty
resolution one as amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
Pirtle center for removing
explain the amendment Senate
floor amendment number one to
house joint resolution one as
amended.
basically take the anti donation
clause out of the constitution
and put it into the hands of the
legislature we come back here
and year after year after year
donation clause it would just
put it in the hands of the
legislature so that when we do
have a situation such as this
arise we can handle them the the
points were made Mr president
getting sweetheart deals but yet
you look around the state and
there's ways and creative ways
that we all do it whenever we do
our junior money or you write
the R. F. peas in a certain way
railroad but it's kind of the
real road to this to space so I
I think this is a part of the
thanks in part of centers we're
debating senator member number
one Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so I
certainly understand where
Senator portals going
proposing to do versus the small
piece that we're proposing an in
house joint resolution one.
Senator debating Center for
member number one anyone else
wishing the debate.
Twenty four hours ago has duly
Ramon said.
Mr president I rise in support
of this amendment I think women
if any of us look at the section
tattered of what it once was we
have exemptions and therefore
health care worker scholarships
veterans scholarships housing
As an exemption from the Anna
donation Clause was I I kind of
our way on it Mr president since
we're supposed to be protecting
public money from the robber
transformative to part of the
state Senator Pirtle mention I
was a real road to the road to
space and there was once a real
road around right through that
in archaic relic we've a shot
holes through it with previous
constitutional amendments it is
a tatters of water once was and
quite frankly it's incredibly
to get around and donation
Clause so it's it's you know but
so I believe in front.
the corruption and happen in
Santa fe's past would most
likely not happen if there's
more sunshine and transparency
in the process not because of a
couple lines in our constitution
they give you the feeling that
constitution so we can have
these debates as poses
continuation board holes in it
and it really is a tattered at
this point so I I support this
if we can actually do this and
Thank you Mr president and in
committee in the rules committee
I voted for this amendment it
makes a lot of sense.
For all the reasons that
Senators mourn Pirtle of
complete reanalysis of the
reevaluation of the anti
donation clause in the future
session so I to a vote against
this amendment here on the floor
thank you Mr president did you
Any further debate senators.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
you know as we continue to carve
out more holes in the Swiss
cheese really doesn't make sense
to open it up doesn't make sense
winners and losers and we put it
under all these labels of equity
in and all this sort of stuff
but but really it's not that
do that normally but coming back
to re evaluate on a
constitutional amendment is a
whole different story we're
altering you know arming
back to it let's stick it in the
constitution.
You know that's that just
doesn't seem to settle well
anyway thank you Mr president
will point out that at one point
in time the legislature thought
it important enough to put in
language to ensure that
scholarships could be given to
of.
Now neither one has been
challenged in the Supreme Court
is violating the anti donation
clause with that's what's at
risk that once we brought this
document forward you start
reading through and noticing
ammendment now that somebody
could challenge the opportunity
scholarship that I don't think
has passed the house yet it has
passed this chamber.
number one to house joint
resolution one as amended I
asked the rule be suspended in
that the record show that the
rules been called and all those
present vote in the affirmative
except those voting in the next
Wirth voting now.
Senator Lopez voting now Senator
Stefanics voting now.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
Senator Rodriguez voting now
Stewart voting no Senator Pinto
voting no Senator Hickey voting
no Sierra voting no Senator
Sedillo Lopez voting now Senator
McKenna voting no Senator Ortiz
center how to meal voting no
Senator about this voting no and
senator Munoz voting no.
Center per year string of four
successful amendments has come
to an end.
By a vote of fourteen
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president you know
even some of the best baseball
players only about about three
Thank you Mr president will the
sponsor yield Senator Wirth C.
L. Mr president happy to.
This presents centered we have
any reports or have we seen any
reports on the expenditure of
the tribal infrastructure fund
There certainly is.
Data collected on the money in
that fund how it gets spent when
of the one of the challenges
that we have with the the three
the three funding sources that
come off the top of the
severance tax bond reporting on
the water trust board really
But it appears to me Mr
president center also is
opportunities for direct
appropriation for other
Chair Mister president center it
it appears to me that although
this opens the door possibly to
to more money being available
going to be able to afford or
want to for water lines running
for miles to get to their to
their
about people that have chosen to
live in in remote places and
that's that's not judged.
Individuals who could be tribal
well we will provide you for we
will provide your subdivision.
To allow you to have wells and
And and Mr president I think
that's an over reach I think
that that provides opportunities
at.
particular particular bill is or
this constitutional manage
trying to do so I would I would
just tell the body we ought to
reject this amendment and work
instances that Representative
Allison talks about that show
on the make those better work
the colonia of chaparral.
Has about twenty five thousand
people in it right now.
This could turn around and be an
a use for it so Mister Mister
president senator I you know I
appreciate what this is doing
but I do believe we have other
opportunities and other funding
Si no further debate.
Senator Wirth to close.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members I very much appreciate
that at any time I I completely
understand that I think this
particular bill has gone through
a two year vetting process we
have this in the sixty day
session I went through multiple
and so again I think for the
specific reasons that's why the
amendment wasn't pro wasn't
appropriate but I completely
understand that we can we can
one as once amended do now pass
and pass Ms consenus center
records show the rules been
called all those present only
permitted except those on and
negative by show of hands
Senator Diamond voting no
senator Sanchez voting no
Senator Ingle voting no one's
voting no.
Senator Baca voting no Senator
availability now Senator Davis
to vote.
Yes Mr president thank you vote
no senator Byrd voting no.
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative fourteen the
negative house resolution one as
amended has passed the Senate
always get around it when we
need to but the big part of this
doesn't matter how you do this
or what we do here in the
legislature.
in those districts in a way that
you do not imagine right now but
it's going to happen.
Because this is the way this
process works and utility
companies because they have a
really be careful what we're
doing up here because this is
going to face be something that
you're.
A lot of here right companies
and Hans once once gets part of
rates thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so next
up we're going to item twenty
four house bill seven as amended
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all actions for placing House
Bill seven as twice amended on
final passage is been taken and
that is now subject to debate
enterprise fund legislation
before you is a partnership and
funding program that is created
within the New Mexico finance
authority to support local
communities that want to build
investing commercial or
legislation helps as do that
with a program that is
financing and leasing is one
option and direct loans or loan
guarantees and another but
president in addition it does a
it's a complimentary piece
legislation to lead a J. tip and
all the other things in our
economic development toolbox
thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president and and
if the Senator Padilla would
deal for a question or two.
Senator by the I do yield Mister
president I do have a
Thank you Mr president
In my district can not Townsend
I've got a lot of buildings that
are vacant how will this bill
Thank you Mr president that's an
excellent question I know
Senator would you brought up
this topic a couple of times and
I want to help you with that
eventually but that particular
financing to re have that
building into the shape that it
needs to for whatever business
wants to go into the community.
And Mister president.
Who
need to give them a phone number
of who to contact to get these
bills and three had and get
get a hold to me so I can
contact my people it back in my
district Mr president Senator
Padilla I thank you very much Mr
president thank you Senator
connected with Marquita Russel
them I am the CEO over at the
New Mexico finance authority as
well as the permanent folks
already Konami Development but
this is a great example of a
president I think we can help
you move forward with this.
Well I'm certainly looking
forward to getting those old
abandoned buildings back into
use so thank you for that and
People to with the initiative to
to go out and and start
businesses and do business in
our state we've got some
excellent
center pirtle and thank you Mr
president with the sponsor of
the bill please yield etcetera
but it A. L. I will yield Mister
president.
And thank you Mr president and
Mr president center was there
any discussion that this could
possibly violate the anti
donation clause.
Center for them thank you very
much Mr president of the pending
if there is financing.
Or leasing that would simply be
leasing or financing it the more
fair market value but if if it
were something that the locality
so that would steer clear of the
anti donation clause Mister
president.
Senator Pirtle Mr president
senator I'm reading through the
analysis here and it talks about
you know if if they renovated
for a salon you know would look
awfully suspicious Mister
president senator that they
already knew of a had a salon in
our study on on what's missing
within a community of what how
are they going to determine how
to renovate these buildings and
and what purpose the building
should be used for center for
to say a banking you have to
have a business plan a proposal
a finance plan a a long range
revenue generating plants that
are once you put all that
together then you may be
everything in complete light of
day the board is going to
consist of some really great you
know individuals within
government including those that
private equity venture capital
commercial real estate
development engineering
construction organized labor
urban planning economic and
environmental sustainable
proposal that would be submitted
for review and approval.
Senator Pirtle so Mister
president senator I think that's
the issue with the the anti
donation portion of this if if a
salon if somebody a licensed
So essentially the NMFA could by
the scissors the chairs the
sinks the the dryers for the
for people Mr president and and
senator if we're going to go
that far with this I think
violates the anti donation
clause and and I would hope is
present center you could address
back at fair market rates and
and things of that nature where
they might not have been able to
get a loan somewhere else for a
very unique project that's one
thing calling this out as a
salon or what have you that's
private equity commercial real
estate cetera to make sure that
that's not what would be
happening here everything would
have to be paid back and it
would be an agreement that would
back two years four years six
years down the road and will
forgive all these loans and will
be in a situation where it was
years and circumvent what what
we intended thank you Mr
president Senator Pirtle any
further debate.
Si no further debate center for
economic development toolbox for
New Mexico that sort of a
missing link right now it's
going to really make communities
are ready to act a lot faster
and economic development
the roll then called in all
those present voting the Fuhrman
except those voting the negative
by show of hands Senator voting
to your seats please.
raise your hand we have center
diamond voting no senator
Sanchez voting now Senator Baca
voting no Senator Brandt voting
now Senator Pirtle voting no
Senator Kernan voting now.
Senator Moores voting now
Senator Burt.
Senator Byrd voting no senator
Byrd voting no.
return to the chamber seeing no
objection.
Thank you congratulations
Representative Dixon.
We're going on to the next one
Senator.
Daniel A. Ivey Soto.
Thanks very much Mr president
ninety one as twice amended on
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objections centred assaulted
licensing Linda Trujillo the
other one is
consultant to the nursing
communities in the state Linda
single.
one is a bill that deals with
licensure.
Of occupational professional
licenses and one of the problems
of the state of New Mexico has
boards or agencies just are of
the boards which is just don't
get around to processing
licensure so someone comes here
there lice's of the state
they're not able to practice in
New Mexico.
And they just keep waiting.
is we we take away the residency
requirement if you're gonna be
licensed in the state but you're
subject to licensing boards of
the laws of the state the second
thing is if you're licensed in
You shall.
If there's any New Mexico
specific things he did take care
of you take care of them during
that first year as long as
you're already in good standing
professional people are coming
into New Mexico reducing the
barriers and making it easier
for them to be able to practice
here make it easier for the
people of New Mexico to build
questions thank you senator
debating.
We have Senator Pirtle followed
by Senator mantas Senator Pirtle
thank you Mr president sponsor
please yield Silvercity yield
even though you know I I I kind
of take a little pause you know
I don't want us with mess up my
batting average some of the a
little bit more careful on when
I through some of these out so
wanted to clarify that quickly I
didn't see an appropriation with
it so what is this to help with
what we call travelling nurses
Mr president Senator.
officially they are independent
of each other however when it
comes to the travelling nurses
who are part of the compact.
The things that happens with
those travelling nurses part of
in the gas to the school
district eleven a Paso their
permanent jobs in New Mexico as
nurses and they are not licensed
compact what this bill does by
contrast is it allows someone to
be licensed in New Mexico pay
licensing fees to New Mexico the
allow us to revisit some of
these contacts.
And and thank you Mr president
thank you Senator for bringing
up my my next point and and
that's the fact that we we do
but yet they want to work in New
Mexico so I think it just points
especially in our border
communities Clovis for Tallis
Hobbs in those areas people will
live on the other side of the
a long hard look at that I I
think this is kind of a bandaid
on a larger problem but I do
support any time we get nurses
licensed in the state of New
Mexico that's a good thing thank
Senator so the yield I'll be
happy to Senator Ivey Soto I
haven't read the bill but I'm
looking at the title and listen
to the debate there's a
reference here to professional
licensure changes could you tell
Thank you very much I miss
president Senator
sirventes.
Engineers and architects are not
included in the professional
work on amendment in future the
the the challenge of course is
the my my artificial licenses
California and it's been pretty
tough to get it moved into New
California so it's been a been a
catch twenty two for a long time
but I was kind of hoping that
you're gonna take care of that
here maybe some place down the
road thank you senator.
Senator Stewart.
this bill.
Of.
You may remember three years ago
I amended the body art safe
practices act requiring them to
show reciprocity with other
what they were required to do in
that bill which had an emergency
clause so I've been very
frustrated with some of these
people who want to practice
professionally in this state so
this to me is a great bill I'm
very happy that our new
governor for giving a message
thank the superintendent for
working on thank you Mr
president Senator we have
further debate Senate Kernan
followed by Senator Ingle
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
mention that there would be a
thirty day temporary provisional
license what happens after that
to make sure it's all taken care
Thank you very much Mr president
thank you that that explains
that I I'm really stand in
support of this in fact
received information last week
hospital they're going to need a
lot of staff and absolutely
could get no where and with the
help of superintendents are he
goes by we just have to get
these individuals a license
quickly we were about to lose
that staff person and we can't
afford to do that so thank you
so the yield agency preservation
to present center I have
analysis of the bill and it the
list of boards that this
blushing for requirements and
Both of whom have different
things and I'm like the bears
are said licensing board for
medical practice then there's
licensing boards that are not
expedited licensure and then
there's some parts of says the
same subject that are not
expedited licensure can you tell
me what that is.
Senator Ingle sold the so one of
the things as we were going
through the various different
licensing acts is that we found
that there were some boards
Authority of the board it didn't
and it provided that it would do
it under the uniform licensing
act enough say that part of that
it would do it pursuant to the
are included simply to change
the rule making authority so
that they're all aligned but not
to provide the expedited
licensure.
doctor would under this act
would receive the expedited
licensure
but we did clarify the
rulemaking authority so that
it's consistent throughout all
the various professional and
Senator.
That was Brianna and Senator
Ingle that is a law unto itself
pursuant to the Supreme Court of
the state of New Mexico and so
Anyway present I hope we get
these I get lots of calls on
different professions trying to
figure out where the rules are
and who makes them and the
things and how they get those
things done so if this hopefully
simplifies it it will truly be
Americal and I do notice that
the the bill also removes
Senator Ivey Soto here good man
for this sort of thing because
you have noticed on your career
up here you do love details.
Si no further debate Senator Ivy
Soto to close on the bill and
thank you very much Mr president
and Senator Ingle images to say
to be appropriate within each
each practice act actually
although I'm I'm closing this
president Matthew back to
Senator Ingle.
it's for senator Campos and I
it's called capital outlay.
Senator so the to close I thank
you very much Mr president this
provided for this for the
people's state of Mexico is
ensuring that professional
occupational services are made
available to them and the
numbers needed and that we
facilitate that process while
amazing job of going through all
of the different practice acts
and so with that Mr president I
ask unanimous I move that that
house commerce and economic
affirmative except for those
voting in the negative by show
of hands Senator voting tier
seats please if you wish to vote
now.
Please raise your hand.
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninety one as
twice amended has passed the
Senate centers open thank you
very much agency present
colleagues and I'd also like to
here as well thank Nico the
chamber Representative.
We'll go on to the next item
that's going to be Senator Lopez
for.
House bill forty six Senate
office thank you very much Mr
president.
house for substitute for House
consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill forty six on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
me no objections the state who
you're expert witnesses are
Senator I thank you Mr president
I have of justice Briana
somewhat a.
And also Marian chaining.
the Senate house bill forty six
will create the office of Family
representation and advocacy the
office will strengthen the legal
representation we are
statutorily required in the
a similar bill was introduced to
in the twenty twenty one session
it was of course a past through
Senate committees here on the
advocacy will be overseen by a
thirteen member family
representation and advocacy
commission the office will have
the independence and authority
to create policy and budgets
began of course to strengthen
the attorney services
Mr president there is a the.
Task force piece of legislation
of us and with that Mr president
I will stand for questions
Senator debating.
Anyone wishing to be we have
centered the subpoena.
So what is the Mr president
center yes.
Mr president and senator the
I've been getting emails from
current guardians of light and
this legislation.
the selection of which guardian
to sign to a cases left up to to
this office or to the judge who
would make that decision.
we're talking about guardians in
the in the adult guardianship
system to that horrible cases
Senator Paypen is alerted us all
dealing with thank you senator
for bringing this forward thank
you Mr president thank you
center this panel any further
debate.
Senator Stewart.
objection.
Senator Lopez to Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president just a
quick question the sponsor would
you Senators and nobody else Mr
I thank you very much Mr
president I now move that house
for substitute for house
consumer and public affairs
committee substitute for house
in the negative by show of hands
senators will vote into your
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative to of the negative
house or substitute for House
Senate going on to the next
available have centers the
Lopez.
Thank you Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
I see no objections Senator
Lopez to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president may I ask
chamber and I believe that the
cable guy who is a co sponsor is
here as well.
Thank you senator syllabus can
Senate center can you please
just the hood organization who
are they with is your accents
okay aren't such a what yes it
is the executive director of
agreement better deal combo is
with the center for long poverty
okay thank you Senator and
welcome to the chamber.
Senator Lopez thank you.
Mr president H. B. twenty two
resources needed to ensure
meaningful access to services
the services are like public
benefits or unemployment
insurance.
Even food pantries.
who primarily speak languages
other than English and it would
require the state agencies with
secretaries submit an annual
report to the governor and the
legislative finance committee.
New Mexico is home to thousands
of people the primarily speak
languages other than English
Spanish Vietnamese Chinese and
innate are the most common.
interpretation or translation
when required this increases
health and economic disparities
in our communities.
Although service is available at
others unemployment insurance
food assistance and Medicaid
during the pandemic.
H. B. twenty two provides an
effective annual process for
state agencies to plan and for
With that I stand for questions.
Centers we're debating anyone
wishing to bank.
I should recognize my co sponsor
and deciding what to this but my
co sponsor in this bill is is
Madam pro tem de Stewart and I
would like to now turn it over
for her Senator Stewart.
part the last five years by the
Asian community in New Mexico as
the senator for the
international district I right
now I share that also was center
wonderful community stewards and
they have been trying to ensure
that we follow federal guidance
on this issue the outlook City
this will give them a chance to
do that so it's it's it's time
for us to pass this and I urge
the support of the body thank
Lopez do you yes Mr president I
yield so Mister president and
senator.
Do we know how many languages
are spoken in the world.
or seventy two hundred different
languages spoken in the world
today how many of those would we
need translators for fluent
speakers.
federal law requires is that
there is an analysis of the
population served.
and so that analysis would be
The Navajo Nation.
would be required to offer
services in today.
If an agency serving perhaps in
rushing to the through of this
but yes they there would be an
analysis agency by agency
service by service and
Mr president and in senators so
we we we've certainly.
Brought a lot of Afghans into
are fluently spoken in
Afghanistan how do we sort that
out because what we would get is
Afghans and how would we know
how many of those speak Farsi or
How would that work.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
that is a really good question
because
that they speak the agency would
have to discover that
information and then there's a
difference between
interpretation and translation.
For interpretation there's
something called a language
the number and you get an
interpreter within depending on
how easily accessible the
language was but in a reasonable
time and you use you use the for
would be required to be
translated and in that instance
there are many many services
including the universities that
can provide that.
Although my parents meant Laos I
have never tried to.
The clout anybody.
Unless we had a a large lotion
community.
Why is this not sufficient to do
the job.
Senator Lopez.
situation however.
I would suggest that if that was
a language access plan to speak
into a phone it might be
evaluation would get a
certified.
interpreter or at language line
or a certified translator rather
But again this would be of this
would be in the agency's
language access plan.
Session so Mister president
senator I understand that but I
in while some of may be similar
they're not the same.
interesting the official
language of Uganda is English.
So.
Again as I said yesterday I I I
think that we should speak more
So it may be you know perfectly
of Quebec for example they speak
French.
An English okay S. S. official
I don't think I'd call it French
but they certainly know how to
talk to each other.
So how the language interpreter
Spanish has a problem here
because this speaks Spain
Spanish not Mexican or New
Mexican Spanish in New Mexicans
Even though it's all Spanish.
So.
It would seem to me that would
make.
what they speak not forcing.
They have interpreters that they
will bring.
That's that's part of what what
are English speakers that speak
the native tongue special.
I would think that instead of
To bring their own interpreter
because then they then they're
speaking not only English but
they're translating it into the
dialect of the person that
they're actually with such as
necessarily meet all the
criteria.
So that's why I'm.
I'm just confused to how this
would possibly work Mr president
see that it's pretty darn hard
to come up with translators for
that.
So why not have the community
find their own translator.
Mr president center.
the Senator because I think just
made the point each agency is
going to do an evaluation of
what the needs of the community
it serves our and the agency
will try to determine whether it
to New Mexico which is very
exciting
and the other point I wanted to
make it is this is actually what
translation of written
interpretation.
Based on the results of of of
the four factor test and that
The frequency with which Ellie
P. individual come in contact
with the ended entities program
activity or service the nature
of importance of the ended
analysis that needs to be made
by the agency.
There is a safe harbor for a
provision.
If the language group the cause
is constitutes five percent or
they're fine.
There I if if if the population
is less than that but what I
what I think is important about
lines I know when I was at
unless the committee that you
that hi taking of.
Contracting for one language
will probably end up saving the
state money.
So Mister president senator.
A year ago.
and then we decided to go
abandon all of our friends in
Afghanistan to get a bunch of
kids including American service
members.
And now there's a significant
need.
from Afghanistan excuse me to
the Farsi speakers for putting
in the wrong country.
But
But now there is there there to
probably is a need.
dari train somebody in imposto
pesto.
It to do this we probably have
Arabic speaker sure that's
probably not a problem because
they were to exist here.
To do this before we were in
violation of the law.
Thank you Mr president my
experts tell me that in fact
but to answer your question with
regard to this law is the
agencies would develop their own
time line and their own
assessment of what what the
annually so they would they
would have a way to figure out
whether they're meeting the
needs of the population.
Senator so again Mr president.
people from that community
anyway who are going to do this
translation anyway because
they're already there anyway and
so now we're going to make them
state employees.
upon that and I think it's one
that's not necessarily necessary
there may be.
May be.
But there are an awful lot of
Navajo speakers in Farmington.
uncomfortable with their English
skills and it's not that they
don't speak English but there
are people that are
uncomfortable with their English
skills.
They bring somebody with some.
that speak New Mexican Spanish I
don't have people that speak
Lara mall and Spanish very well.
Certainly not Chileans Baelish
Spanish and if you come from
Yes it's sort of the same but.
So so please put me so
translators on on the pay roll
Issues why are we paying people
to do what they're already doing
I think Mister Mister president
senator.
Senator Lopez.
There are many children in New
Mexico that have had to
translate for their parents.
Translate a bout medical issues
with this law requires is for
each agency to develop a plan
for meeting the needs of the
community they serve and for
This is not about paying people
are hiring people this is about
developing the plan.
Mr president.
Senator.
knowledge of three thousand.
Maybe we should try to learn
some more words thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator we do have
further debate will have Center
So Mr president listening
hearing debate we heard that
this is already federal law so
my question is why is this bill
designed to help the agencies
more effectively and efficiently
comply with the obligations they
already have and so this bill
does not
We have top talked to the to a
DFA and they are on board with
doing this service we have
going to help that the state
deal with potential liability
problems if there are problems
with the interpretation that is
provided because it's going to
And Mister president senator
thank you for that so federal
law doesn't already do that for
us.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you senator Mr friends so
my other question was you say
that it's fully funded with
junior money and some other
stuff we are still needing six
point three million dollars to
you Mr president I'm not sure
where that the figure is
The co sponsor Boca and I
provided some of our junior
money to the DFA to coordinate
we spoke with
and they believe that this will
help them with coordination of
of of this service.
Senator Sanchez.
between eight hundred thousand
and six point three million.
Senate Bill office well
the plans of you can't implement
of a you can't implement
anything unless you have a plan.
So I don't know where that
We fully funded the next year Mr
president yes.
Mr president and senator thank
you.
Well if we have a permission to
remove our jackets.
Is generally not a request
unanimous request to remove
jackets seen any objection no
Senate good afternoon to the
sponsor.
The sponsor would yield to a
question.
Yes Mr president I yield.
Let us assume that a cabinet
secretary.
For all of them just simply
choose not to.
Do this.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you senator Candelaria and
it's good to see you that is a
for
Meeting the duties under
outlined under the bill and then
the other thing is there has
been litigation for the state's
When the state fails to meet its
federal law requirements.
Thank you Mr president senator
and I think that that.
I I just as for the bill that's
bill Mr president is quite
frankly that it is a new require
it is a directive it is a shall.
You know memorial masquerading
as a statute it is a requirement
now I think that the issue Mr
president.
For me and I think it's more of
a.
other requirement the
legislature as the Supreme
legislative and policy making
body of the state decides to
place on the executive I think
All have passed bills like this.
That enumerate a new requirement
Many of you have been here for
more.
Well if you have you been here
from more actually the majority
of us now been here for two.
I think it's rather common that
To ultimately hold the executive
accountable for implementing the
policies we direct.
Sometimes in this body we let
the tail wag that all I do not
matters is the policy we decide
and ensuring that the executive
follows what the law requires
And so you know I think the
strength of this bill is it is a
requirement on the
administration.
I I certainly am happy to hear
that this administration is
absolutely I'm willing on able.
To push back on any executive
power.
We just sort of been plodding
along the way.
democratic legislature was just
applauding
and let the governor had of a
broad sway a broad breasted and
many say.
to actually do our jobs.
And send partisan interests
aside.
And actually exercise our
constitutional role to ensure
you're bringing this bill as a
as a lawyer I will say in
closing Mister president.
That I always favor legislation.
clients come into my office
we've been deprived once
discussed the right at issue
here the right to language
access folks come to my office
and I say well unfortunately
legally nothing I think that's a
fault of the bill because as I
said we're we're putting that
really.
Does something simple something
we ask of every person in this
state every single day.
Which is simply follow the law.
So as long as people follow this
enumerated even in this section
of law.
Senator requirements that I've
never received complied with.
individuals with a with a remedy
if they if this is not complied
with so you know absent a
private remedy it requires a
I see no further debate.
Senator this close.
Our governor has shown a deep
commitment to racial justice.
She has asked her agencies to
collaborate.
have spoken to me about their
commitment to comply with this
and and and they believe that
this will help them I've spoken
with the secretary CYFD who is
I move that house bill twenty
two do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record so that the role
Has amended.
Yes has amended is the worst of
all know please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty and
affirmative seeing the negative
house bill twenty two as amended
has passed the Senate Senator
Lopez.
The reader to read we have all
the members attention please.
introduced by absolutely
everyone.
A memorial honoring Lenore
Laurent ho for her peerless and
unanimous consent we go to that
order of business.
Senator Wirth we just need that
let me just make sure that we do
all the proper procedure Center
memorial thirty three having
been.
unanimous consent we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous on that order
business nonsense miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
remove Senate memorial thirty
three from the president's table
having eleven fifty nine AM I
move we adjourn until twelve or
one PM the Senate will come to
order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules we
suspended that the journal so
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee hearing no
objection it is so ordered
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
before we do that Mr president
unanimous consent that we
suspend the Senate rules to
allow the reader to actually
Seeing no objection.
The reader to read.
Senate memorial thirty three
introduced by senator Wirth and
all others a memorial honoring
have the foresight to ask a
young woman from Espanola to be
his secretary for the upcoming
legislative session and she
readily agreed.
to Pino felt she should honor
Senators UConn's commitment and
arranged for the woman to be
hired as a door attendant by the
sergeant at arms.
Pino learned of Lenore secretary
secretarial skills she convinced
Lenore to return the following
year as a secretary eventually
She chose Lenore to be heard
deputy chief clerk.
And we're as when when ito when
know what what need to Pino
retired in nineteen ninety the
chief clerk position was offered
And for as when Margaret.
Look what.
There are going to a.
Became chief clerk in nineteen
retired and whereas the state
Senate realizable nor with the
most qualified candidates and
elected her as Senate chief
clerk in two thousand eight
Senate Lenore has performed her
duties in each position she has
held with integrity dedication
and professionalism that has
proven to be an outstanding
And we're just under Lenore is
tutelage and guidance over the
past fourteen years many members
of the Senate chamber have
learned how to become effective
leave some very large shoes to
fill and whereas Lenore is now
looking forward to being a lady
of leisure spending time with
her family golfing with her
the state of birth and sent to
the state of New Mexico that
heartfelt thanks and deep
gratitude be offered to one or
Laurent hope for her many years
of dedication loyalty and
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to
Lenore marrano.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president let me put this on for
substitution I see no objections
senator Wirth to explain thank
you Mr president and I know one
or you didn't want a memorial
and appreciate you for your
incredible dedication the
legislature.
To the Senate's.
And you've provided stability.
Continuity and that
institutional knowledge that's
just on matched.
I know it's been there for us
Senate family and certainly have
raised the bar incredibly high
for all the future clerks that
And I know that you and Alex are
gonna enjoy.
All the times on the other side
and you'll be watching us I'm
sure and I know this isn't
happening right away but this is
schools will have words we just
appreciate you so much and
everything you've done I DO
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president
I would I would tend to say this
is the most important order of
business.
The reason is is because at the
end of the day.
Forty four years what
dedication.
Professionalism.
I don't know if you noticed but
she still was correcting
And more dedicated.
Welcoming to new individual when
I got here and I will never
forget the two years that I got
in this building so far.
Give me a reliance on the rules.
On how to treat people.
Starts again over and over and
over managing this chamber we
all know what goes on in here it
For this body because I see you
helping everybody and there's
not a time when I've called the
that you haven't come through
for me provided me an answer
guidance.
you have many many years on the
golf course.
And I'm I covet your family that
gets to spend all that time with
you.
You're dedicated person servant
Thank you Mr president.
To say this without crying
you're crying enough for all of
us up there.
So when are we're just gonna
offices stopping in your always
smiling at me always have a
wonderful word
I love the additive of you
and you're just not afraid to
assert yourself mean I love
strong women and you are one of
them and I will never forget how
appreciate you if only I could
golf I would join you in the
golf course but to but I know
you're not gonna forget about us
have fun on that golf course
thank you.
Thank you Senator Stewart
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr president
and.
I've grown up with you guiding
teaching.
And the sometimes no down all
right same he did do this right
and it's part of what we learned
I think for the heartfelt.
Of what you have done for the
state of New Mexico what you
have done for us here in the
And you are a friend and for
what I call it says is that even
more so than just a friend this
family.
as we talked about is change
we're Mr president to family is
for everyone and you have been
see where you're going on your
travels and such but I know on
the golf course and you will be
enjoying a well deserved time to
enjoy thank you and love you.
What can I say I think of BG
here maybe once in the morning.
In ten years here before all of
us.
And you're always you're after
us.
You're coming back and I said
how much longer he got to be
here tonight I'm not going to
get your calendar ready for
more.
And that's the dedication.
And we're gonna really mess
But before I even was sworn and
I met you.
Senator Crowder brought me up
in.
Brought me to your office on few
member that.
Make sure that this lady you
Throughout the years and the.
I just love coming in and
sitting down talking about your
family and my family and they
Of the we don't know we see
around here and it's needed.
It's needed you never play
partisan games.
So is this is what it says and
The state Sir bracket more notes
this is that it has to be done.
Insiders Preciado your.
Dedication to the state of New
And I will miss you dearly
around here on the.
And I'm gonna leave in quite yet
I'm hoping to see a few times
before you retire but we will
Rural just that overtakes
replace better start studying
now because it's going to take
him years to understand the
rules the way you do so thank
with with sense of one for you
he wouldn't be here.
And so on thank you for bringing
him.
For a.
That's quite a gift you you
Thank you senator and senator
Morris.
Thank you Mr president T. F.
long long way and to help you
and Alex are many of them are on
those are given my mother myself
my grandfather my grandmother
been an honor and love you more
than I can actually say on this
public setting and I I too was
just laughing Washington was
soul learn or are watching
because of reading the memorial
detail to the rules it is
because it matters so marches
institution matters and you and
body that and your such a
your family on behalf of all the
more distances for many many
First year I was here she was
the committee secretary for
corporations to use this system
chief clerk.
And the amount of work that she
You won't be replaced.
Mr is.
And I'll play golf with you this
Thank you senator Senator
Campos.
Thank you very much Mr
president.
you will the professionalism the
strength.
The tenacity and even when.
We saw one or possibly not
feeling well.
And that's really the.
Role of a leader in the family.
To all of you as you remember if
And that is an S. Census what
loan or has taught each and
everyone of us.
How we can be like her with that
work ethic.
So there are a few things that
really come to mind.
And one of them is.
Because we have quite a few new
people that have come in.
And it does take time it takes
years to learn processes.
You take your skills and whether
it be a college university
possibly even and one of our
social studies classes at the
secondary level.
Real important.
Because oftentimes we feel what
I can do it better.
And often times we feel.
Doesn't take that much work.
you who've possibly still
remember some of the shorthand.
Those are some of the old
skills.
But those all skills are the
Talking about long days and long
nights.
Three o'clock in the morning
four o'clock in the morning
working on the bills making sure
that things are going to be in
order organizing if you will
And that's what Lenore continues
to give to each and everyone of
us.
Sometimes we're tired.
But when our says come.
Keep working at it.
And Lenore goes back to her
office to ensure.
The everything is organized that
is proficient that it's truly in
order.
Continue to build those
credentials.
Continue to build upon what your
experiences are.
And then sharing with others.
From this point forward.
I hope we all take it to our
families.
And we look forward to possibly
see you.
A teacher who is a plus.
Who is top quality.
Was given every ounce of who you
are.
And will always thank you for
what you've given us thank you
Mr president thank you Senator
Campos Senator Rodriguez.
with us here and I hope you are
still with us in the future to
come and spend time with us
Lenore
Mr president I remember in
Lenore I used to go to I just
got used to working with Lenore
for everything and
you were always there with the
not be betrayed to be trailed is
one of the worst things in life
because we lose trust right when
somebody does that you have
never done that you tell us the
always admire you in all that I
learned from you I will have and
take with me and so I hope that
you come back and see as often
and
memory of Lenore was shortly
after getting elected and came
up for the training in December
I think it was and I walked into
our office as you said Senator
souls it's good to see you.
even walked in and had things
ready and set up for all of us
in a packet of materials and
things ready to go.
That was Lenore she runs the
Volkswagen and diesels in the
very cold in Santa Fe don't
start very well.
And so I had electric block
heater put in and Lenore make
Lenore is always taking care of
us and Lenore this place will
always always have here
influence in everything that is
You know we've had the people
recognized here in the ten years
I've been here at different
times and this one's going to be
a really hard one because I am
going to really miss you Lenore
I mean.
market appreciate that you
helped me to become a better
person I think along the way
thank you so much for that when
I was doing greater whatever
things are going good you always
took time to to recognize that
the way they know that someone
is coming through that is going
to make great decisions smart
decisions fair decisions and I
want to thank you for that
because I think you bring the
temple of this chamber into a
the first conversations we had
was about my son's Erin and Zach
in the right we wanted to go
meet her ex I said what
wonderful things about her and I
must to mention to her and you
heard from Senator souls the
with all of us different
personality showing up and I
must have mentioned that my
favorite number was eleven
because I have son's twin sons
and that's always been my
makes me every day I think about
my son's when I drive up to this
building so thank you for that
because all the hearing this of
it all I want to make sure that
we stay grounded so thank you
for that.
And the phone kind of buzz in my
phone kept buzzing a little bit
and I just happened to get a
call from our current governor
she was calling me about
something I don't remember what
I I need to finish this part.
It so do you want to know how
serious call fiscal in our there
impressed with one or is Galle
skills you may not know this
guy's but if you want to be a
better golfer go golfing with
Lenore.
I just want to say thank you all
the words that you've written
shine as a senator so thank you
very much for that there's a
line I don't know if you all
have seen some of the Morial's
and some of the certificates
Lenore is written for all of us
love you so much I'm gonna miss
you and don't hesitate you have
my number you need to do
anything for you pick up the
phone I'll be right there for
you thank you thank you center
runs because of Lenore and today
because of the north's it's come
to a halt.
Which I think is fitting.
Yeah I don't fear many people.
anything like that it's because.
It's a fear of of disappointing.
In instantly you're part of the
family.
And so I think that's one of the
most important things that we
can all remember.
No doubt there's gonna be an arm
out for a hug.
The best hugs.
There's a lot that can be said.
You got to go see Lenore.
Of.
But then there's those times
that.
I talked to someone I former
LA's.
The respect you for good reason
your fair honest but yet stern
when you have to be.
special trip as I'm trying to
sneak out of an interim
committee.
I can't leave the building
without going in talking to
Lenore.
Because I just enjoyed our
conversation so much.
Talk about golfer all the
shenanigans I'm doing at home
in.
All those things and I think
that's what I'm going to miss
the most is just that that
gonna carry with me forever and
I carry with pride.
Always be your Pirtle the
turtle.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle Senator
Minorities on constitutional
track she make sure that we dot
all of the eyes and cross all of
the tees and she does it so
well.
going to the parties the one
hundred day parties and and just
really enjoying Lenore and her
husband Alex it's that has been
a pleasure I've only been here
session started and if the I I
don't know if you can imagine
how overwhelming that was and he
took me right in and and help me
figure out where my offices but
state government works the other
thing that she has really done
is help with constituent when I
finally figured out that we
could use our office for
constituent services.
Sedillo Lopez Senator Hey.
Thank you Mr president.
In our give me a hug.
We were so deep in COVID then
and it was the first time the
someone who I was related to at
that height.
Kindness and welcoming that I
will never forget
and.
Selfishly I feel cheated that I
clearly towards every member in
this chamber
and around Christmas I came by
at the wrong house with my son
one day and he got to meet
so thank you so much we will
miss you so much thank you
senator examine us.
Thank you Mr president you know.
She's your boss Mr lieutenant
governor when you're lost in
language she knows the process
and doesn't even hesitate.
seven of us more mallard creek
in a few others and we have to
go to a funeral well we're going
to the funeral and all this and
we get a call from from the
state police Senator Wirth
invoke privilege but but for my
kids.
And my son was here the other
day said I want to go see the
norm Sajjan well there then and
so
thing you can do this or stamp
in the office and where's my ice
cream.
cupcake.
That's what nickname each other.
Right.
Life needs to go on I mean
except that and I wish the best
thank you.
Thank you Sam yes Senator
Stefanics.
everything I first met Lenore
when market logo date was still
here as the Senate chief clerk
and your styles are totally
different and we appreciate your
the welcome for all the freshmen
who came in so that whether
people had been around this
building before or not they had
besides being around so that we
all could say hi to Lenore when
we were here I was very glad
when she wasn't here because
that meant she was taking a tiny
vacation.
take a long break.
Like you're planning to we
understand that it might be the
time so please come round please
Thank you Mr president and
Lenore I will not.
I will not
rehash everything that's been
said.
If you love it and if you fall
in love with.
And.
When you're part of this
institution you see each other's
lives on for.
only chief clerk that I've
worked with for the last decade.
That you and I will share the
same final session together.
You've earned my respect because
of who you are.
And I think that now.
It is our time to.
You know I came to the Senate
ten years ago.
Along with that that large
freshman class that Senator
Padilla was was referencing a
minute ago.
but you have been I'm a person
in the storm of this political
enterprise.
Whose word is always true.
Do you can always speak with a
never feel like you're only
and not from self promotion or
self advance.
And those I ultimately think are
the greatest gift that you have
tried to in part to this
institution.
Mexico we've been the state for
a hundred and ten years.
You've you've been around the
legislature for for for darn
near forty percent.
constituents for the work you've
done to the state of New Mexico
to the institution of the Senate
and to the work of the Senate
and as a person and as a future
are ever up near angel fire or
ever want to come up and play at
the Country Club there you have
my phone number and Corey line
the family would love to
the slot missing sounded fun as
long as I'm sitting next to you
so take care my dear friend and
god bless you.
Thank you senator Candelaria
center how to mail.
I don't know how to get through
intimidating and I think every
senator has felt that coming
into this chamber.
But walking in knowing I had
somebody from back home with me
I felt at ease.
every day.
Before I left the Senate
chambers every date stop to make
sure she was okay.
If she needed a ride home or she
needed to come with me in the
Forty six years ago Lenore came
to the Senate would hold while
her daughter was a page that's
when she was asked to work here.
Is the number of jobs with pride
To the to secretary standing or
sitting behind me who work in
the freshman suite in just this
one short amount of time with
you have been impressed and
not the economy I told you to
tell Alex that you and I are
going to do our trips to states
and centers and he's gonna have
to wait at home and is.
You've been so kind and generous
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you center had a male.
Senator Hamblen.
do want to apologize in advance
for the word that I may be using
in just a minute which is so
much part of New Mexico and if
you are a woman in New Mexico
you of use this term but we have
Can go on that.
And.
And I think that really
encompasses a lot of what all of
intelligent.
Fearless and can get things
done.
Also see and my apologies for
this boss and better just.
And I would like to say I would
down.
Well deserved.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
here when I got here and and I
just hate to see you go before I
leave I thought I'd be leaving
before you actually.
but.
Raul Burciaga and I would spend
a day with them and you treated
those students like they were.
commented about it they all
thought that's the woman who
really runs this place right she
she is the one in charge and
they were correct.
But what most struck me was when
This came through and it and it
just struck me here is a woman
who really understands what.
The legislature is about but the
visiting the casinos the mark
you've left on this body will be
here.
And we really love you and we
really want you to to know how
Thank you senator anticipate a
Senator about this.
Thank you for that so much of
this is serious but I'm gonna
reveal a secret but when are
will probably get upset with the
shorthand
and you will probably think that
she's doing that taking notes of
what we're doing here she's
actually working on a book.
And her retirement plan is not
Because she knows where the
bodies are buried she knows the
old stories she knows what the
Senate has been and what it is
of maybe one of the last around
here from a generation.
That is a fewer words.
But would communicate a great
Or the fact that you would
sometimes twinkle when you were
a co conspirator in some of that
Mr missing you know what we're
talking about so we'll wait will
wait on the book.
Because of course Phillip is a
constant reminder to me about
something that you're a reminder
to all of us about.
And you want me to tell you what
And it's a generation of women.
Who could show us dignity very
few words with a hug.
most when we be in every session
as we always do by coming to
sign in the book.
And you won't be there holding
the pen for me.
But you will be.
Hard to follow that but I was
just a look around the Senate
floor think about.
ourselves Eleanor she is the
heart of this chamber.
You look behind you you've got
the president you look at your
All the things have been said
today so important and know
you're taking him in here all of
the things that have been said
today we all need to do here's
well.
it all over again because
everything that's been said
today is gonna be part of this
history.
We're gonna miss you.
Thank you senator.
Senator Gonzales.
what was being said of both the
Senator Hemphill and myself we
were on the house side as expert
witness on one of our bills the
when you're elected you know
there's a process when you come
in.
When you're appointed there's
also a process how you come in.
Analysts my part you know coming
can get sworn in at your local
level and which of the you know
at that party north of Portland
an opportunity so I did that and
I was the first person to ever
know I set up and she said well
me too at your office.
And I said fine.
So we were in the house side in
my office and she walks in.
a you're moving now.
And had not realizing that she
had three of the staff right
behind her and I said way high
been here twenty five years I
there and then the the following
that you know so I called.
Representative Lundstrom in a
civil the office is empty she's
that's that's what it was but
you know I think that all as
much as everything has been said
you know it is so is that part
to you know the to do learn to
keys you know to the leadership
part to know of running the
system and also know how many of
us you know have the same
opportunity of also having the
know how to have that human
element of just really making
someone feel like you know
you're very special and we're
working here all together and
your many years of service and
to your family for lending that
part you know for you to be here
thank you.
Thank you senator well as
senator Claire Hemphill.
a lot of opportunities are first
session to meet outside of the
round house there wasn't a lot
of celebration and we didn't
was like.
It was always about the the
warrant the love the compassion
that you shared we were
separated from our families from
into what we didn't even know
what we were getting ourselves
into here what to expect and you
were just that solid source of
support and so thank you for
always one of the last to leave
we showed up early the next day
and you're always here before
any of us and it was so humbling
you're the real MVP here in the
Senate and we are really going
to miss you.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
Senator Burt.
anyway yeah this is it's the
it's the hearing age I guess
senator Byrd will maybe give me
a thumbs up here and then go
ahead Senator X. thank you thank
we're fortunate to continue to
know you and that we're gonna be
fortunate to see you in
I want you to do me a favor
though because there's there's
one thing that I've heard for
Is far better than a good day at
work.
And I want you to let me know
because without question I
we're gonna mission love you
both.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr president and
I mean literally about a week or
so before the session started
and.
I missed orientation I missed a
do is go see Lenore will
take care we are I didn't even
have a little Miller's last name
just so you know typical
freshman I'm kind of familiar
and that glad to have you here
and I said well you're supposed
take care of me she says I will
take care of you Senator Burt
Always sharing the good bits of
information and and that
sometimes some things that you
may not want to hear but it's
coming from the heart and is met
with all the love in the world
And all the other senators who
are presently here or have come
and gone.
But I hope.
If you ever need our help.
All you need to do is call.
You will all be there for you.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Byrd Senator.
Thank you Mr president.
As you know I can stand up and
Because Lenore.
This meant so much to us.
And I don't have the words to
Thank you Mr president
I guess I'll start this off with
the jokes I don't start crying
myself but I am worried about
Especially with what's going on
in the world you know this
pandemic
In some ways I feel kind of
cheated.
With everything that we've heard
today.
I'm happy that you're doing this
on your terms you're making a
decision for yourself.
I want to thank you I want to
thank the sacrifices of your
family as well.
I really enjoyed our
conversations.
I really enjoyed the last few
months before the session we had
it's who you are.
And that's really what I'm going
to miss.
You know our legislative aides
were talking about it this
morning.
to and then say
Just like the.
Tom Brady right now retiring I I
don't know how it works in the
roundhouse.
Do they have rights to you if
I appreciate you for being you.
Thank you Mr president thanks
Center pope Sierra.
I want to congratulate you and.
I'm leaving here.
Let leaving a leading L. as
Whoever follows you really have
a high standard to meet.
yesterday we of.
Praise the former Senator Paypen
act.
And also your smile.
You always greeted me with a
smile and make sure you did
everybody else.
In you never seem to be in a bad
I call they never called me back
then I called several days
later.
And you all very response you
all called me or you have one
your staff called the really
eleven number nine is kids will
you gave me.
number thirty five which
I'm sure with coincidence but
they always remind me of my wife
And then she started greeting me
by calling me.
The need to say I'm I'm your
can leave here knowing that you
of a left the traffic
I'd like to see in to begin the
interview right your retirement
knowing that you did a terrific
talked about all of the things
that Lenore is done for us and
I've got a whole list of those
myself you know your door key
doesn't work for you want to
change our parking place or all
mentioned is how many times
we've had a constituent call us
and we send of quick email them
the Lenore and say fix it tells
That have a I had the problem
solved are more people who have
had more problem solved and then
of through Lenore and her office
and her staff she's she's a
tried to call of whatever the
work.
If you call in or if you just
centered email it isn't just a
day or two and you get another
Thank you senator Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president.
And I think Senator her meals
going to put you on the list to
be probably our first
You are the sunshine that the
New Mexico state flag
represents.
And I salute to Senate chief
clerk the state of New Mexico.
And it's not been an easy
transition but
Where I am.
Where I part for a set
Thank you Mr president.
I am honored to call.
The more my friend.
said you're today but I think we
left one now and I feel special
that I get to see it we forgot
Lenore as a tour guide.
My first day I came in here
before I never been in this
office and I poked my head in
and I Taylor I'm of lost the
terminator's Jocelyn she says no
senator Sanchez.
And I said oh the R..
tour of this building as she
walked everything with me we
went everywhere and tell me
about this picture in this room
and stuff.
Thank you senator Sanchez
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president everybody
said everything all I could say
Lenore.
I'm was senator Norvell you tell
me very early send email you
take care of a constituents and
no matter where I am what I'm
doing.
that I thank you also for giving
tours to to my family when they
came up here in children this
great round house we work out of
On our.
Thank you know I said bye mother
was a Senator back in LA knowing
And and what you bring is.
The law of this is a pretty awe
inspiring place in pretty
way that gives us confidence to
be who we are.
And to also make it safe because
sometimes again it is pretty
scary and then all those
and that's what I was looking
forward to learning from you
going forward but again thank
you for making me feel so
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president well in
our I just wanna add my
appreciation for your public
service you know I I started off
for a couple members of
Congress.
And I was blown away by just how
warm the staff was and you know
center of five six years ago is
it was a fresh a fresh start in
the I quickly realized I was in
a new team there is a new
professionalism and your
competence I truly believe you
are you I have told you this I
am just blown away by your skill
and.
intense Florida bay and it's so
pressure packed you're seeing
sound waves.
I can barely kind of figured out
and I go up to you in like
without missing a beat up and
write out the amendment.
And just a you know the
attention and love that you show
me and I know you shows all
individually to so appreciated
it's going to be it's gonna be
really hard to find somebody or
love and I know our first
reaction to you leaving is like
mellow.
but but absolutely you know
somebody who can save some of
sharing so much your life with
the citizens in New Mexico with
all of us thank you thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Steinborn Senator Gallegos.
Of your retirement I think it's
an excellent point in life that
you get to actually enjoy I was
going to go back in history I've
been watching you from up there
my superintendent correct me the
in the halls would be lost hold
school board members and I
always remember when I do need
to you to ask how I was doing.
If there's anything you could do
looking out for anyone to look
lost in your hallway I and I
appreciate that but of this year
I was really honored.
Your daughter and granddaughter
we're so proud of when I told
him as a senator that I worked
rather keep the then chief clerk
going she says well she's on and
it's just one of those things
just to hear in your daughter's
voice in your granddaughters
watching their eyes that they
all you've done for the state
thank you.
Thank you senator Hagel's
Senator Diamond.
with leadership and learn from
them but I have the pleasure of
sitting directly in front of you
and for hours after hours
watching you orchestrate and
operate the goings of this
may be right and it's not just
because of your skills and
understanding of the process
because eventually that can be
learned by someone else what can
be learned is your innate
to teach political creatures and
in the political arena like this
that there's something far more
important than politics and
divisive campaigns the minute we
land on your doorstep here in
the Senate you remind us to
collectively we are one and
together we are working for all
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr president.
But I appreciate that we've had
a.
A dress rehearsal but hopefully
we do this again two years from
now because.
When I started as a state
senator you asked me who I
wanted to have as my as my
secretary.
And I realized I was coming into
And
they're wonderful.
Eight years together Henrietta.
committee secretary recently
gotten Linda hill you need to
keep and.
I want to things talking with
with Lindy is that she's she's
she's told me that she doesn't
done with hundreds literally
hundreds of people.
Over the years.
And again when I needed to have.
A new.
There's there's so much that
happens in the background.
That none of us are aware of.
None of us.
And when things happen
seamlessly and magically.
That only happens because you're
the one having the seems.
Want to make sure that I have
not missed anyone Senator
Shendo.
Say goodbye to one of our
traditional leaders passed on.
And the.
Go back at a highway in.
Eight stereo blasting listen to
music.
But to hear everybody.
Doing this.
Every time somebody says
something how you have impacted
the lives and all that.
You know it's a very special
place.
Of our own to your language this
morning.
To.
songs.
Grounded us in who we really
are.
Representative generation.
Of people that we all have in
our lives.
Of this appointment I think all
of us have those individuals in
our lives.
And we we come up here you are
that person the for all of us.
with hopefully now so you don't
have to be here.
Your nice drive over Hey miss
mounts into the beautiful
Espanola valley in the we can do
families and everybody that has
ever set foot in this chamber.
But in the.
Thank you Senator Shendo.
You know as in our had shared
with me a couple weeks ago that
this is going to be her last
session.
I struggled.
institution.
That I've never known without in
our.
When senator Reynolds Madonna
who's a president pro tem and
Senate finance chair for many
Manny's wife.
Give me advice.
An adviser she gave me back
then.
See the legislative life but the
pace yourself and remember why
you're here.
And the northern on.
And it was the need for more
than are because when I came in.
I was the baby of the Senate.
I was the only one that was
sit right there were CENIC on
the essence and observe the work
that have been done.
It was an amazing experiences
Senator Diamond has mentioned.
here to eleven fifty seven home
we recessed.
Nor didn't go home till two in
the morning.
She was here by five AM.
not a service scene but the
impact that we have with the
staff right in front of us is
right in the direction of the
north.
She may be writing something
upstairs I'll work through in
our she has the highest
expectation for them to make
sure that they are taking care
of everyone of you.
take care of me just as you've
been taken care of with all of
your help.
And it really was something that
really meant a lot she may not
even remember.
And I never forgot when we're
big dogs in the COVID issue
maybe.
She said these are my kids.
I raise them.
And how it is the impact that
you have.
Nor does so much work as we know
for constituents are Mrs.
Beyond the legislative session.
than life birth or death.
And also often with center of
visionaries.
This you would recognize people
who have passed away and our
been so thankful for the work
that night is done we will never
know.
Those families now.
And I know that in New Mexico we
I'm confident.
The New Mexico ranks number one.
We have our Senate rand the way
it is because of our Senate
chief clerk.
and are.
Teaching me and for however many
years and I'm blessed to be in
this role I'll have known that
I've learned from the best.
Mexico behalf of all of us.
This certificate that reads.
Hereby.
The state of New Mexico this
certify the to make the state
We are your service and your
commitment to the New Mexico
legislature we thank you for
your serving faithfully and
honorably as chief clerk since
dedication and love your
leadership will be missed but
never forgotten sign is still at
the capitol city of Santa Fe by
before I yield to Senator Baca
for a closing motion I think
it's particularly appropriate
that I uh.
Asked one or for a little
procedural help here because we
the auto pan but will quickly
told no you got to check with
our first.
So I don't know whether we need
to suspend the rules given that
to allow.
Senator Candelaria centers
committee senator Byrd any other
member who wasn't able to sign
that the auto pan or they can
come in after the facts I would
It is so ordered.
And so I think before we close I
think it's part particularly
of the rules that nobody else
speaks except the members of the
Senate that thank you for giving
me the opportunity.
I did not want this memorial and
I want to first and foremost
thank my staff.
Who have helped me run the
so Florence and well in my
office RigCount TM and others in
proofreading.
And need a more good and play a
role more good to fall over
there in the journal.
staff here on the dais.
The committee secretaries and
all the Senate staff the
sergeant at arms staff.
Found out I was like super woman
today wait till my husband
years.
But I couldn't do it alone you
I have raised most of you
there's a.
Like the governor says that you
know I see all these young faces
golf all week and then when it
come November December when
start getting colder than I'd
come here and then spring time
and I was back out on the golf
I love each and everyone of you
I've enjoyed every moment that I
have served you.
And will continue to serve you.
taking some leave and I will
have cleared my office out by
October and.
There is.
awful.
The New Mexico state senator.
Extend its honor and it's
eternal gratitude to you and
forty two members and the
president more in the formative.
Seeing no objection.
state Senate has passed the
Senate senator.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen
and Senate thank you or going on
holes.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that our
business messages from the
house.
I'm directed to inform the some
of the house has concurred in
the Senate amendments to house
bill sixty as amended by the
house and further amended by the
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk the journal so the message
from the house has been
received.
Mr president I'm directed to
the officers of the house in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk journal so
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three as amended
by the house and further amended
by the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk the
one that business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so we are
going to take a break we're not
gonna take a break we have a
conference committee report on
announcements and miscellaneous
the plan tonight is to be back
on the floor at six thirty and
just as a reminder there will be
announcement will were on
announcements and miscellaneous.
We're in that order business
senator you Senator McKenna for
thank you Senator McKenna
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will will meet as soon
Mr president Senator Brandt just
present the thank you for and I
just wanted to remind you Mr
president that and and I didn't
consent motion for you to be
able to speak thank you senator
efficient that that sometimes a
Senate habits are just hard to
break.
three immediately following the
floor session one through three
after the floor session.
Senator Moores.
Any free thinking lovers of
liberty are welcome to attend
thank you thank you for that
notification Senator.
set for the conference committee
report.
Mr right but the reiterated and
reiterated.
Mr president your conference
committee to home is been
Senator Wirth.
Respectfully submitted George K.
There's been a
There's been a motion to death
report the first sentiment us
can you give an explanation of
house bill two and three has
come up with the following
adopted changes
in the conference committee.
violence and statewide projects
for advocates of the dam of gun
violence
in the executive agency we added
five million for comp and for
And we struck some language and
section page two twenty two line
seven that was a continuing
continuation language contention
language with that Mr present
C. nine centimeters.
Mr presence in center Mr
president I move that we adopt
the committee report centers is
been a motion to adopt the
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
present were just checking on
Mr president sentiment us your
Senate finance committee is
going to go into that that's a
three forty five.
Senator Morris.
were having a caucus or finance
members might be a few minutes
late Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman just wanted to
remind you rather caucus right
out of four sessions so we will
caucus breaks in Senate finance
room three twenty two.
Thank you centerman yes.
Mr president I believe three
twenty one three twenty one four
PM are when the Cox's content
and Senate Judiciary Committee
thank you.
Si no further announcements
PM.
