With.
When they.
In the leadership.
Senator here thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
introduce my guests during no
objection proceed.
Thank you Mr president I have to
constituents here with me today
the first time today so please
help me a lot from them.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you Mr president as
consent interesting guests.
student she we elementary
she has a different platforms
issues working across her nation
in across our nation in the US
but her passion is to get more
more children into school
athletics in Zuni and and bring
more athletic so if you notice
are beautiful jewelry and
governor there's nothing wrong
with that some of the body
welcome here today.
Will stand in place so we get
that corrected.
The idea is back on.
We're on that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
are members of the boys and
girls club generation
empowerment from the beautiful
Espanola valley and I'd like to
welcome them there in the Senate
gallery Johnny abate the senior
also some amazing seniors who
worked with the department of
justice on having a round table
in regards to ethnicity and body
members which is Larkham Marcus
and Melanie Marquez who are
joining us today I also want to
welcome the nursing program from
northern New Mexico college
today is a historic day for all
of us right here in the land of
enchantment on this date in
eighteen forty eight the treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed
us in this chamber stand proudly
here today on the soldiers of
our on the buy side those or
ancestors who were in that
Spanish mestizo is headed by
those who joined in to fight for
then welcome my guests who are
in the chamber thank you.
majority floor leader was taken
to the next order of business.
Thank you Mr president so we're
going to go ahead and do the
memorials I think will start
with centers to fantexts given
ideal Senator semantics for
Senate memorial number twenty
where that order of Business
third reading of legislation.
Senator phonics to guide us
through that sentence of annex
second twenty twenty three New
Mexico student nurses they in
the Senate whereas the American
public for the twenty first
consecutive year has ranked
as the backbone of the health
care delivery system and whereas
nursing as a career provides
economic stability for
individuals and their families
and has positive economic
sixteen thousand four hundred
sixty six registered nurses all
the New Mexico or nursing
licenses were practicing in the
begin to meet national
benchmarks to ensure quality
care and whereas nurses serve
New Mexico's population across
many settings including
research academia and hospitals
and whereas the legislature has
supported funding for New
Mexico's educational
institutions to begin to build
the capacity by of nursing
that ensure geographic diversity
for recruitment of students into
the nursing profession and
whereas the growing number of
seriously ill patients creates a
are visiting the state capital
now therefore be it resolved by
the Senate of the state of New
Mexico that February second
twenty twenty three be declared
the executive director director
of the board of nursing and the
chair of the New Mexico student
nurses association signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
Mexico state Senate.
Thank you to our reader Senator
facts Mr president I move that
Senate memorial twenty be put on
its final passage subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
students later but as we
mentioned two hundred nursing
students from all over the state
from every corner of the state
the middle the state southeast
us to educate them about how we
address health and Human
Services and nursing safety
issues in our committees so this
morning I had the opportunity to
that these are the people who
take care of that.
They take care of us that our
budget side they take care of us
in our doctors offices and in
clinical treatments and with
Anyone wishing to pay.
Center how to mail thank you Mr
president and I stand in support
of this as we know student
nurses are at the cutting edge
each year the demand for nurses
grows now more than ever the
nursing field eight more people
dedicated to the field of
medicine the drive to care learn
and specialized nursing will
Senator by the F. followed by
Senator could Hemphill center by
the I thank you very much Mr
president I do it and senator
how to me of Senate do rise and
support the this effort Center
great thing for our economy also
in addition to the healthcare
profession this and all the
wonderful things that that this
profession does for us you know
from a health standpoint but you
know if your nurse today you can
pretty much write your own
Mr president and I just want to
thank Senators defendants for
always leading the charge on
this thank you.
Thank you senator Senator today
interacting throughout the years
my son was diagnosed with
osteosarcoma when he was four
and we spent a year in the
hospital in and out of the
son and his hospital room so
that I could leave and get some
food outside of the hospital or
go shopping for Christmas gifts
for my family nurses have the
rise and support and thank the
sponsor again thank you Mr
president thank you senator.
Any further debate.
Center by the.
president after I close I will
recognize those in the gallery
not name my name.
This is two hundred Mr president
See no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
zero the negative sentiment oral
twenty New Mexico student nurses
day has passed the New Mexico
state Senate Senator panics
much thank you centers of annex.
Senator Wirth takes the next
order of business thank you Mr
president so what we're gonna do
next.
so you know just how we go about
our business well we're on third
reading so ideal the Senator
souls for Senate memorial
nineteen school board
appreciation day we're in that
printed not referred to
committee and that it be read
for the third time in full
preparatory to its final passage
debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator also if you go ahead and
just explained that the will go
to debate them to close Senator
thank you Sen Morial nineteen we
schools they are watching out
for our children and their the
local voice in the local leaders
for educators around the state
the legislative education study
committee the Senate Education
in New Mexico Albuquerque is a
huge district and we've got some
micro districts like gal House
most ghetto which are very small
point then I would move that
Senate memorial be put on final
passage subject to debate
amendment or substitution center
center so they want to make sure
Thank you Mr president I fully
support of this memorial today
are school boards are very
important they're all over the
state their elected officials
and the they're just very
impressive the way they have
learned educational issues and
health a focus on what's best
for their district so I think
eight years he is a great
administrator for the school
boards and is always open and
we're celebrating our school
boards in New Mexico thank you
senator souls for the memorial.
Senator also.
designed to meet the educational
needs of all children and to
empower them to become competent
productive contributors to
society and an ever changing
as they continually strive for
improvement excellence and
progress in education
recognizing that all children
can be successful learners
especially when education is
school district to the public
and the public's expectations to
the districts by working closely
with parents educational
professionals and other
community members to create the
and help ensure the solid
foundations of New Mexico school
system and whereas in doing so
these leaders help strengthen
the state's educational system
held at the New Mexico school
boards association board member
institute in Santa Fe
celebrating and acknowledging
the commitment and contribution
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state in New
Mexico that for every second
twenty twenty three B. declare.
they provide and be it further
resolved that congrats
graduations be extended to the
New Mexico school board
association for over six decades
decades of service to New
association signed and sealed at
the capitol in the City of Santa
Fe Senator William P. souls how
we see Morales president sherry
things is it now appropriate
that I make a motion to open for
debate.
Center sells proceed thank you
Mr president I move that Senate
you know that I first started in
volunteer government work as a
local school board member in Los
crucis back in the nineties
moved up from that in the
leadership in the school board
chair elective and followed
after he has continued his
incredible service to the school
boards but we all have school
board members in our districts
some of which have multiple
and in almost all cases it is a
volunteer position that takes a
lot of flak from the community
and from others but they do it
because they care about our kids
vital importance of our boards
to our education processes
within the state thank you
Senator also we do have Senator
Lopez followed by Senator
fenics.
Thank you Mr president as of
people repeatedly here here say
me hear me say I have six
counties in my district I also
number of students every school
board member works really hard
they have sometimes have
difficult decisions to make
sometimes they have to make ends
meet financially and I'd like to
Thank you Mr president thank you
center for bringing this
memorial for as I stated earlier
I'm still on school board Eunice
I think I'm the only legislator
opportunity we have in Jo thank
you for bringing him here Santa
Fe we have a training in
Albuquerque and there's some
really good detail the goes out
center for all you do important
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president in.
thing to be able to to work
within your community to make
sure that the children in your
community and and that you're
providing the best education
and that's one thing Joe and I
have agreed on since I served on
the school board association
executive board.
want they want the authority to
be able to do what needs to be
done to educate the children and
their community and so we need
to do that and so yeah stand
thanked for it you only get to
criticized for it and so I I
just want to thank you for the
work that you do.
Thank you Joe.
their time to sit on that local
school boards I know that in my
own school district there of
Albuquerque public schools
with them to learn much more
about the intricacies of what
happens within our school system
and I know that it takes time
for everyone who serves from
their family from the other life
because those who give of their
time need to be given thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Senator Rodriguez.
senator souls for bringing this
before us you know that more and
more as the pandemic hit I
realized how much appreciation
many times are not recognized
and yet they do do do for our
communities and our students in
school so I just wanted to thank
them and let them know that we
and support of this memorial and
want to thank the Senate sponsor
for bringing this forward and so
in my Senate district there's
for school boards at each doing
be standing on the Senate floor
and I want to recognize
individual schools and districts
who are answerable to the people
who elected school boards these
boards that a vision for their
Mexico but I stand in support of
this memorial thank you Mr
president thank you sent out a
mail.
Si no further debate.
We do have further debate
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
forward I thank you for the
service the legislative to Los
crucis public schools many years
later I was elected to the
school board in truth or
consequences New Mexico was a
not a partisan issue there's
always a mama bear who was upset
about something and you can't go
to the local gas station or a
Walmart without running into
the school board members who are
to here today I want to thank
people of the parents watching
here today and I often we get a
lot of people that come to Santa
the service we encourage our
parents and our students and our
community members to re
establish good relationships
with our local school districts
in their school boards who
really are building our our
president.
Thank you senator.
Any further debate.
that you had a bad experience on
the school board certainly
anyone served on the school
board has had meetings and gone
past midnight
it's thankless in many times but
moving up and doing well some as
a direct result of what school
boards due in the policies they
put in place the the issues they
have to deal with on a regular
basis and sometimes dealing with
and to take those those
criticisms but with that there
are lots of rewards that come
with it and so.
Yes so with with that Mr
president.
governor the shown as voting in
the affirmative.
Three no objection by about four
during the formative zero on the
negative side of memorial
nineteen school board
appreciation day has passed New
up in the the gallery if you
would please stand be recognized
I know they're many over the
house side as well thank you for
what you do every day.
Lok in Santa Fe as a student
school board member I was
chatting with her earlier and
when districts have a student
member on their board it reminds
important and also Mr president
with a permission I would like
to introduce some guests that
are with you up on the rostrum.
No objection for state senator
The president elect from west
Las Vegas schools Christine
ludi.
Mr president the vice president
from the scores schools Paul
from mesa Vista school district
is more of an audit me hope.
We also were honored to have in
New Mexico with this today in
the executive director of the
Association Joe again.
Mr president one other person up
on the rostrum who is not on my
list but our esteemed readers.
you should be recognized for
your services a school board
member of the past thank you.
president we're gonna stay on
third reading and I do yield to
senator tall men percent Morial
I and we're not going to read
that one per the agreement
Sierra office if.
Madam Connecticut as some of you
Of of property taxes the schools
were going to get some attention
the interesting conversations
that we would get into over the
twenty million we gave an extra
thirty million so I learned a
lot about of school boards in
there and the.
It and secondary education and
entirely different us process
sent set up so moving on that Mr
president to.
Memorial.
Federal member I.
Madam.
Thank you Mr president I move
that Center memorial number five
Thank you Mr president.
This memorial declares different
The school of electronics.
Of suffers UNM and Albuquerque
is an international nonprofit
organization with the range of
community charitable and
philosophy and arts and culture
music and use mentorship and
support what they're Mr
Low income families and the
elderly.
So consequently Mr president the
to school again back by donating
nursing homes community centers.
Homeless and refuge.
Refugee centers.
Mr president just over two tons
weeks in advance for suggestions
on what nonprofits in
Albuquerque that they could
donate to so I would call my
daughter who works in the
join them when they
as a donated and deliver these
donated items to the various
nonprofit nonprofit
If there is no debate.
For a.
The Sierra.
Performance before moving to
So Mister president I moved it
several more room I do now pass
affirmative seeing no objection
viable affording the firm has
reeled in a some more I has
passed the Senate Sir Thomas.
Thank you thank you Mr president
members of the Senate.
miscellaneous no objection or
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president so we're just gonna
get the work done up on the
table and that'll be it for
doing that Mr president Ms
consent we go that our business
committee reports.
I proceed to that senator Wirth
business committee reports.
The reader to read.
Mr president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificates
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
actions on individually no
objections the return the
certificate number for
certificate number five
certificate number six
certificate number seven.
The certificate number six
respectfully submitted Katy M.
Duhigg chair.
Senator Mr president I move the
adopted in the journal reflect
that they're acted upon
individually the reader to read.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman.
Senator Shendo I move Dobson
Committee report.
Say no objection the reader to
read.
Senate bill thirty do pass as
amended and that's referred to
the finance committee Senate
bill one oh four do not pass but
that Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
And please rise.
The drive to the committee
report thank you senator Senator
Reiterate.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
Senator.
At this present time of the
committee report says we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report.
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
one eleven has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommend date
recommendation that a do not
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman.
Senator anticipate all Mr
president I ask unanimous
opinion unanimous consent of the
I hear no hearing objection the
rich right.
Senate bill eighteen do pass as
amended and that's referred to
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
the adoption of the committee
report is been a motion to adopt
the committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
As opposed may the eyes have it
the committee report has been
Your Judiciary Committee to whom
has been referred sentiment
Morial fourteen has had it under
consideration reports that the
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Mr president I move the
adoption of the committee report
members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Center
moral fourteen.
Senate majority floor leader
Senate bill three thirteen
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
an act relating to trade
practices adding a definition to
Senate bill three thirteen
Senate bill three thirteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
committee and act relating to
finance authorizing the New
Mexico finance authority to make
loans or grants from the water
project fund for certain water
committee Senate bill three
fourteen Senate bill three
fifteen introduced by senator
Ortiz the Pino and act relating
to children and acting the
fifteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee Vance
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill three fifteen Senate
Senate Senate memorial twenty
five Center memorial twenty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed is ordered
not printed not refer to
committee to be placed on the
Senate bill three sixteen
introduced by Senator Lopez and
others and act relating to
corrections providing juvenile
community corrections grant Fund
Senate bill three sixteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health Public Affairs
Senate bill three seventeen
introduced by Senator in goals
and others and act making
appropriation to the magistrate
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three seventeen.
appropriation to the judicial
retirement fund to address
solvency issues related to the
judicial retirement act Senate
bill three eighteen.
Senator three eighteen having
Senate bill three nineteen
introduced by senators Mooney
also and Moores and act relating
to business and acting the age
business and transportation
committee Vance Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill three
nineteen.
operating company to maintain a
redundant cable line providing a
penalty providing definitions
Senate bill three twenty Senate
introduced by senator Munoz a
memorial declaring February
thirteenth twenty twenty three
New Mexico State University I
guess football team they in the
Read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to
committee and replaced on the
president's table that Center
memorial twenty six.
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection or on that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so that
ideal two chairs to make
announcements about committees.
Thank you senator Wirth we do
have Senator would like to make
announcements Senator Duhigg.
for the week are here in the
gallery merry Karen Shuman and
Christian chairman the body
could help us welcome them.
open primaries bills from
us Senators o'neill hand
Hemphill a great Hemphill
Senator Schmedes and a
constitutional amendment from
transportation committee will be
meeting at one thirty.
Just what room is that going to
be in three twenty one I believe
right twenty one thank you
passionate of.
February second is the official
holiday of the New Mexico
legislature thank you.
Thank you senator pirtle senator
Morris the agency president us
is not a floor session just
wanted to clarify thank you so
members.
Senator Pinto thank you thank
you Jim Mr president the Senate
Education Committee will meet B.
Rodriguez thank you Mr president
Senate finance will meet at one
thirty or at the college chair
thank you.
Thank you senator is a yes.
We're in that order of business
committee reports the reader to
read Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill six has had
do pass respectfully submitted
senator George when you also
chairman.
Yes we would option the
committee report that is we have
a motion to that the committee
take us to the next order of
business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
that we got out of his mouth
Spence miscellaneous one that
order business announcements and
know thank you Mr president I.
I just wanted to share with the
body of a concern.
That I have about the junior
bill last year if you remember
and submitted them and this year
we're told they could only be be
a nonrecurring projects we put
in there that's fine.
scored as recurring and so
they're all non recurring so if
you want to put money into
something that you put money
into last year and you're hoping
that it would now be part of the
recurring or nonrecurring
because it seems to me that the
legislators says if we pass this
we would like it to be
recurring.
What more scoring do we need
and use some of the money I'd
intended for those new things to
just keep the things that we put
money into going last year
because it turned out not to
have been accepted as recurring
president thank goodness Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Munoz thank you Mr
president and just to senator
Ortiz **** point DFA does all
the scoring whether it's
reoccurring are non reoccurring
that so that's why in your
package you have a letter from
blank that says I will accept
the money I commit to accepting
the money and I will do that
from what it was for how is
going to work and so they
everybody got confused and so in
the meetings with the executive
and you know thank you and and
thank you senator I think what
you said makes a great deal of
sense however I do recall last
year.
It was the executive branch's
executive branch said no we're
not going to score at the way
the first part of the executive
branch wanted us to score we're
going to score in a different
way any have it was a little
sentiment us thank you Mr
president renouncement to
miscellaneous we're
announcements miscellaneous
animal yes proceed Mr present
we're gonna going to Senate
finance maybe about one forty
Capitol with the exact so it's
about one twenty five for our
chamber so about three million
dollars per member.
And so
and so as we do that the exact
has requested us and we're
trying to figure out the process
that if we have a project and
I'm gonna use McKinley County
that legislators do that so.
One twenty five is a total about
three million dollars for each
member of the Senate.
be due on Friday the house when
it and change their date so what
we're gonna do to our members so
that we can work with house
members as well to extend that
makes us it makes it harder for
us to do that because we don't
have Council process and you
know me it's all if all Senate
finance staff that's processing
junior money and we have to make
The little patient in a you know
we're only human working me
makes mistakes but we can
correct.
As a junior comes around so
just be prepared a whole bunch
of stuff getting hit once you're
cities and counties still have
federal and state federal and
are from money and so they have
a lot of that left over in some
cities and counties as you're
projects are under funded on
your previous last you need to
reach out to those communities
and state any more money for
this project complete it or is a
looking at about another pretty
close to billion dollars routine
statewide exact and and other
things in capital we'll have
four billion dollars sitting
they're short about nine million
dollars we're gonna make sure
that gets funding statewide
because that's a project that is
really worthy that needs to
happen but there's there's a
to complete that so as members
do that make sure can get really
complex for us but we'll try to
help you do that in your
communities I'll give an example
in my community.
they're not looking at numerous
items and so they'll be able to
complete those with a two year
extension but that's some of the
things we can help clean up with
capital so thank you Mr
president.
his questions I think they were
very good questions I think a
lot of us have questions around
how the junior money and the
capital outlay money's been done
this year I thought we're gonna
we're told that we're only going
to have this much so I'd like to
know how much executives getting
I like to know on the statewide
projects whose determining
whether it's a worthy project or
The the bought the legislature.
It's our job.
To actually say where the money
goes yes we try to work with the
It's hard to say that the.
Starting to think about that
much money but a billion dollars
is being decided by the
governor.
used to be a third a third a
third the governor had her third
which were statewide projects
and now we're splitting this
you know I'm sorry but me I
can't be bribed.
No one's come to me to drive me
but I can't be bribed I would
split it otherwise we'll do it
take the money put it back in
the into the permanent fund
don't do any.
What is put it back in the form
of funds we have more money in
the future we know we don't have
the oil and gas money so thank
you that's my opinion it be nice
Thank you Mr president I do have
a a similar concern you Mr
president when that when the
committees were formed to
discuss this.
Just don't seem right this is
the Senate which is part of the
legislature.
Eight forty two of us here.
all this is already settled we
already decided this.
So we think.
Put a Republican on.
The billion dollars to the
governor.
Wow.
It was all settled.
You know Mr president I've been
I've been trying in the session.
To have some bipartisan
agreement to the little love in.
But if we can work together a
little bit.
It would help a lot just a
little bit.
make a point that's all I was
trying to do to make a point.
The amendment was poorly written
it was in the wrong said I knew
all of that.
because he started asking
questions going to help.
Sorry about that.
We don't need.
And I know I can be.
I can't remember the word has to
deal with donkeys I think.
I'm looking for bipartisan love.
And we had a chance to have a
I ask again Mr president.
That we bring down the
temperature.
That this side of the aisle be
allowed to play.
because Senator Woods might just
have a brilliant idea.
That you won't hear if you don't
let him talk thank you Mr
president.
Those of us they claim to
support democracy.
Our constituents are losing
their voice.
We are elected at the local
level.
The executive wants to
appropriate.
Inappropriate and undemocratic.
And all of our communities lose
out because who's their local
voice.
For sex Center there is thank
you Mr president if I may just
respond and try to address some
of the questions that came up
first with respect to Senator
go out and check different
agencies and departments and
buildings and and try to
prioritize those that are most
needy of infrastructure or
during all of this process is
taking place
it is not something that happens
overnight as I said it's pretty
lengthy and very very intricate
in the committee that's been
appointed the situation it was
not settled that if you're
referring Mr president center to
just a recent meeting that we
the list of projects that she
was requesting in the statewide
so that we can make sure that we
don't have any duplication
perhaps you already voted in
those differences and that's
where we are we don't have any
settled decisions yet so as soon
as we do we may be able to to
free up some funding if in fact
remind everybody that you know
LFC built this framework and and
the other side of the aisle has
three members on LFC that voted
and when we found out about the
appointment public and then we
went to appointed Republican
and so I think the process is
pretty fair I may have
about not being fair
you know the governor probably
read in the dark more democratic
capital outlay than Republican
and it's interesting the
the framework is built the
entire year along with what's
happening in LFC so for
everybody to say it's a surprise
the LFC reports are all public
the number that we we do in the
framework and so everybody's
well informed there's nothing
being hit in their if we set up
a committee and they go up to
capital and so he does have a
voice there he said that
Representative Harper from the
Republican side is also on that
committee he didn't have
Normally in New and so everybody
has a voice in this chamber I
don't think I think those guys
are my friends everybody's my
friend and not in disrespect you
by saying you think it's unfair
because the process is fair we
may not all agree with that.
and and and try to change that
and and so I just think that
need to be very well explained
that we try to work very hard on
Thanks sentiment us any further
announcements.
The state now for Elvis Center
Tom did you like to make an else
So you do have an announcement
Center helminth designing and
one of the the the picture there
was photograph is taken me of
last week is much better than
did not have an answer for that
Sierra level will get one back
to you soon.
Thank you thank you for
following up on that Senator
Tallman Senate majority floor
leader worth take us to the next
read the report Mr president
your conservation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill twenty one has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do not
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairwoman Senator Stefanics Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
Hey no objection the reader to
read the report.
Senate bill seventy seven do
pass and that's referred to the
tax business and transportation
committee Senate bill ninety
four do pass and then referred
committee Senate bill two
hundred do pass investor for to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
Those opposed named the eyes
have it the committee report has
been adopted in the committee
and the journal show that they
were acted upon individually.
Senate majority floor leader
president unanimous consent the
Senate stand recessed until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
