The rostrum the counter the
analyst secretaries and zoom
operators telephone operators
everyone in the bill rural
members secretaries are minority
my no major major.
And Vince Torres and then in my
office Lee with mark Valdez
Darby size Kris Nordstrom Arnold
the hill Andrea Gonzales nightly
Center Stewart Senators we can
please all have all your
attention as we have our
leadership share a few words
about the session if we can have
everyone's attention please
Senator Stewart I thank you Mr
Gonzales along with Sanders more
very appreciative for them I am
appreciative for this body I am
so appreciative of what we all
looking up at the screen and
there was a Republican and there
was a Democrat over and over for
the house built for the Senate
bills it really took all of us
interim so I'm very grateful to
everyone in the body thank you
Mr president.
Thank you Senator.
pretty much and fixing that
crisis in our state it was quite
a moment and really something
pretty cool for this body in for
the state that we actually solve
me I don't know only know half
of it and I'm sure you all have
loved ones at home to do the
same for you and I also want to
think of I want to thank god for
Thank you Senator Baca.
Sen Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr Presbyterians I
also want to thank my wonderful
other side with that idea to you
Mr president.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth all of our
leadership all our members I
want to say thank you for all
the work that we've done this is
lot of debate a lot of
disagreements but more
agreements and I'm extremely
proud to be part of this chamber
to see how the work continues I
want to personally thank my
for the amazing job her
understaffed.
that's the art of compromise
that's a politics is about and
we had the opportunity come in
to make life better for the
people the state of New Mexico
and I believe that together we
have done that.
I also saw some very beautiful
things.
That we experienced here at the
height the more debates at the
height of the pressures I saw
come in to divide us here is a
body we have center see a Lopez
go and give words of
encouragement and support to
center diamond when we look and
tears that's what makes this
body so special is that we can
have disagreements but at the
end of the Stewart family and
that family is every single one
of us the members the staff
the milagro of course thank you
very much Majority Leader worth
to each and everyone of you is
we go through the session so we
many things that happened during
the last sixty days the
illnesses if you will the other
travesties things that happen
the heartbreaks so much of this
that are presented to people who
have gone through a change of
gone through some difficulties
but at the same time continue to
do their best as the New Mexico
tempore A. R. Majority Leader
minority leader to.
Please come forward because
they're the ones who will
present these awards.
to listening understanding and
making a gradual difference it
takes time.
The senator who is fifteen
seniority has read too many
Senator William E. bill share
has dedicated his life to caring
for his family supporting them
as a small business owner and
standing up for what he
believes.
whose training and discipline
are exemplified in his public
service.
Senator share is proud of his
work in the state Senate where
alignment to highlight oil and
gas tidbits tax reduction and
simplification options.
You pick a topic.
This
have gotten it had I gone two
more minutes.
Thank you very much is a very
big surprise very well.
Welcome thank you all of you.
But if if I may to each and
everyone of you.
Senator aware though Bobby
Gonzalez
Has continued throughout the
sixty days.
dedication and commitment and
most importantly he did that
with a lot of love.
I'm gonna read this anyway so if
you get a chance you might send
a text to picture.
He loves the New Mexico state
Senate and those were his words
as I dropped in on.
At his place where he was
residing during the session.
His family has always come first
in with their support.
He has dedicated his life to
serving the public as a small
business person on lifelong
educator and public servant
ability to guide others in their
quests to make a difference for
themselves their families and
their communities.
He has touched thousands of
reflect upon our accomplishments
accolades and hurdles.
This humble an effective leader.
Hasn't looked back instead he is
and forget for site that he had
much to overcome.
But he is move forward to the
hardest of times and served as a
positive an honorable example
for all of us to follow.
guiding students now he is
moving ahead to settle on what
really matters.
The health and well being of
family.
He is a true champion of doing
Senator Roberto Bobby J.
Gonzales.
Representative Lara under
president honorable members of
the Senate we are here to notify
you that the house has a turned
seeing ADA.
Thank you Representative
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Campos with that we'll
see you all in January of twenty
twenty four.
