Senator army on.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
It center my Estes.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Pena.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo best year
present and now with center
share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator words.
You do have a quorum Mister
Please remain standing for the
salute as for the pledge
allegiance to be led today by
Senator panics Division leaders
in Spanish to be led today by
Fourteen more days.
Very with the way.
Got our creator.
have forgotten that spirit and
matter are interwoven in that
our time here and internet are
intermingled.
Lessor gifts of imagination.
experienced ultimately knowing
that to be made of god is to be
made of sacred imagination.
Allowing us to dream our way
into a new way of being in our
god name of the father and the
son and the Holy Spirit.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of.
Madam the land that I love on
that a this is.
Once again I'd like to welcome
all the members to the chamber
Senator Padilla Senator Mike
over the thank you very much Mr
president units consent to
excuse introduce o'neill Pinto
and last us until they return to
the chamber.
rules and their table of
contents all that so feel free
to crack open those iPads.
Thank you senator by this
senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
and as you know I very much
enjoy thinking about what's
being said and having these
moments to pause and the gift of
imagination is a good way to
a good space and just really
thankful to be able to be here
and and do the work on behalf of
the citizens of New Mexico just
want announcements Mr president
actually be Wednesday next
Wednesday in the Senate lounge
from ten to one PM
just for the members in terms of
members for announcements up
front.
Thank you Sir Peter Wirth just
from past experiences Senator
doctrine is I'm glad that he's
and becoming in a Wednesday but
Senator Wirth Mr president we
will make sure that he gets that
message on Wednesday when he's
here that we need him back in my
guess is we're going to need in
the following week as well.
Thank you senator Wirth.
consent to skew Senator when you
listen to return to the chamber
no objection.
Any further announcements
Senators Senator Pirtle just
like to announce that I don't
the next order of business I
thank you Mr president Ms
because then we got our business
committee reports were on that
order business committee reports
the reader to read the report.
do pass respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
the reports Senate bill four
fifty three that it do not pass
but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill four
fifty three do pass and that's
bill forty four eighty five do
pass and that's referred to the
tax business and transportation
committee respectfully submitted
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee report has been
adopted as journal show that
they were acted upon
individually reader to read Mr
president your finance committee
chairman.
Senator Nancy Rodriguez.
they were acted upon individual
hearing no objections the reader
to read.
Senate bill two seventy six do
pass.
Senate bill four thirty nine do
pass respectfully submitted
senator George when you also
chairman senator the biggest
move adoption of the committee
reporters we have a motion to
upon individually the reader to
read Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred sentiment Morial forty
six as amended has had it under
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Thank Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report we have a
the officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Center
moral forty six as amended.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
go to third reading as I
mentioned we're going to do
items.
one through nine.
we are going to start a little
of legislation I yield Senator
Stewart for item I Senate bill
eleven is twice amended we're in
that order business serving
legislation Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
No objections are Stuart if you
explain what the bill this.
Thank you Mr president Senate
bill eleven.
Paid family and medical leave
fund will be funded through
employee and employer
contributions and will be
available to workers who need to
through very small employee and
employer contributions.
Employees would contribute five
dollars for every thousand
employers with fewer than five
employees would not contribute
to the fund at all that is sixty
six percent of New Mexico
passed Senate memorial one which
requested the department of
workforce solutions to convene a
task force stakeholders to
business groups advocacy
organizations labor unions
economists and department staff
balance the needs of workers and
businesses these recommendations
have been incorporated in the
version of the bill you see
before you today.
Additional amendments and Senate
interests and labor unions this
is a complex bill so I would
like to walk through it section
by section to be sure we all
know what we're considering and
voting on today.
solutions money in the fund will
be appropriated to the
department for distribution of
leave compensation payments and
will also cover the cost of
secretary of workforce solutions
to ensure fund solvency each
year beginning and twenty twenty
seven.
beginning January one twenty
twenty five for employee
contributions are set initially
at point five percent of wages
that's that four dollars for
every thousand dollars of wages
one of the changes recommended
by the task force is the waiver
in our state will not be
required to pay into the fund at
all.
Section four also clarifies that
employer and the employee as a
as currently the case the
employee will continue to pay
fifty five percent of the total
Indian tribes can opt into
participation in the program.
Self employed individuals will
only be responsible for the
employee portion of the premium.
paid family and medical leave
plan for their employees.
Another change that was made in
the Senate finance at the
request of business groups was
Section five outlines the
process for applying for leave.
Beginning January one twenty
whose welcoming a new child
managing a serious health
condition providing care for a
family member with a serious
for the period of time required
to manage their situation before
returning to the workplace.
Employees and self employed
The cap for weekly income
replacement is set at the mean
wage in the state currently that
increments of leave has been
amended to eight hours rather
than the four hours recommended
by the task force think of one
of your constituents are family
intermittent leave that would be
paid under this proposal.
Section six.
Outlines the types of
verification required of
requirement that a third party
provider confirm that the
employee need sleeve and would
verify the length of leave
when they receive an approved
application for eight it
clarifies that an employee who
would be eligible for paid
family medical leave will be
appeal the determination.
Section eight outlines the
requirements for notifying the
department of the employee or
recommendations were included in
this section first the period of
time that employer has to notify
the department of return to work
begin until an employee has been
employed for at least ninety
days.
Section nine prohibits
interference and retaliation.
in the event of an allegation of
a violation of the act.
Section eleven was added at the
request of the business
community preempting local paid
Section eleven was at it section
thirteen and fourteen are
related to the rule making
process which will be completed
appointed by the secretary to
provide input and
recommendations related to
rulemaking and the development
of educational materials and
Sections fifteen and sixteen our
temporary provisions related to
the initial appropriation of
thirty six point five million
which the department will use
convert contributions being
received into the fund in
January one twenty twenty five.
Section fifteen also creates a
After contributions begin at a
rate of six million per year
beginning in twenty twenty six
so for six years at six million
a year we will pay back to the
portent to make clear first once
the initial implementation is
completed and contributions
began on January one twenty
contributions the initial
implementation cost will be
repaid in full to the general
fund by twenty thirty two.
Secondly the ramp up period for
originally proposed timeline by
six months to ensure ample time
for robust employer training and
be complete on July one twenty
twenty four and the first
contributions would be collected
beginning on January one twenty
implementation so Mister
president I would like to a
yield now to one of my two co
and you know I I heard of the
bill when we started working on
it after the study was was
enacted and then when we got to
the session I immediately went
to the pro tem Mr presents and I
volunteer to to become part of
the the group here and the pro
tem and I started working on
this with a bunch of other folks
to make sure that you know we
were we were doing this with
business at the table it was
insert myself into this for this
discussion and also said to the
team that was working on this Mr
president that it's important
that we take each.
Hispano chamber in Albuquerque
and we received some very robust
feedback and it was really good
stuff and so we began working on
some of the Avid and that's what
you saw introduced Mister
president and then as I looked
of the the pieces of of you know
who qualifies or who who must
participate in this or that or
whatever
nothing in this legislation is
telling a business how to run
their business it's simply
you're a small business in New
Mexico a lot of times we get a
lot of feedback here in New
Mexico that we don't do anything
for small business this bill is
directly a benefit to small
business owners here in New
this is actually gonna bring
more people into the workforce
Mr president some estimates are
that it'll bring an additional
forty seven thousand workers in
the state of two point one
and payrolls of about one point
four billion Mr president that's
a very good thing for New Mexico
yeah I do believe it's going to
create a stronger economy
because our workers will be able
to take care of themselves and
again you know we're exempting
out essentially sixty six
percent of the company's in New
Mexico and I was direct.
The back from business owners
here in New Mexico and from the
when you think about replacing a
worker in my business as an
example it cost me about twenty
one percent in addition to what
I would pay the individual for a
increase increased productivity
and employee morale it's
important that employees feel
good about where they work and
if they do then they typically
provide higher quality goods and
services and and greater
implemented this they have seen
reductions in other parts of
employers expenses like
unemployment insurance workman's
comp insurance and things of
that nature because workers
generally B. in in better shape
that way it helps us smaller
businesses to compete with
larger businesses if you're just
starting out you probably have a
very hard time competing with
leave policy examined and and
opt out of it but let's say
you're a small business you
don't have that luxury this
legislation this benefit is
going to help small businesses
to be much more competitive in
the New Mexico economy that way.
have thought that it was
impossible for them to come back
to work this is going to be one
tool to help them come back to
work successfully feel better
and add to the bottom line of
their household budget Mr
medical leave they were able to
respond and react a lot quicker
and get their workers better and
healthier in back to work a lot
quicker so that is another
reduction in cost to a business
to pay into it and even if you
have four more employers Mr
president.
This is an incredibly affordable
benefit to to those companies
and so in a lot of ways I see a
lot of time is going to want to
going to lower your company's
liability because the employees
going to be healthier happier
more motivated to come to work
and produce better quality
products and services which
lowers your liability
don't do enough for small
business this is probably a two
thirds of small business type of
benefit for those types of
companies and for that for those
I do have an amendment that
before we go to that if I could
deal to my other co sponsor
which is Senator Katie do
Senator has.
specifically around child
neglect and abuse I know a lot
of us are familiar with that New
Mexico's health first and and
they do a lot of really good
policies like this that that's
in this bill strengthen economic
supports that yield significant
benefits not only to employers
are individuals but also
families when families face
pressure hoping to head off
childhood adversity before it
happens and there Hey they they
provide me with information
about the study
maternal health and lower rates
of family structures and risk
factors and there were there was
a two thousand sixteen study Mr
chair that found that
California's vaping paid family
is good for employers employees
families and especially children
here in New Mexico and I will
yield back to madam pro tem for
reader to read Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill eleven as amended amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
So Mister president this has a
an extra comma everyone will
laugh about that if you're on
Judiciary it we left out of the
about after our Senate finance
discussion Senator.
Thank you Mr president so we
want to make sure that that.
If people are using these paid
getting to collect twice when if
they were just there doing their
job they got the right people
getting paid once and so this
amendment does two things Mr
president one it ensures that
we're not gonna have a
the other thing it does is in
that sub I what we create really
at a quite broad catch all this
as lead COVID you can't get
these benefits if the leave
because we don't have a piece of
paper.
Senator Senator I believe the
man has been handed out just
make sure that every member has
the amendment.
Is present for personal
Senator Blake so I'm not sure
who Senator blank is.
But we had no idea if this is
amendment they were talking
about because there is no
sponsor on the amendment
it is Saturday and it's hot in
this building can we please have
you just consent to remove our
jackets.
Has been requesting Aniston
Center remove jackets.
See no objections jackets.
correct amendment you give us
the two oh two number Mister
president two oh two numbers two
two five seven nine two point
three.
that some I on this ammendment
really create a broad catch all
to ensure that folks who are
using using the benefits that
That's it Mr president.
Senators we're debating Senator
Corman number one to Senate bill
eleven is twice amended anyone
wishing to debate the amendment
the amendment is to strike the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
amendment fifteen so what did
that do and why we striking at
a quotation mark at the end of
whatever was added that needed
to be moved because we're adding
in additional sections here
Representative.
Senator Mr present so that it
already says if you look online
twenty two with the department
there so it was just some
repetitive language that I think
was accidentally added and and
and we're just clean it up
to page thirteen it's a little
hard because
you're trying to track this with
the other members that were done
love the cracks in my colon.
And then we're adding of the
foreign I.
During okay and those are the
well there on.
Family leave.
Centered.
And Mister president senator.
Senator Stewart.
representing John Lipschutz
works with the American
federation of labor seeing no
objection at the start of our as
a please escort the expert
witness into the chamber and
provide seating for the expert
expert witnesses Tracy McDaniel
from the southwest women's law
Center at ten Carolyn Massey
from the southwest women's Law
In center Brandt if you'll just
restate the question once they
get settled in.
Thank you Mr president so
Senator Mr president Senator
Brandt no so this would be
duplicative wages and insert it
in the same job.
in the same job.
So Mister president senator so
I.
Let because let's say Senator Mr
president Senator
that someone had multiple
not be able to.
To get paid family medical leave
compensation
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president I'm not a attorney but
maybe that's why I didn't
understand half of what you said
just described like maybe there
is a job that you have where you
might have have various contract
with their employer in place and
maybe some of those jobs you can
do from home
family medical leave for the
three force of my job that I
can't do from home when you're
still able to be earning wages
from your employer otherwise.
I I I.
I didn't just on the on the
expert witnesses but it seems
really.
Interesting to me that there is
Business experience of the on
the business of ever signed from
the paycheck.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Representative thank you
Mr president sounds like lawyers
that's not really business but
that's my personal opinion on
that one.
But
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator Stewart to
close and senator member number
one.
in and this is under this
section where individual shall
be in eligible to receive leave
compensation if so we thought it
where voting on Senate floor
member number one.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
By a vote of twenty five an
affirmative I in the negative
We are we're on the bill.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senator to move in explain
imminent.
This president I move Senate
floor amendment number two to
Senate bill eleven as twice
amended.
Senate Bill just restate the
explain to your amendment does
so Mister president as I listen
to this about how great and
wonderful intricate marvelous
this is for small business this
is the best thing that we've
everybody's going to be smarter
we will be able to run faster
and jump higher if we just pass
this bill.
Do it set up the fund to set up
the mechanism and let the let
the employer decide if they
really want to do it or not if
it is that great.
If that is true for every
business.
Then simply let us opted.
We're not.
So let that business owner see
if it works for that business
for not.
Let that owner look around too
Let's try it.
Let's see if it works.
Might in fact do everything we
just heard.
president our staff questions
Senator debating senator then
number two Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president.
So.
to look at and the district of
Columbia.
There was one state that did
your fifty employers are less
and they're the only state
that's had to come back and
insurance plans everybody pays a
tiny little bit and then we can
take care of these huge events
that happen in people's lives so
unfriendly in them thank you Mr
centers we're debating senator
member number to anyone wishing
to debate.
And I'm I get called a little
bit wrong but I believe it goes
something like this all
calculations based on experience
In work here I think we're still
trying to do that we're still
trying to.
Pretend like we're somebody else
when we're not we're New Mexico.
I I take great offense to that
as a small business myself.
If this is good.
But if it's not right for small
business.
Then maybe it's not right.
And while it was said that sixty
six percent of the businesses
small like I'm my own business.
But it is a hundred percent of
the workers.
As opposed to make why not allow
freedom.
As opposed to the bashing in
twisting and forcing.
Of actions.
With the mighty hand of well it
was Big Brother and book
nineteen eighty four but I guess
it's now big sister.
It's going to be dashes into
submission.
And because we in this room
absolutely the most brilliant
people in the state that know
everything about every small
business in every community.
Which I should say and what they
should think this just gives you
an option build it.
And maybe they'll come.
If they don't there's a reason
for that.
There's a reason.
I can't claim to speak for every
small business in New Mexico.
I don't know what that's like.
I have done other businesses in
my life.
I know what they're like.
I've never sold cars New Mexico
has no idea what that businesses
like.
By cars in New Mexico I've been
a customer.
again until I finally took it to
an auto shop.
But I can't speak for every
business in New Mexico.
Which are different than those
that are on one side if you bank
versus the other side if you
bank in Albuquerque.
submission and not even give
them an option not even not even
consider an opt in option.
And people into submission.
I think this might bill makes a
lot of stab at this amendment
makes a lot of sense in this
bill.
It makes sense.
The chair of the Judiciary
brought up the other day that I
I had concerns about the
constitutional amendment
committee.
This could be one of those good
things I don't know.
But in this case we're going to
take a hammer and beat everybody
And certainly not tax reform.
In here.
And we're not subject to the big
hand the big heavy hand of
government.
Let's consider for a minute that
we're not taking a sickle to
Most small businesses actually
work together on things.
They may not be bloodline.
Family.
And I think what this does is it
to slices that family part.
part a hammer to beat us into
submission.
I am not in favor of that.
Those things just.
This tear my heart Mr president.
And for us is the state to take
a look at it and see is this
work.
If business is not coming to it
why can we change it can we
adjust to can we make it better
No we're not gonna let that
happen.
We're not gonna let that happen
we're just gonna force it down
everybody's throat because
that's what we do.
occasionally we have one that
says Hey this is cool.
We should have a special day for
this or whatever.
But most of we're trying to fix
a problem and you know where
those problems came from.
same problem could we keep
breaking on.
Let's do this once in in in in a
manner that makes sense in a
Let's do it that way and that's
what this this with this
amendment does.
This amendment simply says elect
to participate.
That's the key to it anyway
functioning that's the way that
a civil nations civil states
civil society.
Should deal with each other.
If that makes me more efficient
if it helps me Madam absolutely.
But I don't have to take any
particular wrote.
decided don't want across it
because it looks scary to me.
That's elect to participate we
do that all over our society.
That we don't have to bash
ourselves into doing anything we
don't have to bash our
constituents into doing
anything.
We can build it.
If they don't come then it
wasn't a good idea.
Not saying don't do it might be
a good idea.
Might be a good idea for my
business.
So with that Mr president I now
move Senate floor amendment
number two to Senate bill eleven
now it's just three times
amended before it was two now
it's three and now I'm confused.
I'm actually gonna ask people to
come into the room because all
over there watching football or
something so Mister president I
move through that the St for
on Senate floor member number
two.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Wirth voting no.
Senator could Hemphill voting no
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no.
Senator Campos voting no Senator
pope voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Senator Stewart voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Center how to meal voting no.
We do have another floor
amendment.
Reiterate.
The Senate floor amendment
So Mister president I move
Senate floor amendment number
two again to Senate bill eleven
just three times amended.
I think that the the fifty
employee is probably still too
low but at least it takes out
most of those mom and pop
businesses most of those
There are still relatively small
but are a major part of our
community.
But it's still bill still lets
us put some people in the
program so we can see if the
Thank you senator Senator debate
senator then number two and all
you'll to Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president so the
only ones only four percent of
our business so this is not what
this fund would not be solvent
and school more in so to get the
fund solvent so that it helps
people recover from these
terrible illnesses help family
be undone by this ammendment so
it's unfriendly Senator debating
Center foreman member to an
ideal to Senate pro thank you Mr
president sponsor of the
participate under the statue
would they still be able to take
care of their employees and and
purchase some type of private
insurance that would do
essentially the same thing
insurance that would do this
because well there is private
insurance out there that does
this so absolutely Mr president
that because in in today's
market competing I think it's
great that certain businesses
will will do this by this
private insurance because they
want to attract and and they are
out of business because they're
just not good people and so I
think this is a great amendment
it allows our small businesses
to make those decisions for
themselves and then the
employees can then go and find
Si no further debate center
shared close on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president so the
there was a mention about the
soul we would we would increase
that we would we would say that
if your business is large
enough.
The employees get paid.
gonna do that then then let's do
that.
But again we need to do that for
businesses of I.
Four three.
It sounded something like this
to me.
If we don't take all of the
lower wage employees which are
most of them in New Mexico and
force them to put money in a
fund so that other people.
Can take twelve weeks off paid.
That's that's what I think I
Took that hammer to the smallest
businesses to the smallest
businesses.
The smallest businesses would
probably also have the smallest
payroll.
No.
about eighty five thousand
dollars here.
And we replace those jobs with
jobs that pay about thirty
thousand dollars a year yeah a
for us because we took a big
hammer and smash the business.
And take the the least paid
employees.
The employees that are actually
closest to the employer because
they're working all together.
solvent if we don't force them
into the plan.
The plan will break.
So we're forcing small employers
Now that sounds to me like a a a
backwards progressive thing
that's where we're taking money
from the poor and giving it to
the rich and I just keep hearing
that all the time about how we
from them we're gonna put it in
this fund.
To keep the funds solvent.
employees or fund will go
bankrupt.
That's what I think I just
heard.
So certainly this is a step up
from what the federal government
does the federal government
This still says you get twelve
weeks off paid.
If your business is big enough.
But we're not going to harm the
small New Mexico businesses the
We have some kind of weird to
stain.
For small New Mexico businesses
could certainly the big
Walmart's the big Wells Fargo
But this really goes after the
little business this goes after
the business.
With the actual family is
This is the one that really
bothers me that we that we have
this unbelievable disregard for
New Mexicans.
Thank you Mr president I told
you about some of the things I
didn't do I didn't sell cars in
New Mexico.
I did own a gourmet popcorn shop
once the.
But we also a lot of the
popcorn.
And it was my wife and I.
We ran it.
And we eventually had to hire
some people.
would have done to my little
business.
It was struggling anyway you
gotta someone off a lot of poor
popcorn to make money at it.
We're struggling anyway.
with five other you know with
that little tiny business that
little tiny gourmet popcorn
shop.
It's called popcorn packs can
once looked up.
Rules and regulations and all of
the things that came from the
state the federal government
already and then we're going to
put this on top.
We don't have to do this to the
That company.
We have to smash that small
business that struggling it's
already faced hardships.
because they're coming out of
COVID if they survived COVID at
all.
They're still struggling they're
Are struggling right now.
Which is like the popcorn
patcher little restaurants.
And in fact.
These little restaurants makes
Can the little restaurant handle
this thing.
They're already begging for
relief and now we're going to
this is a tax on them.
This is a tax on them.
now as we speak they came.
For some relief because they're
just burdened with all of the
things that we put on them.
I think this sends a clear
Those are small New Mexico
businesses.
We don't want them.
What we want is the giant
Walmart Szeryng selling to
That's what this that's what
this does.
This is we support.
The big international businesses
the ones with hundreds or
thousands of.
We don't support the little
businesses the business is where
the owner was born in New
Mexico.
The one owners.
you're too stupid.
You too small you don't give us
enough campaign donations big
boys give us campaign donations
struggle with the popcorn shop
as you struggle can you give
some people an opportunity to do
some things as you struggle.
We're going to increase your
And Walmart hasn't.
Interesting.
Interesting I don't think that
it's our job Mr president to go
Absolutely.
Even fifty people you hit a lot
of New Mexico businesses.
Run by New Mexicans with New
Mexico flavor whether that's
actual taste to the ambiance of
the place.
We're gonna put it an extra
burden on them we're not going
to we're not gonna give a tax
break will raise their taxes
we're going to do some other
things here we're going to add
I don't think that's what we
want for those restaurants okay
sure but they're not New Mexico.
those places are imported from
somewhere else.
They certainly higher New Mexico
staff.
The morass.
Of taxes and regulations that we
keep piling on people.
So great.
In got hit somebody apparently.
So let's go ahead and hit them
but let's leave the little guys
alone.
But if it's good well we had a
little then if they want to if
they think it's good for them
then we element but we should
not.
We don't need to do that to our
to our home grown businesses.
We don't need to do that to
them.
doing rounds in orange because
my need one so with that Mr
president I move Senate floor
amendment number two to Senate
bill eleven just three times
amended and I ask unanimous
all senators to your seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand center Sanchez
are you voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no.
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator McKenna voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no Senator
Tallman voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Rodriguez voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no.
Senator souls voting no.
Senator Shendo voting no.
By a vote of fifteen affirmative
twenty two in the negative
Senate floor amendment number
two has failed to pass the
Senate.
three times amended amendment
sponsored by senator Munoz the
share Senator to move and
explain the amendment.
Mr president I move Senate floor
amendment number two for the
Mr president this one's really
easy it changes the twelve weeks
to six weeks so we still have
the the paid family medical
like we want but what it does do
is it is it moves the twelve
week threshold to six.
And the big reason for that Mr
happens to the business is in
general so Mister president.
One of the concerns that I have
here.
with children and all of I get
that.
And some of those things are
absolutely important.
are twenty generations of people
that own businesses.
And so just trying to find a
happy medium here I thought
okay.
Really tiny businesses.
So if you have a business of
ten.
Most small businesses cannot
survive on ten percent capacity.
Of a loss of ten percent
capacity they need.
things yes add extra burdens yes
to all it but just to a for
shorter time.
Just a little bit shorter time.
Because you know who suffers
when when when you lose the
they have to pick up that slack
that's missing.
They have to somebody has to the
customers are burdened more
because now services slower.
be a great restaurant.
And now it's slow.
The food is not the same.
Because ten percent of the.
And for most of us we've had
people that are that are absent
for whatever reason don't people
get sick.
People have to go on vacation we
we allow all of that so
Often it's one week at a time
but maybe multiple weeks
throughout the course of the
year.
So most businesses have a way to
deal with that.
In fact that burden so big
you've got you've got to hire
somebody to replace them yes in
this case we have to keep that
job open to we're gonna hire
somebody for ninety days.
So if we just change this from
twelve weeks to six weeks.
I think that's a reasonable
compromise.
the sponsors Center Stuart.
Thank you Mr president I'm gonna
yield to my co sponsor to answer
this ammendment Senator do.
Thank you Mr president so Mister
people who need it most such as
folks who who are have are
giving birth and have just had a
C. section so the the twelve
association both recommend that
infants should not enter into
childcare settings until at
least three months of age due to
the risks of communicable
diseases and its and the impact
correlated with better maternal
and child health outcomes
including breastfeeding
initiation and duration well
child care vaccination rates and
improved maternal mental health
this very substantially based on
the cause of leave but what we
do know is that for pregnancy
complication claims that those
have have the higher highest
number of weeks at eight point
and and for folks who are
managing those serious serious
health conditions or who are
maybe caring for a family member
has a serious health condition
the length of leave it is going
are healthy enough to return to
week I'm sorry to return to work
so overall Mister president
that twelve weeks was not just
pulled out of a hat it was
facing a serious health
challenges that's what's most
helpful reducing a to six weeks
is going to make it so that the
people who need this most aren't
Thank you Mr president.
With the sponsor of the
amendment yield Senator share do
you yield a yes Mr president.
Yes Mr president I am.
This presents etcetera and we
please do you have on average Mr
president of.
With the current business I've
limited to just one at a time
have your employees being out
for twelve weeks mean to your
business.
So Mister president.
Of the I hire people because I
need them to be there.
So we provide them with the
tools that they need.
We provide them with training.
And they do that over time.
So from that perspective.
I can certainly take a hit every
But if all of a sudden I died I
I had somebody gone for twelve
weeks that would mean that I
would have to hire a
replacement.
Because the business runs
tightly.
Thus it interferes with my
customers.
It interferes with the other
people that works there because
now they have to do things.
else to take two or more.
I think that shuts me down.
Shuts me down because now I have
impact not just on me but the
entire community in fact the
entire state because as Senator
Cervantes points out I also pay
taxes just like him.
Oil and gas pays a million
through the entire state if we
do too much stuff like that so
yes it does have an impact into
in it could be a devastating
impact Mister president
depending on how many people and
that would need to come in and
take the place of someone who's
out for twelve weeks.
So Mister president.
Experience means a lot so we can
between being able to do the job
and being good at the job.
And that takes lots of time.
Just to get the experience.
what you're doing now some
businesses some businesses all
you gotta do is push you know a
card around or whatever it is
they're they're not that
difficult to figure out but
other businesses.
run heavy equipment that takes a
lot of time.
A lot of effort.
If you're teaching somebody how
make everybody of the same and I
understand I understand.
The health.
But there's nothing in my
amendment that stops a business.
The business can still let
people off.
The business can still pay
people.
Money is saying is that.
train and the time that that
your production is just down
thank you.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Yes I do Mr president senator
Sanchez you have a business
line.
Yes Sir.
Mr president Senator yes we have
about two right now I think
about five thirty eight.
is present there is a certain
sound like a game show but
Senator Sanchez Mr president
Senator and some of our
positions over here to train
them depending on what they're
doing in their it's heavy
equipment or learning a skill in
up to a year and then after that
it's it's continuing training
assist it's not over after that
Mister president senator.
Representative this presents
center
Mr president center even with
the amount that we have when we
have people out it's pretty
devastating we are a small
company
office staff and everything so
if you divide that up your
people get pretty thin and you
never want to have your people
short handed at any job site you
want to make sure they have all
the tools and all the training
out so you're trying to run so
many trucks one Danielle three
truck drivers out you're kind of
You know you just can't meet the
quota.
you on the floor as well so I
appreciate that thank you.
Mister president senator thank
you a lot.
Agency present with the Senator
Pirtle yield Senator Pirtle the.
Senator Pirtle do point more
than five people in your
business.
Mr president Senator yes.
Senator Brandt is present
For for any business we're very
depended on on our employees as
our employees are dependent on
Negatively affect the ability to
run efficiently but I think
there's the balance here that we
have to strike Mister president
senator is we we want we want to
make sure somebody's health is a
where you have employees that
you have year round essentially
just to help during the harvest
season and it's very hard to
in the way of my decision
whenever I give someone time off
for whatever personal reason it
is especially when it comes to
their health but I do see some
who then gets to fill the
position permanently so I do see
some issue with that and and the
main thing that that I have
giving the employers any type of
information that would say okay
yes you you have a an illness
that you qualify for but the
doctor doesn't then let the
go that that employee within
that's all that they would
qualify for so I think there's
some issue with that language
that that really needs to be
Sometimes I somehow tried to
force them back sooner than they
should but I will tell you with
the environment that that I
create within my own business
and and the team work that we
increasing workload on their
friends their co workers and so
I think that's really something
that I would like to address as
we're we're we're demonizing
businesses as if we don't care
about our employees that they're
if if not almost all treat their
employees like family and and I
think this is just a real slap
in the face that of business
owners such as myself that
makes it really hard to plan and
schedule and see if you need to
replace somebody temporarily to
to get the job done and ensure
that you continue to have a
business to employ the other
yield Senator is to yield.
This presents a you Sir guy goes
do you have a business.
Senator Gallegos misprint Center
I actually work for my wife's
employees that you would have to
do this.
Mr president center we don't
look M. as employees we've got
eighty seven families currently
on our payroll.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator and how difficult would
it be for you to have one of
your employees are more with
jobs are more critical than
others just for understanding if
we had our payroll clerk on for
twelve weeks would be really
hard for us to be able get our
Senator Brandt is president
center how long does it take you
to train someone to get them
competent where they can jump in
and fill in those holes with you
lost employee.
fill in voids and I think that
Not not
versatile enough to take their
job over I would think you'd
Senator Representative thank you
Mr president you Center
appreciate those answers Senator
Burt would you yield Senator
deal.
Senator Burt do you have five or
more employees at this will
apply to you I do Senator just
reminder to go to the chair
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
How difficult is it for you to
lose an employee like that.
Of the for twelve weeks and I
know you actually kind of went
through this recently so well so
For example I have three sales
salespeople salespeople sell
advertising on our radio station
and that's how we make our
living if you take one of those
people will attempt to cover the
bases with that what we call a
list the third group of
advertisers.
But.
you would lose money if someone
was out for that particular
time.
And I I think the.
Mr president and senator you
And we pay them full salary.
And we took care of them as best
we possibly could and that meant
sales people were double
they were being taken care of
Mr president Senator they also
did their best to maintain their
list as well.
schedules and and technical
things in the broadcasting
industry that most people don't
really understand but it's labor
intensive and when the bottom
line is most present when you
to another department
programming Department.
So we've spent a lot of money
and a lot of time a lot of
effort establishing our.
and and auto dealer has a
special sale going on they
specifically request.
these people to come out and do
will come out to meet them and
talk with them many of them have
friends that column on a day to
day basis Mr president that is
very important to because when a
And finally our support staff
within the station Mr president
if we lose a copy writer who
followed on the air every day if
we lose someone like that we
have to hire part time people to
come in and and fill a gap
because we just don't have
enough capacity within the radio
it is costing us additional
money or losing money and and
that's the the the the reality
because they were an integral
part.
Of our family.
And that's what most small
businesses are is a family.
Whether it be health or any
other instance.
And that's why this bill is
going to be extremely difficult
online having to let somebody go
and no one ever wants to do that
as well thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Byrd senator
Brandis to us for thank you Mr
Senator Munoz.
Do yield.
Hi Mr president to mailing to
send a friend request said that
Is present do you have more than
five employees that this bill
would apply to you.
Yes Mr present center yes I do.
Thomas present center would be
yes it it is but that happens
currently if someone becomes ill
or has surgery heart problems
you lose them for a time frame
government have to tell you to
do that or you just do it
because you're a good employer.
Yes Mr president center know
what we do it because our
didn't need the government to
force that down your throat that
you.
Senator yes Mr president center
no.
Thank you Mr president.
You know we had several business
owners.
The server in our body.
And it's difficult for them but
they already do this.
Because the family.
No small business.
So.
First of all I don't think that
we need to force this upon our
employees employers sorry.
I think employees are smart
when it's hard to find
employees.
Employees can take care of all.
Many small employers employers
that we're putting this on hurts
me even more.
We'll get into the bill itself
when we get there Mr president
but before we do that I need to
excuse.
We're debating senator member
number two.
Si no further debate Senator
sure to close on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president.
employees for a year with full
pay.
It does not stop a business from
Wells Fargo might not know who's
really sick and who's not.
But those businesses that are
owned by New Mexicans they do
know.
This this is let's work together
on it after six weeks.
Let's work together on it.
There's one other thing I'd like
to point out here Mister
president.
Two thirds of us are going to
vote for two thirds of them with
the the body's gonna vote for.
That is all about abortion but
all of the arguments that I hear
in caring for them and loving
them and helping them and
holding them.
And loving them.
What this bill is a lot more
than that.
But.
This is really about more than
that.
And that's all of us in this
particular amendment.
Allow us to work with the people
we work with.
A small New Mexico business
owners.
Is once again that big hammers
coming out smashion us because
barely were too stupid not to
take care of our people and yet
we heard story after story over
here about how.
We took care of them.
And I'm sure if you go outside
this building there are tens of
it says business owners are not
evil robber barons.
Because that's what this bill
says.
Business owners are evil robber
I think that's a small thing.
It helps this businesses.
I don't think it hurts anybody
important just the very idea.
The small business owners that
small New Mexico business
owners.
Have to be bashed into
submission.
longer.
Because if we go out of
business.
These folks don't get anything.
See if we can survive.
That's all we're asking.
Can we survive.
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show that all
those present voted in the
negative except for those of
voted in the affirmative by show
of hands.
Because it's a smaller number.
side wanted coal little faster
get page count of the smaller
number so Mister president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called in all
those present voted in the
chamber in no objections.
Centers we're voting tier seats
please.
You Mr bono please raise your
hand.
Senator o'neill Fortino Senator
hope you know.
Senator Steinborn voting no
Senator Campos voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Center how to meal voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Senator could Hemphill voting
Senator Hamblen voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no.
By a vote of thirteen
affirmative twenty negative
senator and member number two is
failed to pass the Senate we do
have another floor amendment.
sponsored by senator William P.
share Senator to move and
explain the amendment thank you
Mr president I move Senate floor
member number two for the fourth
one was supposed to simply be an
opt in one but it did have that
fifty people in it.
and so that was an error so I
fixed it in this one here so
wanted to and and not if they
didn't but this one and this one
actually does say if you've got
fifty or more employees fell
shall if you've got less than
now the L. shape they Val may.
in it's really a correction of
what should have been.
The.
The one I was arguing is the
first amendment I did was not
the appropriate argument for
Thank you Mr president to I
don't see much difference in
this between this and the first
one it still on friendly it
position where our phone doesn't
work for people who are either
very ill or pregnant so this
this is this won't work of this
really need it so this is not
acceptable and friendly.
Senator debate the Senate floor
member number to anyone wishing
to bait.
This one just corrected an error
that I made in that first
amendment.
So.
The Interstate international
businesses.
This really tries to focus on
who can and who shouldn't be
forced to do anything.
amendment Mr president I
withdraw this amendment.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senator Pirtle move and explain
the mammoth Luisana four minute
number two to Senate bill eleven
as thrice amended.
is after the subsection B. of
section six where it talks about
Department show required
employee or self employed
individual who seeks medical
leave compensation to provide in
line language and I think this
is important because as an
employer.
Just say somebody has hernia
surgery or something like that
it just puts the employer on
notice that there's a time line
putting their employee into
situations where they might end
up injuring themselves not
giving the specifics of what was
going on but just a timeline of
when they can return to work the
between employee employer that
Hey you're gonna be out twelve
weeks I need to really search
for somebody very competent to
replace you or if it's only
gonna be two weeks we're gonna
Mr president we feel like this
ammendment is friendly and adds
to the bill and we would like to
accept this as an amendment.
Senator is we're debating
senator member number to anyone
wishing to debate.
two to Senate bill eleven as
thrice amended ask for a voice
vote.
Senator is there's been a
request for voice quality except
senator member number to all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Senator thank you Mr president
thank you madam protium centers
we are back on the bill.
On the bill we have Senator
quite a Hemphill followed by
Senator.
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to thank the Madam pro
time enter co sponsors for
bringing this bill forward
ninety three that president
Clinton signed into law the
family medical leave act and
this was just three short months
before the passage of this law
parents were not guaranteed time
off for staying home with the
new born or a sick child or
family member workers could even
toughest moments paid leave is
going to go a step further still
by providing more people back
to stimulate the economy because
it's the middle class who really
contribute the most to the
economy and this so keep more
over their lives my experience
with family medical leave
happened back in two thousand
thirteen I just had my fourth
When he was four and had to have
his left leg amputated he broke
his right leg kids only lay and
needed full assistance being
transferred in and out of bed on
had to take on paid family
medical leave at the time so
that I could care for my family
and still protect my job and
this bill is going to be so
provide that financial security
for families across New Mexico
and Mr president I knows you
understand how challenging it is
dentist visits outside of our
community because we don't
always have access to
specialists to dentists
orthodontics in our community
and lots of compromises made
with the business community so I
think the the sponsors for
bringing this forward and I
think this is really going to be
how to meal followed by Senator
Moores than seven McKenna center
how to mail Mr president I just
want to thank the sponsors for
this bill I heard from a lot of
my constituents who supported
the bill and I just want to
Six a loved one or recover for
one's own health I see that this
bill will help New Mexicans
balance the demands of work
health and family by protecting
their jobs.
Well they take time off to
take care of one of but not what
it one another Mr president I
want to thank the sponsors for
this bill thank you.
Senator Morris.
The agency president rise in
opposition to this bill house
insurance a four the employees
so when doctors get pregnant
which we've had the last year my
wife obviously now and many
to to managed especially in New
Mexico and be able to get that
level of service and you for a
medium size business like ours
diagnosis for cancer and other
diseases they're in the hospital
waiting after surgeries and be
able to staff that process is
very challenging I cannot
only the large corporations who
are able to do it what there are
much more sophisticated H. R.
programs and policies and
ability to transfer resources
employer is going to be
incredibly incredibly difficult
so I'm very concerned about this
bill and also Mr president what
it does to the other employees
up the slack in it's very very
difficult when you don't know
when they're going to come back
how it's going to work on.
large corporations will be able
to handle this they will lost
consolidate their operations
small and medium size businesses
will sell if they can or go out
opportunity to be entrepreneurs
in New Mexico especially as we
talk about for that hurts the
middle and lower income families
ability to get out of poverty
make America New Mexico a of
more difficult and government
dependent state more of a social
states are not use that word
very often but it is in this
that is what's happening now is
already happened with a number
the policies are built in
legislation passed personal last
couple years.
California so we want California
policies without having talked
California economic
opportunities and and we just
don't have it and it's is going
to get worse and worse agency
like a knife cut it's going to
exaggerate and bleed out the the
body as we get closer closer Mr
president thank you.
Thanks for the to have further
debate with Senator McKenna
bill just be eleven I want to
thank senators Stewart because
the and word for bringing this
to us to to discuss
leave you do not get vacation
time you do not get PTO paid
time off you do not get health
benefits and so those years when
rent pay my car payment.
And because I'm such a planner
and I'm circumspect about what
I'm doing in life I always
injury on the job I would worry
about losing my my home my
apartment at the time.
being sent to collections
because I can pay my bills.
the way I was living in their
job as a contractor.
For as a permanent employee
and what's what's remember this
for a serious health condition
providing care for a family
member with a serious health
condition someone on employee
who's facing domestic violence.
incredible emergencies right.
But that's what it's there for.
I heard this afternoon Mister
Act and.
I maintain Mr president the act
is going to be so much more
helpful to them and why do I say
that let's review.
I the five Bucks for every one
thousand dollars in wages that's
the employee contribution.
Employers with less than five
The P. M. so.
Is a responsible decision.
Mr president.
As a small business owner a
medium size business owner ever
even a large part of business
owner.
illness for up to twelve weeks
it would be irresponsible not to
have that in your business plan
to plan accordingly and finally
Mister president I will say.
companies due to make their
employees feel like they truly
matter and folks in this chamber
have mentioned I've mentioned
Wegman's time and again.
their employees like they treat
their customers thank you Mr
president we do have for the
debate with senator I will solve
fifty generation family that I
work for
we've been doing dirt work we
don't do on gas we say in the
communities we serve and we live
To me right now I'm just
thinking through Mr president
the three employees of if there
ever three employees caught at
same time creates a huge
as families that's why we call
it not eighty seven employees
eighty seven families because
what we do affects the whole
family and I just understand
that if if this bill were to
state we're nationally three
point five percent is our
unemployment rate I don't know
where those numbers come from
thank tell you in Lee County we
president center centers that
well my boss was here the other
day I've had a huge discussion
with them because I have a Joint
us to get six in for me for
myself up to ten individuals at
six hundred dollars per
individual if I brought in from
Cuba or any of the war torn
work for me or the husband would
we looked at six hundred per
husband wife and two hundred for
family we would need the the
border and in el Paso in that
area because this way would
bring bring them in to actually
I could see changing families
lives by being a small business.
But that's can be put on hold
because we don't know what kind
Mr president I would just hope
that we would vote are true
ideals for New Mexico not for
anything in California nothing
Thank you Mr president I do have
a question if the sponsor would
yield Senator do yield.
Yes I will yield so Mister
other remuneration under a
contract of higher written or
oral express or implied includes
a person employed by the state
or a political subdivision of
as defined as either the federal
railroad unemployment insurance
act or of the federal employees
liability act so I think this
a hundred days so they're past
the.
They're past the ninety day
thing to then I in my then
obligating.
they have to prove that they're
pregnant they have to prove
they've had a baby they have to
prove that they have intense
medical issues their doctor has
an employee for a Hundred Days
and they paid in two and also
the employee has to pay in for
six months so in your example
a remote employee
so somebody.
Has an issue but they can still
work from home do I still need
to say I'm sorry
or.
I'm asking in in the business
Senator Stewart Mr president
it's the same thing have state
paid in to the fund for six
months.
fund if you have more than five
or more employees who you would
have to pay into the fund and
then they would have to meet the
employee that was being paid by
the fund and then if they had
worked for you more than ninety
days then you would give them
make us come back to work we do
just fine as remote employees
and in there they say it helps
us because we get to take care
of whatever issue they have.
of their ailing a child or
themselves or their spouse or
their parents or whoever they
get to do that.
We still pay them so they get to
That they don't have to work
anymore for twelve weeks so
they're going to do all the same
things.
You're gonna get paid but they
don't have to work even though
We're gonna say no they're gonna
get twelve weeks off anyway is
that correct Mr Mr president no
that's not correct that employee
has every incentive to stay at
have no incentive to even apply
to this fund.
This president no incentive
doesn't mean they won't or
can't.
Services for wages or other
remuneration under contract of
higher written or oral express
or implied so.
you know didn't have a big
business or anything like that
Hey can you go finish putting
the.
The term in the house.
Of the baseboard and crown
molding Kriegel hang that for
me.
But maybe I maybe I hire this
guy often.
Not not consistently not
everyday but often so over the
course of the year.
taxes out or anything I pay him
it's up to him to pay his taxes
on to anything since he has
become an employee because his
work for more than ninety days
over the course of a year.
five dollars for every thousand
on they have to show to the
Department what their yearly
wages are
use so I think they get a ten
ninety nine so they don't get a
W. two from you so you're not
responsible for them or their
feet.
Mr president it's the of folks
that have to determine whether
or not you qualify for the eight
so it medical doctors you're
basically medical doctors
solutions have any role in this
at all.
Mr Mister president of course
they're certainly going to do
a rules with public hearing and
then hearing after the rules is
made so they will be educating
small businesses of they have a
little advisory committee that's
temporary that will have
businesses on it it will go away
after those rules are determined
You can try to get a claim in
twenty six so the workforce
solutions will run the I. T.
system we intend to get a very
money in and we're going to pay
that back when the fund as a
stab which so workforce
solutions has a big role in this
So Mister president if there is
a dispute between the employer
and employee since we're no
longer family because a sickle
porous part if there is a
dispute.
ready are able to do that
through unemployment insurance
they know how to resolve
disputes and it's written into
the bill.
but also in here says workforce
solution gets to set the premium
so the premium is set right now.
But next year will look at it
We put that again workforce
solutions.
Can set the premium workforce
solutions in this bill gets to
raise our taxes.
it's in there it's in there so
they get to raise taxes whatever
they feel like it will once a
year I guess they get to raise
taxes theoretically they could
in so lowering taxes this is not
something that.
That we do very often yes
there's going to be an effort to
try some of that this year but
as I pointed out earlier Mister
president.
it's more like sixty six
percent.
So we have a lot fewer people
that could be working actually
working.
And I've tried to ask why what
what's what's that about how's
that working in in I'm not sure
that I ever go to got a good
answer on that.
But right now.
Departments are are are agencies
here in the state huge vacancy
rates.
Because there's nobody to hire.
outside of this building outside
of state government.
There's things like insurance
retirement those kind of things
are offered to state employees.
Still can't hire enough people
and now we're going to tell
private business.
That even in the case where
there's not enough.
You Mr president our businesses
are struggling our small
businesses are struggling.
Our small businesses are
With just finding people to work
is real and we don't have to be
rocket science drive down
surreal so look at all of the
We have to take a hammer.
In dash you into being good
people.
We can't fix it anyway we can't
this body is trust giddy about
spending oil and gas money.
Lots of oil and gas money.
avoid that and I I just don't
get that I don't understand why
this is become such an important
thing for us to put more burdens
more about their burdens other
than Senate bill eleven.
But I'm gonna highlight some of
these.
The New Mexico Chile is the
heart and soul of New Mexico's
culture.
Is New Mexico the mandates are
coming out of St fence Santa Fe
have made it too difficult and
too expensive for me to grow
provide medical paid leave for
families.
I am disappointed every year
hearing lawmakers promote New
Mexico Chile and supporting
That includes Senate bill
eleven.
Here's somebody that really
works.
What they did.
So Mister president.
I do believe that this sends a
clear message to small New
I do believe that there's lots
of other things that we need to
consider there are there are a
the.
Those things we didn't
considering here because those
things really do get in the way.
They get in the way of
everything.
You know today we have a
shortage of variety of medical.
To respiratory therapists.
To phlebotomist I don't know.
But we actively seem to be
running out of state were making
this but yet we're running the
medical staff out of our state
we're trying to make sure that
no new industry come into our
state and we're trying to run
Among people's.
Have been solved by the market
not by government the market.
Solves all these problems.
I am writing.
Do you to share support for
Senate bill eleven the paid
family medical leave act New
Mexico's workers and families to
serve this bill to be a top
sees use the space to
personalize your email.
How many these you got it was
really only one but then I
pointed out that it says uses
Most people still didn't put in
a dot dot dot.
We also talked about the
chambers of commerce.
So I have this here from the Los
crucis chamber of commerce which
you to register our opposition
to Senate bill eleven if passed
the bill is position to add
another level of cost to
businesses to businesses and
ultimately hinder business
opposition to Senate bill eleven
this bill is ill conceived and
will only add to the already
overwhelming bureaucracy the
state has created.
absolutely mind boggling.
That the legislature would be
entering into anything like a
tax increase and this is a tax
increase.
Many businesses are just one
disaster away from closing down
in addition to provide financial
mandate the Senate bill eleven
paid family medical leave could
be devastating for them and the
The department of workforce
solutions which we put in charge
of this.
Over paid an estimated two
my dollars in his dollars and
her dollars.
Mr president squandered by the
same people that we're going to
give total authority to raise
our taxes.
I have great concern was Senate
bill eleven affecting my work
force I manage production shop
of fourteen employees that will
be entitled to family leave
legislation.
jobs data centers in oil field
companies for skilled labors
many of these people traveling
to Mexico from out of state.
With SB eleven I will be forced
to hire additional employees
there from real life New
Mexicans.
They're not a chain letter that
was just cranked out by the
thousands.
These are from real small
business owners.
What I got to support it was the
chain letter.
That's what came out to support
this.
Four times I believe.
And it saddens me that we've
locked herself down.
existential threat to democracy.
The way tyrants operate is the
lockdown the politburo so that
you can only vote one way.
So I stand here is the loyal
opposition trying to get through
to people.
Trying to get through.
To the real life.
Business owners.
are going to be affected most by
this and that's the employees
that will not get a better job
because the new industry won't
come.
That might lose their job
because they're small businesses
The only thing that I have found
positive about this bill and
there is one thing that just
came out overwhelmingly positive
That this bill promotes life and
is a pro life bills.
Thank you Mr president do you
have further debate we have
senator Munoz followed by
Yes.
Thank you Mr president
If a person becomes ill
immediately or has to have a
they have to still do the
tendering waiting period or can
they come back and say this
happened to me on April twenty
second and I can come back to
Present what they stopped
process the claim so that will
take a few days but we certainly
want to have the ability to deal
Semenya's let me ask you Mr
president madam let me ask my
second question how does it work
with part time employees.
Their wage would be much lower
so there amount putting into the
fund would be lower.
The workers compensation fund if
ever a part time employee is
just based on fewer hours and
his as his benefits would also
be lower.
Mr president and and madam I I'm
looking in the bill and it looks
five percent so if if the fund
becomes insolvent she can
trigger that dollar amount up to
a hundred thirty five percent is
that correct or can she trigger
There will be an annual review
starting in twenty twenty eight.
The bill requires that
claim funding in that font she
could adjust those rates of the
rates because Washington started
out to low Washington started
out of point four for everyone
and it was a fifty and above so
Washington since then has raise
to and the fees going into it of
the fund looks like it will be
solvent and when we paid back
lower those rates like to states
have done in the last several
years.
Cinnamon yes Mr president could
you ask Representative when this
dollars and then they increased
to.
Twenty over two year period so
they got a five dollar increase
over two years does that number
goes up the C. will you doesn't
sound like it that employee
makes very much so those fees
would be low.
Thank you.
take up right and no matter what
scenario I seem to get at.
It seems that the fund becomes
insolvent either way in the only
What do you think the actual use
is going to be in New Mexico did
you guys do any type of serving
saying if this was a benefit in
Mr president we have a lot of
data because we use the.
Eral at the bar at UNM business
what is it pure of Business and
their ten percent was that was
not based on anything based in
New Mexico it had nothing to do
with New Mexico data beeper came
about a four percent up to eight
that could be a little higher up
if we look at the other states
Connecticut it's one point two
our assumptions and the economy
economist who have developed
this fund feels very solid and
and their conservative I feel
lower those states.
Mr present me ask of one last
question.
I mean you took a a number of
the fund when you took that
number up and said person at
fifty one thousand dollars that
it works an average of.
Mr president know it that's
based on the mean wage.
That's determined by the federal
government in New Mexico and
from that we've got the.
in New Mexico space on the main
page in New Mexico.
In center you said again the
mean wage in New Mexico is nine
hundred and ninety seven dollars
get with a claim through the P.
FMLA and that cap weekly cap is
nine hundred ninety seven
dollars and that is based on the
and eight no fifty one thousand
dollars eight hundred and sixty.
In this present to me asked one
themselves from this policy.
Present self employed
substantially similar plans that
they use with their work force.
Present.
In one of my companies have
about ten employees I'm also
FMLA bill.
Can I exclude myself as part of
that benefit program.
Mr president that that is in the
that works with them which is
temporary will have businesses
on it they will be having
stakeholder meetings all over
the state they will write the
rules and then everyone will
on the fund and if we're gonna
do this we need to make sure
that we create funds that are
stable that people can use and
then all of sudden there may be
different number on uptake use
summer saying four percent
summer saying ten percent Rhode
Island is nine percent there
people are text me stuff but I I
like to see a lot more data on
on what we really think it's
going to happen and then I one
thing I really would like to see
this in cases of emergency and
people don't plan for medical
at work how can I quickly react
to this because my mom broke her
hip I'm gonna be gone for two or
three weeks and I will be able
to be back that's something that
doctor's going to bill that
that's not an issue here's a
copay how do you get that that
doctor's prescription our
doctors beautification and what
it's a it's there's a little bit
of work left to be in that in
this bill so that those are some
things but they're merging two
things that happen to people so
that can trigger this if they
know they're going to be gone
so thank you Mr president.
Yes Representative Griggs
followed by Senator Woods then
Senator Kernan Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president with the
pro tem yield for a question or
two Senator Stewart I certainly.
about pay and I think it's part
of what maybe you and and
senator Munoz just discussion so
one of one research clear for
for me
the employee would receive.
Their weekly pay in the same
amount
While they're going.
And our.
because right now the way I read
this is rich state minimum wage
Mr present so that amendment
dealt with workers comp so it's
it's not here it's it's in the
part where we say
you you cannot get funding from
out for this program is based on
first giving anyone who
that average wage right now nine
hundred ninety seven dollars a
week.
So so we we wanted to
incentivize employees to come
Senator you you did and I think
that's when we were in we're in
tax that was the part of the
employer.
Does not have to pay while
they're gone
the the fund will pay for that
Senate while I get to be correct
lunch today I don't know it's
pretty good deal but
Thank you for thank you for that
madam madam president you know.
just as because of even though
even though the the pro tem and
and those involved with the bill
have made every effort that they
from almost every business owner
in here what we've heard from
the chambers of commerce what
we've heard from
handle the what they see as
people taking increased time all
and I even though H. in order to
taking or would take under
current conditions.
It's it's going to be it's going
to be difficult for these
And while it may ultimately turn
out to be not much it is
certainly something in an age
it's different than they have to
do today
From pro temp side I are you
still cannot I cannot get my
arms around this bill enough to
support it
me in the fund it's not going to
be that we didn't put and well
do we put too much it's going to
be that we didn't put enough
initiative chair pointed out we
traumatic for for businesses so
President and madam pro tempore
certainly hope.
Did it work right because I'm
pretty pretty comfortable that
Senator Woods followed by
Senator Kernan center what's
thank you Mr president.
You know this is presented as a
risk management tool years I
We already have the lowest
worker participation rate.
In the nation.
We've got a growth rate over a
actually lost point zero eight
percent of our population.
The federal reserve came many of
the day and listen to them a
little while.
percent of the business license
R. two single employers.
Not employing anybody.
And course we asking why that
He wouldn't give us a whole lot
of.
Forward prediction he more or
less just told us what was going
on in our state.
Our state was booming in one
corner.
To the rest of our state was
very stagnant.
Nobody in this room on in that
money.
Those guys down early and Eddy
County.
Turning money for.
I hate to see what's going on
with this bill.
My.
Employers that.
hands I gotta depend on a lot of
people to keep their business
going.
And we.
Making it harder for them to
stay in business.
finance about health insurance
in and in the bill that says the
employer has to keep the health
insurance up and I asked her how
exactly that was going to be
And if that worker happens to be
off three months.
When I understood what she told
me was that the employer would
employee recoup that will I
don't know that never did come
to me.
But I'm sure that.
The smart people in rural figure
that out.
too so Mr president thank you
very much for the opportunity.
You have further debate we have
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president maybe you
said this and maybe I just
didn't read the bill clearly
enough but with regard to our
school districts and I thought
of this when the.
as the school district.
Mr president it does it does
include them thank you Mr
president and did we provide
doesn't start for three years so
we certainly didn't do it this
year now I can tell you after
spending thirty years in the
public schools in Albuquerque
that were out longer so most of
these a school districts have a
program somewhat like that this
will make it easier on them and
paid family medical leave act
through the governor's executive
order.
Thank you Mr president in and of
course we do have three years to
figure out what that cost is
going to be and I think there
have to go before
the collective bargaining
agreements with they have to
come to some sort of agreement
what if they decide that they
don't want their employees to
agreements this I don't believe
this will be something that will
be able to be bark in this
program so Mister president I
think I hear you saying that
participate.
Mr Mr president now and and the
you Sir in support of this also
so no of by putting that in
there there's there's other
this program they will all be
part of so Mister president I'll
move on and that does concern me
though that that may be the
districts would at the end of
medical reasons I can understand
that you would need to get
support from a third party
provider who pays for that
second opinion.
employee needs the least for is
accurate and they'll be the ones
that will answer that amendment
that Senator Pirtle put on that
we accepted so these are the
that person that's what we mean
by that third party provider so
Mister president explain to me
though is that within workforce
Mr present it's probably not a
good term that we're using here
it and that's that's so it your
own medical doctor who you go to
it to know who's taking care of
for this because of the medical
issue or the pregnancy so Mister
president Senator what about the
safety verification so there's a
it do you feel that that's
sufficient that gesture pastor
could send in something to work
for solutions and say this
person needs to have that time
it's a high bar to get in and
those are all the folks that we
already identified in our
domestic violence a law where
you can get off for fourteen
will be for Senator Padilla with
regard to workforce solutions
and the ability of that
department to actually
communicate at the level they're
gonna have to communicate with
workforce solutions and and and
get an answer someone on the
phone we had such a difficult
time during the COVID.
We all did for our own
I yield no when asked me to but
I yield you mention me so I will
thank you Mr president thank you
world renowned cabinet secretary
that we have now is we decided
to push back the implementation
by two years I think we learned
a lot Mr president through the
pandemic and what can happen to
solutions call center it's seems
to be working great now
and so I think that that's one
step as we give it two years to
implement it we also have the
date and information for what
there's also going to be this
two year ramp to develop the IT
systems communication and
education with business those
twenty four months are going to
be critical to making this thing
what's going to ale the the the
employee what's gonna ale to
businesses so that they can
build out the knowledge bases
within the contact center so
they can easily answer those
questions
workforce solutions to above
ninety percent but again we
learned a lot through that
pandemic in those are new
processes that were implemented
Thank you Mr president present I
I don't think I need the Sanchez
yield I appreciate very much the
goals here I think this is a a
good initiative The the
bill session for the bill
describes who this act will
apply to.
And and section a two says the
act applies to employers whether
common parts of our border
economy involves people who live
in New Mexico but working all
passed so remember of houses
across the street literally from
would apply to every business
and I'll pass or Texas complies
anybody from New Mexico.
And I got to believe that's
really not enforceable.
that's true in chaparral or or
any of the other number border
communities that we have with
other states the the other trick
they have an agent here maybe
they have a pharmaceutical rep
here maybe they have any number
of different folks here working
for those those the national
companies to have employees here
The the bill says that this will
apply to employees who are
subject to state jurisdiction.
I hope the Sanchez will think a
little bit about that those of
what subjects another company
from out of state to New Mexico
jurisdiction one can I sue a
national company in New Mexico
and I went I sue a corporation
from out of state in New Mexico
be litigated a great deal and so
when you read subsection a two
and A. one together of section
four that says this act applies
to all employers whether they're
the state sometimes means being
found in New Mexico if you're
found in New Mexico you may be
subject to state jurisdiction
may not we have an office here
then we find ourselves in years
of litigation that's my concern
with this bill and now and it of
course I I'll look forward to
the the Sanchez good efforts to
Mexico or not.
S. employers of every other
state.
I'm sorry I missed that madam
president.
district where I've got a number
of my constituents in Los crucis
Dona Ana County who are working
in L. el Paso and I'll look for
to perhaps hearing something
that will help me to read
Senator Stewart to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president I'm going
to take just a few minutes to
answer some of these questions
that the employee and so person
working with in the state so
those employees of that out of
state employer that are working
we're trying to harm small
businesses.
Nothing could be further from
the truth and I am very aware of
this I have teachers in my life
that and so if teachers and
neither one of these groups want
us to do anything to help help
them out I get that I I really
trained experienced employees
back to you immediately.
So if New Mexico Women's of if
medical leave we're the only
industrialized country that does
not offer that we would have
another forty seven thousand
women working in the state with
much for offering this my
daughter actually went to
California so she could work for
a company that has a paid family
later they had a massive layoff
but she was kept because she was
a loyal employee she took time
off and she came back so a
research is everywhere it's in
other countries in these other
states I know you don't want me
to talk about California but
they've had this for twenty
effects on employee morale New
Jersey employers noted the
state's paid leave program
helped reduce stress among
employees and improve morale
today I I appreciate help home
we are all are all including you
Senator share you're always.
Fun to listen to even when you
haven't really read the bill.
of great programs that are
offered and that's great.
And your company could opt out
if it truly is as good as you
think it is let me give you a
women returned after maternity
leave Nestle's US employees
ninety seven point six who used
any form of personal leave we're
still active six months after
their return.
We believe that this will help
employers what's with employees
so I think it's time to wrap it
up ministers president I would
you heard today was very
valuable I think all of this
debate discussion is going to go
into the Advisory Council that
advises the workforce solutions
department as they put the plan
together in the promulgate the
New Mexico this is a giant step
and a giant benefit that we're
gonna put together that's going
to help small business your
large businesses the pro tem
said Mr president you will be
able to opt out of this without
we've improved broadband across
the state we're looking at that
the telecommunication
regulations we produced any
number of things to help small
businesses in New Mexico
businesses to succeed and I
think that's why we should
bill eleven amended four times
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca center Baca votes
Campos Senator Campos votes yes
interest savant this center
Cervantes votes yes center
diamond center diamond votes no
Senator Griggs road snow Center
Hamlin Center Hamlin both CS
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill both CS Center Hickey
Senator Hickey votes yes center
Kernan center Kernan votes no
center Lopez Senator Lopez votes
yes into my Estes Center my
Estes votes yes Center McKenna
avail.
Center Neville both snow Center
o'neill Center o'neill votes yes
center to the Pino center to the
Pino vote CS Center Padilla.
Center pope both CS Center
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez both
CS Center Sancious.
Senator Sanchez both snow Center
smitteez.
no center Shendo.
Senator Shendo both CS Center
souls Senator also CS interested
phonics Center Stefan expo CS
worst Senator Wirth both CS
Senator Woods Senator Woods
votes no.
Twenty three in the affirmative
fifteen the negative Senate bill
eleven as four times amended has
duly passed the Senate Senator
Stewart.
Thank you so much Mr president
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president members what we're
gonna do on a calendar on once
we get the committee reports
read in is just items one
through four and then we're
to whom has been referred house
bill one eighty four as amended
has had it under consideration
and report same of
recommendation that a do pass as
Katy M. Duhigg chairwoman
Senator.
Mr president I move the
committee report we have a
motion to adopt committee report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye those opposed may the
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Shendo Mr
will in with one motion that the
general secretary directed upon
individually no objections
retreat.
Senate bill to I do pass and
Senate bill two forty do pass.
Senate bill two seventy four do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill for seventy to do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
Indian rural and cultural first
committee substitute for Senate
bill five fourteen do pass and
House bill forty four do pass in
this referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
House bill seventy nine do pass
committee report we have a
motion to that's could report
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
As opposed nay the eyes have it
the committee point been adopted
in the journal show they were
substitute for Senate bill one
seventeen.
Has had it under consideration
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
on them with one motion Joe
reflect that were active on
individually but I I would like
to ask the reader to count each
of the following committee
reports using the voice of the
if you would Mr present ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
for him to count the following
committee reports interesting
you say that senator Sanchez I
did receive a tax on their
original count senator John
Who's the count.
You are now the count Mr leader.
One one committee one tool
committee report.
Senate bill one forty six as
amended to pass and then it's
referred to the finance
committee
Yes for it could be.
Senate bill one maybe Dawn
ninety eight as amended do pass
as amended.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill to fifteen do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Six committee.
to sixty as amended to pass.
Eight committee.
Senate bill two eighty six do
pass.
Senate bill three ninety eight
do pass.
Eleven committee.
House bill seven as amended.
This month is.
So miss present am I correct
that's eleven committee reports
consent we act on them with one
motion that would generate like
directive on eleven times.
Is there a motion to adopt the
committee reports all those in
Thank you Mr president members
Senate and for a little bit of
levity after a long day thank
you have a big round of applause
for our readers.
third reading of legislation
ideal Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for
item number one on the counter
Senate bill three ten as amended
crisis triage centers around
that order business there any
ten is amended on final passage
is been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objections
Center dissipated explained the
centers and we we only have the
one fully operational crisis
triage center the one billion a
county but there is one in
Albuquerque that sort of under
proposal and and they're working
toward it the state has
developed regulations concerning
it and it during our interim
committee process last summer an
issue was brought to our
that barrier and that is it
makes it possible for emergency
vehicles are police vehicles to
take people to the crisis triage
center rather than to the
number one second of it and have
the right to read out that
amendment then we'll go back to
move it Senator the reader to
read Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill three
look identical to a similar bill
is going through the house and
in the house they use the phrase
licensed art therapist in our
bill we amended to say
Senator debating senator member
number one to Senate bill three
ten as amended anyone wishing to
debate.
I see no debate on the amendment
etcetera to to be able to close
on the amendment.
And I do now ask for above the
voice vote.
Centers is requested up senator
member number one all those in
favor signify by saying aye
Okay seeing no debate on the
bill Senator disappear to close
on the bill.
Mr president I move that the
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands there
is more voting all senators to
your seats.
that's going to be Senate bill
four as amended yield to Senator
by the thank you very much Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all actions for
substitution no objections
center for that explained about
thank you very much Mr president
this bill has come to us as a
follow on to the legislation I
carried in two thousand
editing that let their amending
that legislation to call with
the healthy hunger free students
bill of rights act and
essentially what it will do Mr
president is provide a free
program in addition to that the
funding that we put together for
this legislation will increase
the funding level for breakfast
about forty point four percent
and also to help them to buy
from local farmers and ranchers
Mr president which will help
them to find healthier options
fruits vegetables meats fish
you know in that situation for
the rest of their lives the
other nice thing about the
legislation Mr president is this
is available to.
to quicker district that way you
know in a lot of ways we have
health related issues here in
New Mexico Mr president that are
because because of the unhealthy
eating habits or of some of the
the achievement gap improve
reading scores a third grade
math and science in eighth grade
and ideally help us to improve
the graduation rate here in New
Mexico and as you can see from
the big board Mr president I did
for me because coming from a
community where all of us
qualify for free breakfast and
lunch hi who was part of that
program before there was such an
opportunity all right myself
it would ensure that she gave a
little bit more food on to those
trays to ensure that their
bellies revealed what they were
going to head back to the
classroom as an educator myself
there were students would come
nutritious breakfast and lunch
and for many students in New
Mexico this might be the only
meal they have for that day
during the pandemic I heard from
a number of parents who talked
place chicken drumsticks of
their pockets to ensure they had
something to eat later in the
day now a number of teenagers.
being labeled and so this is a
bill that I'm happy to stand
behind thank you Mr president
Senator mail center for the I
thank you very much Mr president
think with that will stand for
farmers and ranchers to put that
healthier food on the table and
but we did do a couple of things
to the legislation along the way
we strengthen the language Mr
president around making sure
million dollars and are gonna
start the program with
approximately twenty million
dollars and it's already in the
budget thankfully and so we're
gonna be able to get this thing
rolling right away thank you
senator Senator is very debating
remember it has personal
resonance with me because I
remember when my father lost his
job when I was in third grade he
was too embarrassed to apply for
wouldn't and just ensuring that
every child has it has a full
belly when they're trying to
learn things seem to me to be
one of the most positive
positive things we can do for
that is such a positive thing so
I I want to thank the sponsors
for bringing the bill and stand
in strong support thank Senator
Lopez any further debate.
her staff Kendall Travis from
the governor's office was very
helpful upon the research and
all that together for this and
Mr president you know we passed
that hunger free student bill of
rights back in two thousand
seventeen and it went around the
with that Mr present I move that
Senate Education Committee
substitute presentable for as
amended do now pass and pass its
consent to the Senate that the
rules we suspended the record
show that all those.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca center Baca votes
yes inner Brandt.
Senator Brandt both CS Center
Diamond Senator Diamond Vossius
Senator do heck Center Duhigg
both CS Center consolidates
Senator Griggs.
Hamlin Center Hamlin votes yes
center Hemphill said Senator
Hemphill votes yes center Hickey
Senator Hickey vote CS Center
center Kernan votes yes Senator
Lopez Senator Lopez both CS
Center my Estes Center my Estes
both CS interment cana yes
Senator Neville both CS internet
fail.
Etcetera now.
The center part of us CS Senator
pope Center pope both CS Center
rod Regus Senator Rodriguez both
CS Center Sancious.
Center share center share both
yes center Shendo.
Senator Shendo votes yes center
sells.
Thoman.
Etcetera Thomond both CS Center
worth.
Senator Wirth both CS Center
what's.
Yes in explain my vote Center
Education Committee substitute
for Senate bill four as amended
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Woods to explain his
vote.
Mr president if you really want
million it'll cut down food
waste tremendously thank you Mr
president thank you secretary
what Senator Padilla I thank you
very much Mr president want to
congratulate the body on this
office.
Thank you Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty nine.
explained the bill thank you Mr
president low speed E. bikes are
his safe and sturdy his
traditional bicycles and move at
speeds that are similar to
law so it's about time we do it
and the reason this is important
is so that the the local
governments can regulate where
they are on the trails and M. D.
kind of what kind of bike they
are we have two basic kinds of
bikes the first kind is class
one and class two which are the
basic bike they cease to provide
hill.
Last three bikes provide
assistance only when the riders
pedaling but they cease to
provide assistance of win win of
the bike goes twenty eight miles
an hour.
questions thank you Senator
Lopez centers we're debating
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
nine.
Senator Woods wishes to debate.
one or one in my analysis it
says that there was one person
stood up in opposition any says
the bill by default puts bikes
Judiciary if you look at page
where is it on the bill it's I
think it's toward the end
allowed by default on on open
spaces and where regular
bicycles can go types two and
three
Are not allowed unless the
allows municipalities because
they know the trails in the open
spaces better than anyone else
so that's that's what but it was
changing Judiciary and this was
very important change to him for
exactly the reasons you state
senator to yield.
Thank you Mr president I do
miles an hour with the throttle
kind of getting more like a
feels more like a motorcycle
than a bike I would have allowed
all of them in the class one
bikes were to the pedal E. bikes
to have the throttle bikes also
be out unless a local government
opted in and that way the local
government can make that
decision if they would like
those throttle bikes on their
the level one and those will be
allowed on pass but if it's a
throttle bike it can happen but
only the local government ops in
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president this is
an important bill because of
safety reasons sometimes these
very quick fast bikes are on the
can pose pose a hazard so I'm
I'm very pleased to to be
sponsoring this bill and I ask I
move legislative Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
Senators tier seats we're voting
if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Thirty three affirmative June
the negative Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty nine has duly passed
four fifty as amended all you'll
to Senator Pirtle.
Mr president take me to that
point.
Senator Pirtle nice try Gordon
Reid discreetly is.
amended has been taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution thank you Sir
pirtle I see no objections
center pirtle to explain the
bill.
four fifty as amended anyone
wish need right.
I see no debate Senator Pirtle
to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president move that
show of hands Senators tier
seats we're voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
that point to close.
Thank you Mr president of the
points well taken but I just
would like to say look at that
here thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Pirtle senator
Pete or to take it to the next
Senate memorial sixty four
introduced by the McKenna said
the Lopez and others a memorial
four Senator Mario sixty four
having been read twice by title.
This is referred to the Senate
rules committee that Senator
Mario sixty four.
relating to human rights extend
the scope of the Human Rights
Act to apply to certain actions
of the state and its political
subdivisions and public
contractors expand the list of
Having been read twice by title.
Is referred to the Senate
Judiciary this is excuse me is
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee then
Mason Pettigrew lord alright LA
Martinez and Townsend and act
relating to motor vehicles
providing for the issuance of a
special support for the national
FFA organization registration
sixty.
House Bill three sixty having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee that's house bill
three sixty.
public property removing
counties from the definition of
a local public body that needs
state board of finance a prove
all to sell property pursuant to
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill five
government election indifference
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twelve.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business
thank you Mr president M. X.
that we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
ask unanimous consent for this
is Senate bill five thirty one
Senator Cervantes is bill and
we're gonna change it it's
currently Senate Judiciary it's
going to be referred first to
medical malpractice act
Committee substitute to to
number two two five eight eight
eight point one so unanimous
consent to keep to sponsor the
I'm asking that the Senate for
our finance committee a referral
for Senate bill two fifteen
establishing the crimes of ****
be dropped thirty gone through
unanimous consent on this to the
as apologize in incidents and
more as I thought you were on
that point for the now unitary
to that point Mr thank you
senator Senator I don't know
Floor leader what is the
emergency that we're.
Putting this bill in for I mean
I don't understand the an
working hard to get there and
again part of this is this is
one of the bills that was
discussed at the hearing we had
that we knew was going to come
maybe for that one but usually
it's called the dummy bill
because we were all dummies to
not get the men earlier.
Thank you senator brat Senator
Moores which purpose do rise
do have a unanimous consent
request any objection seeing no
objection so ordered Senator
Moores.
Are we at that point as
president at that points in the
to the floor of the floor leader
that chair and review member of
finance and they said that was
all right with that Mr
president.
no no floor session tomorrow I
think senator Ortiz Pino has a
committee he's going out
tomorrow but will be in on at
eleven o'clock on Monday so
now's the time for chairs to
meet tomorrow afternoon at one
thirty mostly were meeting on
house bills but we do have three
bills that senators have
Hernandez is sponsoring that's
at one thirty in our usual place
the body.
And and I'd it's been
inspirational have to say and I
I I I it is not showing yet but
I'm taking I'm taking it to
heart and I'm growing my hair
Pirtle and thank you Mr
president and and as we all know
next Sunday is my favorite
holiday with the clock change
I'll just announced that the U.
a Judiciary get it to the floor
and finally get it passed it's
time Mr president I feel like if
I get that bill passed I can
finally retire so pass the bill
And Mr Senator Pirtle Mister
president senator I don't know
if it's a promise but you know
it could be it could be a
promise you know I I'm ready to
retire I I have a living years
etcetera which purpose here as
well on if if that is a present
if that is a promise that
Senator Pirtle is making I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
Senator Duhigg thank you Mr
president the rules committee
will meet on Monday at nine AM
in room three twenty one and
well thank you senator Senator
souls thank you Mr president
education will not be meeting on
Monday we have no bills sitting
in our committee except for
thank you so meeting thanks
Center cells and Senator my ****
to give us an update on that one
of a party that our staff has
been talking about thank you for
providing that for them can you
give us an update on that.
hundred mil party since nineteen
thirty four.
but yeah I was a blast of also
please thank a when you say
you're in the hallway
Representative about that at all
metal thanks guy devore who
president thank you senator my
SS and flow fader flow fader the
DJ of the year thank you senator
with center how to meal thank
you Mr president I just want to
the girls state tournament it
was nice to have northern New
Mexico give advice more more ten
you're welcome to our Senator
and he was able to give a few
words on the floor and make the
going down and so the lady
Trojans won that game they're
onto the second round but units
plant had a hard fight and and
they're a class act and I want
to thank the senator for joining
fifty miles south but the odd
thing was we had to be escorted
out because we are making a
comeback and they weren't ready
for that of I enjoy the game
Si no further announcements
Senator Peter Wirth we do have
for the office I apologize
senator Munoz followed by
Senator Shendo sentiment us.
Thank you Mr president Senate
finance will go in Monday and
and then will look for the tax
package and and see what's left
over and and will keep Oregon
house bill two Monday at nine
and Senate finance thanks seven
assessed in recess until eleven
o'clock Monday morning say no
objections the Senate to Senate
