The committee comes down I think
we will switch over to the
Senate supplemental calendar
number one and then we'll see
where we are when we get done
order business message from the
house the reader to read Mr
president I am directors
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed Senate
conservation committee
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill ninety two
Senate bill one eighty as
amended by the Senate and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk.
house to do sherry Committee
substitute for House Bill three
thirty four House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty two and request
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take is that next
order of business thank you Mr
president because that we within
our business committee reports
on that order of business
under consideration reports that
same as been duly enrolled in a
grossed preparatory to signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part has been
adopted and I'd like to announce
to the members of the body at
the officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
sixty four as amended has had it
under consideration and reports
that same is been doing these
rules and the gross preparatory
the signing by the officers of
the Senate respectfully
committee report we have a
motion to end up committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part has been
adopted I'd like to announce of
order of business thank you Mr
president Ms because that we
going into business
announcements and miscellaneous
we're in that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Mike about them I thank
There are no objection so
ordered senator Michaelia.
Mr president I just units
Toronto is.
And senator serve on this Mr
president I love the bipartisan
support right here looking out
for one another thank you.
Senator Steinborn I just ask
that
Once you do the script to get us
into that point just explain
what the change was and stand
bill twenty one is three times
amended with the emergency costs
see no objection Senator Griggs
thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate can Kerr with
I
see no objections Senator Griggs
if you explain what that those
amendments were thank you Mr
president on page two line seven
See note.
No debates are questions.
Senator Griggs close.
Thank.
Misprision I now move the Senate
concur with the hash
Amendment to state conservation.
been a request to concur with
the house amendment to Senate
conservation committee
substitute percent of a twenty
one is three times amended with
emergency clause all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
president deal to Senator
Steinborn for concurrence
counter number for Senate bill
ninety fourth twice amended
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president I now move the Senate
concur with the house amendments
remove the appropriation in the
title and in the final session
the bill that's solid thank you
Senator I'm are there any
questions.
Say no debate centers time we're
the house amendment to Senate
bill ninety four is twice
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it sent us heard.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president again as I mentioned
we're gonna start with item
number twenty nine on today's
calendar the blue calendar work
Thank you Mr Senator miss that
we go that our business third
reading of legislation I yield
to Senator Pinto private number
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing.
House bill one forty two with a
once amended.
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president members of the body
this is a prevention bill the
bill authorizes the Mexico
Environment Department Andy and
and mine closures to perform an
independent comprehensive
assessment and report back to
the legislation legislature
additionally the results of this
done after the independent
comprehensive study is performed
but it does require oversight
and enforcement to be determined
based on the findings of the
independent.
Assessment show up in the four
Cleanup in that it could
possibly breach and we just
wanna make sure that that's not
the case by case of what's going
to happen although they it EMNRD
for house bill one forty two as
amended anyone wishing to
debate.
Say no debate Senator Pinto to
close in the bill.
All action has been taken and
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
thank you senators tier seats
please we're voting.
This.
wrong the negative house energy
natural resource committee
substitute for house bill one
forty two as amended has passed
the Senate.
Senator Pinto thank you Mr
president and members of the
body.
two is Senator Servan tastes so
let's go to item number thirty
one house bill two seventy that
Senator Shendo.
Or
seventy on final passage has
been taken and that and that it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection.
Senator Senator explained the
is a bill that during the
declaration of federal or state
emergency the maximum size and
weight of commercial vehicles
may be increased to allow for
the transport of emergency
oversight a permit of the
traffic of the truck traffic and
and issues oversize overweight
permits.
DOT was tasked with waving
oversize overweight permits
executive order this may cause a
delay in the transport of
necessary goods and services.
An emergency declaration was
issued in twenty twenty due to
San Miguel counties due to
wildfires the bill will
eliminate any delay in transport
of goods and services during to
declare emergency but allow the
deal to to respond directly to
debate with Senator Brandt to
the things off Senator Brandt
now thank you Mr president with
the sponsor yield Senator Shendo
deal I am not sure I think it
exhausted his questions at the
clarify a couple of things
so DOT said this is to make sure
they don't have to go and have a
Have your trucks on the road for
temporary time to haul more
items to go to those emergency
sites is that right Mister
president senator you're
correct.
long they can go I think will
really look at making sure the
legislature has a state so after
a certain amount of time
I I hope we're not giving away
An emergency order would they be
able to use that emergency order
to do this
and so that what they're having
to do today.
Thank you Mr president answer so
in the in the Thai arc in the
introduction to this bill it
about it with the national
emergencies to be able to get
goods through New Mexico or even
to New Mexico if New Mexico's
the side of the natural
emergency my understanding that
going to clear Burgess seed and
that allows the governor to
declare emergency to get things
out so that also is part of
that.
So much present Senator
Mr president those Senator can
repeat that I I didn't get the
last part of the question
Senator at I think the intention
Mr president Senator is really
with we see that several times
in our state the fires that
we've seen it would allow a
response for those types of
situations this really isn't.
Sir appreciate that any further
debate senators.
Say no further debate etcetera
etcetera the clothes on the bill
Mr president I move that the
bushel fans Senator is more
voting all senators here suits.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of twenty nine
affirmative one the negative
house bill two seventy has duly
passed the Senate etcetera
Shindo thank you Mr president
members of the body service
Six.
Just talk to the floor leader
about in the.
House bill four sixty six on
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objection.
these things and basically what
this this bill does it specifies
an independent hearing officer
rather than a general counsel
will be the person that
Can take a look at this without
this and to see exactly what's
being charged here or what the
complaint is about before we go
into something that turns into a
sixty some to nothing so it's
just a bill that tries to make
the same sample for us to do and
very thorough but we have to be
and it be extremely fair way to
See no debate Senator Ingle to
close in the bill thank you Mr
president Mr president on now
move that house bill four sixty
hands senators to your seats
where voting if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand senator
Munoz voting no.
By a vote of twenty nine
affirmative one the negative
or item thirty two on the
calendar now you'll to Senators
souls to present the bill thank
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
amendment or substitution no
objections Center souls to
explain the bill thank you Mr
president house bill seventy six
takes the judicial education
fund and moves it under the
administrative office of the
appropriation for it is already
in house bill two and with that
I'll stand for questions thank
you senator souls centers were
debating house bill seventy six
as twice amended with emergency
had a chance to to see this bill
that didn't come through my
committees and so I'm just
trying to figure out exactly
what it does
administrative office of the
courts is a place it's much
easier to set this up and the
set up for the professional
development conferences and to
move the money out to the actual
judges that are going off to
courts to pay for this or did we
leave that money with U and M.
and just find more money to the
office of course Senator so
Mister president senator my
to this as it was going through.
So this presents that of that
money going to U. N. M. same
same amount of money I'm
guessing is just being moved to
the office of the courts for
their run it since they have the
correct Senator absolutely thank
you Mr president purchase any
further debate senators.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Mr chair Senator what is
the purpose of the emergency
clause.
Senator souls Mr president I
could call in my expert
this puts the money available
now so that they can go to some
of the conferences and things
that are happening between now
when the bill would become law
if without the emergency clause.
education center because that
seems like a very abrupt ending
of Miss Mister
calling in my expert witness if
you like me to do that I'd be
happy to call them in.
Senator Lopez.
I would be very interested in
the answer the question about
call raise Nick and David
Thompson that justice David
Thompson coming as my expert
witnesses.
And there any objections saying
no objection.
Mr president I haven't heard
from the law school so I assume
they don't have a problem with
judicial education center has
there been discussions about a
smooth transition especially
because it has an emergency
clause which means it would go
into effect immediately when the
governor signs it.
complete through the end of this
year and so that that all is
been worked out very smoothly
everybody's in agreement thank
you Mr president I appreciate
the the answer to those
questions thank you Senator
Lopez any further debate.
with the emergency clause do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
As twice amended with emergency
clause has duly passed the
Senate Senators cels thank you
Mr president thank you all that
this will ensure that our
judiciary continues to be well
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House
appropriation finance committee.
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection Center pope
will explain the bill House
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee SubDiv for
defenders and detention and
correction officers thirty six
point five million in probation
or in the current version of the
GA are contingent on house bill
poaching by providing resources
for recruiting out of state
candidates and promoting
collaboration between agencies
that would otherwise be
competing for the same candidate
pool overall the goal is to
Senator is we're debating house
appropriation of finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three fifty seven
and I yield to senator
participate in a debate.
I didn't see this bill in in
either of the committees that
I'm in so I'm I'm kind of of.
Catching a pair of the but the
term building in there is what
threw me off we're not really
And and what will the what will
the funds in these things well
the money in these three funds
be used for.
officers and and recruitment and
retaining really helping build
that workforce in our state and
and the the Mister chair Mister
are the how is it how is it
going to actually get more
people into those positions will
they will they have easier
access to hiring than going
officers and relocation expenses
help with our retention for
current officers hello with
professional development for
them as well
And and.
The Mister president senator for
one last question
Five five fifty million dollars.
Didn't didn't register that was
in that enough we need to put
some more.
Mr president I believe so I
support this workforce but also
understanding that we did put
some better guardrails on this
money that will be using.
Okay so in that sense committee
Mr president
so we're basically going to have
the law enforcement workforce
capacity building fund and with
that they'll be representatives
Mr president and Senator pope
the three separate task
workforce for the calls
workforce capacity building fund
Mr president that's correct it
will be in the office okay thank
you thank you Mr president thank
you senator pope thank you
Thank you Mr president.
Senator is this money available
to every area of the state.
to municipal municipal police
departments county sheriff
offices
throughout the state.
a county with a population of at
least two hundred.
Thousand people.
Center for.
So I'm reading here Mr president
up to three percent of the
for course to and entities in
counties with a population of
five hundred thousand or greater
thirty five percent maybe used
for counties with a population
So Mister president
So the twenty five percent.
And there's a committee that's
going to allocate that right.
a representative from DFA the
department of public safety.
Member of from a municipal
police department appointed by
the municipal league and one
percent of the money in the fund
to counties of at least five
hundred thousand according to
the most recent so that's
Bernalillo county right that's
the only county that would
Is present and answer I think as
you as you think about the
counties I think that's the only
County that's over five hundred
thousand.
Current thirty five percent of
the money would go to counties.
County Sandoval County one of
the counties with that beast
Senator Steinborn is that just
those two.
Between a hundred five hundred
thousand.
San Juan in Santa Fe County
Senator Brandt.
San Juan Santa Fe okay so those
those counties and then the rest
of it would be available for the
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president trying to skim read
this sorry.
and so then the other thing I
notice in here and I think
the problems right now you know
once we get it corrected
there'll be somewhere else
because prime just moves around
and so I think that's fair
and then you know you have four
defenders to is that is that
correct that's correct Mr
president public defenders are
are dust and also our
corrections officers as well.
that that's actually fair with
the dividing that up so I just
want to cover that make sure I
was right on that and see if I
was doing that correctly so
thank you center person.
Mr president I move that house.
Appropriation finance committee
substitute the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill three five seven do now
please.
All Senator seats if you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
has duly passed the Senate
Center pope.
Thank you Mr president thank you
to the body when I go on to the
next item on the calendar that's
going to be item number thirty
action for planking placing
House Bill eight is twice
amended has been put on final
passage all actions been taken
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
Miss present colleagues as we
know New Mexico has seventy five
percent more visual artist per
capita than any state in the
country we're rich in our were
this as a economic development
strategy so what this does is it
creates a division very similar
to how we created the outdoor
division time modeled after we
know how the successful this is
this industry and organizations
to support this industry and so
with that be happy to stand for
questions thank you Senators
time were Senators we're
Thank you Mr president that with
the Senator Steinborn the
sponsor yield Senator Steinborn
in that fund now Mr president
thank you senator miss present
no that's that's a there's not
there's if appropriation in the
budget for two million dollars
to get this thing off the ground
infrastructure towards these
requests so we started off we
first graph to the bill
aspirational in with the fun but
of course now we're at two
million dollars and that'll help
this fund Mr president center it
does and probably then some I
think a you know when we started
the outdoor division we actually
ended up in the final seconds of
the session with the two hundred
division and have maybe a little
bit grant funding available and
then just one final question Mr
president senator Wirth so what
would requests from this fund be
different buckets one bucket is
for public infrastructure one
bucket is for organizations that
create capacity and support
Senator disciplina.
The agency press center we can
be used for three different
purposes.
In a minute Mister president
to spend all Senator duration
debate.
I see no further debate Senator
we do have for the debate
senator Munoz.
Thank you Mr president I don't
creative industries for the good
senator from Albuquerque as a
visual and literary arts
entertainment media plied arts
design industrial design
architecture landscape
architecture and a whole bunch I
think what this program looks
like it is if you get a
certificate or associates and
something that that they put you
throughout the rug weaving I
could go on and on kachina
dolls.
Go on and on in our area what it
does but just to clarify
media arts is one I think they
took filmmaking out but it just
it's a whole classification in
the whole idea is a concept is
if you get an associate's
president.
Thank you seven yes any further
debate.
Si no further debate Senator I'm
going to close thank you very
affirmative except those putting
negative by the show a show of
hands.
Senator seats where voting.
Senate committee voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative to in the negative
house bill eight is twice
hard work with the creative
industry consortium of arts
groups all over the state want
to give a shout out because I
know they're all watching I want
to thank Gelbart's from your
debate where it all started
tonight I'm sure this all be
sign and hopefully well but I
just wanna thank our parts for
the beautiful postcards and
congratulations to the people
And I'll just Senator Ivey Soto
thank you very much Mr president
was present ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
show will show that all actions
for placing House Judiciary
Okay thank you senator say no
objections etcetera so that
explained the bill thank you
very much Mr president was
president of this bill is an
amendment to the special public
exchange it with regard to the
inspection public records act
itself.
It provides that a competitive
bid is
the finalists are announced or
the award is granted
it also with regard to
information technology protects
the information technology
systems themselves so that
people to attack those systems
it also moves all of the law
enforcement exceptions into a
single place and adds protecting
the names of victims of child
video to be delivered to you you
need to provide certain
information so that they know
what you're looking for but if
you'd like to just simply view
all the video you want on your
state police has the support of
the partminer of information
technology has a has the support
of the office of broadband it
has the support of the New
objections were were dealt with
prior to this bill going forward
and with that was president have
stand for questions.
Thank you senator Senator
senator debating.
what's important about this bill
is that the that the videotapes
will still be made the
difference is whether they're
released and and I think that
want to emphasize that there are
other kinds of information that
can be released that would hurt
individuals and the Sanchez said
that they were that this would
be continuing conversation and
information on these tapes that
could threaten them immigrants
of people's sexual identity
there are sexual orientation and
continue thank you Mr president
I didn't need to sponsor you.
Thank you Senator Lopez we do
have further debate Senator
Brandt Mr president with the
exceptions we're not seeing that
can you can help me out and
looking at it in context
amendments in context so if you
can kind of help me out as to
where that got moved because it
Compiled it section fourteen
dash to dash one point two.
it all looks like new material
because it's laid out as a new
section of law and then you'll
Senator Brandt.
Was present we we just drugs
some references to the law and
then put put it here is that
portion of that simply made a
reference to fourteen dash to
dash one point two and then we
created fourteen this to this
one point two we laid out all
of a video etcetera and how that
works.
Senator rand Mr president
Senator we we have another bill
here
last week a couple weeks ago by
Camera video of when they're
telling someone that their loved
one has passed was actually
amended out of the bill which
was very disappointing to me
does this cover that and are
video this bill is but when you
release video one of the
restrictions that we have in
this bill is that we don't
deliver to people we don't let
that's never let out because I
can actually see them recording
it just to make sure that you
know if there's any complaint
against the officer that that
see.
This presents a rant correct the
officer would record that
episode but it would not be
subject to a product Navidad we
displaying this for everybody to
see the voyeuristic kinds of
stuff.
Senator right.
Mister president senator thank
you help me understand this bill
on the internet is a law
enforcement officer telling them
their family their mother their
father wife husband has been
killed that's just the system
Thank you
Mr present with the bill sponsor
you'll please Senator said the
deal was presently have to thank
if for a.
Regarding these you know
software programs networking
systems what what what can they
Senator committees so you need
to look at two different places
one is the definition of
information technology systems
but if you go up towards the
beginning of the bill and
section fourteen dash to dash
there that is provided is is
information about information
technology systems only where a
specific vulnerability is going
to be revealed it does not deal
with verification of information
received so it's only those
things so for example if you
were to it brought.
happening that would be denied
if you're gonna it brought
however on information
technology system
you know what what overall
I'm just trying to walk through
this I am undecided on this bill
I'm usually a little
little iffy when we restrict it
that's election software.
And people wanting to know you
know are their vulnerabilities
are valid concerns and some of
which I think are really not not
I mean they're not concerning to
me at least but it could if
opener vulnerabilities mean that
that seems.
I I guess we're just going to
leave that up to to the state
and when we're not going to I
mean it just seems there's no
about this bill in in
relationship to election
software and hardware certainly
this president and senator I'll
be happy to do that first of all
the Senator states always had no
in in one of the bills that was
passed earlier this that session
and provides specifically that
that certain information you
have to go to a judge first in
so if you were to to ever for
example.
Which platform the the
tabulators using.
but the platform itself doesn't
reveal any vulnerabilities
if someone were to approach
whether or not the machines have
a modem embedded in.
the election code and therefore
we should know about that so so
the the way that this is
crafted.
I really don't think it can be
used in terms of obscuring
Go south raise other concerns I
always for the bills thank you.
Thank you senator Munoz any
further debate senators.
for House Bill two thirty two
when they were sick laws do not
pass by unanimous consent that
the record show that the rules
been called of that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
affirmative zero on the negative
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two with emergency clause
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr president.
final passage has been taken is
now subject debate amendment or
substitution.
No objection Senator Ingle
explained about.
Thank you Mr president what this
for any twelve consecutive hours
in a day.
And its current used to be from
noon to twelve AM now it's any
twelve hours that they want to
because there simply of what we
found out over the years is
there's just the lack of gaming
in the COVID of the COVID
sickness really really hard to a
this will help the ones that are
still there that's what this
does Mister president.
Thank you Senator Ingle Senators
very debating house bill two
fifty three as amended.
Senator Ingle I'm sorry who he
wants my pictures were.
And the Mr president I think it
the eagles the other night they
had your pictures on the token
in the slot machine no it's only
president that's Senator Campos.
Yes present center no that's not
center companies they can tell
the the distinction between the
Campos.
Is a lighter color charter to
see.
Mr president that's like
comparing Ben Franklin Abraham
Lincoln.
on the token because you asked
me the same question the other
day and I found out that your
pictures on the token not my
picture.
Present outside Hederman Gallup
Lopez Senator Brandt is present
with the sponsor yield Senator
Ingle deal I will for the
Representative was present
center at how often do you use
I'm never use them because I'm
not a veteran.
Senator Brandt of Mister
president senator Arthur other
nonprofit organizations of these
are in or is it just the
is doing is taking I think from
four thousand is the current
thank Mexican have boosted up to
ten is that not correct Senator
Ingle all I know what this does
is it changes the percentage
Mr president center I think is
confusing with this with the
other bill that allowed the ten
thousand dollars lot machines in
there and then this changes the
amount that has to go to the
charity down to the twenty
Thank you Mr president Senator
and I have on this was will this
bill is not so it's fine.
ten thousand because of four
thousand machines are hard to
find Senator Representative this
presents I think there possible
to find in the can't prepare
when they do find them and so
ten thousand the vendors are
be able to continue to use these
machines that money goes back
into the organization and the
use of health or members thank
you.
We do have for the debate we
Sedillo Lopez this president I'm
I'm just unclear about what the
problem is that the bill is
trying to address says resident
Senator Ingle.
campaign to correct so they can
use the ten thousand dollar
machines that's all I know about
I'm not an expert on this but I
have an expert here with me.
Senator Lopez and this is
Senator Ingle present the
manufacturers do not make the
four thousand dollar machines
anymore they just make the tens
Thank you Mr president but that
confuses it for me
I'm the analysis I have Mister
Ortiz Y. Pino.
The yeah the analysis I have
says Senate House Bill three oh
nine.
And to Senate bill one forty
three change the pay outs from
And and so
but then to move so I first I'd
like to ask is that an accurate
description of the bill Senator
Ingle.
the other bill it has to do with
this report I understand on this
bill what this does they are
related but this bill basically
but the I'm not reading the bill
I'm reading the analysis of the
that's what the analysis seems
to indicate but also points out
reduces to thirty percent but
then there's a note that says
the house consumer and public
affairs committee amendment.
Of Direxion nonprofit gaming
it cut it down even further is
that accurate to present I think
that's that that is the correct
the amendment that was on there
because it was at thirty and I
guess they discussed it more in
that's all I could contribute
and still has it you you keep
the game's going because they
have the.
The F. W. is have to have a
little a little part of the.
they had the chance to change
that person the percentage from
thirty down to twenty.
Center this panel Mr president
Senator Ingle thank you I I
Any further debate senators we
do have further debate Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
with the senator yield Senator
yield yes I will.
I don't know if the VFW through
those that are receiving the
revenue push for this bill
sounds like one of the principal
think there is that is that
correct.
And Mr president it's
interesting because these are
tax exempt organizations I'm
gonna gather and so the raising
not sure how I feel about that
but they're themselves terrible
organization so they're raising
money for their own existence so
Senator.
It stays the same the what they
pay to the state page the center
stage the same.
Senator Steinborn interesting
Thank you Mr president basically
what what when we pass these
this legislation years ago there
were a lot more members and
these come in these different
of the folks that used to go
there and play a lot of those
folks don't exist and then on
the COVID head and we basically
were closed for two years to a
big part of more for so for that
would now move that house bill
two fifty three is amended do
now pass and ash unanimous
senators to your seats please
where voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator committee voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator souls voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
It's.
opposition.
This past.
And pass the Senate Senator
Ingle.
Potion Mr president close.
in that order business announces
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president we're
going to do the committee
reports and then Senate
supplemental calendar number one
the five items and that'll be it
committee reports we're in that
order business committee reports
reader to read.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty three do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Benny Shendo junior chairman
Senator Shendo Mr president.
House bill seventy five as
amended to pass.
House transportation public
works in capital improvements
committee substitute for house
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty seven do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
House Bill three sixty six do
pass.
House Bill three seventy six do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
House bill four fifty nine do
pass.
House joint resolution I do
pass.
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the committee
report has been adopted in the
journal show that they're acted
upon individually.
Saying no objections Jack is
maybe remove thank you senator
rand the reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill three sixty
thank you Mr president may go on
coffee break but we'll wait for
a few minutes as asset Senator
Shendo Yassin has consented to
re to be allowed all the re with
all the committee reports that
Senate bill for to do pass as
amended.
Senate bill four ninety one to
pass.
House taxation and revenue
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill four hundred as amended do
pass respectfully submitted
The eyes barely had it.
The committee part has been
adopted in the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
individually.
yield to senator Correa Hemphill
for item number one on the
Senate supplemental counter
number one house floor
substitute for house bill one
thirty one where that order
business.
thirty one on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objection
Senator Hemphill to explain the
active by addressing the largest
barriers to SSA accessing.
Prosthetics and orthotics for
insured individuals which
protections that prohibits
insurers from applying benefit
caps and requiring insurers to
use evidence based standards
basis of disability and so this
really helps to find the an
individual who's experiencing
these a disability.
back to the same level of
physical activity that they had
prior or at the same level as
their peers and so members of
the chamber know that I had a
as much as he did a year after
his amputation he was never able
to obtain the same level of
functioning that he had prior to
old Callaway as well as hi all
stop
they have been such strong
advocates for this bill because
they just wanted to run with
their peers whether it was at
and so we want to make sure that
all New Mexicans have that level
of coverage and they're not
discriminated against and they
can run with their peers and
Mr president I move that house
bill House Bill floor substance
house floor substitute for house
bill one thirty one do now pass
a show of hands Senators tier
seats please we're voting.
I to forty one in the
affirmative zero on the negative
house or substitute for house
bill thirty one one thirty one
Representative Thomson as well
as
Representative Kathleen Cates
Josh west Hernando this Jon
know Larry's in the gallery and
Blue Cross blue shield for
supporting this legislation
thank you Mr president thank you
were going on to the next order
on the counter as soon as
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions for placing House Bill
one thirty four as one is
amended on final passage has
menstrual products it's impact
is magnified for people of color
by nearly two times eighty four
percent of men Streeters in New
Mexico attended title one
products will be available in
public school bathrooms.
Thank you senator then Senator
debating house bill one thirty
four as amended.
Senate committee.
center what to how is the
women's bathroom defined and how
is a men's bathroom defined.
Is that defined by sex.
senior Sophia Liam Liam nor
alley money MICOS my day on my
CS and more Lee Fisher.
Seeing no objection.
Sergeant Garcia please as Carter
Is our president Senator period
poverty is an issue created by
exclusion based on poverty race
and gender as such it can't be
solved by excluding another
transgender population in the
nation HB one thirty four
mandates access to menstrual
products and boys bathrooms in a
much more limited capacity that
in girls bathrooms or only one
transgendered variants not to
harm boys.
Thank you in but I'm I'm still
wondering and I I appreciate
that Mr presents under but I'm
I'm still wondering in in the
bill.
bathroom is you know it it is
so.
Are we are are are we are we
able and and in the law are we
able to define and men's
Senator Hemphill Mr president
yes.
Okay and so Representative is in
Mr president senators so.
we we're gonna have to learn how
to live with each other you know
we have we we were we seem built
to separate medical boards
political preferences and you
know I I think if we're going to
do this with bathrooms we should
probably offer single sex
The that of men can menstruate
maybe someone doesn't believe
that.
Maybe someone does believe that
but how to those two people live
together well I think one option
a single sex men's bathroom
single sex women's bathroom.
And I think that would be more
inclusive of everyone's beliefs
whether you believe in some of
bill I I think I'd vote for it
if I could see see that there is
going to be that guarantee.
for people that just want a a
single sex Beth and for whatever
thank you Mr president and
senator I I apologize I didn't
see center Greg this is to
Senator Gallegos this presents
center of the states Internal
enough to have this in committee
and talk to these young ladies
and has really good dialogue
given in my office but this
present and etcetera
Mr presents an Senator mail.
Mister president senator in
instances of rural New Mexico
there may be times that boys may
take a product home for a family
member.
family use of without throughout
the communities that what I'm
understanding this presents
Center how to mail Mister
president senator menstrual
equity it begins with the
recognition of the need twenty
available but ensure students
understand that menstrual
products will be consistently
available they choose only to
use drugs as needed.
members they can't afford it so
now I'm envisioning sisters
mothers aunts so the way I
looked at Mr president center is
understand Mr president
Centerville Mr president Senator
these products are important for
both school and home students
shouldn't feel as if though they
can't they can only have the
emergency needs only.
Senator Senator gave us colleges
Mr president center and I
appreciate that I I give me
little comfort that they're not
know the a young lady could ask
a guy to go get her product from
the boy's room and so Mister
president center I I called my
specifically in I do Mr
president and body all in all
reality go to the store and and
byproducts for not only her
asking her boyfriend this
presents center to go to his
restroom and get her a product
and heard discussion with me was
center have you had any
discussions with young ladies
are willing to have a stranger a
boyfriend maybe even a brother
ask a male student for the
product they be available in
their bathrooms.
Senator Gallegos grade point Mr
president center then why would
we need to in elementary
Mr president we have young men
Streeters who are going to the
same type of questions and fears
and by eliminating the stigma
with boys at an early age
This presents etcetera etcetera
had avail.
Mister president senator if
they're trans boys yes.
Senator Gallegos Mr president
currently center how to mail
Mister president senator no.
Senator Gus Mr president center
I thank you for the call log I
other places that they didn't go
but not to actually hand them
out to family but with that all
you'll thank you Mr president
thank you so very because we do
have a further debate center by
the sponsor to yield for just a
moment Senator more detailed.
Mr president I yield thank you
very much Mr president so just
to clarify on the distribution
dollars that we wound up the
pulling together for this
initiative does that cover the
state or do we need to come back
after a year to to make sure
that we're doing this the right
way Mr president of million was
that I do serve in the finance
committee so it was of working
really hard to get through these
dollars together for this
initiative does that cover the
state Mister president Sinohydro
the advocates on the initiative
and I'm very proud of them Mr
president that poise the
intelligence the smart comments
and discussion and the where
working for I'm so very proud of
these advocates Mr president I
just want to say that and I'm
glad that we're covering the
entire state and I hope that we
will continue to do the work
that they've done the work so
hard to get done also want to
president sometimes it's the
simple things and something so
simple has providing these
products for for girls and for
young women in the schools is
discussion about having boys get
these products for their
girlfriends are for the sisters
are for the antis I think that's
wonderful because we need to
it is I am so impressed with the
team the legislators the the the
advocates they have done such an
enormous such a wonderful job
dividends for the young women
and the girls in our schools and
it's particularly important for
those young elementary girls
because when girls start
administrative admin
time and so if we can normalize
this by this simple act it's
really going to pay dividends
for those those young women and
I'm I'm so thrilled to be able
president and I don't need to
sponsor to yield
But when we talk about the
elementary schools in the round
the fifth grade area note some
level
you know when Senator Schmedes
was talking about defining a.
Boys restroom it up female male
have been a different aspect
it's just it's specially if
you're traveling three hours
four hours on a bus they don't
let you like stop at the the
store just to buy something and.
To ask about those things but
even when you go into a school.
It's not like they have a
restroom designated that
And you know you're as an adult
you're using the kids restroom
the the staff might have a
separate restroom somewhere but
they don't let the public you
know you don't know where it is
first respect if you want to
place and the men's restroom the
house of their
and that the women's line is
men's restroom so that they're
not having to wait.
And one of the other things to
our when I was thinking about
having drugs in there was the
excellent brother in law that at
times you'll see okay I'm in
it's my turn to take but the
question I asked does this rush
to have a baby changing station
And yet there's that argument
about wealth you know men are
parents to men are doing these
things that are single parents
they have to do you know the
some people might not have it.
which really you know leads to
another aspect of.
You know that having children.
public it that is our job as
teachers
so we don't have that bullying
aspect even from girls two girls
of we're actually live and then
when I went to school and urban
area the way they saw this was
two different views which is
restaurants and service
industries some of them do have
unisex restrooms already and if
you go further east that's all
current for us but thank you
thank you senator Hermio for
being in fort.
Senator Michael.
Thank you Mr president is
consent to skew Center serve on
this until returns the chamber.
that house bill one thirty four
as once amended do now pass and
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
Please raise your hand.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Ingle voting no.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
By a vote of twenty seven the
affirmative thirteen the
gradually these young ladies
because every hole I look down
they were there looking at me
saying I can help us so you can
help us has yet to help K. till
Monday Monday to go home go to
passion that and it's incredible
and they do that but
congratulations and like thank
you senator Senator Gallegos Mr
president I also want to thank
the young ladies for being here
that's what part of the reason
thank you we're gonna go on to
the next item on the calendar
we're gonna jump back to center
how to meal Mr president I just
want to thank the house Sanchez
house bill two oh seven as
amended and I yield to Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I ask unanimous
Senator Hamblen deluxe plan the
bill thank you Mr president I
lived in New Mexico for thirty
years more than any other place
in my adult life I grew up in el
knew the state was different.
However as a young person Mr
president given the narrative I
was hearing on television in the
newspapers and even in my own
home.
needed medical help I wouldn't
receive the care I deserved and
if I ever needed help because of
being kicked out of my house for
being queer I would be done
denied and turned away.
are a strong people with values
of community family and respect
for each other's differences and
I believe these are some of the
reasons why we've had such a
strong and powerful Human Rights
protecting our trans siblings
across New Mexico.
But what we're dealing with
today in this bill House Bill
two oh seven as amended is it
updates the definitions for
cannot be used to discriminate
and it ensures that public
entities are held to the same
standard as private ones.
What this bill does not do is it
does not determine whether a
accountable and hold public
bodies and institutions
accountable.
And so Mr president I would like
to yield to my co sponsor
senator Peter Wirth if you'd
sponsor on this piece of
legislation I just Center Hamlin
said the Human Rights Act is is
a statute that we've had on the
books in our state here in New
and and what we're doing tonight
with this piece of legislation
is simply expanding that so that
there are no loopholes in the
Engenders respect and it's about
just treating everyone equally
and so I I cannot be more proud
to stand up as a co sponsor on
this piece of legislation and
thank you for bringing this
thank you Mr president etcetera
have a thank you Mr president at
this time I ask unanimous
consent to allow my experts to
join me on the floor that would
be mark Marshall Martinez
executive director of equality
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill two oh seven
as amended amendment sponsored
by senator Munoz the share
Senator moving explain the
Mr president this is the we talk
about respect and non
discrimination and doing all the
right things with each other and
absolutely absolutely.
means is that there are many
faith based organizations out
there.
That are part of our social
services network.
and governments mandate can we
do both.
Can we do both these faced faith
based organizations.
Feed the hungry and they didn't
care who the hungry war.
Give drink to the thirsty and it
didn't matter who the thirsty
work.
Close the naked and it didn't
matter who the naked were.
Help the sick visit the
prisoners and bury the dead
those are those are.
The mission statement of most
If we don't show them the same
respect.
The that we're trying to show
everybody else here if we don't
make sure that we're not
They will be cut off.
And all of the services that
they provide to so many people.
Well then be in jeopardy.
because we should not care who
the hungry are or the thirsty or
the sick with the homeless.
But at the same time we should
for everybody in this can be a
more.
Bipartisan and bicameral happier
place if we can do this so
without all stand for questions
Senate body we believe that if
any religious entities receiving
taxpayer dollars our taxpayer
dollars then those monies cannot
Lopez all by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino Senator delivers thank you
Mr president with the sponsor
the amendment yield Senator
yield.
Absolutely Mr president Senator
so certainly there's adoption
services there's of a variety of
things that that part of the
social of social network of.
so there's there's a lot of
things that happen like this not
a direct give way to a church
it's for the services that chart
provides just like any
contracting with any other
organization.
provide B. it would be for
providing services and all of
this bill does is require that
any entity not all that it does
that felt that it could not
provide those services without
discriminating then they should
not be receiving public funds so
I think that the amendment is
faith based organization or I
guess it's a religious
organization so I I propose the
amendment the proposed amendment
thank you Mr president we do
to stand in opposition to this
amendment it.
In the course of my of my career
over the years working in
different social service
do a wonderful job very low
administrative costs provide
wonderful services.
But they all always abide by the
with it and then they simply
don't get the the government
money they go about raising
their own funds to to to serve
say we want to be able to
discriminate but we want to use
government money to do it and
that's we simply cannot allow I
mean it's simply a question not
religions it's supported
segregation apartheid the vin
religions is supported slavery.
But they should never have been
are sacrosanct but they
shouldn't expect also to be able
to use government money to
distribute and to say that we're
doing god's work using the
government money.
To discriminate and that's all
that this ammendment says so I I
I hope the members will reject
this amendment.
We do have further debate on the
amendment Senator committee.
check this is not a drafting
error
When I pull this up
electronically.
I I thought this amendment was
going to go into the definition
funds and we say as a result of
contracting with.
A government entity that's not a
religious organization I is is
only thing Senator so Mr
president.
What I was trying to get to that
hopefully I got to a public
accommodation means any
provider off services facilities
accommodations so that's exactly
what I meant to put it because
right now we're talking about.
go somewhere else but the whole
idea was that that we were not
going to.
Discriminate against people of
faith.
This whole long laundry list of
Senator is any further debate on
the amendment.
based organizations just want to
take money and in the and
discriminate.
I see it is exactly the
opposite.
organization is contracted to
do.
So they're they're feeding the
hungry.
And they don't care who the
young we are.
Or is there something that we
can pray for you about.
That suddenly that becomes
problematic.
Not that they're going to deny
food to anybody their mission is
to feed people.
All people.
Their mission is to is to cure
the sick.
there people that are not.
That way absolutely why because
well humans are imperfect.
And that's that's what I want to
make sure that we don't
discriminate against.
to share something.
Are they then gonna be
discriminated against in it and
so what I'm trying to get at
here is that we can all get
along together.
We believe that faith based
people want to discriminate and
want to have hatred.
Then we're in a very small set
But this is one of those places
where we can come together where
we can.
Have a unanimous vote or maybe a
I do believe that god wants me.
Bill.
To help other people.
We've been called on to love
god.
In right here in this room I
fear.
That we have decided that we can
And I would hope that.
That this would be viewed more
as.
Love.
their faith openly.
And I would hope that god would
smile upon us today.
With that Mr president I now
move Senate floor amendment
number one.
House Bill two oh seven as
amended.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The needs have it the Senate is
We are back on the bill senators
we are on center how to mail
followed by Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Senator CENIC's sent
out a mail.
Thank you Mr president I don't
generation Mexican who grew up
in the south valley of
Albuquerque throughout their
schooling they never once felt
safe in their academic setting
coming out about their mixed
of state they always felt they
would be put through hell if
everyone knew who they truly
were or rest of their family for
that matter this deeply hurt
share this story with us today
now they keep hearing stories of
others like them living in fear
because of how where people are
being constantly attacked across
public institution because they
are late or Mexican they would
be protected but only under
federal law if they experience
discrimination because they are
of their identity.
We cannot legislate protections
for all young people the end
depression anxiety stigma or
sort of suicidal intentions
everywhere in New Mexico let's
set the proper example across
the nation and exemplify how
many lives can be saved due to
this critical piece of
legislation from the bottom of
held yes Mr president I do
Mr president Senator can you
tell me a little bit about the
differences between sex and
gender Mr president Senator yes
talking about is how society and
other people see a person on the
scale of masculinity and
femininity for example Mister
president most folks in Semey
Whereas also Mr president my
colleague here who asked the
question may be perceived as the
his gender as male.
And and so those are pretty much
the gender and gender identity
absolutely Mr president fund and
senator I can so gender as I
mentioned I am perceived as a
I've made this comment multiple
times usually to folks here.
Often of lesbians will be
stereotyped we've got this kind
cap the have a lot of cats all
these things my gender identity
is a masculine presenting women.
Who loves tools.
know but I don't fit the
stereotypes that we have but I
identify as a masculine woman.
Thank you Mr president thank you
sponsor no further questions if
Thank you Mr president I'll be
very brief and I do not need the
sponsor to yield I'd like to
thank all the sponsors for
to modernize and I think the
body for considering this bill
thank you.
Si no further debate.
that house bill two oh seven as
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Neville voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Burt voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
However of twenty six and
affirmative ten in the negative
house bill till seven as amended
residents and make sure our tax
dollars do not support
discrimination I'm glad we have
taken a protective stance for
trans and queer kids in New
Mexico when so many across the
on your supplemental calendar.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules be suspended and
that the record show that all
actions for placing House Bill
three fifty three with an
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken and it is
sixty seven million dollars in
tax increment development
district revenue bonds to
provide public infrastructure in
the three hundred thirty seven
acre south campus district in
City of Albuquerque in October
of twenty twenty one as a
partnership between the city and
the and University of New Mexico
the city dedicated seventy five
percent of the G. R. T.
increments in the Ted Bernalillo
very happy to help this is that
in Los crucis we have a to
district and it's in our main
street and because of this to
district our main street is now
thriving were for many many
with Sandia national labs
Kirtland airforce base in the
Air Force research laboratory
this also will allow
participation participation in
interstate twenty five
facilities and other things and
what will happen Mr president
Senate body if this bill doesn't
pass without the state's
dedication of gross receipts tax
increment the project would be
and job growth opportunities Mr
president I look forward to the
discussion that will come from
this body senators are debating
house bill three fifty three
with emergency clause.
with an emergency clause would
not only improve a much needed
area around you and I'm but also
improve areas that are used by
not only residents but by
visitors this is an important
area of collaboration between
on that Mr president I move that
house bill three fifty three
with an emergency clause do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
emergency clause has duly passed
the Senate center Hamblen Mr
president thank you in the
Senate body when I go on to the
last item on the supplemental
calendar that'll be house
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objections Senator Duhigg to
explain.
Thank you Mr president this
Committee subs are submitted to
the committee they will then be
made publicly available on the
legislature's website as soon as
practicable whether they're
fiscal impact reports will also
be made publicly available on
the website as soon as is
practicable after the FIR has
been posted without stand for
sponsor you Senator Duhigg deals
yes Mr president thank you Mr
president and senator what kind
of time frame is practicable.
Senator.
you reasonably can generally.
Mr president Senator what what
is reasonably.
Senator.
reasonable under the
circumstances.
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
president Senator
so if a committee substitute is
after the fact is that gonna be
an issue and then also what is
the punishment if it's not
reasonably practically sometimes
done.
Senator.
sub to be transmitted to the
folks who update the website
before the committee starts then
that would be posted afterwards
it's again it's going to depend
on what is reasonable under the
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president centers there any
practical practical practicable
time line for putting up the
agendas.
going to happen is is kind of
what happens with the agendas
their amended their uploaded
five minutes before there's lots
of issues with the public
there's going to be excuses of
that yeah we're gonna feel great
look at us look at us we're
trying to be more open but the
committee chairs at the end of
the day are going to hide what
they want to hide and and claim
that it wasn't practicable it's
otherwise this is just a feel
good story a great headline and
and really is going to do
anything thank you Mr president
we do have further debate with
Senator Steinborn followed by
Senator when you us in center
session
The public absolutely has to be
brought in on everything that
happens here we've had issues a
session where they haven't been
able to in some most
consequential things that we've
No excuses the past is the past
but I'll go beyond this rule Mr
Mr present colleagues and say
that we need to also have
transparency on the mechanics of
the things that influence these
long let's just don't stop with
this role if we say we're for
transparency Senator stand all
the elements.
That shape.
Our policy the public has a
right to know.
And this is this is huge.
But let's not forget the other
areas of transparency that we
need to move forward they
president well the sponsor yield
Senator Duhigg detailed yes Mr
president thank you Mr president
and the good senator from
Bernalillo and Sandoval.
published and and done before.
Senator.
Mr president Senator now so.
got that amendment or substitute
then as it would go ahead and
and it would be uploaded that
but for a for example if if
there's a committee that does
committee
Finishes here in their business
Mr president but this does not
require automatically that all
of these must be uploaded on to
Bernalillo Sandoval so if we're
doing a regular bill and someone
wants to submit a amendment and
you have a twenty four hour role
how long is it before the twenty
press as is practicable so when
when it is reasonably
practicable for that committee
secretary to get that
information to the folks the
good folks to update our website
amendments because if there's
ten amendments or by amendment
on a bill if there's amendment
on a bill and you have ten
amendments in the committee and
public probably doesn't know
that in the state of Ohio I
thought that was my amendment
that I had a legislators sponsor
and I thought that god on why
didn't get on it it's on the
website and and and they think
Senator Mr president Senator so
one of the benefits of this is
that it's going to have that
information up but whether it
we will ever accomplish that
what this doesn't chair Mister
president is that folks who want
to look back and see what what
amendments were offered whether
they were adopted or not they
can see those there what subs
about insuring that everyone has
real time instantaneous access
to absolutely everything
although I will say Mr president
in the house they are there as
the standard that this bill
would impose.
Senator Williams and Mr present
center so what happens when
councils backed up in and even
on the floor here and we're
sitting waiting for amendments
if we tell the public awaiting a
substitute or amendment and
they're gonna wait for to be
posted in.
Senator.
Mr president I if they will be
do so it will be practical for
them to do so when they have the
ability to to upload them
sentiment us to Mr presence
entered the other day and Senate
finance we had to go back in
dead deadline in this process
and amendments are brought the
last minute then what we do.
Senator Mister Mister president
So again if the business of your
committee means that is not
practicable to upload them at
that point you would not be
compelled to do so you would
when it was practicable.
and who's making amendment and
who's behind them that may be
the best clarity we have a
specially when it comes to film
thank you Mr president.
We're going to the next person
and you consent to skew senator
Gonzalez to return to the
chamber say no objection.
Senator gave us.
you just a couple of our hop
pertinentes for thought of so a
lot of the paperwork that I hit
at work has a watermark behind
watermark the tells us to it's a
proposed idea that might be as
easy to do and I wanted to use
this president and etcetera
etcetera mean else's discussion
we had here on the floor and
just because they went back and
did amendment came back out and
so I re read it let that night
and the next morning about six
from the house they did not know
it the public did not know that
and I was trying to work off of
the paper copy here and there's
hours trying to resolve that in
till I looked on the website
this presents center and saw
that they.
Ron old version.
Jeez I'm sorry
Just having the house and Senate
to have clarity to their their
they were seen something totally
different than we had here on
the floor of the Senate really
irritated him so and and like
say it took me a long time to
Mr president center thank you
thank you senator goes Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and you
know every so often you get a
practicable I mean some time
there's another word that gets
did you just kind of fits and
there's word soon.
worked for Texaco.
In Texaco was pretty good about
given raises at eight given
We're talking to him about will
wind we thank you know might
direct.
And he said well soon.
So Mister president Senator.
Thank as soon as reasonable and
soon as practicable means
they'll get around to do shoes
there it is so thank you Mr
preservation thank you Senator
Griggs seen no for the debate.
Senator Hickey close.
consent of the Senate I ask for
a voice vote Mr president.
There are now Senate and we said
we needed never mind I'll ask
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Diamond voting no.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative for the negative.
order of business thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the reader to read this
president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman Senator about this this
presents kind of corny it's late
I know but we did a lot of work
to the judiciary side really
appreciate the reader make sure
report three house bill ninety
do pass.
Committee report for house bill
one sixty one as amended to
pass.
bill one ninety five as amended
to pass.
Committee report eight House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to thirty four do
House Judiciary Committee report
tend House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill three
thirty seven do pass.
Bill three ninety nine do pass.
Committee for twelve House Bill
Foro seven as amended do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
we act on them with one motion
now in the June reflect their
act on individually but without
requiring them to read them all
again thank you Senator about
it the committee for.
Has been adopted.
And the record will show that
they're acted upon individually.
The reader to read Mr president
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs Senator Hamblen.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted I'd like to announce to
the members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
bill twenty six as amended.
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill three
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty
four.
House committee Judiciary House
four.
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill five
twenty two an act relating to
Bill five twenty two.
House government elections in in
infers Committee subsea for
twenty two Senate majority floor
leader Peter Wirth takes the
next order of business.
I thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go about
our business announcements and
miscellaneous run that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
announce we will here Senate
bill five twenty three the
medical malpractice changes
tomorrow morning during the
early session so now would be
committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning at nine AM in
room three twenty six we will be
hearing house bill five forty
seven which is the tax act.
hearing on it and see where we
go from there Mr president.
House joint resolution on so
we're gonna hear that tomorrow
No we're gonna go ten Mister
president.
Thank you senator yes any
further announcements.
Senator.
Mr present the rules committee
committee so they'll be there
thanks.
Any further announcements
etcetera etcetera Brandt Mr
president with the chair of
rules you Senator hate yield yes
Any further announcements.
Si no further announcements
center Peter Wirth.
