for confirmations. So I'll hand
the gavel over to him.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone, it's Espanola
day and the Roundhouse that has
a proud native son of the
Espanilla Valley. I hope you can
go cruising with me after.
So we're gonna go with the first
item on the agenda today, which
is the appointment of Man
Barreras to the Department of
Information Technology with his
Senate sponsor joining us this
morning. Good morning, Senator
Padilla.
All right, good morning, uh
members of the committee chair,
vice chair, ranking member, and
members of Senate rules. I'm a
very excited this morning to
move our information technology
and and uh security apparatus
here in the state of New Mexico
forward with a solid leader, um,
it is my privilege today to
introduce and wholeheartedly
support the nomination of Manny
Barreras, uh, for the position
of cabinet secretary and State
Chief Information Officer for
the Department of Information
Technology.
Uh, Mr. Barreras is a dedicated
public servant with a
deep-rooted commitment to the
state of New Mexico. He has over
26 years of experience in a
sales, business development, and
government relations all in the
information technology arena, 22
of those years he's focused on
technical and public sector
solutions. He is going to bring
some real leadership to this
particular department that has
had a lot of rockiness and
waviness, and I think we're in
very good hands here. He
actually has been in the acting
role of uh cabinet secretary and
CIO for some time now.
Um, Manny has been instrumental
in ensuring the seamless
operation of the state's
technology infrastructure
overseeing mission critical
public safety communications and
driving cybersecurity
initiatives which we all know
have been very uh seriously um
affecting New Mexico's business
operations. His leadership has
been key in modernizing and
expanding statewide technology
services, all while maintaining
fiscal responsibility and
ensuring that they manage to
their budget in an efficient
manner.
Uh, Manny spent nearly two
decades at Motorola Solutions,
and you'll hear a little bit
about that from him today, I'm
sure, uh, where he led
multi-million dollar contracts
delivering over $400 million in
mission critical public safety
solutions
organizations like police, fire,
and emergency management
services also a big contribution
for the state of New Mexico. His
expertise in public safety
communications, network security
and IT solutions have a direct
impact on the work that he will
be doing in this new role.
Um, Manny has a profound
dedication to public service as
well. He was raised in Socorro,
New Mexico. His father, who is
here with him today, and his
grandfather were both uh public
servants in the community of
Socorro that we all know and
love there is deep appreciation
of New Mexico's communi
communities and his passion for
for his neighbor's shows every
time I talk to him.
I have full confidence and I
hope you do too. I want to make
sure that you know that he is
also fully focused on New
Mexico's the state of New
Mexico's cybersecurity,
broadband, and all the other
information technology items
that exist in his um in his
wheelhouse as the in this role
that he's in. I do have his
resume in front of you, in front
of me, I hope you do too.
There's a very, I could go on
and on for about, I don't know,
38 minutes just talking about
his experience, but I know we
have a lot of other people that
want to talk, and we have
limits, Madam Chair. So I'm
gonna ask Mr. But
to say a few words and then we'd
like to you to hear from a few
people. Thank you. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Pares.
Good morning.
Uh, good morning, chairwoman,
uh, Doha, Vice Chair Jaamillo,
ranking member Townsend, and
esteemed members of the
committee.
It is an honor to appear before
you today as the cabinet.
As the cabinet secretary
designate and Chief Information
Officer for the Department of
Information Technology.
I'm grateful for the opportunity
to speak with you about my
qualifications, experience, and
vision for this role.
I'd like to begin by expressing
my sincere gratitude to my
sponsor, Senator Michael Padilla
for the Trust and confidence he
has placed in me with, with this
nomination. I also want to
acknowledge my family, friends,
mentors and colleagues, those
who have supported me throughout
my career.
And whose guidance has helped
prepare me to lead the
Department of Information
Technology.
Now, before I dive into policy
and vision, let's take a, a, um,
let's take a moment to
appreciate the title Cabinet
Secretary, Department of
Information Technology and State
Chief Information Officer of New
Mexico, quite the mouthful,
isn't it? No wonder tech world
loves the acronyms.
Um, in New Mexico story, well,
my name is Manny Barreras, and
today is a special day, not just
for me but for my, my family as
well. My journey to this moment
is deeply rooted in New Mexico,
and I wanna thank, I want to
take a moment to recognize the
people who made this possible.
My parents, uh, Louis and Mary
Rose, just to the right of me,
have been married together for
57 years raising me and my two
amazing sisters with.
With the values, hard work,
service, and integrity. They've
called New Mexico home, uh,
their entire lives and have
spent the past 33 years in Las
Cruces, um.
Though depending on the day
might they might debate just how
much they're enjoying retirement
out there.
Uh, I'm, I'm the eldest of 3. My
son is also named Manny, uh,
because why not keep things
simple. He works in the
entertainment industry as a
professional video colorist
working with the likes of J Lo,
Beyonce, Bruno Mars, to name a
few, uh, he owns his own company
and and and has the opportunity
to travel around the world and
it's currently in San Francisco
on project.
My sister Judith and her and her
husband Casey.
I live in Albuquerque. She's in
education. He's in
pharmaceuticals, uh, the legal
ones, and their two daughters
are making us proud. Simone is
studying law at Texas Tech.
Watch out world, we've got a
lawyer in the making. while
Brooke is at TCU pursuing her
undergraduate degree.
My youngest sister Leandra is a
proud New Mexico State graduate.
She earned her master's at UNM
and and is now a student success
specialist at UNM Assisting
returning students. She and my
niece Vivian, uh, who is 5,
already has an attitude of a
teenager.
We are, we are a New Mexico
homegrown family roots that run
deep in the state. My father
served as city councilor in
Socorro, and my grandfather,
Benny Barreras with the county
commissioner.
Public service runs in my blood
and being nominated for this
role is a profound honor.
Even my great grandfather played
a part in shaping our region. He
was a cowboy, a cattle puncher,
whose skills were sought after
by the federal government to
To block foot and mouth disease
in Mexico traveling into the
United States. Public service is
in our blood and being nominated
for this role is not only
profound honor, but an
opportunity to extend the
legacy.
I stand before you.
Not, not just as many Barreras,
but as a product of this
community, this history and this
family, I'm and I am a graduate
of New Mexico State University,
Goagi and my New Mexico
upbringing, uh, shaped.
Shape me to be the leader I am
today.
A vision for a smarter, more
connected New Mexico. Technology
is no longer a luxury. It is a
necessity. Powers are
businesses, connects our
communities, strengthens our
government.
Sir,
Services are and most
importantly impacts the lives of
every New Mexican.
My vision is clear. It is to
moderate, secure, and expand New
Mexico's digital infrastructure
so that every resident, not only
in Albuquerque, Las Cruces,
Santa Fe, Gallup.
Tribal, um,
Pueblo's, but in the most rural
communities have access to
reliable, cost-effective, secure
technology.
Keep key areas of focus for New
Mexico do it, bringing the
digital divide.
Access to high-speed internet
should not be a privilege, is a
necessity. Many communities in
our state lack proper broadband
access and collaboration.
So in collaboration with the
administratively attached office
of Bradman, we will expand
connectivity, especially in the
rural rural and tribal
communities ensuring that
businesses, schools, and
families are not left behind.
Enhancing cybersecurity and data
protection, with increasing
cyber threats protecting New
Mexico Data's top top priority.
We will moderate outdated
systems, strengthen
cybersecurity infrastructure and
implement statewide training to
protect both government and
citizens. Streamlining
government service, no New
Mexican resident should have to
jump through hoops to access
public services. We'll modernize
IT systems to improve
efficiency, reduce bureaucracy,
and
And ensure that the residents
can access DMV services, health
records, permits, and more at
the click of a button.
Investing in the workforce and
innovation.
The future of technology in New
Mexico depends on our people. We
will train, attract and retain
top IT talent, partner and we
will partner with universities
and businesses and create
pathways for young professionals
to drive in innovation right
here at home.
sustainable cost and effective
IT solutions. Innovation should
be smart and cost effective. We
will adopt cloud-based
solutions, automation and AI
were applicable, ensuring
efficiency while saving tax
dollars.
Experience and commitment to
public safety or public service.
This is just on my vision. It is
our vision, achieving it
requires collaboration across
agencies, industries, and
communities. I am committed to
utilizing the nearly 20 years of
experience I gained at Motorola
Solutions, Incorporated with New
Mexico's police, fire emergency
management agencies to deploy
mission critical public safety
systems and solutions through
networks across our state. These
investments have improved
overall.
Communications and response
times by ensuring they have the
tools they need to keep our
community safe, yet.
There is more to be done. At the
core of everything I am is a
deep commitment to integrity,
accountability, and service to
the people of New Mexico.
When I'm not working, you'll
find me enjoying hunting,
fishing, golfing, and traveling,
especially we can getaways to
Santa Fe and Tas with my
beautiful girlfriend Teresa
Tapia, who was right behind me.
She is my greatest supporter and
my anchor.
A commitment to working
together, if confirmed, I pledge
to work diligent diligently.
In in a bipartisan manner to
fill the duties of the office
with professionalism, fairness,
and dedication. New Mexico has
an opportunity to lead in
technology innovation and
cybersecurity and I am eager to
play a role in that journey.
Thank you for your time. I look
forward to your questions.
And and and ranking member.
Thank you both. Uh, Mr. Barras,
we do have a few people who
signed up in support of your
appointment. One is here in the
committee room, 2 others are
joining via Zoom. I'm gonna ask
that if
Assets can please come up
although I stated your name, if
you can state it again for the
record, you have a, yeah, you
have a minute and a half.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name's Pete Cassettis.
Retired uh New Mexico State
police chief from 2013 to 2019
or beginning, beginning of 19,
um, it's an honor to stand
before you here, uh, support of
Manny Barreras when I was the
chief, took on the task of
merging 14 different dispatch
centers around the state to 3.
And I did this not just for
efficiency, but I did it for a,
a better, better outcome as far
as uh the
What we provided to the law
officers out there in New
Mexico, as far as communications
and the citizens calling into
911, needing help.
I was able to count on many on
different, many different
levels, although he was in the
private sector at the time, he
understood the task and I was
able to get straight direct
answers from him and doing this
merger, which uh ended up being
very productive. So again, I
fully support uh uh Manny
Barreras, uh, he, his position,
I, I do not believe he and I
believe he understands it, um,
is, is paramount to public
safety. It's very important and
the work you do hear is very
important, so I appreciate the
opportunity to to fully support
him.
Thank you. Thank you for your
comments. We have 2 online,
you'll also have a minute and a
half each. And I'm gonna start
off with Greg Pettis.
OK, so he's not online, but we
do have Rick Brown.
Good Morning, Rick, you have a
minute 30.
Yes, good morning. Uh my name is
Rick Brown.
Um, I'm not man.
Uh, for almost 20 years, uh, Mr.
Chairwoman and the same members
I really wish I could be there
today to represent um Mr.
Perrera's
force, uh, I'm out of town uh
traveling.
Um, and it's one year plus years
I've known Mr. Mars, uh, I've
worked very closely with them,
um, on several projects
including the one where I was a
technology leader at the time.
Police Department, many
developers uh proposal to
replace a 20 plus year old
system, uh, radio system and
dispatching system, which is now
as state of the art digital
system that serves the time
around us still today.
And I have to say, um that the
radio system that was replaced
was old but the depressing
system and ip was even older,
uh.
What men proposed to move out of
a
double white trailer, uh, into a
state of the art, uh, dispatch
center.
Uh, after I left the time around
and joined Pima County as a
communication manager.
And later as the director of the
Pinaan was integrated network.
Mr. Ros was an integral part of
developing and proposing a
countywide radio system
that is still in use today. Uh,
and it's currently used by 60
plus public safety agencies over
9000 radios on the system which
includes state, city, county,
and tribal agencies, um,
throughout the account.
I do.
Thank you, Rick, for your
comments.
Now we didn't have anybody who
signed up and organized
opposition, but we did receive
one email with concerns that
we'll keep you, um, but I would
go to the committee room, by a
show of hands, how many in the
committee room are in support of
this country.
16. Any online?
To
online also in support. Now
going back to the committee
room, anyone in opposition of
the country.
none anyone online.
none of them go to the
committee.
Thunder Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um, Mr. Bres.
Appreciate the time that we had
to, uh, talk in the office as
well and um.
Especially like you're talking
about um.
Using technology to make
government more efficient.
Um
One thing that I had a
conversation with the chief
information security officer.
Was
Kind of concerning, not about
you, but just about IT at the
state, um, he was talking about.
Every departer, every branch has
their own IT and it's not under
like 11 server. Are you, are you
aware of that?
Yes, sir,
uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block. Yes, uh, there are, there
are, um, we have 76 different
agencies and several board and
commissions, uh, the executive
boards do have their own IT uh
departments and their own CIOs,
uh, 90% of them are are
classified in in a in a few,
very few of them are, are uh
goex. But yes, I am aware of
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, sir, is
there.
Does that bother you at all? Uh,
yes, well, no, that, um, Madam
Chair, uh, uh, Representative
Black, um.
Sorry.
My, my apologies, senator
a little a little nervous up
here, but um.
You know, um
I got into this role about 5
months ago, uh, maybe close to 6
months ago, and I've had the
opportunity to meet with all the
cabinet secretaries, um, and,
uh, several of the CIOs, um, in
working, we are all working
together to try to centralize,
um, you know, New Mexico do it
as being the hub of the
technology side of the house,
but as we move forward, we're
going to progress. I'm going to
continue to work with the
cabinet secretaries, work with
all the CIOs and to try to
centralize, you know, a lot of
the cybersecurity that
of the house, um, oursiso Raja
Saamadam is a, is a great, I've
been working with him
constantly, um, and what we're
doing is trying to work through
um the cabinet secretaries and
CIOs to adopt our cybersecurity
plan.
Thank you, sir, and Madam Chair
and uh Senator Block, um, and
this is another great reason why
we need Manny in this role is,
um, the help desk is a unified
function. Now we're, we created
the Office of Cybersecurity
which rolls into this area,
that's a unified function,
implementations for new um.
Um
Software packages for various
departments, that's a unified
function because they oversee it
and do the IV and B and and the
quality work and all that. So I
just want to mention those
couple of things that do
irregardless of the agencies
having their own, you know.
Island of IT help on the ground
with them, there is also some
unified functions of. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, I mean, I think
there's multiple servers. I, I
like the idea of, you know,
having a unified effort in just
a single stream and makes things
more efficient, uh, in the
costs.
a hell of a lot less with.
You know, a single.
Single centralized server versus
all these different islands like
you were talking about, I, I, I
really hope that's something
that you can.
Uh, get your arms around because
that's a lot of money.
And um
You know, it doesn't work well
in, in, uh, in business where,
where I work or where Senator
Padilla works as well when you
have all this overlap and
duplication.
Um, it reduces risk. I'll, I'll
give you that with the multiple
servers, but you know, you do
have cyber defenders out there
that I I hope are working,
working hard. Uh, lastly, um,
Mr. President, and uh Mr. Bres.
Tell me what type of um.
Tell me what AI and ML can do
for your department.
Madam, uh, Madam Doig, uh,
Senator Block, uh, can you
elaborate a little bit more on
AI which. Sure, um, Mr. Chair,
so AIML, it's
Uh, artificial intelligence
machine learning.
So
There are a lot of um
Private firms out there that
that work with government
agencies that do AI and ML.
programmatics, data mining, and
it is, I mean, it is fast,
looking through millions of
documents to pull certain
information that you need, it
just, it saves so much time and
and manpower and money.
And I'm just curious.
Uh, what's your thoughts? Uh,
well, it sounds like you don't
know what the tool is, and
that's OK, but it's, it's it's a
relatively new technology that
can do incredible things for
state government.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator.
Lo, thank you for that question,
um, currently I'm working with
my entire team. I mean, we have
several um.
Different bills that are out
there that contain AI, um, and
we definitely understand, uh,
quite a few of those. Currently
today, the state of New Mexico
doesn't really have a policy or
state statute in place.
Uh, one of, one of the things
that I am trying to work on
currently today with my entire
team as I'm bringing on a deputy
cabinet secretary, um, and a
special projects coordinator uh
along to working with my
enterprise and CISO uh CIOs is
trying to put a game plan
together so that we can
standardize on AI technology and
AR platform. But I think the
first things first, sir, is that
what we need to do is be able to
provide uh some guard rails to
protect the state of New Mexico.
At this point. But yes, we are
going to continue to work on it.
This is something that is a high
priority. I got a whole team,
um, that I work with that are
sharp and and experts, and we
will continue to drive AI.
Um, you know, here in the state
in the very near future. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
lastly, I'll, I'll just say, um,
I'm gonna vote for you.
I've read the letter. I'm not
going to discuss the letter. It
to me it's a one-off.
Um
I think you're more than well
qualified.
Your, uh, your father and
grandfather seemed like nice
gentlemen, so that kind of wins
me over a little bit.
Um,
Having your family there is
just, is, is a really cool thing
today. So congratulations.
You got my support and I really
look forward for you to come
back and talk to us about
eliminating all this duplication
of effort and duplication of
resources. Uh, we don't need to
be operating like that in state
government. We can do a lot
better. So, thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Townsend, followed by
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And
Um
Cabinet Secretary designee.
Thank you.
Congratulations on
On this, so
Opportunity before you.
It's also an opportunity before
New Mexico, cause we got, we got
a lot to do in a short time to
get there.
Um
I have 2 questions.
And I'll give them both to you
so you can sort them out like
you want to, but
One is across the Mexico now we
have reduct set up.
And in a few instances, we have
Um
Individual cities and towns that
have not going to read.
Who
In my opinion, should, because
of the duplicative cost of.
Maintaining two separate
entities.
Will you
Bush.
that consolidation for the, for
the cost savings and, and for
the efficiencies that it brings.
And the second question.
And I say this because I have
had the same.
Problem coming from my
background.
Can you look beyond Motorola for
solutions going forward, and I
think, I think that both of
those questions deserve answers.
Senator Duigg
Senator Townsend, thank you for
the questions. I'm gonna answer
the first one first.
I definitely understand the
situation in Rita, when you have
two different dispatch centers,
you may have a city.
And a county dispatch center.
That
First of all, is a lot of
redundancy.
A lot of money that probably
shouldn't be spent on two
separate, you know, dispatch
centers.
You have the same sets of the
same type of people working in
the same 911 center, one in, you
know, it, it, it, it both
dispatch centers. I have
experience with that. I have uh
worked together to consolidate
various dispatch centers not too
far from uh from Rita, which was
uh Otero and and Almogordo at
one particular point, they both
had two separate dispatch
centers. And eventually within
the last few years have merged
and consolidated their dispatch,
saving the city and county and
the state.
money and and it's running more
efficiently and more
streamlined.
The second question is yes.
I can
I
The the way I work, we have
checks and balances at New
Mexico do we have New Mexico
state contracts that have been
competitively bid. I have
various folks that that I work
with that handle radio
communications on the enterprise
side so I have a layer of a CIO
then I have a radio
communications manager. I will
require that all vendors uh meet
all the standard requirements
and if there ever comes a day or
a point, I will follow, follow
all ethic guidelines, and even
in, in the
Even if I have to later down the
road, I will.
recuse myself for, from anything
if it is something that I feel
that is a conflict of interest,
but you can, you have my trust
that that will happen.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator.
Right.
That's good enough for me. I, I,
uh.
I understand the challenges of
doing that. I mean, we.
When we have a career that we
put our
Our life into a building and
supporting an entity and you
make this step.
You
You know, you're gonna have a
million people watching all over
you, and so I would just tell
you, I, I do believe you have
that capacity, you've shown it,
and I look forward to your help
on.
On the reader issue all across
New Mexico, including, I still
have one in my district that is,
is uh
All comes down to football, I
guess, and, and we're spending
millions of dollars trying to do
2 instead of 1, and we just need
to get over that, but I
appreciate it and I look forward
to your support.
Thank you, Senator Bradley,
followed by Senator Stephenix.
Thank you, Mister Chairman,
Senator and welcome. We're happy
to have you in this role, uh.
In in spite of all the really
good work that your Senate uh
sponsor here has done and trying
to provide connectivity across
New Mexico and we've made large
investments as a legislator. We,
we are really trying to get the
ball rolling and thank you for
all the work cause we still have
some challenges in getting
connectivity to the rural areas.
And so I would like to, to work
with you and I hope that this
coalition of rural legislators
will come together to try to
maybe eliminate some of those
roadblocks so that we can get
that money out and and.
Um, provide connectivity to
rural New Mexico as fast as we
possibly can, um, in one of
those areas, it's very important
this year, both Democrats and
Republicans have identified
that.
There's a public safety issue
because along our southern
border, there are miles and
miles and miles of area that are
still without um not just
Internet, but cell phone
communication and stuff and so
we're working with New Mexico
Tech to provide, um, uh, some
coverage down in that area. I'll
lean on your office quite a bit
so we can get some some
connectivity and radio towers
and cell phone communications
down in that area. I, I just
can't stress enough the dangers
that that puts uh migrants in
and law enforcement in, we
human humanitarian camps that go
up and no one there has service
and so we're gonna lean on your
office to help us as much as we
can in that capacity. Um, and I
guess my, my last question is I
didn't have a chance to connect
with you again this morning
before this hearing. I
appreciate you making the rounds
so to to visit with everyone
prior, but how much do you know
about MacBooks. I was hoping
you'd swing by my office this
morning.
I'll, I'll bring it by this
afternoon and and and have this
discussion a little further.
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
uh, to be honest with the Alman
HP guy.
But I tell you, we got plenty of
experts in our office if you
need some help, we'll have no
problem sending somebody over
this afternoon.
Thank you and good luck. Thank
you.
Thank you for that. Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, Senator Padilla, Mr.
Barreras.
Um, I'm interested in, uh, we've
had some conversation about the
rural areas and in particular,
um, I've discussed the specifics
of Pecos in New Mexico, just a
little ways from here.
When they had some people, drug
dealers bursting into people's
homes, they couldn't call the
state police, they couldn't call
anybody because there was no
cell service, let alone um
internet.
I live on the east side of
Highway 14.
Which has no fast internet, but
the other side of 14 has it.
I mean, we have many
inconsistencies in our state,
and I'd like to know in your
planning for the department. How
do you plan to address some of
these inequities,
Madam Chair.
Senator Stefaniks, thank you for
the question.
I know we've had a couple of
different discussions.
Within my department, we have a
gentleman by the name of Robert
Olives. He's actually our
liaison to our Verizon.
Pardon
Unfortunately
Mm
Currently, New Mexico do it
doesn't provide cell phone
coverage. We, we provide RF we
can provide LTE, we can provide
uh broadband coverage through
various states and we, we know,
uh throughout the state of New
Mexico, the terrain can be very
challenging.
But what I want to let you know
is that uh, since we've had
those conversations, uh, Robert.
Uh, and Verizon with along with
their engineers, went out, did
some sidewalks. They actually
located a a state of New Mexico
site, so I can tell you the good
news is that the uh between
Verizon and state of New Mexico
will probably be entering or
negotiating the contract for
Verizon to build a tower in that
Pecos area. Unfortunately, they,
they cannot share the design
with us because it's
proprietary, but um just through
with a little bit of hard work
and the persevere.
of uh Robert, who works for us,
um, there will be some, some
plans here in the near future to
build out a site.
So, um,
Thank you for working on that,
uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, and
Mr. Barreras, but what about
The IT inequities around our
state. Is that part of your job
and how are you, uh, addressing
that. I think Senator Townsend
alluded to it, but I'm very
concerned. It's not just the
South, it's all over.
Madam, uh, do, Madam Chair
Duhig, uh, Senator Stefaniks,
thank you for that question.
The state is definitely
challenging. We definitely have
to do something about it.
Um, currently, you know, Bridge,
when I say bridging the digital
divide, right? We have to expand
broadband infrastructure through
public and private partnerships
and federal grants. So continue
working with our uh Office of
Broadband, or Office of
Cybersecurity, um, we will
prioritize that. We're also
gonna prioritize fiber optic
networks and 5G deployments and
underserved areas such as Pecos
and several other rural
communities and throughout the
area.
we're gonna launch affordable
internet subsidy programs for
low income families, and when I
say that, it's in collaboration
of working with the office, uh,
of Broadband, you know, we want
to work closely with them.
Currently today, they are
attached uh department to the
New Mexico do it and we
currently just provide program
services, HR benefits, payroll,
and so forth, but you have my
commitment that I am going to
continue working with Obay to
try to put some game, some
plans in place to build out
those rural Native American and
Pueblo areas that are
underserved and unserved. Madam
Chair, that's just brought up
another question. If they are
administratively attached to
you.
What is your collaboration. What
is your coordination between the
two, or are you just an
administrative entity and they
are the program entity, but.
How does this work?
Uh, Madam Chair and uh, you want
to hear from me, I'm gonna,
yeah, yeah.
Uh, sorry.
Uh, uh, Madam Cha Duhig, uh,
Senator Sabonics, yeah, you're
absolutely right. It's a
definitely a very difficult
situation in regards to where
we're at today, but
Currently do it, um.
Has a. It's a cybersecurity and
the Office of Broadband. We
handle uh.
You know, like I said, you know,
all the HR, all the payroll, all
the benefits, but it doesn't
mean that we can't stretch our
arm across the aisle to work
with the Office of Broadman or
the cybersecurity. I have a
great working relationship with
cybersecurity. We, you know, we
work on, on centralizing uh IT
networks, securing networks,
whether it's a state-owned
operated network or um
Or or a third party, uh, system
in regards to obey.
We are currently working
together. We've had
conversations where we want to
be able to communicate and help
each other. We have resources
within our IT department that
handle all our voice and data
networks throughout the state of
New Mexico. And so in
collaboration when I say in
collaboration, I wanna bring my,
my folks just have a seat at the
table to help maybe
Plan for the future and, and to
help.
Build out networks and broadband
throughout the state of New
Mexico. So just reaching out
across the aisle, working
together.
as a partner. Thank you for that
response. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator Gao
is followed by Senator Bergman.
My chair, Mr. Chair, and
Senator.
Uh
Secretary Des, appreciate you
coming to the office. I was
gonna start out, um.
I know that uh Secretary said I
came and told you it's, um,
sometimes a little spotty here
in the Capitol. He came out, was
used in the window, be able to
get uh connectivity, uh, years
ago, Mr. Chairman chair,
Senator, I gave money, uh,
they're bringing, uh, internet
from down towards Espanola.
And uh I used to have an office
in the annex, and we're always
doing that, leaning at the
window to try to get
connectivity, and I know that
that's here in Santa Fe.
Uh, it goes back to sort of
conversation center saidonic and
Senator Brantly about the rural
areas. So in Lee County, where
I, I've got Lee in A County. Uh,
we have legal ural telephone
that's doing a really good job
of trying to get uh an activity
all over the area, but they're,
they're looking at a loop line,
and I'm just wondering what your
job is in your department in
helping these others fill those
gaps and so I'd like to start
there if you wouldn't mind.
Adventures, Miss Chan.
Uh, secrets.
Madame Chair Duhig, Senator
Galgos, thank you for the
question. I definitely
understand, um, there are a lot
of utility companies and, and,
and co-ops throughout the state
of New Mexico, uh, currently
today, um, you know, right now,
we do have a, you know, a voice
and data network department that
we currently work with and we
have voice and data
communications that we provide,
you know, service offerings to a
lot of state agencies throughout
the state of New Mexico. Now.
I'm not, I'm not clear if we're
currently working with.
Lee count, sorry, what was the
county?
Uh,
Leon Leonti sorry, Leonetti
County, um, I'm not sure if
there's any, uh, third party,
uh, partnership out there, but
What we want to do is we want to
take advantage of existing
fiber.
networks.
be able to, to partner with
those folks, why go out and
rebuild?
Or lay fiber when there's
already fiber. What if there's a
point to point microwave. Can we
take advantage of that? So those
are all things that we need to,
when, when we're looking at
building out unserved,
underserved, or even providing
just internet access and
broadband for various cities and
counties.
One thing that we got to look at
is one, does a state owned
fiber?
What's our backhaul look like in
those areas? Is there a third
party co op that we can work
with.
So, so we're not going out and
spending the state's money on
something that's already
rebuilt, but that's kind of how
I would look at working in that
Lee and Eddie County if we're
not doing work with them
already. I can tell you though
that we do have radio
communications in those areas
today.
We'd have to look at the
capacity to see if we could
bring on any additional
broadband services in those
locations, but again, as I
mentioned, public private
partnerships and federal grants,
what we got to start looking at,
and this will help save money
for the state.
Thank you for that answer, Mr.
Chairman chair Senator, um, just
another little caveat, uh,
industry in the gas and oil
industry, uh, they've laid a lot
of fiber in Southeast, actually
just.
Out west of Jo, New Mexico
because they used it to operate
their valves and be able to have
some accountability out there. I
don't know that they're
interacting with us, that might
be a good uh conversation to
have.
But I just want to thank you for
your time, come to my office,
uh, we'll support you today and
just uh look forward to having
some really good opportunities
to get Wi Fi, uh, fiber
everywhere in the state. My crew
and turn.
Uh, Senator
Bro fiber optic just this
morning, so Jo's probably a
little bit upset with me right
now.
But thank you, Mr. Chair, in
closing, I just want to tell
you, I appreciate it being um
Did you say it was Espanola day.
Eilla
it's definitely Espinola day in
the chair, the reason we started
in subcommittee is my colleagues
were just cruising.
On the way to the Capitol.
Thank you I appreciate that,
Senator, Senator Bergman,
followed by Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and good
morning, Secretary David Ne.
Also thank you for coming to the
office, uh, and discussing your
appointment with me beforehand.
And I really appreciated our
conversation on how we can
innovate this department across
the entire executive, but I do
have one question real quickly,
just what metrics would you use
to measure your success?
With do it under your
leadership.
Madam Cha do Senator Bergmann,
thank you so much for the help.
Well, that's a good question.
Metrics are always good, right?
Cause you got to find a
A foundation or a baseline kind
of where you're at.
I've only been with the
department for 6 months.
Um
To date, I could, I could say
that.
When I look back 6 months ago on
some of the changes that I've
made in the last couple of
months.
One was to.
Uh, one, we're hoping fairly
shortly to remove procurement
and contract out of
Our EPMO office.
Basically moving, moving, um,
procurement contracts will help
expedite
professional contracts for for
all our state agencies, probably
by 50%, uh, a lot of my, um,
Uh, folks that were working on
those contracts and procurements
we're spending almost 60 to 80%
of the time doing red lines.
So we're moving that over to
GST.
The second piece when I, when I
think of success or a little
quick wins is that recently, uh
our Sims building uh was going
through a renovation.
Uh, GST had provided 3 different
facilities that we could move
all our, you know, 206 employees
into.
Working with the GST group
working with the train, uh with
some trainers from uh the
asbestos, third party group.
We decided that, hey, look, you
know, instead of going out and
spending $2 million and moving
on relocating everybody. Let's
train everybody and for those
people who didn't feel
comfortable staying at Sim's
building during the renovation,
it would have the ability to
move, so I worked with my folks
in the DOH side of the house,
they provided uh a work some
workstations and some locations
where they could work, but those
are small success successes,
right? I mean.
Moving out contracts,
procurement.
A lot of the agencies will be a
lot more happier.
Having to to pay for um 2
million of moving, moving into 3
different buildings. I thought
that was a waste of money, but
we worked it out with all our
agencies, but those are small
ones. Those are small little
things, but in regards to
overall the state of New Mexico,
I think if we can all work
together, we'll continue to work
with public safety, continue to
build out the coverage that we
need. We're at 60% coverage for
all public safety. We have 55
agencies that are on this on the
New Mexico state system.
success in in measurement would
be to build out the system to 85
to 90% of the entire state,
bringing on all state agencies
and being able to pro provide
interoperability and
collaboration based on the state
system. Cybersecurity, when we
talk about 76 different
agencies. Somebody had talked
about disparate systems and and
IT departments eventually what
we'd like to do is centralize
all of that into one centralized
hub and standardized the entire
State to utilize the New Mexico
do it cybersecurity now.
Is that gonna happen?
Maybe not, but it, it is
definitely. Thank you very much.
Thank you send her to.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Barreras, um, how reliant is
do it on federal funding?
Uh, Madam Chair Duhig, uh,
really, to be honest with you,
New Mexico do it doesn't really
rely on too many federal funds.
We, we actually run an
enterprise and and we basically
generate revenue through all the
different state agencies that
are that we host on various
systems throughout the state,
but very rarely does do it have
any uh federal funding uh type
2, any of it now, when we work
with the other state agencies
like uh DCA D
um,
HCA, a lot of those folks have
federal funding and we work with
them to help them provide, you
know, a, a technology pathway,
but one of the things that we
say urgently just based on, you
know, today's current
administration is if you have
federal funding today and you're
relying on federal funding
today. Let's get that. Let's get
those projects moving quickly.
So we don't, so we don't lose
that money, but do it really at
this point doesn't rely on any
federal funding.
And will, and, and my
understanding was that
But, uh, the state was in the
process of applying for about
for 675 million in federal
funding from the broadband
equity and access deployment,
uh, program, and that that has
now been for that process has
now been frozen. So what, what
impact is that going to have?
And what are the plans to
Pursue other approaches to
funding if that is, that funding
is not available.
Madam Chadu, thank you for that
question. Um, definitely
understand, uh, so, as, as I was
um discussing earlier, when
we're talking about New Mexico,
do it. New Mexico do it doesn't
rely on any federal funding,
however, are attached
administratively be attached
department broadband does rely
on grants. So my understanding
is that there was a $670 million
grant, uh, obviously that.
Could be at risk. I'm not 100%
sure if it is, uh, but because
we are administratively
attached. I really don't control
any, any of that budget, but
again, as I had mentioned
earlier,
We have a big department. We
have a lot of resources and.
We would be more than welcome
and glad.
To sit at a table with the
office of Broadband and worked
through some particular projects
that might be able to get done a
lot quicker faster so we don't
lose any of that funding.
Thank you and
You know, uh,
Senator Trujillo really is the
one who got me thinking about
this, but, uh, administrative
attachment.
It's problematic.
We got, we should stop doing all
these administrative
administrative attachment. Um,
there's really no one.
No one to, to, no, no ultimate
accountability often, uh, when
that happens. Um, and I think
puts
The agency that whatever it is
that's administratively attached
to in a in a very odd position,
um.
Yeah,
Senator Townsend asked about,
uh, how you would handle
potential conflicts of interest,
Motorola. I, I think the fact
that you are looking to move
procurement to GSD, um.
Oh dresses a lot of those
concerns, uh, but I would just
ask that anytime you are in a
position of making a decision,
uh, that would involve Motorola,
um, that you take a step back
from that decision. And, and,
and someone who who did not have
the, the involvement, ah, is the
one doing that.
It's a real catch 22. We, we
want people who are experienced
and who have worked with in
these areas, uh, and then when
you get to a position like this,
it's conflict of interest. Um,
so I
I, I don't have concerns that.
You are here to funnel any
contracts to Motorola, um, and
I, I appreciate.
What you said earlier, uh, about
being aware of those potentials
for conflicts and, and that you
would assess those carefully,
uh, and recuse yourself if, if
appropriate.
So that's all I have for sure.
Thank you, before I ask for the
will of the committee, I also
echo what Senator Stephanics and
Senator Gego said as somebody
who represents rural New Mexico,
Senator Stephanics can attest to
this that during the pandemic
when we'd meet via Zoom, if it
was windy, we had to turn our
camera off in order to stay
connected, uh, because if we
kept the camera on at the same
time, you then couldn't hear our
audio. And so we're still
running into that. Eric Lujan,
the city manager of the city of
Espanola is here along with
Carlo Martinez.
The municipal clerk, we can
attest that just 2 miles south
of us is Santa Clara Pueblo, and
their amount of the pueblo
that's not connected is really
astonishing to me, so I'd like
to work with you one day to see
how we can connect even the
outlying pueblos and rural New
Mexico, and I look forward to
hearing your plans. And with
that, what is the will of the
committee?
Senator Townsend.
German.
And the Senate rules.
work.
Appointment of
Designate
Ferreras to the full Senate for
confirmation. Thank you for
that. There's been a motion to
move you forward to the full
Senate for confirmation. I'll go
for a roll roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart. Yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara.
Senator By a vote of 9 in favor,
you will move forward later this
morning to a full Senate
confirmation. We'll see you
later in the chamber.
I'm gonna have the gavel over to
our Madam Chairwoman to continue
with the items on our agenda.
As people are are leaving, if
you could take your
conversations out of the the
committee room. Ah.
Representative McQueen, come on
up.
We're gonna do HJR 2.
Ma'am Jerry, are you ready? Yep,
go ahead.
Um, and members of the
committee, each there are two
proposals of constitutional
amendment to eliminate the
pocket veto. Uh, it doesn't in
any way limit a governor's
ability to veto legislation. It
just requires a message. So as
you know, if we send up uh
legislation before the final 3
days of the session, uh, message
is required. If we send it up in
the final 3 days, the governor
has more time to review the
legislation and usually provides
a message, um,
But sometimes not. And so
sometimes, uh, the legislature
and the public's left in the
dark about why legislation
that's passed both houses, uh,
has been vetoed.
And that's it.
Great. We have 2 people signed
up in support, uh, Mason Graham
from Common Cause and Hannah
Burling from League of Women
Voters. Come on up, the
representative was very brief,
so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning.
Bagra from Common Cause in
Mexico.
The veto ability from the
governor lacks transparency and
accountability.
We believe that every veto
should receive a message from
the governor to provide
legislators and the public an
explanation why legislative
measures are being blocked
during shows ensures that
lawmaking remains open to
everyone at all stages. So we
thank Representative McQueen for
bringing this bill forward. next
for you pass.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Hannah Burling,
co-president of the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico, the
league stands in strong support
of HJR 2.
We have a number of positions
that promote transparency in
government operations, and we
believe that any governor
owes the legislature and the
public an explanation for any
veto.
We're grateful to representative
McQueen for introducing HJR2.
And we urge the committee to
give it a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. We did not have
anyone sign up in opposition, so
members of the committee.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Representative
Um
I
I don't have
Anything
Negative to say about this
legislation, you know.
The one thing I would tell you
that I think
is a little bit dis, I don't
know, I I.
One more thing that ought to be
added to this is the fact that
Committee chairs did the exact
same thing.
They pocket veto all the time.
And a bill never comes forward.
And I don't believe that's fair.
What do you say about that?
Uh,
ma'am, I will say, Senator,
you're a little off the bill at
this point I'll, I'll give you a
little bit of leeway, but.
We might argue whether I'm on
the bill or not, but pocket veto
is the topic.
Pocket veto by the governor is
the topic. I'll give you a
little bit of leeway, and then
let's move on.
Representative Senator, uh, you
know,
You know, one thing at a time,
you know, I.
I have 2 HCRs, there's another
coming to your committee,
hopefully, um, and some of the
discussion we've had in the
houses.
Well, we have all these other
issues we need to fix. Like,
can't can we fix all these other
issues? Can we do it all at
once? Nacho is largely no.
Right? I, I, I mean, what, you
know, I understand what you're
saying, uh, and believe me, you
know, some of my bills are on
that, that list that never sees
the light of day either, uh, and
it's frustrating.
Uh, but, you know, we have a
constitutional provision that
allows the governor to veto
legislation, and that's what
we're trying to address.
Well
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
I appreciate.
I appreciate the bill.
I'm probably gonna support it.
I might have a whole bunch of
comments that some might think
will be off topic when, if and
when it gets to the floor.
But I will tell you that I don't
think either one of them is
correct and
When I see
League of Women voters and other
uh groups stand up. They ought
to, they ought to be looking a
little deeper into the issue,
but I appreciate it very much
and I will support your bill.
Herbert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this, and I'm glad that it's
already on our agenda. I
definitely support this measure,
and I just really wanted to come
in, but I'm glad we also have
the opportunity to update.
Constitution to no longer say he
or him when referring to the
governor.
So thank you for that.
That's all. Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. I think one
of the important things to note
is often these bills, and
they're just a bill when they
reach the governor's desk have
been championed obviously by a
majority of the legislator and
many accounts, there's been
bills that have been pocketed
veto that received almost
unanimous support from
legislators, both in the House
and the Senate from Democrats
and Republicans.
As representatives of New
Mexico, that then is the voice
of most New Mexicans that have
reached the desk, and I think
that you bring up a very good
point is to allow that the want
and will of New Mexicans to go
away by just expiring on
someone's desk is disservice,
not to us, but a disservice to
our constituents and to all
voters. So thank you for
bringing that forward. I will
support the bill.
Anyone else?
Now, what's the will of the
committee?
Right, we have a motion for to
pass, uh, is there any objection
to that motion?
The then show 9 members voting
in favor, you have to pass.
Thank you, representative. Thank
you very much.
Come on.
Go ahead. Thank you.
Excuse me. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Um, so House Bill 193 would
allow our legislative education
Study Committee to expand into
studying early childhood
education as well as um higher
education, which I think is
important so that we get a, um,
as I've heard it called Cradle
to career view on, on our
education system as a whole. So
with that, Madam Chair, I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you. We have 2 people
signed up in support, uh, Naomi
Valdez, who is on Zoom, but
first we'll go to Meredith Main.
Go ahead and
Come on up.
And all these representatives
are so efficient in their
presentations. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee on Meredith Main, and
I'm speaking on behalf of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico, the American Association
of University Women in New
Mexico, and now, um, the local
branch of National Organization
for Women, um, we have a real
disconnect. I, I want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward, and I basically, I
wanted to say that we have a
real disconnect in our state,
um, you know, even if we look at
Dorado, uh, there are systems.
We don't have real systems here,
and I think the legislative
education Study Committee is the
best thing we have in state
government.
Um, I really love that
committee. I, I, I think all of
the people who volunteered
throughout the year to work on
the LESC. It is so amazing to
see the bipartisan work that has
gone into that committee to make
sure that we get the best
results in New Mexico and um and
we have obviously uphill
battles, but we have a real
disconnect between uh public
education and higher education.
And for many, many years, um, we
have been pushing for this kind
of uh connection and I honestly
think, uh, I know we're gonna
hear about constitutional
amendments about uh state school
boards and so on, but we need to
look at other states like
Colorado, like Massachusetts,
high performing states, and
think strategically and I think
the LESC will do a fabulous job
looking at the issues, you know,
with uh open eyes.
Uh, we have lots of problems,
but we also have lots of talent
and opportunities here in the
state. So I urge you to support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, and we have Naomi
Valdez online. Go ahead, Ms.
Valdez.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Naomi Valdez and I'm a
registered lobbyist for NEA New
Mexico. Uh, we want to thank
both of the sponsors for their
efforts in this legislation, um,
having representing thousands of
educators around the state,
including some higher ed, um,
and early childhood as that
expands into our public school
system. We're really grateful
for the proactive approach and
looking at policy and are
optimistic that this will also
include more opportunities.
To engage those most affected by
policy.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we did not have
anyone sign up in opposition
members of the committee.
Senator Bergmans, followed by
Senator Stewart. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Hello,
Representative. Uh, I just have,
I noticed in our analysis that
this has been brought before
twice and it's been vetoed each
time.
What are your thoughts on this
year's not getting vetoed.
Um
Madam Chair, and Senator, um,
obviously, I'm optimistic in
that, um, but I feel that it is
critically important that we be
offered the opportunity as a
legislature, we're, we're kind
of in this tension of us as one
branch of government having to
ask another branch of government
for oversight into that branch
of government. Um, so it's an
awkward tangle, um, but I think,
um, we have had, as you heard
from public testimony, a more
diverse group bring
attention to this issue. So I'm
certainly hopeful that that this
is something that that a
governor who is in her last
couple of years, will we be able
to allow us to do into the Thank
you, that's all.
Clara Stewart.
Any other discussion?
We are moving way faster than
our agenda today than I had
anticipated, um.
No, OK. Go ahead. I moved to
pass.
Alright, is there any objection
to that motion?
and show 8 members voting in
favor, you have to pass. Thank
you. Senator Pinto, come on up.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
We have a Senate Memorial line.
Which request Aliy to convene or
may begin, madam chair, um,
which request LSC to be a broad
working group to study and make
recommendations. The members are
listed, and this is concerning
the 520 Native American language
and culture certificate.
The working group will be
requested to include statewide
representation, uh,
recommendations to the LAC, the
legislature and our PED and uh
IED within the PED.
The 5:20 N ALC organizational
structure and accountability,
advancement professional
development, uh, data collection
and transparency will be
included with a long-term
strategy for system improvement.
And this is one of the first
steps in convening and I do have
a expert witness here. Would you
like to introduce yourself?
Good morning, yeah, uh, Buenos
dias. My name is Doctor Geneva
Vicente. I'm also from the um
Navo nation and I'm also a
director of the Danet language
mentorrentice program through
NISN and also we have um our
work group online and who are
also available for witness if
you have any questions at the
end. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
We didn't have anyone sign up in
opposition or support. So we'll
go to members of the committee.
Mhm
I guess so. I, I have one
question. I so, so what is the,
the 5:20 Native American
language and cultural
certification program.
Thank you for the question,
chair, uh, 5:20 certification is
to allow the to know, I mean all
the tribal call uh tribal
languages to um.
They have an agreement with the
state.
And so um each of the tribes
are.
They have the mend their own
assessments. And so they are
when they pass this assessment
through their own tribe. It goes
to the licensor through PED and
PED um honors that and so it
goes to the public school
system, so the language is being
taught by the um.
the respected um community.
Thank you. And it has PED. I, I
always ask on memorials where
we're asking.
We're asking uh agencies to do
something, uh, because I, cause
sometimes they don't. They don't
do what we ask. Have they
indicated a willingness to to do
what what was being asked of
them in this memorial.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, this is something
they're supposed to be doing,
but it is really hard to get
them to convene, so this would
be one of the first steps to
initiate a
Um
Consultation amongst all of
them, even all the other tribes,
nations and pueblos and the
Navajo Nation has um given
support.
Through the um other committees
uh with the.
Navajo Nation Legislative
Council.
So there there's um.
Some work that needs to be done
and this is just one of the tiny
steps we can take to require
them to come.
Right.
Thank you for bringing this up.
Sophonics.
And
Stewart.
All right.
We have a motion for to pass. Is
there any objection to that
motion?
See none show. You want be
included in this vote senator?
I'm sorry, I apologize for
stepping out. What? You want to
be included in, we're going to
the vote, you want to be
included in the vote?
You guys are good with it, I'm
good. All right, so 9 members
voting in favor.
What's that
I trust your judgment on this
bill only, yes.
Probably murdering.
Uh
Oh, it's Senator Pinto's bill,
madam chair. Oh, hold on, no, so
I'm, I'm good, I've talked to
him.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, we're
getting over, hold on.
We're gonna just hold off for a
couple of minutes, uh, on souls
is just wrapping up his
committee and so he'll be here
in a couple of minutes.
But we are, we have flown
through our agenda. I should
have put more on here.
I
11:30, yeah.
Great.
Good morning, Senators.
of an important bill over there,
but I.
Uh
handle
Oh yeah, you're go ahead on SGR
15 and, and we have, we have
heard something similar to this
earlier in the session, so.
So you might even just talk
about what the differences are
between what we had heard
previously and, and let me start
there. The prior bill for to
move back to a state.
Board of Education, uh, followed
the old model that originally
the bill started with 15
members, 5 appointed by the
governor and 10 elected, uh,
there was substantial opposition
from
The charter schools, and so over
an education, it got amended to
have two separate elections, one
for a 10-member Board of
Education, and one for a
10-member public education
commission to oversee charters,
and then, and also changed to
have one.
Appointed by the governor.
I wasn't happy with my own bill
at that point and that that's
210 member elections from the
same areas, the PEC elections
typically have very little
opposition, but that was, you
know, a gift to the charters.
but
it wasn't very feasible. It was
going to be confusing. And so in
sitting chatting with some
people, came up with a different
way of doing a state board of
education, which might be
considered a board.
Of stakeholders.
And so, what it would be is, and
the actual bill that you have in
front of you.
It's fairly short.
But what the envision would be
is the PEC would stay as it is.
Stay as it is, they would still
oversee charters.
But the state board would
consist of 9 members, all
appointed from the various
stakeholders.
One from the Senate, one from
the House, one from the minority
in the legislature, one from the
governor. I mean, and again,
those can't be actually in the
legislation that would be in the
enabling, uh, one from the
school board association, one
from the unions, one from the
superintendent association, one
from Tribal nations.
Uh, one from the charter
schools. Am I up to 9 yet? I
might have missed one.
But what that would do is it
would take away what has become
the culture wars in school board
elections, where people who
really aren't interested in high
quality public education, but
are more interested in their
particular ideology, whether it
be left or right.
But we have the board run by
people who are deeply invested
in care about education and are
appointed by those other groups
that care and are deeply
invested in education.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, we have
one person signed up in support
Miss Main.
Oh, you are. I'd never look at
what the check mark is. So we
did have organized opposition,
uh, so we're gonna, gonna let
them go first because we
generally prioritize organized
opposition. I think there will
be time left over, Miss Main,
uh, Greg Forstad.
So I have Greg Forsad, Matthew
Paul, Terry Cole, Amanda Argon,
Pope Morales, uh, I don't know
if you are all planning on
speaking. Are you all planning
on speaking? Yes. OK, then I
would have uh about 2 minutes.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Gregory
Frostad. I'm assistant secretary
of Education at the Public
Education department and thank
you for the opportunity to speak
in opposition to SJR 15.
So there is no body of research
to support that having a state
board would be a better system
of governance that it has better
student outcomes, but it would
take a lot of time and resources
to change the system of
governance that we have. time
and resources that would be much
better spent focused on student
outcomes.
The last time that we had this
system of government, governance
before 2003, there was no HED
and there was no ECECD HED came
into existence in 2005 and the
ECECD much later.
We collaborate very closely with
our sister agencies on projects
such as New Mexico Rise, uh, or
rise MM, the longitudinal data
system, the summer reading
program, the Office of Special
Education, and if we were, if
the public education department
would be to were to be pulled
out from underneath the governor
and reported to a state board
while the others reported to the
governor, it would be much more
difficult for us to collaborate
on these important projects that
we have together.
I also wanted to mention that
You're likely to hear that this
will increase stability of the
The secretary or the
superintendent, uh, because
prior to this, prior to 2003, we
had long term stability in those
positions.
That is not specific to New
Mexico, that is a national
trend.
In 2008, the tenure for a chief
state school officer was 6 years
nationally.
In just 7 years, that was cut in
half to just about 3 years and
has continued to decline. So
there's no guarantee that going
to a state board of education
would increase stability at.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Matt Paul
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. Um, I want to just
echo some of the comments that
the sponsor made. This does take
care of our issues regarding
authorizing. Um, we had, we had
some, some big issues with the
prior iteration of SJR 3, that,
that amendment changed that bill
and so we appreciate another
attempt at this. What, what are,
we have split membership on this
bill. We have some that support
it and others that want to
maintain the secretary role. Our
quest is just that we bring this
to the interim. Um, it's a big
decision that has, you know,
it's a significant change in
direction on how we accomplish
this, and we have a real great,
um, interim committee focused on
education issues that have
figured out some pretty big
things, new graduation
requirements, um, a calendar,
uh, law that was enacted years
ago, and we think they're up to
the challenge of figuring out
the best path forward with this,
so again, I'll just reiterate
that we appreciate the sponsor.
We know that this takes care of
our concerns around charter
school authorizing, which was
the issue last time, but it's a
big decision. It's 40% of the
state budget, and we think that
we should take our time
determining the best path
forward.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'mmami Aragon,
the executive director of New
Mexico Kidscan, um, and like Mr.
Paul, I think our major concerns
really involve just seeing this
new proposal after all the
conversations around uh SJR3,
and then trying to really figure
out.
Um, a path forward understanding
that a lot of the details would
obviously come under enabling
language, but it asks a lot of
stakeholders of residents of the
state of New Mexico to say vote
on this, and then later we'll
decide exactly who would be
qualified to serve, who gets a
seat, um, and so I think it's a
lot for us to digest and, and
like Mr. Paul said, we really do
feel like this is a huge
decision. This is a $5 billion
system.
Of
Of education in our state. It
serves 300,000 students. And so
even being in the situation now
where the other bill is still
alive, we're talking about this
one and trying to figure out how
gubernatorial elections would
play into this are the people
that are running for governor,
would they have a role in our
education system, should they
have an education platform?
Should they not? Uh, I think
it's a lot for education
stakeholders to take in. It's a
lot for us to decide what the
path forward is, and so we would
also ask that this be brought.
to the interim.
Right, uh, do we have Hope
Morales on Zoom?
OK
OK.
Terry Cole, Hope Morales, ahead
for 2 minutes.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
speaking today in opposition to
SJR 15. It is problematic that
this legislation gives no
indication of who the board
members would, could be, or the
mechanism by which they'd be in
appointed. It's a heart of the
matter issue. So far this
session, we've heard proposals
for a 15 member partially
elected board and 11 member
board, a fully
elected 10 member board and now
this 9 member appointed in what
looks like an undetermined way.
Some would keep the packs, some
would scrap it. Changing the
governance of public education,
it's just too important an issue
to be handled this way. The
parameters on who could serve as
superintendent under this
proposal. We think are just too
restrictive. It wouldn't be hard
to think of any number of great
people who could do this job,
but wouldn't be able to.
because of the restrictions.
Finally, the number of adult
decision makers is not driving
students unacceptably low
academic performance in New
Mexico. This resolution is not
going to fix what's broken.
Let's not advance a so-called
solution that hasn't worked
before and won't again. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Ms. Morales, go ahead for 2
minutes.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. It's
challenging to stand in
opposition to Senator Souls, a
strong advocate for students in
our state, but despite my
personal respect for him, we
stand in opposition to SJR 15.
My name is Hope Morales, and I'm
the executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico. We work with
hundreds of teachers across the
state, including some of our
state's best teachers, and there
is concern among educators
related to a state board of
education. We have followed
similar legislation this year
and have heard opposition from a
variety of legislators.
And individuals that share
different perspectives, calling
out some of the challenges,
including the strategic
collaboration and longitudinal
data sharing between state
departments, the gridlock and
dysfunction that we've seen from
similar state board systems that
would slow efforts down in a
time where we need urgency and
action, and worry about the
elimination of the PEC or the
inclusion of the two state
boards if we keep the PEC.
Joining us in these concerns are
about 70 educators across our
programs that have signed on to
our letter of
concern related to a state board
of education. Well, SJR 15 is
different from some of the other
legislation.
In that members would be
appointed. There's no mention of
the process that would be used.
This would be a major change to
our governing structure, and we
must understand the details to
be able to engage a stakeholders
to either support it or share
concerns about what is being
proposed. There is also a risk
of people that are not part of
the mentioned organizations
being represented on this
committee. Now is not the time
to focus on educational
governance, but rather solutions
for students. I urge you to
oppose SJR 15, and instead
support initiatives that focus
on
Students empower educators and
uphold our commitment to a high
quality education for all. Thank
you.
Miss Magen go ahead for up to 2
minutes, Madam Chair, I'm
Meredith Main. I'm speaking on
behalf of the League of Wom
voters of New Mexico, the
American Association of
University Women and the
National Organization for Women
Local branch and um I also want
to express my respect for the
sponsors, and I um do uh I do,
uh, we do oppose this um
iteration of the state school
board.
Part of it is we basically have
a PEC that would continue and
then a state board, and just
think of the bureaucracy of
having all of those people and
different uh boards and
commissions making decisions.
Part of um the reason I hope
that SJR3 continues or some
iteration continues as uh we
definitely believe in having a
state school board. It's really
important that we
moved to that. We're the only
state without one. however, that
I, I think the pub the public,
uh education commission has a
very focused small mission. It
has 60 state charter schools.
Um, the idea that it needs to
have a um a whole commission
when most of the charter schools
are in Albuquerque, Santa Fe,
and Las Cruces. And most of the
other regions have no charter
schools.
Or just uh smattering of charter
schools. So whatever model ends
up, I hope that we'll have the
charter schools be part of the
state board of education, and
that um you will have much more
integration. Other states,
Massachusetts has an integrated
model that I would urge you to
look at and um, you know, where
they have.
The state chartered schools as
well, they call them Horseman
schools. They're part of the
state Board of Education's
purview.
So anyway, thank you very much
sponsors and committee. Thank
you, Ms. May.
All right, we did, um,
That's everyone we had signed up
members of the committee,
Senator Brantley, followed by
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, and good to see
you guys both. I
Appreciate
The attempt to depoliticize.
The office, because they, that
that's exactly what we need to
do and, and it's interesting
cause we've had, I think it was
Senator Ortizi Pino, who brought
up a proposal like this that
would somehow kind of straight
structure, restructure CYFD in a
similar fashion.
And, and while I understand the
concerns, I wonder if it's a.
A reaction to a current state of
problems, and I say that because
in our last conversation, it, it
was noted that under
Governor uh Richardson, he had
one PED secretary, and so there
was
Continuity there that under
Martinez, there was 2 for a long
time, just, just the one.
And now under the current
administration, we had 7
secretaries, if you count the
interims, and so it just seems
that this is a leadership
problem and not a systems
problem.
And, and while we may
Want to take measures to
depoliticize it. I also wonder
if in doing so, we're climb back
accountability.
Because today we know where the
buck stops, I think, I think
back to when our agencies appear
before Senate Finance Committee
or LFC, there's one person
ultimately responsible for that
agency and and parents and
teachers and legislators and and
frankly governors know where the
buck stops.
And I just, my concern is when
you get a big board of people
where no one knows where the
real leadership or influence
resides is that they we're
losing accountability, um, it's
a balancing act, and so it's,
it's, but, but my greatest
concern and reason why I'm still
a no on this is I think because
there had been an example of
stability that was demonstrated
by governors before and so thank
you for your work on this.
Senator Townsend. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, thank you,
Senator. So.
Bro
I to
Um, appreciate this.
Talk to you briefly about it, I.
And and I think uh it's, it's,
it's a move in the right
direction.
And be on frustrated with our.
Metrics coming out of education.
I'm
I'm
Beyond frustrated. Um.
We, we've got to change. I, I
don't know whether.
Um
This is the right move or not.
I keep looking at states that
have better outcomes and
Wondering why we don't pick a
metric.
Uh, a system that works.
And then go replicate something
that works.
Um, I think we have so many
special interests that want
their input into it.
That by the time we get
everybody's
Input into it. We just screw the
whole thing up.
And kids are suffering across
New Mexico, and I, I am, I mean.
We, we're missing the, we're
missing what we're supposed to
be doing by not addressing it
properly. I think, um.
I think this is much better than
And SJR3.
I think, um,
I heard one comment, maybe a
couple of comments about taking
it to the interim and figuring
it out. I don't know what's
right.
I, I honestly don't. I'll, I'll
vote for this because I think
it's better than the last one.
I like the idea and I suspect.
A senator results that based on
your comments that the other
one's not going anywhere. I
mean, you don't like it anymore
than I do now, so, I mean, it's
messed up. It's got a
But we got a, something's gotta
happen, Madam Chair, I mean,
education is in.
It's in dire straits.
We've got to address the issue.
The only systems that work that
I
I mean, there are isolated.
Um
Public schools that have good
outcomes. I, I get it.
Um
But we have to fix the issue,
and I'm tired of playing
politics with it. I'm, I'm, I'm
about fixing it. We have
billions of dollars rat holed in
every fund in the world and our
metrics are still stink.
So, I, I do appreciate you
bringing this bill forward. I
think it's much better.
Um
But I'm, I'm tired of talking
about it. I'm tired to get, I, I
wish we could get somebody in
that would tell us what the hell
was the right process, and then
follow them, Madam Chair, thank
you,
just to one part of that, and I
apologize for sliding in late,
Madam Chair. I'm playing the 3
committee game this morning like
you do. I'm stand rounds. I'm
his expert on this, but I'm also
the uh executive director of the
school superintendents
Association and also for the New
Mexico Coalition of Educational.
leaders just want to frame that
that's about.
Uh, about
230,000 students, about 100
administrators when you take
that whole breath and it's 89
superintendents that I'm.
That we
Dude, I'm sorry, 1,000 100,
excuse me, 1000 ministers
Madam sure what Senator Townsend
talked about is the frustration
we're trying to solve.
I want to remind the committee
that in your state statutes.
What is currently the public
education department and before
that was the State Department of
Education is unchanged
statutorily.
The duties, the
responsibilities, the laws, the
New Mexico administrative code
that they produce is all there.
The real question is about how
do you lead it.
In this case, you have
As in, is in also SGR 3, you
have a state superintendent of
public instruction that carries
credentiality with them about
education into the office.
But also that is that single
point of accountability, Madam
Chair, I would report.
As you move through time, I
worked with Alan Morgan when he
was the state superintendent. We
had a state board of education.
He was the person that came
before your committees and had
to stand for what occurred
within that statute.
And so we believe it may help
limit that, it's, it's one head,
one person. The question is how
is that person higher?
Who oversees that.
And so if we're not going to
elect them.
Or we're not going to appointed
by a governor, which we're
adverse to what is another
option? We want to thank the
senator for bringing a very
unique.
Fashion forward, which involves
probably you as a legislature
and others that are the, that
are the decision makers and the
waypoint makers for the state of
New Mexico to move that policy
because that is part of the part
of the issue. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for letting me speak.
Senator Stewart
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, sin souls are working
on this your multiple Senate
joint resolutions.
I do support this change.
Then an education a long time.
Um, I remember well when we
changed this in 2003.
And all the hopes we had.
About education getting more
funding because the main reason
we passed it then was that we
didn't feel like we had a seat
at the table.
The cabinet level table.
Uh, but I've since then, just
changed my mind about it and
feel like we've made a mistake.
Um
Now we have legislators trying
to undo what's in the PED
statues because they don't like
what this governor has done.
Uh
You know, we're about to uh
You know, to try to uh uh change
all those statutes, depending
upon how we feel now.
And I just can't abide by that.
So,
I'm very concerned that one of
the opposition says.
But they don't want a
superintendent to be qualified,
experienced, and have a New
Mexico Educational administrator
license. That to me is a
minimum.
And yet our opposition says, oh.
That would eliminate something
or other, I don't know what, so
you want just a political person
popped in there. That's
certainly what we've had at
least twice in the last 20
years. I've, I've counted to see
who would qualify under this,
and I get 6 of the 9.
Uh, so
I think this is an interesting
uh.
Uh
Suggestion.
Um
I, I like it, um, I also can see
looking at it more in the
interim because this won't go on
to the ballot for another couple
of years, so if we don't pass
it.
Um, and I'm really kind of tired
of the current administration
trying to stop something that
will not impact them.
Uh, so this is not for now. This
is for later.
So I don't really like them
showing up to say no, no, no.
Uh, everybody tries to protect
their own personal space in
these legislative issues and I
don't like that either.
So.
I don't like a lot of stuff this
morning.
Uh, so I just think this is an
interesting and solid way to do
it. I want us to go back to
state school board. It's only 2
states.
Bless us with only an advisory
committee.
That don't have a state school
board.
Three states.
Don't have a state school board.
Now, some of the other states do
it differently. They have a
state school board, but they
have some type of uh.
education authority, uh, like we
have with it an appointed
secretary.
Um
So, um,
I think it's time that we uh
call this experiment failed, not
with their current.
Education designation is doing
an incredible job. I wish she'd
been the secretary for the past
6 years, and we wouldn't be in
this place. That's what we need
in education, being whiplashed
with the politics of having a
governor in charge of who runs
it.
Uh, so, um,
So I'm, I'm in favor of this,
and I'm also in favor of
studying it at LESC if we don't
get to it. So, thank you.
In her block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Senator Souls, thank you. I,
I've supported.
Um
Your bell, I think it was
yesterday, it was a long day.
Everything's kind of blurring in
in math. The reason I did is
that has a direct impact on the
classroom right now. This, this
does not, I think there's a lot
of issues with this still when
you have.
People from all over the
political spectrum coming up to
uh in opposition of it, but in
deep respect for you.
Um
It, it gives me some concern.
You know, I think we're focused
in this session on reading,
which is a good thing. I
supported that bill.
Bill Math. Uh, there's a couple
other bills that have direct
impacts on the classroom, I
support because.
I, I don't know like what
Senator Townsend said.
Um, his frustrations rather,
he's exactly right, we're
spending one of the highest
rates per capita per student,
and yet we're 51st.
And I don't think this is the
right way to go, we've already
had some issues with this, we,
we can't seem to keep, uh, some
leadership stability, which is a
problem.
And I think New Mexico's got
some other issues as well that
we need to fix. But for me, I'm
gonna support something that
impacts the classroom right
away.
Um, and when I see
The, uh, education assistant
secretary here with
League of Women voters and
charter schools and chamber of
commerce, um.
All those different areas I've
never seen them agree on
anything before till today.
Uh, that carries a lot of weight
with me, but.
The other thing that carries a
lot of weight with me serves
you.
Um, I've known you for a little
bit of time, but.
I think you're, you're a good
man who cares deeply about
education.
And um
We'll see how this goes, I think
the interim committees probably
a smart thing to do.
Um
Take a look at this a little bit
more, but I appreciate you kind
of compromising here and there
on this.
But it's not a direct impact
right now in the classroom and
um.
A lot of opposition, so
Thank you, sir, for putting this
forward.
Um, you don't have my support in
this, but you definitely have my
support in the other stuff, so
thank you, Madam Chair.
All right, I don't have anyone
else on the list, um, I'll just
say,
go ahead. I was just gonna
comment some of the things that,
that people in opposition
indicated was there aren't the
details about how this happens,
and this is a resolution, those
details cannot be in the
resolution, if this were to pass
the voters, that's when all the
details get filled into that.
And so, as far as specifically
which groups would be appointed.
I was not, I could not put that
into.
This part of a resolution for
the voters to vote on. That
would be enabling if it were to
pass the voters.
And that that's an important
part in several of the people in
opposition didn't understand
that. It sounded like from their
opposition. Thank you. Yes,
Senator, I have that same
impression had had you put all
that in here?
We would have been taking it all
out because you're not supposed
to, we, we, we can't have our
constitution be 800 pages long,
um, that is for enabling
legislation.
Um, so Stan said I was gonna
make a few comments where you're
just gonna go for a motion.
OK. Um,
Yeah, I'll, I'll say.
I was as surprised as Senator
Stewart, that someone would
Object to.
Uh, uh, yeah, the same the
parameters are too strict and
the parameters are qualified,
experienced, and, and licensed
in New Mexico.
That, um,
Yeah
That, uh,
That kind of undercuts the
credibility of of the rest of
the the comment, um, and this,
this address is my concern about
that I had on SJR3, which was
that if we were having.
An elected school board that we
would see more of that
politicization, um,
And, and so I, I like this
approach much better and uh
And I'm really and I'm thankful
for you for
Being creative, um, and, and
coming back with this, uh, and I
look forward to voting for it.
The center's phonics.
Madam Chair, I moved to table
with deep respect.
OK, that's a non-debatable
motion. Uh, let's do a roll call
vote on that on that motion.
Senator Bergman's past.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly
Senator Brantley is excused.
Senator Gallegos, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil, no.
Senator Bergman's.
No. Senator Doha.
No, with.
Uh, 5 against, 3 in favor of
that motion fails.
All right, we're on motion for
to pass. Um, I suspect we know
what the vote will be, but let's
go ahead and do a roll call for
that as well.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Jaramil. Yes.
Senator Duhaig
Yes, with 5 in favor, 3 against,
you have a new pass. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair
and committee, I really
appreciate waiting for me so I
could get over here. Um, my
plan, the other one is on the
table on the floor, and I've
asked the leader to keep it
there and see if this one
catches up in leapfrogs over,
uh, if it seems to get legs to
continue to move forward, so
thank you.
And members, just so you know,
uh, one of the reasons we're
doing some of these education
bills today is because we will
be doing the confirmation of,
uh, Mariana Padilla, uh, on
Wednesday.
