Center happen here Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator my Estes.
Senator McKenna.
Here center Morris.
Centerman yes.
Etcetera PDS yes here Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Center PO.
Senator Rodriguez.
share Senator Shendo.
Etcetera souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You have a car Mr president.
Thank you would like to welcome
everyone here to the New Mexico
state Senate today I would ask
Shannon Pinto the pledge of
allegiance and Spanish to be led
by Senator McKenna and the
salute to New Mexico flag to be
led by Senator share.
Creator great mystery of all of
us grant us the collective
wisdom that transcends are rigid
as our pre filed biases
explore difficult subjects that
contain our shortfalls and fear
of failure.
Let us remember that our
differences to not have to be
our divisions.
and our ability to just deep and
hard questions has way more
important than offering
superficial answers.
We pray that imagination
So when our work as co creators
with you lord is complete.
What binds us together is
greater than what tribes of
support.
eleven but the cameras present
the phone unless you own a the
yield individuals going to be
done it just took off by the
totals.
Once again would like to thank
all of our guests in the gallery
have joined us today like to
thank all of our senators again
for being here and for the
wonderful work that you've done
during this first week of the
session with that I'll turn it
father into chi thanks again for
your edification and your words
which are certainly appreciated
members I do have some sad news
about a Senate employee a long
committee under the direction of
senator John Arthur Smith died
on Tuesday January seventeenth
twenty twenty three and so I
Cross blue shield
will be here with their van
giving free flu shots in these
parking lot from ten AM to two
Wednesday staff from motor
vehicles will be in the house
lounge help legislators with
simple vehicle title
registration registration title
about that if you have any
questions please call Lee with
in our office nine eight six
four seven two seven in terms of
reception with that Mr president
yield other members and Senator
Griggs I think has announcements
and then I'll come back and give
a sense of what we're gonna do
Thank you Mr president we.
The agency consent to allow for
cameras to be used in the
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to making an
announcement in addition gas.
no objection proceeds are.
Thank you Mr president
name is Katie prevalent Katie if
you please stand.
Katie is the is the daughter of
Reverend David and Jody pearl.
Katie is the granddaughter of
attending the association of
counties meeting Katy works for
the Carlsbad police department
and has worked for them for
nearly eleven years she's been
where they need to go where they
need to be they work to get
vital information from people
who.
talk about are merging she
system.
In twenty nineteen Katie was
elected to the New Mexico
national emergency number
association and to the New
Mexico Nina vice president and
the secretary treasurer of the
New Mexico APCO.
Last year she was elected as a
treasurer for the New Mexico
safety leader leadership
certification she was the first
person in New Mexico to obtain
this high level of
certification.
Senator spare time Katie makes
jewelry so if the if the body
would help we recognize and
Senator Griggs Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to.
talk to economic advisers and
and different people that can
advise us in the direction the
economy is going today I present
Eleven sixty two of the railroad
How the number of trains on the
tracks have slowed down.
That's an indication of what the
economy is doing right now.
we're a condom is going so
Mister president I just thank
you for the opportunity to
present my guest thank you thank
you Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent to introduce
some of our guests that are here
in the gallery today no
objection proceed Senator thank
you Mr president Senate
colleagues I think all of us
when I grow up we have our
friends here from concilio CDS
is a private not for profit
community based organization in
southern New Mexico in my
district and district thirty
senior issues and health issues
of social justice service social
services and this organization
has incorporated
intergenerational civic
passion and commitment some
other programs include foster
grandparents were volunteers
serve in schools head start
programs and youth centers by
offering emotional and mentoring
there our senior companions they
are all volunteers are older
adults to help other older older
adults with daily tasks
necessary to live a healthy and
independent quality of life when
they're also serving veterans
CDS are doing just that so if
you will send a family please
help me in welcoming these
wonderful seniors to the capital
today.
joining us in the gallery this
morning no objection proceed
Senator Mr president joining us
in the gallery this morning are
members of the help New Mexico
foster grandparents give one to
one daily attention to children
with special needs well our
senior companions are volunteers
ensure I have red chili every
time we meet together and so we
can always guarantee a good bill
with them and number two I stand
here as a senator because of
Arriba County thank you for what
you do and to advocate to
continue the good fight I'm here
to support you the land that
could include that though that
the lady that which is the most
Laboratory David and I have been
colleagues for a long time he's
a former assistant county
manager of the county of Rio
Arriba and now advocates for New
Mexicans and tries to find ways
and Mr president to please help
me and welcoming our seniors of
New Mexico and other that any
idea as well as Mr David
Trujillo.
Y. Pino I think is present
agency presents some
announcements and perhaps a
personal remark this morning.
This presents a first of all
senator Wirth our leader invited
you may not be able to go to the
reception but this is a Senator
is a project is in my district
it's also Center Hamlin's a
district and I just want to if
billion dollars to the New
Mexico economy.
Let me try and put that in some
perspective that's more than our
economic development initiatives
with spaceport.
the sexy items that get a lot of
attention the spaceport cannabis
the film industry what's
happening in Santa trace the
dwarfs all of those initiatives
combine.
dollars in taxes to the state
Senate races enormous success
story and it's something that
this chamber in the legislature
and the governor's this and pass
should recognize and take a
And we out computer incubators
in Mexico because we're on the
border with Mexico.
Fox com imports fifty thousand
computers from what is across
Mexico is the key to our future
and we need to continue to to
really support what's happening
in Santa Theresa and so I I hope
you can you can you'll you'll
join us in that initiative.
today's meals day.
And I would like to recognize my
Amigos of Centerville who is
here he's not wearing his amigo
tie but he's wearing is amigo
going to the luncheon for the
Migos and I'll just tell you
this again is an incredible
economic driver we we last year
before last we were in Mexico we
governor and other leaders in
the state to try to promote New
Mexico economically.
Agency president may just what
Agency present it's hard it's
impossible to turn on the news
in the last few days without New
Mexico leading the national
news.
CNN morning programs.
And I cannot imagine we we we've
got we've grown up with cherish
in center Lopez Lopez daughter
around here I cannot imagine the
father of daughters.
recognize the victims that are
in this chamber for one.
And and I'd also like us to
focus on a few things one is
that.
Could be released.
And I'll note that the judge in
Bernalillo county decided to not
bail without a presumptive.
Bill.
On bail.
We repeat that the judges
And I and I use this to show
that oftentimes people in our
state will sell the legislature
needs to pass this and
legislation is passed us and
that's the reason that we have
And the judges doing the
appropriate thing here to.
I've had to ask myself the last
few days.
Is this judge treating this case
Because all New Mexicans should
have the same support and
protection as elected officials.
And I trust those of you who
will follow Senate Judiciary no
Thank you centers about this.
Mr president members of the
Senate of there's a group of six
of family medicine residents who
are interested in health policy
and because they want to find
out how their experience in the
field of Family Medicine can
and with Dr Alicia Gonzalez is a
third year medical resident so
I'd like to the the body to
their names the doctors Ashton
Duncan.
Kerry's Indore Tenzin Yang chin
Thank you senator to subpoena
Thank you Mr president we I do
have a couple of well.
Important to give a road map
today is Senator survived this
is birthday.
you lead us and a Happy Birthday
to Senator contest.
Happy birthday to you Happy
Senator Ingle and please come
down I'll Senator on this.
Senator Wirth.
coming out of the printer is the
word I am getting from Senator
manual so as soon as that comes
down we will get that red in
center but he and I will roll
report yes that's unanimous
consent we go to that ideal
Senator many us thank you Mr
president you know a Senator
want to say I forgot to get your
Some under garments
You have a choice that we can
get your birthday present.
and may want another ethics
complaint against you which I'm
cert I'm stacking up I've got a
long list so so this disabuse
yourself of the undergarments I
think you and I could probably
really like to have for your
birthday like a chocolate cake
or strawberry cake or.
This presentation senator Ron
Mr president good center I think
I can do a life size one for him
it is not much over five by
four.
years Senator Stewart and I have
been connoisseurs and frontier
of Scotch and that's based
little bit on her heritage and
ancestry and she she helped
does begin uh introduced me to
Bourbon I'll just say the Amigos
last year went to Kentucky we
were in Kentucky for the
Kentucky Derby the week before
and I know you Senator were
that that I'd welcome very much
as a birthday gift it's I think
it's got a little pony on the
top of it and I think it's about
I know fifty years old so I I I
to give you that is the
sixty some candles is quite a
bit I mean I mean you have to go
to the bank and get a loan to
get that number of candles.
Say no further announcements.
the gallery.
some of my a community members
from the land up there is a
formal councilman and some other
community leaders that that
really do a great job of
those in need it and the and a
week ago so formal former
councilman as well and so if you
could just please help come help
me welcome my guests from bland
Thank you Mr president while we
wait for the committee report
down we're gonna go ahead start
the introduction of legislation
so unanimous that we got that
our business introduction
legislation.
senators to phonics and act
relating to rural health care
providers creating the rural
health care delivery fund to
provide grants to defray
operating losses of rural health
read twice by title is ordered
print and referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee that's Senate finance
committee Senate bill seven
Senate bill eight introduced by
to the center of excellence at
the New Mexico institute of
mining act and technology
amending the duties of the
energy conservation and
management division of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources revolving loan fund
authorizing the loans making
appropriations Senate bill eight
Senate bill eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
by Senator pope and act relating
to elections amending the absent
voter Act providing for a
permanent absentee voter list
and permanent absentee ballot
Vance Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one one.
Senate bill one or two
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to more motor
Senate bill one or two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate transportation
business attacks Committee that
appropriation to the Veterans
Services Department to of to
fund a veteran police and first
responders post traumatic stress
disorder therapy program Senate
committee Senate bill one oh
three.
Senate bill one of four
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to transportation
making appropriations for
committee and Senate finance
committee that Senate bill one
of four.
Senate bill one of five
introduced by Senator Tallman
and act relating to taxation
five Senate bill one of I
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate transportation
business tax committee Vance
health care including physician
assistants and pharmacists in
the definition of health care
practitioner for the purpose of
making certain provisions in
of six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one oh six Senate
seven Senate bill one of seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health of public
affairs committee and Senate
technical education program unit
adding the career technical
education program unit to the
program cost calculation Senate
bill one await Senate bill one
introduced by Senator Brandt and
act relating to education and
acting the education freedom
account act providing powers and
duties providing for education
creating a review commission
making appropriations Senate
bill one oh nine Senate bill one
online having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
Senate bill one ten introduced
by Senator Tallman and act
relating to chiropractic
practice expanding eligibility
professional member vacancies of
exemptions from the
chiropractic physician practice
act Senate bill one ten Senate
bill one ten having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by Senator souls and
act relating to licensure
providing for the temporary
suspension of the collection of
provisional and initial license
appropriations Senate bill one
eleven Senate bill one eleven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health Public
Affairs Committee Vance Senate
to natural resources authorizing
the natural resources trustee to
bring suit for damages caused by
release of an injurious
substance pursuant to the
natural resources trustee Act
injurious substances providing
limitations amending the natural
resources trustee Fund providing
that the natural resources
trustee maybe join a civil
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight making
appropriation Senate bill one
twelve Senate bill one twelve
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
Senate bill one thirteen
introduced by Senator Ortiz the
Pino and act relating to
education and acting the equal
education opportunities
schools creating an income tax
and corporate income tax credits
for contributions to tuition
scholarship organizations that
provide educational scholarships
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee vents
Senate finance committee Senate
provided for licensed concealed
carry of a firearm in
restaurants that serves
spiritualists electors and cider
Senate bill one fourteen.
Senate bill one fourteen.
Senate bill one fifteen
introduced by Senator Campos and
act making appropriation though
Senate bill one fifteen.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate engine a rural and
Senate bill one sixteen
introduced by Senator Hamblen
large capacity feeding device
providing exceptions providing a
penalty Senate bill one sixteen
Senate bill one sixteen having
Senate bill one seventeen
introduced by Senator souls and
act relating to licensure and
acting the prescribing
psychologist practice act
professional psychologist Act to
remove prescribing psychologists
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
Thence Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one
seventeen.
Senate bill one eighteen
introduced by senators by the
and worth an act relating to
vulnerable or disabled and
unlawful use of a power of
attorney providing penalties
Senate bill one eighteen Senate
bill one nineteen having been
that Senate bill one eighteen.
Senate bill one nineteen
introduced by senators Duhig and
worth an act relating to
nineteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
public affairs committee.
Then Senate Judiciary Committee
that Senate bill one nineteen.
flexibility for children of
military families Senate bill
one twenty Senate bill one
twenty having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Education
act relating to taxation
creating a temporary gross
receipts tax deduction for
certain food and beverage
establishments that have not
received certain grant funds
appropriation declaring an
emergency Senate bill one twenty
one Senate bill one twenty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration to widen Paseo
the north the in northwest
and tax committee that Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one twenty two.
Senate bill one twenty three
introduced by Senator Lopez and
if released pending trial and
that no release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community confirming the
the Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee thence Senate finance
committee Senate bill one twenty
three.
Senate bill one twenty four
public employers under certain
conditions increasing the
maximum amount of pension that a
member is permitted to earn
pursuant to the public employees
committee thence Senate finance
committee that Senate bill one
twenty four.
Senate bill one twenty five
introduced by Senator Tallman
and act relating to public
state to file annual disclosures
related to employment income
assets and liabilities
professional licenses gifts and
procurement providing duties
creating a penalty renaming the
financial disclosure Act
throughout the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight the disclosure Act
repealing the financial
being laws nineteen ninety three
chapters forty six sections
thirty nine through forty five
laws nineteen ninety five
chapter one fifty three section
Senate bill one twenty five
Senate bill one twenty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
Vance Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one twenty five.
relating to limitations of
actions eliminating the statute
of limitations for actions for
damages due to childhood sexual
abuse applying the elimination
twenty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee Vance Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one twenty
rail road from New Mexico's
southern border to New Mexico's
northern border Senate bill one
twenty seven Senate bill one
twenty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by senators Duhigg
Lopez and Korea have built an
act related children amending
the family in need of court
ordered services act and the
ordered primary for to the
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee dance Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one twenty
eight.
providing for the implementation
of constitutional amendment one
approved by the voters in twenty
twenty two which provides for an
additional distribution from the
permanent school fund for
Senate Education Committee then
set Senate finance Senate bill
one twenty nine.
Senate bill one thirty
introduced by senators Lopez and
Hickey for the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee.
Senate bill one thirty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health Public Affairs
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
Senator Wirth.
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted.
Senator George when you us
The eyes have it the committee
part is been adopted Senator
Wirth Mr president M. S. because
that we know that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business senator
Wirth I thank you Mr president
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules we
suspended the record show that
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so as I indicated this
morning the plan is to go now on
the third reading on house bill
one so with that Mr president
Mr president can we have
security about another money Mr
present he left.
Mr president us this consent in
the Senate the record show that
all action replacing house bill
house bill one everybody knows
that's the feed bill that's what
pays our staff that's what pays
are interim committees and and
as we move through the
legislature throughout the year
board and we saw some great
percentages drops because we
don't have staff here and then
as we move forward and come out
of that technology driven
costs of caught up with the
legislature as well as everybody
else.
And so you'll see an increase
across the board about total for
about ten point nine percent and
some some issues in there so
that we can be more professional
lives are self I think we begin
that path in the Senate in in we
need to continue that for
to handle it sometimes in and we
need to look at that and study
that and see how we move forward
we know that that two point five
million that's in there we had a
that Mr president will stand for
questions Senator much Mr
present I need to Canet and
consent to expert witness Raul
Burciaga from Legislative
First of all house bill one
should be a unanimous a
unanimous bill there should be
nothing controversial in it ever
so the debate we had in finance
was really about a few lines on
page seven line nineteen to
twenty four that's what the
debate was.
And it all has to do with the
Now I I might still have voted
against it but I think there's
plenty of colleagues on my side
over here that would have would
have supported it not to speak
for any of them.
And I know that sometimes people
over this welding shut up shared
on flight.
But this is important this is
Absolutely I'm with them.
It's lines nineteen to twenty
four on page seven that did not
need to be there.
And that's that I'm gonna vote
against it but that's why it's
because of lines nineteen to
twenty four on page seven not
the rest of it.
And I would hope that we would
have today and we chose not to
thank you Mr president.
Senator share any further
debate.
Senator.
believe there's anything
alarming in the feed bill at all
the the contention came because
they tried to sneak in this
feasibility study into HB one
house is that doing it was a
process in doing so they took
the field bill and they made
we were trying to do something
sneaky and inconsistent and that
is exactly what the public hates
about politics is what played
out in this bill I support the
professionalizing the legislator
is a standalone issue and I'm
proud to stand on that issue and
have an open debate with anyone
about why I'm in support of it
the concern here isn't in this
land lack of transparency it was
disrespectful to the public it
was disrespectful to my side of
the aisle it's disrespectful to
days since legislator thank you
Mr president thanks time any
further debate on house bill one
with emergency clause.
would you for a couple of
questions Semenya's detailed yes
Mr president.
yes.
In center yes we're we're
adopting the LFC recommendation
the alley S. C. rest
recommendation the LCS
recommendation and then some
anybody happens to care to look
at this.
A clear deal there is agency
requests and then there's the
LFC recommendation so I just
do have concerns as Senator
share has that some of it may be
a little
thanks Center was we do have
further debate we have senator
Byrd thank you Mr president and
and I don't have a question I
just want to add on to what some
of my colleagues have said
Senator Diamond mentioned.
but they've added on a two point
five million dollars for study I
am not even opposed to the study
I'm gonna vote yes but I'm I'm
very concerned or gonna start
paddling different elements in
the bills and because you want
Without having a study forced
into that and that's the final
thing I want the body to
understand is two point five
million dollars is an arbitrary
figure.
or investigation about how much
a study would cost there's not
even a scope of work attached to
this as yet it's an arbitrary
figure we cannot do business
spend two point five million
dollars for seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar project so it
and and I'm hoping the money
would revert I don't think
there's a reversion clause in
comments Mr president and I've
had this discussion with
chairman and in the committee
this morning this is not a good
step out and we need to make
sure that the fee bills just V.
sponsor yield for a question
please sentiment HSD yield
present yes Senator Wirth Mr
president center I was just
wondering if you could just now
received the bill I know you've
seven item ill is your chance
your your expert witness can
give me I was not in finance
push present I'm just trying to
get clarity for me and my
in by the other side and and so
we know when the legislature and
we're we're gonna hear bills
throughout the session about
modernization the legislature
how do we accomplish getting
in Senate finances we're
Senators they we have fifty
thousand people we represent I
have five house members in my
district and and how is that
that they've chosen I don't know
the reason why that two point
five was chosen because we just
wanted to be safe but what I
envision is is when we go
Council will draft an R. F. P..
In the R. P. will go out and
I'll come back to council an
award do you ever applied for
issue and put it there we talk
about should be in house bill
two but you know does that make
something else but we need to
begin that process the other
legislative update bills and you
gets a staffer in I mean we need
a good study Representative
what's going to happen I don't
think you're arguing with the
study is I think that's a a body
going to go through an RFP
process and then we're probably
gonna divide between the house
and the Senate.
nice phone and I don't remember
bill specifically sending that
to Legislative Council do that
force I'm just trying to
understand why we're doing
the last minute even though they
debated it last night I wasn't
there as I was not in finance so
I just have some of Harper on
all yield I stand appreciate it
thank you for answering my
question.
Thank you senator Harris.
Senator so the.
language to see if it seems to
be a predetermined study or not
one thing's I do notice on page
seven line twenty.
Is consider the feasibility of
in is to see if it is feasible
or not feasible and if it were
feasible and what it would take
to do that
and and I agree that that for
presents center yes miss
president and the Center when
the US so the total amount for
those of us who are.
Forty five point seven million.
And our agency president
ceremonials forty five point
seven million that is does that
clarify something the eleven
point seven that you see on the
FIR is the total cost for the
session the forty five point
seven below is is a total cost
for year round operation for LCS
and and and thank you for that
clarification Sen ominous is
this.
Is this took to rounding error
the the total cost of the
legislative branch of government
building services you're
correct.
A bill to around and and this
president and ceremonials if
you're if you're able to
You do the math.
service at the I'll I'll trust
rounding on that and I just I
that we may be modernizing but
that the cost of this co equal
branch of government is about
one half of one percent of all.
fullpercent winner look at the
total cost of state government
in terms of in terms of of the
activities that we are involved
in the oversight that we are
called upon to do but the fact
think we need to be able to
communicate to folks.
That in terms of how the
legislature operates and the
fact that we we do operate
His name is present will Senator
Munoz yield Senator mostly yield
yes.
Agency presentation we could use
to skip the feasibility study
the bill and it is saying and to
study if it is feasible if
council comes back and says
request Legislative Council say
is this number feasible and it
Council services can then say we
don't need the money and we can
reverted to the we can't
reverted to another funder
another direction it'll revert
how could not be feasible for us
I mean it could I just put us
all in the room agreed that it's
feasible that we can do it and
just like I said just take the
money let's do it I mean I
supported everyone here I'm not
and and could Senator but the
feasibility study is really
about district offices right
it's about you I I don't
remember your Senate district
but I'm in Senate district for
encompasses a large area and and
do I determined as at district
office going requests what is it
going Gallup or does it go in
Zuni and and so it's really
you turn on the power how do you
turn on the lights how do you
make sure the gas and get
information on Google and so
this it's kind of getting
intense about what the study is
pen to paper to vehicles to to
the office space to to how many
staff members.
want to hear what does this body
want to hear I can tell you this
body once a year because I know
you guys.
We want to hear that we can do
it.
And that's what we're gonna do
You know and Senator office had
a wonderful which was a tweeter
quote or something and I said
you know a lot of the goals
objectives round here been the
kind of the same for twenty
percent of kids on Medicaid we
got the top you know poverty
leveling kids in New Mexico if
we can't build office in Silver
do it the Senate wants to do it
Senator Wirth for us to do it
center a result you want to do
it I want to it let's let's just
go get it done and let's go
building office and Silvercity
let's just do it you know what
let's let's just get it done
thank you Mr.
Using a ninety term.
Thanks senators any further
debate.
the records show the rules being
called and all those present
voting the firm to accept those
learning negative by a show of
hands Senator is where voting to
Senator Gallegos forty now
Senator share voting no Senator
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative I in the negative
check for two point five million
dollars to Center speedy syncing
figured out the feasibility.
You Mr president I want to make
a Saudi for for the vote but I
service you can't just go hire
an attorney that's a bill
drafter from the university New
Mexico we have such specialized
attorneys in at all let's talk
great staff and an educational
study committee's right and
they're so specialized and that
includes our staff in this
building and on the rostrum
right and so those are
example and house bill one with
with what we're doing to
Legislative Council LFC L. E. S.
C. and all the other agencies
and so that's very important as
we move forward throughout the
session I appreciate the vote
thank you Mr president Senator
many of us.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president asks that
we got our business nonsense
miscellaneous where that order
business announcements saying to
legislation one that order
business introduction
legislation.
The reader to read.
Senate bill one thirty one
public school capital outlay
allowing the public school
facilities authority budget to
be based on a five year average
limiting offsets for school
districts reducing the local
credit eliminating offsets for
charter schools reducing the
local match for prekindergarten
projects by fifty percent
providing technical cleanup
committee Senate bill one thirty
one Senate bill one thirty two
introduced by Representative
Senator Stewart and act relating
to health care and acting
requirements for preventive care
and treatment of sexually
transmitted infection providing
that age does not affect ability
to consent to preventive care
committee Senate bill one thirty
two.
Senate bill one thirty three
introduced by Senator Stewart
and act relating to recycled
information and a photo copy
your image of the sellers or
offers identification legal
document demonstrating ownership
and the catalytic converter
three Senate bill one thirty
four introduced by Senator
Gonzalez and act relating to
exotic animals prohibiting the
use of exotic animals in
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee sends to
Senate Judiciary Senate bill one
thirty four.
and listen for other on track
equipment in addition to trains
Senate bill one thirty five.
Senate bill one thirty I have
Introduced by senator Neville
and act relating to the public
regulation commission providing
that the salary of a pub public
regulation commissioner shall be
printed referred to the Senate
health of public affairs
committee sends to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one thirty six.
Senate bill one thirty seven
introduced by senator Neville
to physical education providing
that recess may be aligned with
other programming Senate bill
one thirty seven.
Senate bill one thirty seven
have been read twice by title
Sir printed and referred to the
and act relating to civil
actions amending repealing and
enacting provisions of the
Medicaid false claims act
increasing penalties Senate bill
one thirty eight.
eight Senate bill one thirty
nine introduced by Senator
Rodriguez for the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee and act making
behavioral health services and
supportive housing Senate bill
one thirty nine Senate bill one
thirty nine have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the.
the mortgage finance authority
act oversight committee and act
making appropriation to the New
Mexico housing trust fund Senate
bill one forty.
forty.
Senate bill one forty one
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
and act making appropriation for
operational support for a
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee thence to
finance Senate bill one forty
one.
Senate bill one forty two
forty two Senate bill one forty
two have been read twice by
title disorder printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
maximum award of a gaming
machine on the premises of a
nonprofit organization gaming
operator licensee Senate bill
one forty three.
Senate bill one forty four
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to public property
authorizing the facility's
Management Division of the
General Services Department to
Senate bill one forty four so
the one forty four had been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee intends to finance
Senate bill one forty four
twelve twelve service accrued by
certain police members pursuant
to the public employees
retirement act Senate bill one
forty five so the one forty five
introduced by Senator Shendo and
act relating to taxation
amending the amount of tax
liability require an assessment
by the secretary of taxation and
defeating a tax with sales
suppression software constitutes
tax fraud clarifying processes
for protesting the value or
Senate bill one forty six so the
one forty six hundred twice by
title is for printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee fence to Senate
Ation providing for a tax
expenditure budget providing for
destination based sourcing for
the cannabis excise tax
requiring the taxation and
revenue department to make
for certain property providing
that certain licenses shall not
be issued or renewed if the
licensee is of the liquid
and gross receipts in the gross
receipts and compensating tax
act allowing the department to
require receipts allowed to be
deducted from gross receipts to
be reported separately
federal American rescue plan act
of twenty twenty one in a gross
receipts tax exemption for
certain health care providers
receipts tax deductions removing
a requirement that a gross
receipts or similar tax levied
by a tribe be at the rate not
greater than the total of the
the amount of trip tax to be
imposed clarifying that when the
premium tax is imposed on
certain taxpayers and when
certain credits will be applied
Chapter sixty five section
thirteen amending repealing and
enacting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight declaring
an emergency Senate bill one
Senate bill one forty seven.
Senate bill one forty eight
introduced by senator Ortiz the
Pino for the Legislative Health
workers and community peer
counselors at community colleges
and branch campuses Senate bill
one forty eight Senate bill one
forty eight have been read twice
Pino for the Legislative Health
and Human Services Committee and
act making appropriation to the
higher education department for
a study to determine the
feasibility of a program that
one forty nine have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee sense
to the finance committee Senate
bill one forty nine Senate bill
services and conduct an
investigation upon a failure to
comply with a plan of care
Senate bill one fifty Senate
Senate bill one fifty one
introduced by Senator pope and
act relating to higher education
amending and enacting sections
of the graduate scholarship act
ordered printed referred to the
Senate Education Committee sense
to finance Senate bill one fifty
one.
Senate bill one fifty two
introduced by senator Neville
compete with an existing
business Senate bill one fifty
two.
Senate bill one fifty two AM and
read twice by title is ordered
by Senator Rodriguez and act
relating to the Legislative
Council Service requiring the
Legislative Council Service to
publish on the legislative
bill one fifty three Senate bill
one fifty three and the read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee tents to
finance Senate bill one fifty
three.
information science technology
faculty positions at the New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology New Mexico State
University and the university of
fifty four Senate bill one fifty
five introduced by Senator
Padilla and act relating to
telecommunications amending the
Senate bill one fifty five
Senate bill one fifty five have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate.
Indian rural and cultural
and act making appropriation to
the tourism department for a
keep New Mexico true statewide
anti litter campaign with
educational outreach Senate bill
Senate bill one fifty seven
introduced by Senator Kernan and
act relating to municipalities
providing a distribution of
fifty seven Senate bill one
fifty seven have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
expenditures by state agencies
required by law Senate bill one
fifty eight Senate bill one
fifty eight have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
workforce solutions department
for a local news fellowship
program Senate bill one fifty
nine so the one fifty nine have
been read twice by title is
by senators Neville and worth
and act relating to public
service company regulation
transferring responsibility for
and enforcement railroad safety
enforcement and ambulance
standards transferring personnel
functions of money
appropriations other property
or household goods pursuant to a
contract removing outdated
references in the aviation Act
and the rural L. service err
repealing ended acting sections
of NMSA nineteen seventy eight
Senate bill one sixty.
to finance Senate bill one
sixty.
Senate bill one sixty one
introduced by Senator Stewart
and act relating to the
program amending and enacting
sections of the pesticide
pesticide control act Senate
bill one sixty one.
committee Senate bill one sixty
one.
L. and.
care amending a section of the
continuing Care Act to update
the disclosure requirements for
continuing care providers Senate
bill one sixty three Senate bill
Senate bill one sixty four
introduced by Senator Tallman
and act relating to public lands
setting the royalty rate on
future oil and gas development
leases on state trust lands to
Senate bill one sixty four have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate conservation
committee thanks to Senate tax
business and transportation
and acting the local choice
Energy act authorizing customers
of you public utility or
cooperative to aggregate their
electric loads in their local
rulemaking providing a penalty
Senate bill one sixty five
Senate bill one sixty five
hundred twice by title is
ordered print and referred to
the Senate conservation
and others and act relating to
health care and acting sections
of the health care purchasing
Act The New Mexico insurance
code the health maintenance
transmitted infection providing
that age does not affect ability
to consent to preventive care
Senate bill one sixty six Senate
bill one sixty six have been
Senate bill one sixty two
introduced by Senator Hamblen
The one sixty two have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
introduced by senator Neville a
joint resolution provide
proposing an amendment to
article twelve section six of
the constitution of New Mexico
transition period Senate joint
resolution one.
Senate joint resolution one
having read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee
introduced by Senator souls a
joint resolution proposing to
amend article two of the
constitution of New Mexico by
adding a new section twenty five
So chart resolution to have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee thanks to
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate joint resolution to.
thirty three of the constitution
of New Mexico to require
elections for justice of the
Supreme Court judge of the court
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee tents
to Judiciary Senate joint
resolution three.
Senate joint resolution for
the terms of members of the
house of representatives and to
six years the terms of members
of the Senate staggering the
terms of representatives and
Senate joint resolution for.
Senate joint resolution for
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
joint resolution requesting the
Congress the United States to
call a convention upon the
application of two thirds of the
states for the limited purpose
of proposing amendments to the
government and limit the terms
of office for federal officials
and members of Congress Senate
joint resolution I.
Senate joint resolution six
introduced by Senator Sedillo
Lopez Representative Ferrary and
rights including the right to
clean and healthy air water soil
and environment a stable climate
and self sustaining ecosystems
repealing the current pollution
control provisions of article
twenty eight section twenty one
Senate joint resolution six.
Senate resolution one.
Introduced by senator pope and
others a resolution enacting a
Senate resolution one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the rules committee Senate
resolution one.
impact of Corona virus disease
in twenty nineteen honoring the
sacrifices that essential
workers of made to protect and
save lives in their communities
declaring support for a
victims of Corona virus disease
twenty nineteen Senate Joint
Memorial one.
Senate Joint Memorial one having
been read twice by title is
Senate Joint Memorial to
introduced by senator Munoz a
to study employee classification
and compensation systems a
budget practices across all
branches of state government
Senate Joint Memorial to.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the rules committee that's to
health and public affairs
committee Senate Joint Memorial
Pavia and Lopez a Joint Memorial
recognizing the Los Amigos
Lenovo Mexico as good will
ambassadors for its work in
promoting New Mexico and its
for the state of New Mexico
Senate Joint Memorial three
Senate Joint Memorial three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
Senate memorial one introduced
by senator should committee.
A memorial requesting the New
Mexico department of
transportation to consider
restoration of the room route
rules committee thanks to tax
business and transportation sent
a moral one.
miscellaneous Senator Stefanics
thank you madam president I have
to announcements of first of all
I had Senate bill seven rural
interested in veterans and
public safety of officials
please feel free to sign on the
Senate conservation committee
three that is senator Wirth
Campos Griggs in Steinborn thank
you very much.
Thank you other announcements or
will be meeting Monday morning
at nine to do a committee
introduction and we will see you
then.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto
you Senator Ortiz the penal
thank you madam president the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will meet Monday
off to a running start up
Senator Ingle will be.
Of particularly interested in
some of these measures so
Senator Schmedes if you can make
sure that he knows about the
my sincere apologies for messing
it up last time
Senate education will be meeting
Monday morning at nine o'clock
we have an organizational
meeting but we also have
the Sen rounds will be doing
that national education and
American federation of teachers
with Steve's Yanis and John
durch and New Mexico school
boards association Joe again
madam chair thank you senator.
Anyone else.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president so we
be staying around Santa Fe this
past week there's twenty six
inches of new snow at the Santa
Fe ski basin nine inches
yesterday so the skiing up
there's gonna be pretty amazing.
gonna go down my list and I have
the list so I won't miss anyone
Legislative Council Service for
all the work they've done
drafting getting us here and
about how appreciative we are of
some of the remodels done and we
got that all done and were moved
in chief clerks office.
Madam chief clerk you certainly
this ship going and we've done
it's our sergeant at arms thank
you always for being here are
committees secretaries M.
analysts and communications and
three chiefs of staff who do an
amazing job Lorraine Montilivi
hill Sanders more invents Torres
they have worked together
much and I just was given a note
we've got now legislative
assistance and some new analysts
in the building and that's part
of our whole effort to get us
Thank you for that senator Wirth
and with that madam president
unanimous consent we stand in
