and Senate Bill 85, uh, and then
we're gonna have a little
Confirmation training session
we're we're gonna start doing.
These sessions where the meeting
before we do confirmations,
we're gonna get a little
presentation about the Border
commission that we're going to
be doing confirmations for our
next meeting. And from the
members, let me know if this
works for you. We, I am kind of
figuring out this confirmation
training as we go. So if it is,
this is not an effective
approach. Uh, I am absolutely
open to, to constructive
criticism. So, so let me know.
But we're gonna get started this
morning with Senate Bill 5,
Senator Campos, Representative
McQueen, you all, uh, have 20
minutes for your presentation,
uh, which includes your public
comment and support. And so feel
free to go ahead and get
started. Uh, thank you very
much, Madam Chair, and of
course, members of the Senate
Rules Committee, it's great to
go ahead and be here with you
today, uh, with me is, uh, my
co-sponsorresentative McQueen,
Chairman McQueen.
And uh we've had an opportunity
during the interim to continue
to work on this particular piece
of legislation.
I'm gonna go through just a few
highlights, turn it over to uh
representative McQueen, and then
of course, uh, our experts are
here as well to answer any of
the questions the committee may
have.
The, the approach that I'm gonna
be taking today has been one
that, uh, I've thought about
quite a bit over the years and
in particularly because uh I,
along with uh several others
have sponsored key information
and key legislation, uh, that
basically ties in, if you will,
as to how we're going to be
continuing with the proper
funding of our gay and uh fish
commission.
But that basically indicates is
as we continue to grow and
improve our environment for game
and fish, what we're finding is
that the costs continue to grow
as well.
A few other things that uh have
really entered into the reform
package that uh we have been
working on, uh, ties directly
into the environment and what's
happened with the fires and
floods throughout New Mexico and
particularly to the rural areas
such as Lincoln County and uh
Mora San Miguel Counties.
This is devastated, if you will,
uh, the species that, uh, so
many of our families have
enjoyed over the years as part
of their uh staple, part of
their meals. This is a way of
life and uh some of the rural
areas, the frontier areas, but
along with that, it's also a
form of uh enjoyment, if you
will, for people in some of the
urban areas here in New Mexico.
So along with that, that
basically ties in uh part of the
purpose, and if you will, the
transition from maybe having
separate measures over the years
with uh possibly looking at the
uh game and fish commission and
how that has been operating, and
then on the other side, the fee
schedules for
hunting and fishing, so with all
that being said, uh, just one
other comment.
If this bill is to be
successful. Two things happen.
Number one, with the commission
itself, and if you will, the
group that would work to help uh
submit, if you will, the most
qualified individuals uh to our
governor, uh, this then means
that we have experts in many
areas that will be able to lend
their expertise, especially with
the growing needs within our
state and what happens with game
and fish. The second piece is
that through a CPI, in essence,
what would happen?
is that over a period of time,
We would be able to continue to
grow, if you will, with the
inordinate need here in New
Mexico to provide the services
in order to of course.
Care for our wildlife.
But more than that, in order for
us to keep up with the trends
that are important so that we
can provide this, if you will,
to the sports persons uh
throughout our state, and of
course the visitors that come
in.
So with that, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the Senate Rules
Committee, I would like to defer
it this time, if I may, uh, to
my co-sponsor, Chairman McQueen.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, good
morning, uh, senators, Madam
Chair, um, we're joined today by
Jesse Debell with the National
uh with the New Mexico Wildlife
Federation. I get that right?
And Judy Coleman with Audon
Southwest, and hopefully I'll
get through my presentation in
time to give them each chance to
speak.
Um, I'd like to thank, first
off, thank the governor's
office, uh, the governor's
office convened.
A very large group of
stakeholders, including the
department during the interim,
uh, and we worked on multiple
drafts of this bill. I think
perhaps not everyone is 100%
sold on the bill, but we have
heard from uh different points
of view and we have tried to
address those points of view.
Uh, so I think, uh, the bill is
in pretty good shape.
I view the bill as a package,
uh, and the package has 4 parts.
The first part, uh, changes the,
the name of the agency to the
Department of Wildlife.
And uh clarifies the mission.
So I, I want to emphasize that
clarifies the mission. As you
might have noticed in the FIR,
it states that the agency
already conserves and manages a
broad range of species, so the
agency already has authority
over some non-game species.
And what we're trying to do is
clarify that authority and make
it so the agency has the
authority to engage in
management of any species in New
Mexico.
But the discretion not to.
So we're giving them authority
and discretion.
Second part of the bill is uh
reforms the game commission
itself. So the game commission
oversees
The agency, and this is a little
different than most of our
executive branch agencies.
Um, in keeping with the history
of the commission, uh, we
maintain 7 seats overall.
Three at large seats that have
geographic and political
diversity requirements.
And then there are 4 new
position seats. There's a a
rancher or farmer, a hunter
angler, a conservationist, and a
scientist.
And one question I get a lot is.
Why is there only 1 hunter
angler.
And uh agency that historically
has worked on hunting and
fishing.
And the answer is that that's a,
a minimum.
Not a maximum.
And our expectation, the history
of the the commission and our
expectation going forward is
that there are multiple hunters
on the commission.
Any of the at-large numbers
could be hunters.
All of the at large members
could be hunters.
The ag position could also be a
hunter, this, you know, there's
so there's a lot of
Overlap between these different
positions and, and ultimate
commission will have a mix of
people that we think adequately
represents diverse interests.
Um
Also critical to the uh
The process is recruiting and
nominating commission.
So we passed a bill a couple of
years ago that was uh vetoed by
the governor.
Uh, and that bill was just about
the commission, and it took the
commission appointments and sort
of distributed them to different
political officials.
The, the centrote.
The minority leader, the
Speaker, the uh House minority
leader. And what I realized in
the process of working on that
bill is that what, when I was
trying to take the politics out
of.
The commission
Well, I really was kind of doing
was rearranging the politics.
You know, if you get an
appointment from the Speaker of
the House.
That's a fairly political
appointment.
Uh, and the governor, since it's
executive branch agency also
objected to having um
legislature make appointments.
So what we've done instead is
create this nominating
committee, which is what we do
with um, judges and the PRC and
Regents. And so we have a
nominating committee also have 7
people with appointments from
those same political officials,
the pro tem, the speaker, and
the minority leaders, um, two
positions from uh academia, the
one from UNM and one from Mexico
State, and then a 7th position
appointed by the governor,
that's a tribal representative.
The nominating committee will
take applications, we'll look at
the, the, the required
qualifications and send the list
to the governor, and the
governor will pick from a list
of pre-screen qualified people.
To be on the game commission.
We also have, um, there are 4
advisory positions, new advisory
positions, those are the uh
director of the Outdoor
recreation division, the
secretary of the Department of
Ag, the state land commissioner.
And the direct uh secretary of
the Department of Indian
Affairs. And what we're trying
to do there is just sort of
increase communication.
Uh, between agencies. And then
as part of the commission, we
have, uh, we have staggered
terms, uh, 6 year staggered
terms, so, uh, that they will
extend beyond a governor's term,
and we have removal for cause,
uh, as opposed to uh removal at
will.
So the goal here is, you know,
in the past, when we get a new
governor, we get a new game
commission.
As the camera asked for everyone
to resign, and we get a whole
new slate.
So we're trying to, we're trying
to even out those those swings
of the commission.
The 3rd part of the bill.
Uh, which Senator Campos talked
about where the hunting and
fishing fees, um, these haven't
been increased in about 20
years. Uh, this is something the
agency feels is essential.
Uh, and then we also have the
CPI adjuster to those.
And then the fourth part of the
bill, which actually isn't in
the bill, but there's really
important to the bill.
is funding.
Um, I've been working on this
issue for a long time. And from
day one,
I was told and agreed that if
we're going to expand the
mission of the department.
We can't do it on hunting and
fishing fees.
That those, those fees are
paying for management of game
species.
So if we're gonna ask the
department to manage non-game
species, we need to get them
other funding. So in addition to
about 3 or more than $3 million
a year from the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund, which
they're already receiving.
There's $10.5 million in the
budget, um, as part of the grow
fund, the government.
Results in opportunities fund. I
think that's what that is. So
it's uh 3.5 million over 3
years, uh, through your
commitment for that for that
money, uh, to get the department
general fund operating funds.
To uh manage this broader
mission.
So I'd like to say before I hand
it off to uh to Jesse, um, you
know, we, we appreciate the
staff at the department, the
department of game and fish.
Uh, we think they do a good job.
Uh, we want to give them the
tools to really do their job
properly.
Um, I think it's time for this
pill.
Um, I'm, I'm really pleased with
where we are right now with this
draft. I know there's, there's
uh probably some amendments, um,
but I think we've, we've really
worked hard to accommodate
diverse interests.
I think uh we're in a good
place. So I would ask for your
support.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Go ahead, experts.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Judy Calman. I'm the New
Mexico policy director for the
Audubon Society. Audubon works
to help birds in the places that
they need, sorry, was that way
too loud? Is that OK?
Um, we work on both game birds
and non-game birds, and many of
our members and staff, including
our own executive director who's
in the audience today are both
hunters and bird watchers.
Bird watching is one of the
fastest outdoor activities in
the country, um, activities like
this contribute over $300
million annually to New Mexico's
economy, and they're often
critical for rural communities.
Just as one example, the
festival of the cranes is
Socorro County's largest
economic annual event, bringing
in 160,000 visitors per year,
which is pretty amazing.
New Mexico is #2 in the country
for bird diversity and people
come here to study and watch
birds from all over the world.
The game and fish department
does not have the resources and
tools to monitor and manage all
of these species.
Just one example that I want to
bring up is the number of bird
biologists at the department.
Um, they currently have 42 of
those, uh, manage about 35 game
species, and just one other
manages all of the non-game bird
species, which is about 203. And
that one person is responsible
for most of the bird species in
decline in the state.
So we believe that um thriving
wildlife populations require
agencies to be well funded and
to make management decisions
based on science.
And to have the tools to ensure
that those species needs are
being met, and our coalition,
which is very large, which
you'll hear about later, has
been working for over 10 years
to come up with a set of
policies to do this here, and we
believe this bill, pieces of
which have already passed
legislature does accomplish
those goals well.
We appreciate the legislature so
much for supporting the work,
the department is already doing
for wildlife. Legacy Fund as
Chairman McQueen mentioned, is
giving approximately $2.7
million a year to the department
for non-game species work.
And there is a new funding
proposal from Chairman Small,
which you'll hear about more
later too, um, to provide $3.5
million annually for three
years, um through grow funding.
So we can do this non-game work
in a step by step approach that
doesn't break our bank.
And I want to close by noting
the critical role that private
landowners play in wildlife
management and conservation,
Audubon partners with private
landowners all the time to help
bird species, agricultural land
is often a safe haven for birds
and farmers and ranchers
regularly support habitat
restoration and additional
funding for the department can
be used to leverage federal
funds like through the farm
bills to increase wildlife
protections on private land and
public lands. So thank you for
having me today and I'm looking
forward to the discussion.
Got sir and just, just so you
all know, you have about 6
minutes left if you wanna.
additional speakers.
Madam Chair, thank you so much.
I'll be very brief. Um, thank
you again, Madam Chair and
committee members for the
opportunity to speak in front of
you this morning. Uh, I'm Jesse
Dubell. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Wildlife Federation, the New
Mexico Wildlife Federation is
the state's oldest and largest
uh sporting advocacy
organization. We were founded in
1914 by Aldo Leopold, and in the
last 111 years, the organization
has spent working to protect the
rights of hunting and angling
across the state of New Mexico,
Hunters enthusiastically support
this bill.
Uh, this bill is a huge
improvement over the current
system when it comes to the
commission structure after this
bill passes, we will have a
designated hunter angler seat,
something that's never existed
on the commission before. I
should say the New Mexico
Wildlife Federation was
instrumental in the creation of
the state Game commission back
in 1921. This bill also creates
a requirement that all the
members of the commission have
an understanding of hunting and
angling issues. So this is a
huge improvement. Hunters are
not concerned that anything in
this bill will deprioritize or
in any way hurt hunting and
angling.
the traditional land uses that
are so important to New
Mexicans.
Very importantly, this bill
solves the funding crisis at the
department. I'm sure we're gonna
talk more about that hunters and
anglers are excited about the
fee adjustment we're eager and
willing to pay more for
conservation because we
recognize the great work that
our state wildlife agency does
and their need for resources for
them to continue to manage the
species that we depend on as as
sports sporting men men and
women. Uh, also, it's important
that we recognize that this bill
needs to pass as a package. This
is a holistic approach that's
going to bring wildlife
management in
Mexico into the 21st century. So
thank you all very, very much
for your support.
Thank you. So the other folks
that I have down as part of your
organized support. There's 3
people. The first one is a gym.
Earlier from Association of Soil
and Water Districts. You hear,
Jim?
No? OK. I have Dan oh, is Jim
here? OK.
A
Are you Jim? You're Dan. Go
ahead, Dan. Dan Roper, uh,
there's about 4 minutes left. I
also have a TBD on backcountry,
backcount hunters and anglers.
Do we have someone there from
them? They can't make it today.
OK. Then, then, Dan, you, you
get the, the last 3.5 minutes or
so. OK, OK, I planned for less,
I don't think I'll I'll, I don't
think I'll take all all the
time, uh, for the record, Dan
Roper with Trout Unlimited, uh,
and good morning committee
members, uh, happy to join you
today. Uh, I'd like to start by
stressing, uh, that this
legislation is broadly supported
by the hunting and fishing
community, as Mr. Dubell stated,
uh, in addition to Trout
Unlimited, that list of
supporters includes Impact
Outdoors, the New Mexico
Wildlife Federation, the
Theodore Roosevelt Conservation
Partnership.
Uh, backcountry hunter hunters
and anglers and Ducks Unlimited.
The significance of this bill is
that it does address three major
challenges to wildlife
management in New Mexico today.
An underfunded agency, a game
commission that is in need of
structural changes and uh a
department that does not have
the clarity, uh, it needs on
which species it's authorized to
manage. Uh, the simple fact is
we need to do more for all of
New Mexico's wildlife. The
species we hunt and fish, and
the species we don't, uh,
passing this bill, uh, coupled
with those
investments you heard of, uh,
from the land of enchantment
Legacy Fund. I'm sorry, I'm, I,
I hope I'm coming through OK.
Um,
And, and what's proposed in the
LFC framework, uh, puts us
definitively on a path to do
that. Uh, so I just want to
reiterate the support from the,
from the hunting and fishing
community, and, uh, this is
something we hope will be
bipartisan and uh we ask for
your support today. Thank you.
Thank you. And and I think
there's someone, someone who is
not imm who is here from the
soil and water districts who
wanted to
was part of the organized
support. Is that correct?
No? All right. Um, oh yeah.
Come on.
And tell us your name. You'll
have about a minute and a half.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eddie B.
Hill, registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico soil and Water
Conservation Commission.
Conservation districts. Uh, I
wasn't really prepared to speak
on this issue this morning, but
The 47 Water districts, we do.
Support the
The overall arching, you know,
On this, you know.
Uh, they are doing a good job of
it and.
And uh hopefully we can get this
passed this year.
Like, thank you. I also, uh,
will read, uh, there's a list of
organizations who wanted to be
read out as in support, that is
the Association of Soil and
Water Conservation Districts,
animal protection voters in New
Mexico, Audubon Southwest, that
country Hunters and anglers,
common cause, conservation
voters New Mexico, defenders of
wildlife, Ducks Unlimited,
Impact Outdoors. Next 100
coalition, New Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts.
New Mexico Wild, New Mexico
Wildlife Federation, Nesttra
Tierra Conservation Project, San
Juan Citizens Alliance, Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter,
Theodore Roosevelt, Conservation
Partnership, Western Resource
Advocates, Wild Earth Guardians,
Wildlands Network, Wildlife for
All, and the Xerxes Society,
which I may be mispronouncing.
All right, we only had one
person sign up in opposition.
And that, and, and members just
you know, uh, written comment
that was submitted either in
support or opposition will be
there at your seats. Uh, we had
Tom Patterson signed up in
opposition. Tom, since you're
the only one who signed up, we
will, uh,
You can have the, the full 10
minutes.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. My name is Tom
Patterson. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association, a cattle rancher
from Catron County, which is in
the
Heart
Of elk and Mexican wolf country
in this state.
For those of us in rural New
Mexico.
Where, frankly, our wildlife
reside.
The work of the New Mexico Game
Commission and the Department uh
of game and fish is not an
academic exercise.
We live daily with the impact of
their decisions and their
management choices and how we
conduct our lives.
Security for our kids.
And
Taking care of our cattle,
having foraged for our cattle
and many other ways.
That's one reason why regional
representation.
On the game commission.
Which we've had historically has
been so important to us.
When we have an issue.
We know whom to call.
We've had Northwest, uh,
Southwest, southeast, northeast,
and Bernalillo County.
District representatives.
Based on making those calls.
Chances are that the game
commissioner from our district.
May already know about the issue
and what can be done about it,
or is at least willing to
discuss the matter.
Or come see it from him or
herself.
That includes things like law
enforcement during hunting
season, and we do make those
calls.
Because having an ear to listen
is so important to us.
We expressed our concern last
fall here in the Roundhouse.
With the draft bill, which at
that time completely deleted.
Regional representation on the
Game commission.
Now in the current draft, cattle
growers appreciates what we, we
see as meeting us partway.
To address the concern through
geographical diversity in
candidates recommended to the
governor.
At 17-1-2.1, sections F and G.
We don't, we're not gonna have
our 5 district representatives,
we're gonna have 3.
But it's better than nothing.
That leads to other matters. We
are concerned with expanding the
mission of the department.
Director Sloane has made it
clear during our meetings.
Including the one here in the
roundhouse that he simply cannot
build out and expanded
department to address that new
mission unless he has recurring
funding in an amount exceeding.
What House appropriations has
proposed.
If New Mexico wants to expand
the mission of the department,
New Mexico needs to pay for it.
The necessary funds should not,
as Representative McQueen said,
Come on the back of the license
fees that hunters and anglers
pay.
We ask that you make it clear in
the bill.
That revenues from those
traditional revenue sources
shall not be available to pay
for an expanded mission.
Lastly
We agree that a license fee
increase should be approved.
There hasn't been one since
2006.
But the increase needs to be
reasonable.
There's one proposed increase
that just isn't.
The proposed license fee
increase for junior trappers
goes up by more than 5 times
from $9 to $50.
And that's a problem for our
rural kids.
We use trapping on private land
to get spending money and to pay
for college.
Regardless of your views on
trapping.
Please
Don't punish our rural kids.
Amend the proposed increase, so
it is in line with the other
proposed increases.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So members of the committee and
Uh
You know, I think you all have
like 2 minutes left on your or a
minute or so left on your time.
You want any rebuttal, feel free
to go ahead. Oh, thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Just very
quickly, uh, in essence, as we
go forward, um,
What we're doing is we're
working to make New Mexico the
outdoor, uh, mecca, if you will,
of the Southwest. This is gonna
be very important to us, the
more input that we get as we
proceed if this bill was to make
it out of the Senate Rules
Committee, uh, it means that uh
we have an opportunity to bring
our collective thoughts together
and make a game and fish and the
protection thereof of our
environment, uh, more conducive,
if you will, so that others will
benefit from the work.
that we've done. Thank you.
Madam Chair, if I may, uh, just
one thing on the regional
representation, um, the, the
bill 2 years ago had the
at-large members being from
different congressional
districts. And that's how we
were trying to achieve that
regional representation. There
was dissatisfaction with that
because of the way the
congressional districts are now
configured that at least 2 of
the congressional districts hit
earlylio County, and so we
adopted the different county
language instead.
Great. Thank you. Uh, so far off
the list, I only have Senator
Hermio.
Other members, uh, let me know
if you want me on the list. Go
ahead, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and
thank you to the bill sponsors.
So we've talked about cultural
traditions when it comes to
hunting and fishing and outdoor.
Did you by chance talk with
members of tribes and pueblos
and even the land grant meeds to
talk about the change in
commission and possibly them
becoming a commissioner.
Madam Chair, Senator Harramio,
uh, as you know, I sit on the,
uh, the interim land grant
committee. I've represented land
grants for the entire DM my 11
years in the legislature, and
I'm certainly sensitive to their
needs and concerns, especially
given the historical background
of of what they've been through,
um, you know, our, our vision
for the commission is, uh, it's,
it's 7 individuals, we have a
minimum of 4 positions with
Specific background, then
everything else is open.
So, uh, we certainly would
welcome, um, you know, land
grant ears,
uh, members, tribal members on
the commission. Uh, we have not
carved out specific seats for
those.
Interest, because, uh, you know,
that we're trying to honor the
historic, you know, sort of
public at large, um, nature of
the commission, and if we
Divvy up all 7 of the seeds to
specific constituencies, we
think we lose that. And one more
thing I would add is
Uh, I, I don't know if you were
there in the interim when we
presented the bill, um,
Representative Ferrera said
something which I thought was
really insightful. There's some
concern that if we have people
on the commission.
Who feel they're there to
represent an interest, they
won't take the, the broader view
of what they're doing. And, you
know, my hope is that the
positions we have, like, the
scientist isn't there to
represent scientists.
You know, scientists would be
there to have a science
perspective and that we're
trying to have a mix of
perspectives on the commission
more so than uh representation
of different constituencies.
Madam, thank you for that. So
what I'll do is I'll encourage
members of Merceds or the
Pueblos that I represent to urge
them to try to get a seat at the
table, because if we're talking
about cultural and traditions,
we need to make sure that our
culture and tradition is having
a voice and not just
representing a group, but
representing who we are as how
we believe people who are tied
to game fish and Mother Earth.
So I'll make sure that I
encourage them to my questions
were answered, I was gonna ask
if the game and fish supported
the bill.
that was answered, it sounded
like in the opposition, and then
it sounds as in 2006 was the
last time that the licensing
fees were increased. And so,
Madam Chairwoman and sponsors, I
wanted to tell you that I went
back to my district and heard
from several people who did say
they, they agree on the fee
increase because they haven't
seen one in a long time. They've
seen how prices everywhere have
increased, and I've seen that
fees haven't increased, so they
were in favor of this. And I
want to thank you for taking
into accountability.
that there will be snap
recipients will be looked at to
have discounts on licensing
bills for rural New Mexicans, we
see a large number of New
Mexicans who are uh taking those
SNAP benefits in. And so I want
to thank you for adding that
into the bill and with that,
Madam Chairwoman, no further
questions or comments.
Thank you, uh, Madam Purte.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thanks so much for working
multiple years on this. I really
like the new bill better. I
really like the nomination
process, um, the judicial
nominating process is run like
this and it's just a very good
mechanism to get a local people
involved in even the nominating
process, so that's a real
improvement.
I do have a slight question on
your, uh, on section 11, it's
the last page of the bill when
we um
Ain these six-year terms, a
position 1 and position D, uh,
are only for one-year term in
the beginning. It just seems
like not enough to me. Um, if,
if, if eventually everybody's on
a six-year, why would you have
uh two of your 1st 7 only served
for 1 year, so, but, you know, I
mean, you've got 13, and 5. I
like the 3 and 5. I don't like
the 1, but that's just me. Um, I
do have a question.
And um
So, can you talk about or
describe um
Species of wildlife that we're
not working with right now and
uh the science behind why we
ought to be working with them,
just a few examples of that.
Senator, if I may, I'll defer to
my experts on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Stewart, um, yes, so the
species that the department has
full authority over or actually
listed in their current statute,
and that list does not include
every single species in the
state. Um, so there are limited
in what they can work on, um, a
really easy example to
understand is that they don't
have authority to work on
pollinator species, which is
really important. We know that
our bees and butterflies are
declining rapidly. That's
unquestioned, um, and the
department currently
does not have an entomologist on
staff even and they're not
specifically authorized to do
projects for pollinators. So
that's something we're really
interested in seeing them do.
So all this bill does is clarify
that they are able to work on
any species that needs help.
Uh, thank you for that. And, uh,
Madam Chair, I, I probably
missed this, but, you know, once
you're, once this new game
commission, what are we calling
it? Do wildlife department that
is up and running, so if they're
moving into, let's just use
pollinators to look at for
protection or whatever, uh,
where's the funding coming for
that new species.
You, Madam Chair and Senator
Stewart, so we know that the
department will not immediately
have funding to work on every
possible species in the state,
and we all get that. We also
understand that the whole
department's budget should not
be paid for solely by hunting
and fishing licenses, and so our
whole coalition has been
committed for a long time to
finding alternative sources of
revenue for the department to
cover some of that work. Um,
Chairman McQueen mentioned in
his opening statement that the
legacy fund that you all passed
and funded last year is
providing almost
$3 million a year for the
department to work on species of
greatest conservation need. So
that's a good start. Um, the
Growth Fund, the chairman Small
is proposing is going to be
another $3.5 million a year. So
we believe that we can phase in
this work as funding becomes
available and we all understand
that it, it probably can't just
come from one source.
All right. Thank you for those
answers. You gotta save the
bees.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Thank
you, Senator Stefaniks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
not sure if anybody said happy
birthday to the Madame Protem.
So, um,
It's out there now.
go away.
Thank you, ma'am, ma'am thanks,
you're probably talking about uh
what they call wawa, which is
the recovering America's
Wildlife Act, uh, which is
actually sponsored by Senator
Heinrich. Uh, my understanding
is that, you know, they tried to
get it into one of those big
omnibus, uh, uh, bills a couple
of years ago, and they fell just
short, but that it's not, um,
it's not dead, there's
bipartisan support and maybe
Jesse, can you add to that?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Stefaniks, thank you very much
for the question. The recovery
recovering America's Wildlife
Act is supported in Congress
with bipartisan support, and we
do expect Raul to pass. I maybe
not this Congress, but certainly
Raul is going to pass and when
it does, the state of New Mexico
and our state wildlife Agency
will be the recipient of about
$36 million per year to fund
wildlife management in the
state. It will require $9
million of matching funds from
here in the state. And one of
the things
most excited about this bill is
that it prepares the agency to
fully utilize and properly
implement that additional
support. It's critical that we
get this agency, um, into a
place where it can, where it can
maximize the benefit to the
residents of New Mexico, to the
wildlife, the people and the
people who depend on wildlife
with the receipt of those uh
recovering America's Wildlife
Act Fund. So thank you very much
for that question.
So Madam chair, the other uh
Question I have, and you've uh
Several people have touched on
it, the presenters as well as
the questioners about the
membership.
So
Could the sponsors
Talk about any um
Controversy or opposition to the
membership that you're
proposing.
Um, Madam Chair Center, uh, you
heard from, uh, Mr. Patterson
about the, the regional
representation, the uh at-large
members in the old bill were
grouped in the 5 groups of
counties. Um, most of those
groups included uh uh more urban
city or or a county with an
urban city, um, but there was
still that sort of those groups.
So it's sort of spread them out.
Um, we do have geographic
distribution requirements in
both the at-large.
members and even the position
members. So, um, there's sort of
like two different buckets that
large members, uh, it's, it's no
one from the same county, no
more than 2 from a political
party, the position members,
it's a separate math, but also
no one from the same county and
no more than 2 from a particular
political party. So because of
that, we're, you know, you know,
we could have as many, you know,
we're 7 members, as many as 7
counties, uh, represented, we
could have
as few as 4, you know, it just
sort of depends on what the
makeup of the committee is.
Another issue that we worked on
was the Hunter angler position,
um, originally, I had that as
Hunter or angler.
Uh, and the requirement is that
they would have purchased a
hunting license or a fishing
license.
free to the last 4 years, and
there was concern that if we got
someone who fished but didn't
hunt, we might lose that
perspective or someone who
hunted and didn't fish, and so
we made it hunter and angler,
and, and the requirement is that
they've either purchased the
combined hunting and fishing
license for each of the last 4
years or 1 of each.
Anything else from anybody? OK.
Oh, go ahead, Jessie. Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator Stefaniks, thank
you again for the question. I,
I'd just like to, uh, emphasize
the importance of rural
representation on the
commission. That's something
that the Mexico Wildlife
Federation feels very strongly
about the activity of hunting
that, that our membership
engages and often happens in
rural communities in and around
rural communities, obviously.
And I'll mention that with the
current structure of the game
commission, even though there is
regional representation, as Mr.
Patterson mentioned in his
comment, it
could essentially be all from
urban areas. So currently we
have a commissioner from Silver
City who does a really
phenomenal job in representing
ranching interests there, but
she could be in Las Cruces,
Donana County is included in
that southwest region. The other
thing I want to mention is that
we've had a real problem with
the current commission structure
in having a full commission.
We've had numerous vacancies,
and when there's vacant seats on
the commission, and nobody's
getting representation from
those uh vacant seats. And, and
one of the reasons for all of
the vacancies is that there has
been no.
process for removal,
commissioners historically have
been able to be removed at any
time without cause. And when a
commissioner is not protected
and doesn't feel that they have
the freedom to properly
represent their constituents on
the commission, and they don't
want to serve. So this bill goes
a long way to ensuring that we
have a fully functional
commission and that we have a
fully seated commission without
any vacancies.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
believe my questions have been
answered.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, representative, um,
I, I appreciate your
Um
tenacity on continuing to move
this, uh,
Idea forward.
Um, I am, um, always amazed at
the difference in constituent
feedback that we get from each
of our districts. I still am.
receiving many concerns over
This particular language in this
field.
Not that there are not needed
changes, and I want you and I've
talked about that, and I want
you to understand that.
One and, and I'll just start
through this, um, madam chair,
um,
And on page 2, section 1.
There is a
Their stricken language of the
existing bill.
And, and, and some added
language.
And would you, for the, for my
sake and, and those listening
today, would you help?
Commit, what you believe the
impact of that language changes.
And not to interrupt, just so
you know, Senator, I'm gonna be,
so this is a purpose section
that we take out in the in the
Senate. So just so you know, I'm
gonna be offering an amendment
to take that out.
Just if that changes your
question at all, feel, feel free
to, to continue. I just wanna
make sure you knew that. I see
it.
Sure, if you look, uh, at the
end of your analysis.
Yeah, look at the next to the
last page of your analysis. It
has a me there. You are welcome
to make the amendment if you
like.
I won't take that bait.
But I apologize. Good. Go ahead.
You have the floor.
Well, then briefly, if you, uh,
with this amendment, um.
Lingering over your head. Oh,
Have you seen the amendment
language and are you supportive
of that?
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend, um,
I'm aware of the amendment I've
heard, I've had requests from uh
other members of the, uh,
committee, uh, about the same
issue. I, I will say for the
record,
I like section one, cause to me,
it's like a mission statement
for the organization, you know,
and it's not, um, you know, that
they are uh general concepts
that don't really have the force
of law. I think the concern in
the Senate is that we're putting
something in the statutes that
isn't really intended to have
that same force of law, and
that's why they get taken out.
So I I I'm a fan of the um uh
section one, the language in
there, uh, we've, we've worked
hard on it.
uh, at the same, at the same
time, I, I recognize uh there is
some concern about it, uh, and
I'm willing to have it taken
out.
OK.
That will solve some problems,
or at least for now.
Um, as we go through there on um
Further down, uh, one of, one of
my constituents.
Believes he reads into the
intent, maybe not descriptive
language.
That there is the
Um
That there may be the
Opportunity for designation of
lands that are now open to
Say hunting or fishing that may
be restricted,
is that something that you
believe is um is, is that
something that you're trying to
invoke in, in this legislation
is a more broader range of
descriptive views so that there
would be possibly sections of
New Mexico that would not have
hunting, um, maybe for
Bird watching or there would be
areas that wouldn't be for
Um
A specific use, what do you
believe that this would open the
opportunities for more
restrictive use of property.
Um, Madam Chair Senator, uh,
it's, I don't know if anything
in the bill that would restrict
the use of private property. The
department manages a wildlife,
uh, historically, wildlife has
belonged to the state, uh, as a,
from a legal perspective, uh,
and they would continue to
manage that and have the
authority to manage different
types of species, but there's
certainly nothing in the bill
intended to affect private
property rights. OK.
On page 4, page 5,
Madam chair and uh,
Senator representative. There's
the
Commentary about a list of
qualified nominees being
submitted to the governor. Is
there a prescribed number for
that list?
Um, ma'am chair Center, yes, it
is, uh, at least 3.
Uh, and that's, uh, in here. It
might be under the nominating
commission language.
But that's the that's the
number, at least 3.
For each position.
And do you believe that um
A list of 3.
And I need to go back cause I
didn't, I didn't pull that
specific number out, but I'm,
I'm not doubting you. You've
been working on this a long
time. But if there is a list of
3, do you think that is a broad
enough scope of, of
People that could be presented
or should there is a concern
that it should be a little bit
broader that maybe should be 5
or 7.
Um, Na chair center, so it's,
it's actually on page 10 line 6,
minimum of 3 qualified nominees
for each position. And the first
of all, keep in mind it's a
minimum. It's not a maximum. So
if you had more qualified
nominees, they could certainly
send up a longer list. The, the
reason we said at 3.
I, you know, there's some
concern that we could have a
hard time finding some of these
people, you know, the scientists
position, I think in particular,
um, might be challenging to
fill, you know, not only someone
with those credentials, but also
those credentials that fits, you
know, the right political
alignment and the right
geographic alignment.
You know, if, so for example,
The scientist's position comes
open, and there's, say, already
um 2 Democrats in the position,
the 4 position seats.
You can't, and you had a well
qualified scientist who was a
Democrat.
They weren't qualify because
you've already got those two
people on the seat. So you would
be looking for, you know, more
of that diversity, and that's
why we kept the minimum at 3,
just cause we thought that could
be a challenge.
Thank you for that, uh.
Representative of
Madam Chair, Senator.
On um
Page 5.
see
One
It lists
Position for to be a rancher or
farmer.
Are you trying to, I mean,
across the state of New Mexico.
I'm, I'm
I hear sometimes people say, I
own a ranch.
And when you dig into it, you
realize that they have 10 acres.
And where I come from, that's
not much of a range.
And so there are people that are
worried about
What exactly are you looking
for? And when you say,
I think there's uh talk about
earns income, that quantitative
of how much income or just
Descriptive are we trying to be
here?
Uh, ma'am Chair Center, so yeah,
that that's one of the
provisions that we tweaked, uh,
in the days right before the
session, um, we added the income
requirement, which previously
wasn't in there. It was
suggested by some of the
stakeholders, um, I, I was told
there was a USDA requirement to
qualify as a farmer or rancher
that you earn at least $1000
from the farmer ranch.
Um, I didn't want to put in a
hard number, um, because those
numbers change over time. I also
don't want to create a situation
where applicants to be on the
commission are submitting tax
returns or something like that
to prove income. So it's just,
we added the word income to
Uh, sort of screen out the
people that might have a hobby
ranch or a hobby farm that
aren't actually, you know, in
the agricultural, uh, industry.
So we added that and then also
uh uh at the suggestion, um from
that community, uh, we used to
say, it used to say on which at
least two species, uh, managed
by the
partner were present. And so I
looked at the list of species.
And uh one of the list of
species was a particular type of
squirrel.
Um, and that's, that wasn't
really what we were after. Yeah,
so again, uh, at their
suggestion, we added the
requirement that they be quote
unquote big game species, which
is something the department
defines.
Um, so, with those, um,
With those other qualifiers that
the income requirement and the
big game species, you know, we,
we think we're
Well on our way to having people
that you might um
Call it legitimate farmer
ranger. Some of that actually
earns their income from uh their
livelihoods from that.
Well, I think, um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
that is.
I think directionally you're
headed in the right direction,
but I think that probably gonna
need a little work there in
order to gain.
Wide support.
OK. Um, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, I'm certainly open to
other suggestions, uh, and as I
always have been, I, uh, Mr.
Dubell would like to make a
comment if that's OK. And I'll
just note, uh, because we need
to save time at the end of our
meeting for this training
session. And we're at almost an
hour, uh, till 4. We have
another bill after this. folks
can just keep their comments and
their questions brief.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Townsend,
I'll be very brief. I just want
to mention that, that the
agricultural seat exists on the
commission today, so that's
already currently in statute.
Also want to emphasize the
importance that private
landowners play when it comes to
providing wildlife habitat
across the state of New Mexico.
I think oftentimes uh they're
underappreciated for the amount
of work that they do stewarding
the wildlife populations of this
state and this bill is designed
to ensure that we, uh, keep
species from becoming endangered
and federally protected. Those
federal.
Protection, I think, have very
negative impacts on our
landowners and our agricultural
producers in many cases. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, and I will, uh, I
will try to keep
Um, comments.
Um, as brief as I can, but I
have a number.
A question, so I'm just let you
know, which is fine, Senator,
your, uh, your three colleagues
are also on the list. I will
have to limit them to 5 minutes
each if we don't have time, if,
if your, your questions, uh.
Don't, don't allow us for, to
manage time. We can do it here,
we can do it later, but
go ahead.
Um
Madam Chair and um
Representative Senator.
When a commissioner on
Item 4.
Yeah.
There's a language about
When a commissioner dies,
resigns or no longer meets the
qualifications required for the
commissioner's original
appointment.
Can you explain to me how that
might happen. Um, ma'am care
center, uh, someone could move
out of state.
Yeah, they, they're required to
be in New Mexico residents. So
something, something like that,
a change in their conditions,
changing their circumstance that
they're no longer meet the
requirements that were laid out.
Is that the only one the
residents would be the only
requirement that you might see
would be um,
In jeopardy.
Um, ma'am chair Senator, uh
let's think about it, uh, uh,
one or the other, uh, potential
changes would be changing their
political party.
Yeah, we have these distribution
requirements for political
parties. So if, if someone, you
know, chose to be in a different
political party that would uh
potentially disqualify you for
that.
Um, also, um, when you're going
down, um,
And G of that section.
There is
The
The language that would allow
for removal for incompetence.
that language come from
someplace else, I mean, uh.
What's driving that and
I mean, you're gonna have
scientists, you're gonna have
farmers, you're gonna have
anglers. I mean, at what point
are they incompetent?
Ma'am to center, um, uh, the,
the phrase is incompetence,
neglect of duty, or malfeasance
in office, and that's a phrase
that you see repeated elsewhere
in the Mexico statutes and so
for consistency we included it
here. Um, I, I agree, uh, these
are somewhat vague standards.
Um, I think malfeasance is
probably easier to prove than
incompetence or neglect of duty,
um, you know, incompetence. I
mean, there, there could be a
split.
on the commission. And just
because someone votes yes and
someone else votes no, doesn't
mean, you know, the no vote is
an incompetent vote. I mean,
that's, I don't think that's
what we're talking about.
So, uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
it's just one of those phrases
that, you know, we go to because
it's been used before and the
courts are familiar with it.
Well, again, um,
Those are the types of concerns
I have.
I have a whole list of questions
of
But in respect for
The chair, um, I'm going to
That my colleagues to try to
pick up the slack.
I appreciate your time and I
appreciate you bringing the bill
forward.
Thank you, Senator. That's
great.
Thank you, uh, Senator Brantly,
you are recognized for 5
minutes. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you to you guys for,
for bringing this bill forward.
I want to first say that um I
appreciate you both making
yourself so readily available in
your advocates for us coming in
to answer a number of questions.
As we look at this bill, it's
really three pronged. And it's a
combination of three bills that
we have seen before. Um, you
spent the most time really kind
of diving into game commission
reform, as you know, I, I joined
you on a bill to get that done
before
unfortunately was vetoed by the
governor. Um, I absolutely think
that that's necessary. In fact,
for those listening, it's so
necessary that there's been
times in which there wasn't even
a quorum, and so the game
commission could not even meet
and take action, and there's
been no value placed on this
commission that for too long, no
action's been taken, right? So
it's important, and I, I don't
even really have heartburn over
the structure of how you've
created that commission in this
bill. In fact, uh, to the point
of competency, I'd like to
that extended to the legislator
as well. I think that um
everything you've added in
there, I can get behind. Number
2 on that three-prong bill is
the license fee increase. And I
think it's fitting that we're
having this is our first bill
here because a majority of New
Mexicans can get behind most of
what's in this film.
It's just the little part that
we all disagree on and so I want
to come to an agreement on that
little part so that most of the
good can actually get through
this here on the license fee, I,
I would agree with that. Second
prong as well, and I think many
of the advocates too is for too
long we have gone without an
increase in that fee. Um, on
this bill, it's interesting to
me that it received a referral
to, to rules and then Senate
Finance Committee because I
think it's important to remember
that the Department of Game and
Fishes.
one of the few agencies that
operates as an enterprise
agency, so it generates 98% of
its own revenue. I think the
argument here is that increasing
those license fees doesn't need
to go before Senate Finance
because it doesn't impact
general fund.
Revenues. Now I understand
there's a $10.5 million dollar
appropriation in there for the
modernization aspect of that. It
also be argued though that that
money is not going to be
Enough
to pay for that 3rd prong, and
that's the expansion.
Of duties for that.
Commission, um, that is where I
would, I would have thought we
would have kind of jumped into
the discussion in Senate
Judiciary Committee about that
because a lot of questions and,
and really my biggest concerns
about this bill is in Section 6
and section 7. And so in section
6, when we are creating um the
new section of the wildlife
Conservation Act, it, it
essentially creates a law giving
the commission pretty
vast
Uh, oversight and arguably you
could say unlimited power to
promulgate rules that protect
non-domestic animals.
My and I, and I know we're short
of time, so I'm just gonna cut
straight down to this
representative McQueen in
section 6. Would you be amenable
to page 13.
Life
4
Striking the word shall.
Replacing it with the word may.
With that meet everyone's
concerns on this that it then
does not become an unfunded
mandate because this is
absolutely an unfunded mandate
because they're not going to be
provided with the resources.
It eliminates it that it's no
longer an unfunded mandate and
it's giving the commission the
option.
To engage when there's critical
species of concern to get
involved rather than mandating
that they have to create.
A list of these wildlife species
that frankly the legislator
isn't giving them the resources
to do.
That
Mate Center.
So, ma'am Chair, Senator,
looking at the list that falls
below that shell.
Um
The
The species of gras conservation
need, I, I think that is a
mandate on the um department. I
think that's one of the key
tools they use to identify
species, so.
That probably shouldn't be
optional.
Um, using science-based reasons,
is your, I'm sure, um, senator
is, is your concern that
The
Because the science will force
them to manage species that they
don't want to. I, I, I'm.
I'm sorry to ask you a question,
but I'm just trying to
understand. Madam Chair and
Representative, what, what I
think is this is such a broad
expansion of duties for the
Department of Game and Fish, is
that how do we ease into this?
And so if we say you may do this
rather than force a shell,
they're gonna immediately be in
violation of this, and that
would be my, that would have
been my concern of why I would
argue that it goes to Senate
Judiciary next is, is perhaps
with the lawyers to see if we
can even do this legally, but if
we say they may, if they may
brought this up and, and Madam
Chair, why I recognize this is a
professional committee and, and
not Shark Tank, I would go
further to make this offer to
you. If we could make that
change, I would joining you as a
co-sponsor championing this
bill, because again, this is
more good than bad, if that's
beneficial to you. Also, I'll
shut up, never support it
publicly if that's more
beneficial, but um,
To get the good stuff that this
bill forward. And so Senator,
are you proposing that amendment
and then we can go and ask if
it's a friendly amendment.
Yes, Madam Chair, I would
propose that striking the word
shall replacing with their word
may as an amendment is that
amendment? Uh, Madam chair with
the, the senator's offer on the
table. I would love to take her
up on that and we would, we
would uh characterize that as a
friendly amendment.
All right. Then, seeing that
it's a friendly amendment, we,
uh, is there any opposition to
that amendment.
I.
Uh, what page?
This is page 13, 4, striking
shell and replacing it with me.
Right. Is there any opposition
to that amendment?
See on that amendment is
adopted.
And, uh, Senator, I think we're,
we're about at your time.
I'm done. Thank you. Thank you
for joining the team.
So, go ahead.
And Chan, thank you. uh, Sarah
Ortiz and I, Ortiz A Pino used
to have this argument, as long
as they're relevant.
The debate, I think I have more
than 5 minutes, but maybe if my,
the gentleman they're proposing
the bill are in mainment to
changes as I hoped they would.
With Senator Bradley that it may
be 5 minutes, but I was just
gonna argue the point because I
think that even though you've
got time constraints, this is a
huge bill.
For the state of Mexico, and I
think it should be allowed to be
heard to the full extent, so I
just wanna apologize to you, but
I think they rules gives me more
than 5 minutes as long as it's
relevant.
And Senator, uh, it is the
prerogative of the chair to
control my committee, so I hope
you are recognized for up to 5
minutes.
only, we only do that when we
are running short on time. And
so I would encourage you to use
your time, uh, well and
productively and let's go ahead
and
and get your I know you get to
the topic, but this topic is
valuable to the state of Mexico,
and I would hope those are on
webcast understand the value of
this, but I'll go ahead and
hopefully we will get them to
see my view.
Within 5 minutes.
Hunter, gentlemen, thank you for
uh this bill. I, I do, I have
heard it in the past. I'll cut
to the chase just because I
wanna be quick about this since
uh um limited on time, uh, on
pages 1819, and 20, uh, where
you guys have the funding
changes to Game fish.
And I've had constituents ask,
um,
The amount of difference. So, so
as we sell licenses, uh, do you
know what the portion is? uh,
uh, from resident to out of
state. You know how the funding
works for the state.
Um,
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I don't
have those, those figures uh
with me now.
Well, Madam Chair,
representative, I guess my, my
question is then if you're
looking through, uh, the
residents are being increased
substantially.
Uh, different than the
non-residents, for instance,
game hunting, 66% non-resident
is 30.7.
Deer is 61% non-resident, 44%,
turkey is 40%, non-resident 25%.
Cougar is 37.5 for
non-residents, 25%.
A is 16.6% increase was 0 out of
state, uh, Ibex is 10%.
er uh out of state.
Bird dealers as a 566%.
And out of state, only a 60%.
Uh, trapping is 400% out of
stages 31%, junior trappers of
450%, which we don't have
category for our state, and then
a second rod of 150% of my
constituents were wondering if
we're trying to penalize New
Mexicans instead of making the
increase.
At Saint Hunter's and I just
wonder what your thoughts were
on that. I don't care.
Uh, ma'am to center, uh, I
appreciate you pointing out the
differences in the percentages.
I, you know, I would just note
that the other state licenses
are already substantially more.
Um, then the in-state licenses,
so I, I think I don't disagree
with you as a factual matter
that they have the state
licenses are increasing by
smaller percentages, but there
are substantially more than the
state licenses. So we do have
that preference for residents.
But I appreciate that, madam
chair and representing I guess,
uh, the thing we need to go back
to is looking back at the
historical value we sent on a
land grant together and those
people are not, um,
Wealthy
And they should be allowed to be
able to hunt and fish in their
areas and uh just consideration
on that. Um, Madam Chair, and
Senator and representative, my
next question is gonna go to um
And these are just some
questions on, uh, this
fishing game currently have uh
the ability to uh study the
programs for the management of
the endangered and non-game
species of wild wildlife, do
they currently have that? I know
you have some wording in here on
that. I'm just wondering if they
currently have that.
In statute.
Me Care Center, uh, the, the
game game department department
game and fish has a statewide
wildlife management action plan,
uh, and unless I'm mixing my
concepts that focuses on species
of greatest conservation need
and those include both game
species and non-game species.
So
Madam Chan and represent him.
I'm just wondering, uh, why are
we addressing some of those
issues that they already have,
uh, and this just, uh, in
thought. I know some of the
things that we're pressing here
is federal.
And or or giving the
Opportunity for the state.
To do things that are federal
are doing already. Is there a
reason for that or we
anticipating huge changes in
federal management, wildlife
management.
Ma'am, Senator, one of the goals
of this and clarifying the
authority to manage different
species is to avoid federal
involvement to, to manage
species in a way that we have
healthy populations, and they
don't become federally listed as
threatened or endangered,
because once they become
federally listed, then the, the
options narrow dramatically. So
by empowering the agency to
manage species, um, our, our
goal is to, uh, to avoid that
listing.
Thank you for that, uh, and I
guess my thing.
That's, that's time. Senator
Block, go ahead. Thank you for
that.
I'm cut off.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, gentlemen, and ma'am,
for being here and I appreciate
the public's
interest in this, and I, I want
interest in this, and I, I wanna
first thank, um,
send her her meal on his
comments regarding
The, the commission and Jesse,
I, I agree mostly with what you
said on the restructuring in the
commission.
Um, but I do feel, I mean, I was
counting, I put my county
commissioner hat on Sandoval
County. We had 14 tribes and
Pueblos in Sandoval County, the
most.
In the United States behind one
county, San Diego County in
California, so I, I agree with
Senator Hemilo that there needs
to be a native American on this
commission, absolutely. I, I'm
not gonna support this if there
isn't one. It's that important.
And I definitely want to say
thank you to Senator Stewart.
Uh, talking about the length of
the terms. I think that needs to
be consistent and I want to also
say happy birthday, and you
definitely don't want to hear me
singing in my Marilyn Monroe
voice.
But I will in private.
Um
The rural representation is
critical, uh, Jesse, absolutely,
and, and we have to have that.
And one of the things I remember
As a
I was stationed at the Pentagon,
giving briefings as words
matter.
And um Representative McQueen,
thanks for all the work you've
done on this. You, you said I
quote, wildlife belongs to the
state.
Does that mean it belongs to the
state if it's private property
or tribal lands as well.
Um,
because I'm close to, I don't
wanna go over my 5 minutes.
Masen, the answer is yes, and
that's why if a deer walks on
your property, you can't shoot
it out of season. You don't, it
doesn't become yours because
it's on your property. So the,
the state I just wanna make sure
manages wildlife. OK, I just
want to make sure I understand
your intent. Sorry to cut you
off, sir. I'm kind of in a, in a
brush here.
So, I, I wanna say, I think it
was Mr. Patterson who talked
about the fees in San Diegos did
as well. I, I agree. I can't
support the fees for New
Mexicans. We've had
Record inflation for 4 years.
Um, you know, my county in
Sandoval County, very rural, uh,
a lot of poor people there,
they're already suffering.
There's no way I can support
that. If you want to raise the
fees of a non-New Mexican, God
bless you. I'll, I'll support
that 100%, uh, because like you
said, I think we are the mecca
in the southwest for outdoor uh
activities here. Lastly, uh, or
just two other quick things,
Madam Chair, is on page 13. I
would like to add
an amendment, um, line 2.
That's right. Nobody heard that.
Um
Starting with, let me just read
this bottom of page 12.
In addition to species defined
as protected in Chapter 7 NMSA
1978, the commission is
authorized to extend management
and protection by rule or policy
to any species of wildlife.
Added as protected by the
endangered Species Act.
I would hope that would be a a
friendly amendment, uh, Madam
Chair, and, and, uh, panel.
And, and so, so Senator, you're,
you're offering that amendment?
Yes, yes, madam Chair. Page 13,
line 2 before the period as
protected by the endangered
Species Act? Yes, ma'am. That's
correct, ma'am. Is that a
friendly or unfriendly
amendment,
um, Senator, uh, that was
severely limit the agency, and
as I mentioned before, the goal
here is to not fall under the
federal endangered Species Act.
So limiting their authority to
the federal Endangered Species
Act.
Just, it can't be a friendly
amendment.
All right. Do we have any
Debate on that amendment?
And then let's, uh,
yes, Senator Townsend.
Representative
Senator.
Limiting.
is not the idea. Abusing is the
idea.
And
Having a commission be able to
add names.
Of species to the endangered
species.
Is not.
In the best interests of, of
this department or the people in
New Mexico.
And I want to make sure I
understood what you just said.
That
Limiting them to the federal
list.
And having the state to be able
to broaden that list even
broader than the federal
government.
is a problem.
Ma'am, chair Senator, the
department has no authority to
add species to the federal
threatened and danger list.
They don't.
But they managed many species
that aren't on those lists.
And that's what we ask of them,
and that's what we hope in that
management, they avoid going on
those lists.
So we can't amend the bill to
limit them to species on the
federal list, um, that would,
that would get
The existing activities of the
department.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, are you saying
that there would never be a
species that would be um
monitored or under the control
of the department that was not
on the endangered species list.
Um
Ma'am chair Senator, maybe you
could rephrase your question.
I'm, I'm not sure I followed
that. I don't know that I want
to, but Madam Chair,
representative, what I'm trying
to make sure is that we do not
have a state-run agency that has
the ability to broaden those
species that they want to call
inangered and protect that would
be more
would be more expansive than the
federal list.
Madam Chair Senator, I, I think
we're
Severely mixing up different
management.
Protocols. Um, the, the, the
game department manages mule
deer.
They're not on treasure
endangered listed species. I
mean, the, the department
manages wildlife already.
We, we can't limit them to
simply threaten the endangered
species, which is why I believe
the effect of the senator's
amendment would do. I mean, that
would literally gut their
existing management activities.
But Madam Chair, and, and
Representative.
What the senator is concerned
about and, and I voiced the same
concern, and I believe this
language does this. It would
allow this agency to add, to
create its own.
Endangered species list that
would be more broad than that of
the federal government. Is that
not true?
Um, ma'am Chair, Senator, I, I
do not believe that's accurate.
Um, my expert weigh in if that's
OK.
Brief briefly. And then we're
gonna, we're gonna get to a vote
if there's no further debate on,
on the amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Townsend. I just thought
it might be helpful to clarify
just because there seems to be a
little bit of confusion that the
federal government only has
authority over species that they
have chosen to list on the
federal endangered Species Act.
The state has no authority to
add species to that list. The
state does have its own list of
species of concern and they keep
that list and that's separate
from the federal list, but the
state doesn't have authority to
like put restrictions on
industry, for example.
or restrict how land uses work
or anything like that. They
don't have that authority. We're
not giving them that authority.
It's only the feds have the
authority wants the species is
listed federally, so we're
trying to make sure that the
state has the tools and
resources that it needs to
manage species in decline here
so that they're healthy enough
to never be listed on the
federal list.
And that helps. Thank you. Thank
you. Um, do you have debate on
your own amendment, Senator
Block? Oh, I'm sorry. Do you
have a debate on your own
amendment?
I, I think we have to control
this because Madam Chair, when
you look at where we're going
with this.
Basically, we're giving the
state.
Power because they said an
endangered species means any
species of fish or wildlife.
Whose pro prospects of survival
or recruitment within the state
are in jeopardy due to any of
the following factors, and
they're very broad, and when you
look at the definition of
wildlife.
This is anything that flies,
walks on the ground, lives under
underground or is in the water.
That's very broad perspective,
and then, um, I would ask
clarification here because it
also talks about the
overutilization for scientific,
commercial, or sporting
purposes. Senator, we're on your
motion for an amendments stay on
that motion.
Thank you. I'd like to make a
motion we vote on that
amendment. OK. We are, let's do
a roll call vote. The amendment
is on page 13, line 2 before the
period.
uh, inserting as protected by
the endangered Species Act, uh,
go ahead and call the rule on
that amendment.
Senator Bergman's.
No.
Senator Block.
Hi.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart. Senator
Townsend. Yes.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
Now
Correct. So that amendment does
not pass, and Senator, you're,
I have just one more question,
uh, very, very, very briefly. So
relating um representative or
senator going back to page um
14 on the 15.
Does this bill have these intent
or the spirit when you look at
Um, subsection 2 on line 1 of
page 15.
Over utilization for scientific,
commercial or sporting purposes.
Is this the department involved
if they find
Uh, do they have to, uh, scope
out or scout the area where
there could be development.
Would that stop any development
if they find a
Um, an endangered species that
the state has identified, and
also if they endangered species
has been identified on private
land, what does the state do to
that private land. Thank you.
Ma'am chair Senator, that's
existing law, and the department
does not have that authority.
Right, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
And so I will
Go ahead and offer the amendment
that we had spoken about earlier
with, with
Senator Townsend was speaking,
um, which would be to and
members, if you look at page 4
of your analysis, you'll see the
amendments there. Um, so the
first moment that I'm going to
offer is, uh,
To take out the, the purpose
language, um.
Again, because that's, that is,
that is something we've been
doing over the last several
years here in the Senate, and so
this will be it's kind of our
standard, uh, procedure. So it
would be to strike section one.
And renumber the succeeding
section numbers accordingly.
And then on page 3, line 20,
after the A.
Striking the remainder of the
line and striking line 21
through the words there, uh,
lowercase there inserting in
lieu thereof and uppercase
there. So that that would then
start.
Just saying there is created a
state wildlife commission rather
than carry out the purpose of
chapter 17 and other acts for
like purpose. And so that just
removes all of the, the purpose
language. Uh, is that a friendly
or unfriendly amendment?
Um, ma'am Chair, I'd just like
to point out that if you simply
strike section one, you default
to the existing purpose language
in statute.
And I think your goal is to
strike that as well.
And representative of your
right, it certainly would be,
um, but that's not in the, the
bill before us, uh,
So, if you have that, I don't
know that we can.
Strike something that is not.
So far
Manchur it's 171-1. You can see
the line through language on
page 2.
That's the existing language.
Right, so, so that's what we
would be just striking all of
them, are you saying there's a
purpose section apart from 1711,
that would not, I'm saying
there's a purpose session in
statute already, and if you want
to take that out, OK. I, I hear
what you're saying. I hear what
you're saying. Um, so I think
instead my amendment would be
to, to strike.
Everything also page 2,
striking.
Line 4 through line 15.
Including a striking the, the
stricken language.
Well, or how about this, uh,
page 2 striking the unstruck
language lines 4 and 5.
And then online's 12 to 15
strikingly added language. That
way the language you're already
struck.
They struck and we strike the
rest of it as well.
Um, man, I believe that, that
gets you there. Uh, we, we might
want to look at the, the best
form for that amendment and I
have no doubt LCS will, will
correct us if need be. All all
these amendments will, will go
up to LCS so if they need to
adjust that, they will do so.
Ma'am Chair, I understand the
purpose and that the mechanism
of your amendment, and that is a
friendly, as I told the senator,
that's a friendly amendment.
Yes. All right. Seeing that it
is a friendly amendment, is
there any
Objection to that.
See none that amendment is
adopted.
Right
Mhm.
Amendment will do, we'll have it
go to the district court rather
than the Supreme Court. Now,
certainly, if there was an
appeal from that district court
decision, it could make it up.
They would go to the court of
appeals and the Supreme Court,
uh, but it would start in the
district. And so that would be
page 7, line 10.
After the word action, inserting
in district court.
And then also online, uh, 15.
Again, after the word action,
inserting in district court.
And then striking lines 18
through 21.
So representative, is that a
friendly or unfriendly amendment
that's a friendly amendment.
Great. Thank you. So being that
that is a friendly amendment. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that amendment.
is adopted.
Um, otherwise, I would just like
to, oh, Senator Stewart.
OK.
I just wanna thank the, the
sponsors and everyone who's been
working on this. Um, I know a
lot of work has gone into this
over the years, and I think you
all have struck, uh, a really
good balance, and, and done a
lot of very meaningful
stakeholder engagement. Um.
time.
Um, I'm trying to adoption, move
passage of Senate Bill 5 as
amended.
All right. Let's do a roll call
vote on that option.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos. Senator Lopez.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig. Yes.
You have a Du pass as Amanda.
Thank you all. Madam Chair,
thank you very much, senators.
Thank you. If you do have
further questions, please feel
free to reach out to me.
Thank you.
All right, we have SB 85 and
We're going to, I think we're
gonna, hopefully we can, can get
through this is a bill. Hold on
one second, senator, and as, as
folks are leaving, if you could
keep it, go out in the hall and
keep it down so that we can
continue with our business.
Uh, this is a bill that I think
everyone, but probably Senator
Block has heard before this past
the Senate last year, the sit on
the house floor, um, I think
even Senator Bergman was was
probably there in the house when
when that happened, um, so we
are going to be limiting
everyone to 5 minutes, uh, on
this bill.
So that we can get through it
and still have time to do our
confirmation training.
So, uh, senators, please go
ahead. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Good morning, everyone.
Uh, as the chair mentioned, this
bill is identical to what came
off the house floor did not come
off the house floor, what ended
up on the house floor, just one
or two small tweaks. So again, I
believe that when you do
something like this and work on
an area like this, it's
important to start, start where
you left off and not redo it
all. So there's a number of
different amendments and centers
to.
Manics, I know there's one that
That, that you had and that's
not, that's not in this bill.
There might be another tweak to
it. Uh, again,
For a number of years, I've
worked on the campaign finance,
uh, statutes, uh, in 2009,
actually, Senator Feldman was
instrumental in finally putting
limits in place in the state of
New Mexico, where one of the few
states that did not have any
limits, uh, unfortunately, in
2010, the US Supreme Court and
the Citizens United decision,
uh, basically created a new
group of entities, independent
expenditure committees that have
no limits. And so since then, we
have tried
To do the one thing that, that
the Supreme Court said we could
do, which is required disclosure
and the unanimously said we
could require disclosure. And in
20019, uh, there was a
significant bill that for the
first time did require
independent expenditure
committees to disclose. Uh, this
bill is a continuation of that
cleaning up some loopholes and
what I'd like to do is just go
through briefly sections 135,
and 6 and then Senator Bergman's
will do 2.
7, Lindsay Bachmann's here with
the Secretary of State to answer
any questions.
Uh, section one, is a
Definitional section on page 7,
basically expanding the word
expenditure right now
expenditure is limited for
something that's for a political
purpose, and that was being
used, uh, basically to avoid
disclosing when something was
done in a certain window of a
campaign, this basically opens
that up so that you get to
current language in page 7,
section Q, which is existing
language, the
One time that you can require uh
disclosure of independent
expenditures. There's a 30 and
60 day window, uh, and this was
all established by the courts or
if there's express advocacy. We
just want to make sure that that
arguments can't be made that
something is not for a political
purpose, therefore, it's not an
expenditure. This clarifies
that. Uh, section 3, is again to
close a loophole, uh,
essentially there was language
in
The current statute, uh, that
says when funds are designated
uh by a donor not to be used,
uh, for an independent
expenditure under that scenario,
uh, basically, they can't be
used, which makes sense. That's
what we're trying to do. Uh, the
problem is we had a, we had
groups where those funds were
being designated by the donor,
and yet the group themselves was
going ahead and using that
funding and there was no way to
catch that. So this on page
14 adds a new section, uh, a
segregated bank account to make
clear that these donations and
we change contribution to
donation because this is
different. Uh, these are groups
that are getting lots of
different money. It may not be
specified. It's just making it
clear though that when that
donation comes in, if someone
doesn't want it used, put it
into a separate bank account and
then it's uh plain and simple
black and white. Uh section 5
and 6 deal with uh something
that's
not happened yet under New
Mexico law, but something that
just we need to clarify when a
candidate has a personal loan uh
to themselves. They can't charge
interest and then pay that loan
back using contributions. I
think there was a Ted Cruz case
at the federal level, uh,
section 4 clarifies that in
Section 5 requires disclosure
about the terms of the loan.
So those are the pieces that
deal primarily with the
independent expenditure, uh,
Senator Bergman's is going to
address sections 24, and 7,
which again are cleaning up some
some uh areas of the code, uh,
and changing some uh disclosure
time frames. So I'll yield to
Senator Bergman's.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Leaderworth. Uh, this is my
first bill presentation, so I
hope everyone will correct me if
I do anything wrong. Um, section
2 is a simple amendment that
just adds electronic
communication to telephone
solicitation campaigning, which
in modern time is used much more
often than telephones.
Section 4 is a slight tweak of
our current campaign reporting
schedule for candidates.
Um, right now, biannual reports
in an off-year election year are
required to be reported in April
and October, which are
don't really make sense for a
calendar year, so it is changing
it to June and December, which
To the normal person is much
more clear than the random month
of April and October.
Um, it also changes.
The
The supplemental report
requiring threshold Currently,
the language says more than
$1000. If you get a $1000 check,
maybe I won't be required. Um,
and it also brings down the
Statewide elections to meet that
$1000 threshold.
Um
For the 4th general the 4th
primary report and the 4th
general report. Those now end on
each election day, so the 4th
primary report ends on election
day rather than 25 days after.
And for the 4th general report
that now ends on election day
rather than days after.
And that does create one new
report the candidates will have
to file file at the end of the
year, which goes from election
day to December 31st. That's the
only new report created for
that.
Um, the regular, uh, general,
the regular reporting periods.
There's also a supplemental
report.
A session supplemental report,
we can call it that is created
that states if you receive any
contributions during the session
that, um, those must be
reported. And it does delete
one.
Currently right now in statute,
um, a pack who has not spent
money for.
A year.
is able to close their
registration with this Secretary
of State's office that, um, the
last part of section 4 deletes
that. So the pack must stay open
with the Secretary of State as
long as it has a bank account
that's also open.
Section 7.
Um
there by
Who during the prohibited
period.
And not solicit contributions,
it adds legislative caucus
committees. It also says that
certain people can now not only
not solicit contributions, but
they cannot accept them.
And that includes, um,
A candidate or an incumbent or a
legislative caucus committee and
not receive or accept a
contribution from a lobbyist,
lobbyist employer.
Current legislator, candidate,
or PAC.
And then the final changes, um,
have to do with
prohibited period when it
applies.
That the pro prohibited a period
applies to a few more candidates
than currently is in statute, as
well as when the prohibited
period ends for the governor or
lieutenant governor.
I think.
Great mentor, and we're happy
to, I think Ms. Wagner will ask
some questions if they come up,
we're happy to stand the
questions. All right. Thank you.
We did not have anyone sign up,
uh, either in support or in
opposition for this bill. So
members of the committee.
Uh
And so I
So our, our procedures require
that, that folks sign up because
we are
Doing very well on time. Uh, if
you wanna speak for, for just a
moment. Uh, but just so, so the
folks, I come, come up to the
microphone, introduce yourself.
Just so folks know, uh, if you
want to speak either for or
against anything, you need to
sign up at least an hour before
committee begins.
Go ahead. Thank you. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Hannah
Burling, co-president of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. I apologize. You are
signed up. That, that was just
on the wrong thing for me. I
apologize.
Thank you.
And the league stands in strong
support of this bill.
We believe that methods of
financing political campaigns
should ensure the public's right
to know, combat corruption and
undue influence.
Maximize fiscal accountability
and transparency.
And allow for the greatest
possible citizen participation
in the political process.
We are very grateful to Senator
Wirth.
For his commitment to keeping
these laws up to date?
And we urge you to give this
bill a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. Great. Thank you. Uh,
members of the committee.
Senator Brantley, thank you,
Madam Chair, and, uh, senators,
thanks for presenting this. This
is a basic cleanup bill,
transparency is all I see, and I
absolutely support it. I want to
take two sections. I know we're
short on time to thank the
Secretary of State's office for
always their non-partisan
approach to helping us. That
website drives me crazy. You and
your staff are phenomenal. Thank
you so much, um, for, for many
of us that kind of IT illiterate
in, in getting that in. I, I
just wanna thank you so much for
all you've done to get us to
this.
members of the committee, if I
may, Senator Brantly, you were
always very, um, appreciative of
to the office and I pass along
every single note of things that
you have sent. So I appreciate
those comments.
Center's phonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
sponsors on page 18, section C,
um, I see that this, um,
addresses some of my concerns
from past years.
That if you receive money during
um the prohibited period, you
can either return or keep it,
and then just report it within 7
days after the the prohibited
period. I appreciate that, um,
consideration. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
just, uh, uh, echo the Senator
Brantley's uh crazy website that
we all hate, but wonderful staff
that helps us. So much more
important than a
different uh operating system.
Uh, so my question on the bottom
of page 15, I think Senator
Bergmann's, uh, so you said that
instead of April and October,
we're proposing, uh, basically
June and then the end of
December, but you said there was
another reporting period. This
is just 2 new ones replacing the
old two ones is the new
recording if you've received
things in 7 days after you have
to file or where's the extra
one?
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Stewart, the, the party
referencing has to do with the
biennual reports, which you're
correct.
It all changes.
What
is uh different part of section
4,
And, uh, Ms. Bachman, will you
name your, your microphone
towards Senator Berkman.
Is that one better? OK. Um.
The biennial reports, the only
thing that changes is the dates
that are required within the
general period, so right after
the general election, because
we're changing the date.
Of the 4th general period to
election day. That means there's
a new time frame that needs a
report, which is the day after
the general election until
December 31st.
I have a chart if you'd like to.
Which we can hand out um just.
Yeah, eventually, I would like
to get a copy of the chart, but
I think I understand you. I
mean, I, I thought we were
putting the end of the reporting
period of December 31.
But you're, we're not changing
the end of the reporting period
to the end of the general
election day.
We we're still in the reporting
period after the general
election until the end of
December, and that has to be
reported by January 7th, 3, the
first Monday or whatever.
Correct. And so the change.
Also goes back to the 4th
general, which required the
closing period of the 4th
general to be election day, and
then that 4th general report
instead of going all the way to
December 31st.
Stops at election day and is due
7 days after that.
So then
Please show me where in the bill
this is.
You
OK
It's page 18 5.
That will be the new end of the
4th general period.
So then that, um,
Means that section 9 is
essentially a new reporting
period.
Which is right after 8.
I'm gonna need a chart. I, I
still don't get it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Senor
Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators, thank you for your
first bill. I sort of remember
this. I was wondering if it's
Senator Schmmetis from last.
Uh, go around with this anything
close to his?
and
I don't think so.
OK. Well, my question then.
centers is um
On, on, um, I'm dealing with
section
3, page 14.
I think it is.
Uh, and in, in there I was
trying to find out, uh, does
donation include the in-kind
services.
We'll defer to our expert just
to clarify.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, it's defined
in enough, um, and it, and to be
clear, this is only specific to
independent expenditures. So
donations to an IE specifically.
I, I sometimes we get overly
broad in the way that we talk
about these things, and I just
want to make sure that we're
being very specific. It's a
payment or transfer in a
commercial transaction,
compensation for services
rendered a commercially
reasonable loan made in the
ordinary course of business, a
gift on a special occasion.
from a family member or close
personal friend or a personal
loan from a family member. Those
donations would be segregated
from the contributions related
to the, to the IE. That's the
purpose of this to de-muddy the
waters and move those donations
into a separate bank account so
that it's very clear that
they're not associated with the
independent expenditure. Does
that Madam chair.
Oh
And Secretary of State's, uh,
office, the, the, as long as I
don't have an independent
expenditure.
I don't have to
Worry about this. For instance,
I get even now during
Um, session, I've got 2 people
to send electronic transfers
every month.
I'm not asking.
But I don't have to consider
that in in violation because
it's not.
Uh, I, uh, expenditure. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
that's kind of why I highlighted
it, um, to distinguish. This
would be someone who opened an
independent expenditure with the
Secretary of State's office. The
items that you receive in your
account are subject to
contribution limit limits that
are outlined in a different
section of the statute in
existing law.
That clarifies. I was trying to
mix the two.
And I appreciate that. So that
was my only question.
Yeah.
Yeah, real quickly, Madam Chair,
um, this, this came up in the
debate from 2023. I rewatched
all the proceedings, um, and the
section 3 does not apply to
candidates. It is only for an
independent expenditure pack or
super PAC.
Also called that.
Go ahead, Senator, so off the
floor.
I'm chairing senators. So if I
had a pack.
Uh, alongside my fantasy pack,
uh, or candidacy account, then I
would have to consider this
because I'm doing dual role. Is
that correct?
Oh, Madam Chair, Senator, only
if it was an independent
expenditure, which is also
different than a regular
coordinated.
Our values. Right. And so, uh,
I'm part of a pack, but I don't
want it as long as it's not an
independent expenditure, I'm
still clearing.
And OK with Secretary of State.
OK.
All right, uh, that's, everyone
I have on the list. Any other
members?
No. Uh,
The hair motion.
We
do.
Great. OK, we are on a motion
for a due pass. Um, let's go
ahead and call the roll.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Hi.
Senator Brantly. Yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Yes
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig. Yes, with 9 in
favor, you have a a unanimous
due pass. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for her
first committee you pass.
I just keep her on all my drills
All right, so now we are going
to uh do, try out this, this
training session for for
confirmations, so we're gonna
have our, our analyst, Natalie,
come down and then we also have
uh Mackley Carroll, who is a
former Senate rules analyst and
now works at the PRC. So come on
up.
Yeah.
Come on up, Maley.
He's right.
Oh
We'll have him go first. So on
Wednesday, we're gonna be
hearing um uh former Senator
Niberts, uh, nomination for the
PRC. And so that's why Mackley's
gonna give us kind of a, a quick
primer on PRC issues. Uh, we're
also gonna be hearing two folks
who've been appointed to the uh
the small business investment,
uh, council. And so we'll hear a
little bit about that from
Natalie.
Go ahead.
Yes, thank you. Thank you,
commissioners, I mean, senators.
I'm still in PRC mode. This
really is a full circle moment
for me though because like you
said, I did start here. Uh,
thank you, Jesse, for inviting
me here as well. So, um, this is
gonna be a broad and high-level
overview of the PRC.
And just to give you a road map,
I'm gonna go over a quick
overview of the commission, uh,
key areas of engagement and
current commission priorities,
why this matters to New Mexico
now and then just close this.
OK, so starting from the
beginning.
You know, we're established
under the Constitution, Article
11, Section 1, for anyone who's
interested, uh, we regulate
public utilities, cooperatives,
telecommunications and pipeline
safety to ensure safe and
reliable, um, and affordable
service.
We have a 3 governor appointed
and Senate confirmed
commissioners, staggering
six-year terms. This is
different from the original
before it was 5 commissioners
and it was elected. So that's a
big change. And like the rule,
uh, commissioned, we have some
type of rulemaking authority
where we develop rules for
modernizing the grid, uh, to
implement state energy policies.
So I stated, uh, one of our key
areas of engagement and current
uh priorities is to ensure safe,
reliable and affordable utility
service. To do that, we enforce
state uh reliability standards
to hold utilities accountable
for service and service
disruptions. We oversee rape
cases from PNM, uh, El Paso
Electric and SPS Southwestern
Public. This is going in and out
or is that my voice?
You know, it, it if it sounds
weird and too loud to you, then
that means it's probably just
right for the people online but
it is awkward, sorry
um, we also, um, strengthen
commun consumer protections and
public engagement efforts
through workshops. We've done
one on grid moization. We have
one coming up on economic
development. We're doing table
topics for disaster mitigation
and preparedness in
collaboration with M Nerd, and
we like to encourage public
comments. So we do public
comment sessions, um,
across the state.
One of our current priorities,
the big one deals with grid
modernization and energy
transition and to do that, we're
implementing a grid
modernization statute. It's on
one of our recent rulemakings
where we required utilities to
have a grid plan on a scheduled
basis and this aligns with great
modernization and transportation
electrification, as well as
advanced metering and uh
distributed the energy.
And part of grid modernization
deals with grid readiness and
economic development. So like a
theme here is that it's all
connected when you see uh the
energy infrastructure. So to do
that, we've done, as I stated,
workshops evaluating utility
infrastructures. Um, we have
direct engagement with the big
IOUs PNM EPE and SPS on uh
service connections and system
capacity concerns.
And um we've done the, done the
process of upgrading the
electrification and transport
and transportation
infrastructure in New Mexico. So
to that end, we interview, uh,
we review transportation
electrification plans to
accelerate electrical vehicles
and the charging infrastructure
to help expand that because you
know in New Mexico, there's some
areas where it's real rural,
where they don't have this
access. So you want to make sure
this is felt across the state.
And as I stated earlier, we're
holding um a workshop on
economic development, as well as
renewable energy investments.
This is another area of focus,
um, that's really dear to the
the PRC and one way we're doing
this is by community solar
expansion, so we're increasing
capacity caps from 200 megawatts
to 300 megawatts, and that will
help drive economic growth. We
also approved big scale uh
renewable projects and battery
storage to enhance grid
reliability and sustainability
in the state, and to do that to
that
And we work with stakeholders to
help leverage the funding
opportunities in New Mexico.
Um,
something else that's really
important to us is the
regulatory transparency and
public engagement. And as I've
been saying, we hold workshops
for this to just get the people
out there to make the public
come and participate through our
rulemaking initiatives.
So why this matters now is that
New Mexico is at a turning point
in its energy and regulatory
landscape and the commission's
work is more critical than ever
due to the unprecedented energy
transitions, right? The
commission is is managing one of
the largest grid transformations
in the state history, right?
We're trying to get renewable
energy in there, energy storage,
and like I said, trans um
electrification.
And to do that, we need
utilities investments must align
with climbing goals and economic
sustainability. We want to do
this for the state and with the
state in mind.
So like I've been saying, one of
our um next workshops is on
economic development. So we have
an inquiry that's going on and
we're trying to identify gaps
and infrastructure that could
slow economic growth because
that's something we obviously
don't want.
And another reason is because of
the rapid evolving utility
business model because there's a
transition happening, um, not
just across the state but
nationwide dealing with solar
panels, battery storage, um,
electric vehicles, and the
demand side management and that
requires some modernization in
the framework.
Um, the commissions, like I
said, the grid model rulemaking
we have that will help ensure
that our investments are
strategic, cost-effective, and
forward thinking.
And something else like is very
uh important for the commission
is rising consumer expectations
and and utility accountability.
That's sort of the theme of what
I'm saying. OK, we want to meet
ratepayers and business
businesses because they expect
more transparency, better
reliability, and reasonable
rates.
And the commission is doing this
by strengthening the oversight
of rape cases and service
quality while holding utilities
accountable for infrastructures,
um, and investments.
So to close this, uh, it's not
about what you have, it's about
what you do with what you have,
and that's why the commission is
more engaged in shaping New
Mexico's energy and regulatory
future.
The regulatory certainty and
efficiency are important to us.
It's uh critical for ensuring
sustainable economic growth,
clean energy adoption, um,
long-term infrastructure
resilience like cybersecurity
and disaster mitigation and
preparedness.
And aside from the nomination
process, I just want to end and
say this, that, uh, the
commission appreciates the
Senate support, and it's
essential for the PRC to
maintain a strong and
independent and well sourced
commission, and that is it.
Open to any questions. Thank you
so much for for coming and, and
sharing that with us. Um, I have
a copy of his talking points of
any members would like, would
like a copy of this.
To help, uh, as you're thinking
through things for Wednesday,
we'd be happy to, to get you a
copy. Um, but thank you so much.
And well, to the extent that we
can bring in kind of experts in
the areas that we're gonna be
confirming, we're, we're gonna
continue doing that. I think
that's very, really valuable for
us. Their job isn't necessarily
to, to answer questions for us.
It's more to like give us a, a
base knowledge, uh, so that we
know what kinds of questions we
should be thinking about when
the conferees come before us,
but thank you so much. Thank
you.
and great to see you.
All right, Natalie, you want to
come down and we're floor's
gonna be starting pretty soon,
so let's just do a real quick
primer on um
Uh, small business Investment
Corporation.
Yeah
Good morning, Madam Chair and
senators. Um, I, uh, just before
we I start about um telling you
about these small business, um,
investment corporation. I just
wanted to go give you a brief
outline um for con for
confirmations, um, and for my
presentations, um, I can give
you this outline after the um
the meeting and um, you know, so
that you have it for future
reference. OK, so, um, first
we're gonna, or I'm, I'm gonna
be talking about the
establishing statutes, the
governance structure, the
governance powers, um, the major
activities of the, uh, of the
entity, um, common common
recipients of the um of the
program and the current partners
that are the current um entities
that they partner with in New
Mexico.
Um, and so the reason I start
with that is because, um, I
think it's really important when
you're making policy to know um
exactly what kind of powers, um,
and who is, uh, you know, who
enforces them and all of that,
um.
As we are going through these um
confirmations.
Um, next, I'll go through, um,
major stakeholders and any sort
of issues with um litigation and
legislation, and then end with
um just general hot issues, so
issues that might have hit the
media, um, or prior or we've had
prior legislation about maybe,
um, you know, for your own
reference, you know, maybe it's,
you wanna ask um questions about
issues from constituent feedback
or even your own personal
observations.
OK, great. So, um, now we are
going into the New Mexico small
business Investment Corporation.
Um, the corporation was created
in 2001 by the by the
legislature to assist New
Mexico's small businesses
obtaining financing to begin and
grow with the aim of growing
small businesses to create jobs
in the state.
Um, it is not a state agency, so
you won't see it on the um state
um the the organizational map.
It is a nonprofit independent
public organization that that
facilitates the distribution of
public money and loans and for
loans and investments, uh.
The corporation is is led by a
board of directors, which
includes 6 governor appointed
governor appointed individuals
with knowledge and expertise in
small business management, 3
board advisors and the state
treasurer or their designee. The
directors are also unpaid, um,
and they, and the corporation
has no employees and the
contract out for its legal,
accounting and financial
advisory services, um, in terms
of oversight, the board sends an
annual report of their
investments and activities.
to the governor and the director
of the New Mexico Legislative
Finance Committee.
The commission also provides the
commission, or excuse me, the
corporation also provides annual
audited financial statements.
The reports on the financial
statements are available on
their website, um, which is
NMSBIC.org.
In terms of powers, they do have
rulemaking power, um, and but
it's with respect to the
corporation's operations and to
carry out the functions and
duties, um, and administering
these small business investment
Acts, so they can in turn to
contracts, sue and be sued and
make operational changes.
For a major activities, the
corporation contracts with or
yeah, contracts with lending
agencies and organizations
across the state to provide
financial services for
businesses such as microloans
and make investments that
consider the enhancement of
economic development objectives
of the state. Um, the
corporation does this by
entering into contracts with
larger funds such as the federal
PPP program, um, and then
partners with these smaller
community level financial
organizations and
institutions to work and they
work with small businesses
through and uh to get them
through the application process
to get them the the loan.
Um, so a lot of these, uh,
community level financial
organizations are um economic
development organizations,
regional economic development
districts, um, and parties that
have demonstrated uh abilities
and relationships in providing
the financial services to new
and emerging businesses, um, and
also, um, those who um who make
investments. Um,
The corporation can also make
equity and debt investments in
New Mexico businesses, um, in
the, in the investments are made
pursuant to cooperative
agreements, um, for equity
investments and um and equity
investment in any one business
cannot exceed 10% of the fund.
The investments represent no
more than 49% of the total
equity capital of a business,
um, and but shall apply to
investments made by um entities
pursuant to the cooperative
agreements, um, for debt
investments, um, the, the debt
investment in one business may
not may not exceed 10% of the
fund, um, and, uh, this applies
to debt investments made by
entities pursuant to the
cooperative agreement.
Um, also, interestingly, um, the
corporation returns excess funds
to the severance tax permanent
fund each year. Um, so the
excess funds means the return on
investment to the corporation in
the amount of dividends and
interest actually received plus
any capital gains actually
realized less the operating
expenses of the corporation and
less amounts reasonably reserved
for losses. Common recipients of
the of their of these loans, um.
are like are very small
businesses actually, um, so some
of the, um, so a lot some of it
is for expanding, um,
restaurants, um, for providing
um infrastructure loans, um, I,
um,
A person highlighted in their
report was someone on a trip or
uh who lived on tribal land, um,
and wanted to expand her um art
studio, um, and so she got a
small loan from um from the New
Mexico small Business Investment
Corporation for that.
Um, so hot issues. So some of
the um the challenges that the
uh that the corporation is
facing right now is that, um,
obviously New Mexico is very
rural, and so most of the
development, most of the loans
that have been, um, that have
been given have been to
businesses along the Rio Grande
corridor. So, um, that is so, so
obviously they are interested in
expanding that. They have given
loans in uh to businesses.
And, um, in almost all counties,
but they very much want to
expand that, um, much more to
rural districts. Um, some of the
other challenges that they, that
they, um, face and um that's
that are unique to New Mexico
is, um, what I mentioned
previously is how is um funding
businesses on tribal lands, um,
tribal businesses have
difficulty receiving funding
because they are on federal
land. And so in order to make
any changes, any sort of
infrastructure changes to their
business that is on federal
land, they
have to get permission from the
federal government to go and do
all of that. So, um,
So, uh, these uh these business
owners have the opportunity to
um to to apply to the to the
court to a um
A loan through the corporation
to grow their business.
Um
They're also having challenges
with the micro loans, um, and
commitment to, to, uh, and
having, it's not really a
challenge that they have a
commitment to doing these micro
loans and um making sure that,
uh, you know, they are funding
businesses that are strictly in
New Mexico that are founded here
and our um and stay here. um,
this present this presents a
challenge because those are
competing goals with the
investors sometimes. So
sometimes these larger investors
that fund the larger funds that,
you know, fund the loan
Um, you know, they want to make
a lot of money, but you know,
and my might have some
expectations that as the
business grows, they might want
to relocate somewhere, right, to
maybe a new market or whatever,
you know, um, but that's not
what the corporation is is
about, um, and, you know, or
they or they just want to make
more money, obviously, which is
difficult because that does not
encourage job creation, which
again is a big part of the
critical mission of the
corporation.
Um, and so that is um that is
presenting a unique challenge
because it is becoming, um, they
are having challenges attracting
large investment funds to the
state due to this mismatch of
expectations. Um,
So, uh, oh, and one of, one of
the types of funds specifically
is venture capital investments.
So these venture capital
investments may not see like um
the return of of investment that
they want, um, or as quickly as
they expect, um, and they may
not be as dedicated to um the
mission as us or as, as the, um,
as the, as the corporation. Um,
so I know venture capital
investment is really big in
tech, so, um, you know, there
that
Something that, that the
corporation will definitely need
to um keep note of as they um as
we go into the comp or as we
move into the future. Thank you
so much. I think we got to get
to to floor. If you wouldn't
mind, if we can like your
outline, if we can just email
that out to, to all the members.
I think that would be.
That would be great. Yeah, thank
you so much. That was really
helpful. All right. Thanks
everyone so much. Ros is in
recess.
Yeah
Have a good day.
