Yes Representative I.
It's a great deal with that
thank you.
Six seven.
Yes this is right for you the
decrease.
Yeah.
This.
Thank you.
This post was cruising along
exactly.
Both.
This.
Very are.
Yes.
For
sleep.
Yeah.
The.
That's awesome.
Our goal is
your love of.
We live in.
What was.
As.
Good how are you all of the.
I think this is Missy that so
interesting may come as is
the.
I.
Once again in the spring Sallee
which is that his name is.
Three thousand.
The house invested.
Is this.
Place your lives right I think.
I think chairman.
This is like.
Yes of course.
With that.
This is an Indian rural culture
Affairs Committee welcome to our
and indeed today because of the
bill to team for to keep you
know more and Senate bill two
fifty eight San Miguel library
services.
And now the silence your
cellphones.
Intervention and you may begin
to thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee of once
again we come before you with
the request for.
Funding to complete the rural
library in down.
Number.
Four years ago four years ago we
created the rural library and
Fund and we've been adding small
amounts of money we just
initially for fifty million.
And we got two or three the
first year three and then we
added another million the
following year and this last
year we have ten we're up to
sixteen so we have now thirteen
of the fifty one of the things.
You see the figures moved up to
fifty one because now there's
fifty one rural libraries that
would be able to participate in
the idea from the beginning was
that.
each of these libraries would in
effect have a one million dollar
dollar endowment and the
interest of that fund is what
would fund the library
operations these for the most
part libraries in small the not
for the most part these are all
libraries in the smallest
communities in the state many of
them are not incorporated many
of those communities have no
other municipal services so in
effect they are the heart of.
Villages like I'm going to go
Carrizozo Eunice
Dixon the one that I'm most
familiar with and I'll I have
with me the the
resident Dixon show landmark who
schemed up this idea.
The he came to me with that four
years ago and
we we've been continuing our
efforts to get the fund built up
to fifty one million at that
point it would be generating
about forty five thousand we
estimate for each library each
year.
And because their needs will
differ what they spend that
money on will differ in in
I see those they may actually be
able to to you know to put the
a wall of four four put in rules
that's the community I think
where they have the of the only
telephone and intending after
hours they they moved their
phone Jack from inside the
building outside an after hours
they have a table set up on the
porch and people can come and
make phone calls that's the kind
of one of the services they
provide in in the communities in
may need to to buy some
computers for the computer that
they may need to pay somebody
these for the most part
volunteer work this might be
able to pay somebody to halftime
staffing.
Keep the office of keep the
library
operating hours longer in the
day so it'll vary from community
to community but this is a way
of saying we value rural life we
really think these communities
deserve our support and here's
one way we can do it through a
vehicle that they themselves
have created everyone of those
libraries was created by the
people in that community and the
service is very but the purpose
is always a state to keep the
community vital and healthy and
I'd like madam chairman if it's
alright for my expert witness to
say a little bit more about this
and then we also have the state
librarian
if you like a grenade is here
with us who can answer questions
about this program so.
Nine more madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
letting me speak today
I have
Mr came a distant for me that
they're now fifty two libraries
eligible for the down and so
that's really exciting
The indictment was created to
deal with a systemic problem so
in Colorado for example
libraries have library districts
they have taxing authority so
we're libraries I really well
funded in Colorado they pay
their librarians well thank you
keep their buildings here in New
Mexico libraries are funded
mainly by municipalities and so
poor municipalities like
Lordsburg plate and
M. as springs distaff all over
the state they don't have the
money to really fund their
libraries well and consequently
many of the library directors
throughout the state are making
between twelve and fifteen
dollars an hour yes the library
street don't depend on volunteer
labor libraries like I'm to
Chico that have been depending
on volunteer labor for twelve
years thank you love to hire
librarian for their community
So because there's no commercial
sector in the small towns the
just don't have the funding the
endowment would really address
that issue the dress that
systemic problem each library
would then get about forty five
thousand dollars a year if the
fund is making about five
percent
right now the first this the
amount as scheduled for the
first disbursement each library
was is going to get about
fifteen hundred dollars from
that this fiscal year you
Senator get about three thousand
next fiscal year because the
funds went down a little bit
it'll be seventeen hundred so.
The amount really needs to
increase there's fifteen million
in the proposed budget in house
bill two right now we're asking
for an additional twenty million
so that each library would have
a million dollar down the so.
Seven hundred forty thousand
dollars in down meant more more
for the endowment for each of
fifty different communities.
That will stand for questions
chair thanks any questions from
committee members.
Thank you madam chair thank you
of Senators thank you for your
presentation what is the
eligibility requirement for
these libraries.
All of which were down.
Or you could give you if you the
the purpose of madam chairman
perhaps a Mr line market answer
then if he if there's some other
issues of disagreement that
answers well.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you for the
question so right now
communities that have three
thousand people or less are
eligible for the endowment fund
and also a few communities that
are unincorporated place C.
tests and elder rattle our I get
there I would see three
libraries there's fourteen five
oh one see three libraries in
the state the organized as I
would see these because that was
their only choice and
incorporated villages so all I
want to see three libraries are
also eligible because they don't
have any municipal funding.
I'm here is because we have the
rural libraries have some tribes
and then we have other tribes or
rural setting way up and know
where no this for twenty five
there's no economic development
so why are there not
intelligible only because your
population is about two
thousand.
I mean it it it is no effect on
our economic development so it
seems to me Madam.
From the economic perspective
you were saying.
You know there's really no way
for them to stay in the library
for this type of Quincy.
Did you speak to the.
To the the issue of some of the
tribal.
Is that are
madam chair that's practice
marks said it's I'm sorry
population three thousand or
under which at this point is
twelve tribal libraries out of
nineteen currently recognize
wider use of tribal wipers are
eligible that's correct how is
that data because I know our.
Of this because the manager for
approval in this.
Our tribal rule meant is
probably sort of of four
thousand but the people that
actually live in what was
probably less than.
Three thousand probably twenty
seven hundred so how how did
global payments not be eligible
for what is I I wanna what what
census data would be uses of the
tribal minister for you know
six.
Years and when we had our
population for harmful and all
that stuff is all based on
population I know exactly how
many people are homeless
features far below three
thousand so that's why I'm
asking because of Santo clear us
to larger try the local papers
this.
Okay we use of the Pueblo of
from our latest there on the
list so I don't understand why
some of the bigger.
Have more people by the looks of
this I sectors of chair members
of the committee thanks for the
question Senator Shendo
I believe that him as well as
the pueblo was the closest to
three thousand when we started
the endowment they were like
thirty one hundred and I looked
at the census recently for him
just pueblo and it looks like
it's there the population of the
Pueblo itself has defender three
thousand which will make them
eligible for for down funds I
believe they're going to be
eligible graduations.
In school.
Those with the Pueblo and we
have since you to economic rules
we have can known all of border
communities and so.
I don't know if his sister
tribal number or is it the actor
get of that that that's the case
that certain of two thousand
and.
It Madam chairman and and and
senator you're you're raising a
really serious issue because
because since there's no
Since these are not independent
communities with their own
political.
definition of their boundaries
the library service and thank
you for example the one and into
Dixon service Rinconada that
serves been Lars hers and they
do service areas that are larger
of the there I mean I'm for I
for one would be perfectly glad
to see us have a larger
endowment fund and more
libraries I think that that
ultimately out of the our goal
when we started there were there
were fewer and and and and the
state library has been working
to provide technical assistance
to groups that want to start
library in their communities and
and I think I think that that
might be something that we would
this just describes what's going
on right now but I think in the
future we might want to make
this available to more
communities not fewer.
Appreciate that of not okay with
that so but no one supported
with this but I just want to
make sure that those communities
that need the above the
population threshold still the
economic development
opportunities in pain as a new
folks on ponderosa can no and
all that they come to the public
library services in.
So that increases the population
off the reservation but yet.
Now is an L. because perhaps
those numbers of the account if
you just take a tribal members
would be able to.
So.
And and madam chairman.
Is there a separate bill for for
tribal libraries no I think
there's a bill that was
introduced after for
construction construction of
life was not not this iterations
so.
you at that for thank you thank
you senator shin and I probably
chase can go out to the our
audience here thank you.
Support Senate Bill.
And does anybody in opposition.
Doesn't support would you like
to go public comment.
please stand up and gentleman we
are thank you madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for allowing us to be able
to speak very thank you but I am
from a small the most of those
and we have on the server the
point that Senator things
to our labs even though we're
we're serving
wide range people even seventy
eight you have people come to
the right.
Even Hey this is for real in and
so we've serve a wide range a
lot of people we offer a wide
range of styles Services.
Many people investors don't have
access to internet service and
it only able to get was able to
determine what is at the library
we lost educational programs to
be used in or more don't see
anywhere from strong of them as
strongly to geology.
In those we consider the gem of
the community and we partner
with many organizations.
So just wanted to.
Ask.
Please consider.
Fund.
Our focus so far we're diligent
about three hundred people were
developing monitoring right now
two of our community server
provides.
Food banks twice because of the
summer wine programs and all
those things we help volunteers
now cataloguing workstation
we've been alleging archery for
thirty five years and having
access to state folks will be
critically important to us in
terms of we have some grant
funds but to
under you know one year funding
other I can't speak highly
enough of opportunity to have
consistent over time so I want
to thank you.
Anybody.
Thank you that we have Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair
Senator almost forty bill
because I think it would be a
good baseline.
I just.
Some things happened a few years
back and and then the guy who
did some of the issues etcetera
are shelters correct me if I
find the issue be.
But
Shizhen County which had defined
local option gross receipts tax
and those things could so we be
used for certain thank.
A few years back with the
passage of center officials or
their own.
That change in season calendars
can pass.
Taxes for.
Purposes that they were not able
to in the crash because that
increments which you're more for
sure hello.
So what I think would be wise is
initialized to the bill that's
coming up next as well here's
the county in some of these
instances block to look at.
What opportunities they may.
To assist with this project you
know maybe rules the amount of
money they have for for life
for.
You know sixteenth of one
percent
Is hardly noticeable it's six of
fiction and fiction questions
for every dollar spent.
But if you had that in your
county you my to make some
The migration additional funding
to to do that show I would just
say you look at some of those
letters because those options
are there and they give you
should be.
And madam chair then Senator
that's that's what I would
recommend I think you've got a
I think this needs to happen but
I think it gives you additional
opportunity to talk with your
County go figures on I'm sure
the motion communities
corporation I don't have means
to do that for the camera.
Thank you madam chair technician
thank you sent.
Thank you senator Sanchez.
There is a so three in here on
the top while one first question
is so from the fund now of the
thirteen million you receive
fifteen hundred this year and
overseas three thousand next
year.
That's all you're receiving this
that said to us madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the question the first
year there was one million
dollars Fund so if the second
year there was two million added
to it the thirty year nothing
was added to it and then the
fourth here last year ten
million was added to it so the
libraries won't see the results
of earnings from that ten
million it's like a three year
lead time so that so that's why
the funds are so low the first
two years.
Second question so when you hit
the fifty one million then you
will get the server with forty
five thousand per year off of
the fund said it is the men's
thank you for that question
if so expanding into twenty
twenty eight the earnings will
be averaged over a period of
five years so
assuming there will be a five
percent five percent is the
maximum that can be taken out of
the fund assuming there's a five
percent average each library
will get about forty five
thousand dollars a year I create
a certain five percent of the
funds will go to the state
library to assist with rural
libraries needs and then a small
percentage would go to grants to
communities that.
The status one.
Thank you
Mr.
Any other questions for
committee members I have a
couple here so.
We're talking about having the
thank you very.
And overlapping and the
communities day Sir.
It doesn't seem like we're
really.
The state but there's gaps so
you know
And if we're just gonna I don't
know I appropriation doesn't
come out just a statewide as far
as doing this or certain
communities it seems like we're.
Us
That's two without any.
Investment I mean there's been
investments already made in that
sense but date continue invest
but try to find other avenues
you know and
About the tribal libraries fires
some still excluded.
And I know it does is the sound
like they need to be statewide
plan overall over half of all
the libraries in the state of
New Mexico so that it's kind of
the equitable and fair
that is the big libraries can
sustain themselves where are
they getting the funding okay
but then it I'm gonna go back to
the schools to I think we really
We're doing things in making
these changes but we're creating
even a greater.
Complication to how we Fund and
when we ask for these numbers we
really don't know how much we're
putting into the libraries are
how much all any kind of life
would be smaller big what their
needs are.
And also those services provided
to.
Then in two people New Mexico we
should have a baseline for the
services this is the minimum
and libraries don't meet that
requirement then you should
actually still being putting
that money directly to those
areas because those are the ones
who are really in need because
they kind of in.
I have a telephone how do we
leave that
and even with internet you know
is the internet adequate enough
for all these libraries that are
around.
it's
I don't know it exists anymore
in support it's just doesn't
seem like or it seems like we're
just trying a little bit a piece
of candy over here okay guys
The this and that we're still
not really getting the full
picture of what can be done but
they're still this
competitiveness that happens
between urban areas and rural
areas again.
So madam chairman if you're
raising an excellent point we've
been I don't think from the
beginning we've ever thought
that this fund would solve all
the financial needs of all the
rural libraries.
But it will go a long way toward
helping struggling rural library
survive basically and and and be
able to continue being.
A way to keep people in those
communities if if they can work
remotely using internet access
if they can find jobs through
the through the library and and
and the resources it opens to
them if they can provide after
school programs and lots of ways
in which families are are able
to stay in those smaller
communities and not move to the
to the bigger cities
In search of all the things that
we might have been able to
provide to the library so that's
that was from the beginning kind
of the idea that when we started
there were I think we had
identified forty six libraries
that that seem to fit the
definition the that's four years
ago and since then they've been
several more on that the they've
been created all these are
create created local you know
the the local people are the
ones that create them not the
state but once they're created I
think we have to recognize that
we can support that we can
finance them the way municipal
or in Albuquerque there's tax
money that they pay Santa Fe tax
money the bigger cities even Las
Vegas has a wonderful library
the the the Carnegie library
there in Las Vegas of the debt
from years ago it was built
foundation money and it's been
supporting the tax money ever
since.
These local communities these
rural communities don't have
that resource so that's where
this is just a little effort in
helping them.
Meet some of those other
obligations that that thank you
continue providing the services
but the need for a statewide
plan the need for assistance to
these groups all of that
continues and and ideally we
might see this fund built up
beyond the the the initial goal
of fifty million and try to
reach a point where.
Every library in the state it's
not it says tax supported
already could receive a little
assistance from this one.
And and and as Senator Griggs
pointed to maybe some of them
could also begin contacting
their county governments county
governments are very strapped
right now we'll recognize but
this may be enough of the of the
of the value to them that they
would want to add this to what
they already finance.
Two and is expanding need
because of the district I come
from this probably impulses
rules when we think most of us
Representative.
And.
You know.
To put a little bit that I
understand that in some sense
like seed money but then when.
C. putting.
It just doesn't seem to be.
When you're talking about the
amount of money.
Putting in is there actually
that same this is sufficient.
First it was still sitting there
basically right it was sitting
there and has it been job
because it was enough to do
anything.
So this what's going to happen
again because we know costly and
that so even though we increase
the funds to still sit there
again cause us.
The following all we can do this
is madam chairman
Okay do this is this make the
effort to find a way.
To provide a regular.
Ongoing source every year they
would be forty five thousand
coming now that may not be
enough.
To run a library and Albuquerque
certainly but it clearly would
be enough to keep the by
seacoast library going or the of
the one in reserve going if they
had forty five thousand that
they can count on the sides
there is a lot of dinners and
chicken suppers and you know
bingo or whatever they're using
out of financings which is
they're struggling the the the
the they they they pay for
themselves as they go and this
would be a real asset.
Thank you thank you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino chair would
entertain a motion
to pass bush included past basin
including you'll seconded by
Senator Shendo yeah would you
please call the roll Senator
Griggs yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo this.
Senator mail yes.
Senator yes.
Seven six.
Four zero propose for Senate
bill two fourteen relay facing
down Fund senator Ortiz Pena
congratulations you see to pass
thank you very much for.
Senator Ivey Soto provided a
yeah just as it's a just that
last conversation they're having
thoughts of this particular.
But you know just to make sure
they are financially stable you
might want to consider.
Going back in the role of
reactive and having them
automatically the dispensaries.
That would help this is.
That certainly is a great idea.
and we will be glad to take that
you consider facial people want
to spend a whole afternoon
reading a book.
Very slowly in Medicaid.
This is what we enjoy coming to
these committee.
Just
stay later and take revise.
And and so madam chairman
Senator access to both put her
bill and for and I I because it
also deals with libraries.
It over.
he's here.
The.
Let's let him put.
You too.
Okay
At
six.
That was cool.
Thank you very much madam chair
and.
to Senate Bill.
L. library services this is the
product of the so thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee and I really
appreciate the presentations by
Senator Ortiz if you know a
couple of things and of course
the centers to fax it myself
she's in rules aren't here we're
trying to take care of a
multitude of issues as as we
move forward if I may basically
this particular measure would
appropriate forty two thousand
dollars for our rural libraries
particularly in FY area in San
Diego county and with the is an
individual who
I have highest for he's a
student New Mexico highlands
university coated event a and if
I may allow him also to make a
statement as a first time user
if you will of of libraries
particularly at New Mexico
highlands but a few things that
I'd like to go ahead and mention
before we get started in terms
of the presentation.
in Senate district eight as an
example there's thirty six
incorporated incorporated
communities within this area
over the years as a Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino has eloquently
indicated particularly working
very closely with the late David
cargo what we have done is we
have built libraries in
communities like economy Chico
and of course set these up in
communities like motor as we
move forward unfortunately so
much of the work continues to be
done on a volunteer basis so
that means people in the
community open up the facilities
we work very closely with the
Rockefeller Foundation we were
able to secure of reading
materials for these these
institutions but again to go
ahead and keep up with today's
technology to keep up with the
reading materials that are that
are important and then to keep
the doors open so people in the
community are able to utilize
these facilities it's been very
difficult and as we move forward
with this one particular
appropriation this would go
ahead and help an area and we
hear so much about what
community and and the
surrounding communities that are
frankly within a mile mile and a
half and in some cases just very
close in proximity to each other
the issue is as we do move
forward.
Libraries in our state are
essential and with the growing
trends in terms of what Gen Z.
is doing today of their method
of course is to technology and
so with that we want to ensure
that our elders have a place to
go over they can read we can
bring our young people and they
couldn't have stories read to
them but most importantly that
we continue to go ahead and
coordinate if you will the real
technology and how today's
generation continues to utilize
the services with that being
said madam chair if I may I'd
just like to defer to a mystery
that are for a few comments in
terms of his feelings about
libraries and I I asked him the
question do you use the library
at highlands and Accorsi
indicated he he does and so with
that if I may just for for a few
comments by Mr that a please
thank you madam chair members of
the committee speaking about
libraries going from all of the
community of Las Vegas we came
up I'm I'm gonna have a hundred
is still out there and I came
from a family who we couldn't
afford a computer so then my
cousin would often go down a
librarian put in our our home
dropping cations and harshly
point those are our way of
utilizing it for technology that
was wasn't available to us so I
know as a as a user myself how
important libraries can be not
only for you know for me but the
community of around us so
analysts just a quick little
story of how how I'm connected
to libraries and since then you
know I've gone back and thank
you so multiple times but I just
want to be she Senator Campos
for for allowing me to speak on
that on that behalf just as a as
a user of a librarian and
somebody who's now content use
the using it consistently and in
thank you very much madam chair
just in closing again so many of
our young people that are being
with us not only today but
throughout the session and part
of fraud mystery but I would
like to do with his career is to
become a lawyer and I'm very
pleased because as we move
forward.
They have high goals and high
levels of achievement that they
wish to continue with but we all
know that it's all based in in
this case of rural librarian or
very thankful for the services
in the ongoing work at center DC
Pino continues to do in this
particular area thank you very
much madam chair your available
for questions thank you senator
because of those in the avid
standard support.
Is there any opposition.
Those in support would you like
to give public comment.
I'd like to just tell us your
story about being with a live
break it will be effected by
this so their library setting up
time TV their budget was sixty
four thousand dollars a year
they got about half of that from
the county because the county
was effected by the fires and
floods their budget again didn't
have no money to the library so
their budget suddenly dropped to
thirty two thousand dollars so
the library during the fires and
floods the library connected
people who needed housing
without state that food to
people who needed for this
library doesn't have sufficient
heating system or installation
in the rules so they have to
close seven hours during the
winter it's the only internet
for spree internet for seventy
five miles of the two Las Vegas
the two they redid the school
every Friday they have a this
has the the food bank they did
to the fire state they have a
farmers market every two weeks
with local people can sell their
produce this library is amazing
they don't know how.
Louise this year this bill will
really help them thank you madam
two senators anybody else like
to get public comment yes Sir.
Of.
Thank you for hello.
The opportunity to comment my
name is Max Garcia my wife
virtual.
From Las Vegas but from what
I've and I lost almost all my
farm in now San Miguel and more.
But I am a user of the Dave
cargo public libraries in more
at it's a wonderful library they
got
access to compute use with years
are and we're now currently
planning our rock renter's
Memorial and we use that
facility as features.
Libraries are tremendously
important and invaluable.
Hi it's wonderful to see you
guys are in full support of
that.
Thank you for your time thank
you.
Questions from committee
members.
You just have like a COVID.
We talk about the rural areas in
my area is the chapter houses
and the government you know the
public tribal libraries and
having that access to funding
for the chapterhouse to have
library put into.
But this is go back a little bit
to talk about statewide plan is
if these areas.
Need such a facility to have
within the community
thank you to I find it hard to
have that just sticks acted in
just a moment to library
if there's such a need then
there probably needs to be some
incorporation where they could
probably.
Draw from several pools of
funding to have a structure
within the area to that is
adequate enough that has the the
heating and that's closing of a
baseline of services that ADA
compliant that has internet that
has all these things even to
conduct that little bit of of
government
Governance in an area especially
when we know we have all these
natural disasters that are
happening.
because if there is no place out
there for
To rendezvous out for the police
or anything you're just your
committee you don't the people
don't know where to go when they
need the help.
So I'm just gonna put that out
there because they do think it's
a need that is necessary
especially some of our rural
rural rural areas
thank you Senator Campos if
there are no questions from
committee the chair will
entertain a motion.
Would you pass Senator Ivey
social funny Soto two four two
passed up a second second place
in addition to the ability to
call the roll Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes or.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo as.
Senator.
Yes and I will not explain.
Senator the.
These.
Well.
It is one of
the ports are opposition Senate
bill two fifty eight Senator
Stefano Senator Campos I'm going
very services to do pass thank
you madam chair members have
centers to fax would really
appreciate your indulgence and
of course your consideration of
this particular piece of
legislation thank you senator
coming.
Committee members need to have a
meeting
Bills that are on the agenda
will meet at ten against.
In it talk with Senator Griggs
depending if we get any more
referrals have all those on the
agenda on next date.
Start at nine.
We get.
