Senator Hemphill Senator Hickey
here Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Morris.
Centerman you us.
Senator Neville.
Center male.
Center Paul.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart here etcetera
Thoman.
Senator Wirth.
You do have a quorum Mister
president thank you would like
to welcome everyone to today's
Senate meeting we ask that you
stand for the invocation to be
pledge of allegiance in Spanish
to relate today by Senator Bobby
Gonzalez and the salute to New
Mexico flag to be that today by
Senator Hickey.
We thank you for our governor
the honorable Michelle Lujan
Grisham.
We also thank you for the men
and women who faithfully serve
Holy Spirit guide the
discussions deliberations and
committee work that will or has
taken place.
Made a new year's budget and the
bills that are passed during
In the day's deliberations help
each Senator to remember the
people they have been elected to
represent.
May they listen with an
empathetic and understanding
here.
Much over their families as they
are away from them during the
week and more peace rest upon
them and the ones they love.
Lord we ask that you heal their
And we ask for their protection
provision and a safe return
home.
Finally we thank you for the
freedoms we enjoy in this great
state and nation and we humbly
It's only with the hello and
that on the list also needles
that may come he's out of
political correctness and the
you just you on on visit the
assemble a perfect friendship
among United cultures.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business Senator
majority floor leader Peter
Wirth thank you Mr president
thank you chaplain for your
words this morning certainly
thanking those who have served
listen to those voices and how
we acts of very much appreciate
you being here this morning.
Ladies and gentleman Senate
today's aerospace stay at the
legislature the New Mexico
Society of acupuncture and
oriental medicine day in the
halls of history.
today is Santa Fe Indian school
day and Senator Pinto has a
also center my Estes we're going
to hear Senate memorial thirteen
which is a L. last day and Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that we remove Senate
moral thirteen from the
correct seven more thirties
Center more thirteen we removed
from the president's table we
placed on today's calendar worth
thank you Mr just couple of
announcements financial
done that Mandy Vigil is in the
lounge.
And so she will help if anyone
needs help doing that she will
help you do that today she did
ask that you bring your computer
with you I guess there's
passwords and things.
their legislative reception at
the la Fonda Lankan's ballroom
from five thirty to seven thirty
tonight by invitation and then
tomorrow the offices
an appointment I will five eight
two seven four three eight five
with that Mr president ideal to
Senator Padilla.
Center I thank you Mr president
Senator heck.
Thank you Mr president in NMAA
consent to introduce my guest
hearing no objection.
born and raised in Albuquerque
and graduated from the college
and career high school in
Albuquerque with six associate
degrees from CNN he started
collecting those when he was
bachelor degrees in American
history and political science
he's the president of both the
New Mexico college that
Democrats statewide and the UNM
DC and I am trying very hard to
convince him to then come back
here and run run for office I
think you'd be an amazing
addition to to the work that we
do here so please join me in
Thank you Mr president it's my
pleasure to introduce to guest
today first we have the eco P.
lady who is the
show that Los crucis the second
largest city in New Mexico is on
the move with lots of economic
development happening lots of
public works happening lots of
He has his Philadelphia Eagles
Super Bowl ring when he played
for them on but it was also Andy
Reid was his coach at the time
city manager for Los crucis is
my guest today.
of things in Los crucis but more
importantly and though she is my
wife we were recently married
the day after thanksgiving after
many years together and so
formally husband and wife thank
you all for all your support
thank you.
Donna.
unanimous consent to introduce
your guests and make some
announcements no objection for
state senator Mr president you
are wearing your chili tight
today and that is quite
appropriate because you're
had Andrew mackenzie from New
Mexico tech Jessica cook Fulton
hick Logan Byron and Eric still
chili Cobb and actually
continued on to be tenth overall
in the world making New Mexico
very proud welcome to the Senate
thank you for being here.
Senator Diamond Mr president we
know I mentioned I am this
competition just recently took
place at spaceport America I
Representative Sierra County
which spaceport is very far from
really is a place like no other
because you can stand in that
area and celebrate the past and
at the very same time celebrate
horizon now show spend lunch
which is shooting sub orbital
you know as satellites to space
areas in which old wagon wheels
today we're celebrating the
aerospace state of New Mexico
and the reality is it's a lot
more than just spaceport America
though New Mexico itself as we
addition to our weather we are
home to three national labs
which employs over twenty one
thousand employees yes
facilities including white sands
missile range in the white sand
thousand jobs three hundred
million dollars and economic
input and my own Senate district
I mention spaceport America but
I also have the very large array
This space race I'm proud to be
from Mexico is proud of the good
work that we're doing I want to
thank you lieutenant governor
for the investment the time and
for really championing this
industry in New Mexico and so
Senator Diamond.
Any further announcements
Senators.
For a second time Senator
Padilla thank you Mr president
Ms consent to skew Senator
you Mr president R. the head of
the aerospace.
Consortium or something of that
sort for the state of New Mexico
but one of only fourteen in the
Thank you Center souls.
Any further announcements.
I see no further announces this
thirteen right up front and then
Senator Pinto is waiting for her
guests for her certificate so
Mister president in now being
Until twelve OO one PM here go
here somewhere.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules basically for the journal
show all those present in this
not a it's not a motion I just
it now being aligned fifty nine
A. M. I move we adjourn to
twelve one PM the Senate will
come to order thank you Mr
be suspended the record show
that the journal's been read in
full and approved subject to the
revisions in approval of the
Judiciary Committee there's no
objection it is so ordered.
just want to just remind the
body as we read the memorials
we just want to insure that
you're listening that we keep
the volume down increases
full preparatory to its final
passage no objection Sir
Maestas.
Thank you I move that Senate
memorial thirteen we put on the
final passage subject to debate
The reader to read.
Senate memorial thirteen a
memorial proclaiming January
thirty first twenty twenty three
whereas ALS has known no known
cause no means of prevention and
no cure and whereas LS New
Mexico is a local nonprofit
LS New Mexico leaves no stone
unturned by navigating financial
hardships through respite grants
access to life changing clinical
care at the university of New
and capacity support as well as
bringing awareness of L. as
through educational
opportunities to New Mexicans
and whereas we as a community
affected by LS now therefore be
it resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico that January
thirty first twenty twenty three
be proclaimed a LS awareness day
Committee and the LS New Mexico
signed sealed at the capitol in
the City of Santa Fe Senator
lido the how to meal Senator on
Senator mess.
Thank you Mr president with that
old stand for questions thank
you senators we're debating
Center memorial thirteen I'll go
to the co sponsor senator Liyel
from Morial for claiming today
as a LS awareness day in the
Senate together you and I
Senator my Estes are expressing
our hope that this state will
yet be another turning point in
with a LS Mr president and at
any given time it's estimated
that more than thirty thousand
people are living with ALS right
here in the United States.
with a LS and their loved ones
those clips through service and
education they leave no stone
unturned in search for a cure of
this disease their mission is to
discover treatment for a cure
hope is watching yes so my
friend and former NMAA a
colleague Jean Pinto Pino a
native of the land and the.
him physically mentally he is
always willing to help any
student athlete and a coach or
any New Mexican G. and I'm
sending my love to you and your
family and thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Maestas and senator how to meal
also a very near and dear
because for our former Senate
Majority Leader Michael Sanchez
years coach thank you for being
here I'm sure we'll hear from
about the year here in a little
bit but just have done so much
work over the years to bring so
much attention to this issue
this really is Mr president an
infants a year but it's so
aggressive in its course that
that this is why we love to
bring attention to this to make
sure that folks know about this
knocking on the door of a fifty
Maestas thank you Senator how to
me.
Thank you senator for the.
Any further debate.
Si no further debate center
Maestas to close.
the lieutenant governor be shown
to be voting in the affirmative
Senator Mestis seeing no
objection by a vote of forty
three in the affirmative on the
Service is yes go ahead and
thank you very much Mr president
honorable members it's an honor
to bring this memorial forward
and to raise awareness for ALS
we have several dignitaries on
Justin profoundly moved by the
work and the dedication and the
love that this organization does
for a New Mexicans with LS so
let's go and welcome
some board members we have board
And we have a beautiful
gentleman LS patient feel block
and his wife Betty block we also
patients and it's just an angel
in her work and dedication
Machel macmall and please
welcome all of these folks to
the Senate.
special guest watching on the
webcast of former a justice and
Chavis former justice at Chavis
and his family are now part of
the Ellis community as a result
delegation and raised over
eighty thousand dollars for LS
and so was as opposed up so his
leadership in love is emanating
even through this family crisis
we want to just send a shout
hearings and raise awareness and
we ask folks to keep in mind if
they have any doing your money
left over from their
calculations so thank you for LS
to Mexico for the tremendous
work that it does work with
president thank everyone for
being here thank you center
Maestas.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you
Center minus this with that then
president unanimous consent
miscellaneous Senator McKenna
I thank you Mr president and hi
I think I'm supposed to read
something special from the
pollution right no I don't
who is working in suite two one
eight and that is miss raven
Delvina Otero symphony she
standing there she is serving as
for a congresswoman and now
she's working for me and.
All along she is an incredible
space enthusiast she is already
to have this honor Mister
president and she is working on
the very first space island
nations conference as an
Mr president would you please
give her a round of applause.
business thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go about
our business committee reports
hearing no objection or on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read the
reports that same has been duly
enrolled engrossed preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that three
to be allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the general Senator will do that
All in favor signify by saying.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the committee
report is been adopted I'd like
to announce to the members of
the body that the officers of
referred Senate memorial seven
has had it under consideration
reports that same has been duly
rules and it grossed preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the Senate respectfully
committee reports and there's
there's a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The representative of the
Senator the reader to read Mr
president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate memorial twelve
has had it under consideration
and reports that the same has
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report.
We have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
Earlier this year.
There's been a real challenge of
the ruling of the chair so this
is something you for many of the
members as we had done vote by
the challenge a vote of no.
Is to approve.
Or to agree with that let me
the nasihat of the committee
report would not be adopted.
Miss miss present.
Senator Senator us about this
agency president of I don't do
we have a parliamentarian these
proper motion and if so then I
think that's consistent with
your last instruction but I
think the proper motion is to
the show the ruling of the chair
be sustainable that was correct.
isn't that the the way the
motion is to be put I see
Senator Stewart saying yes I see
centers we're saying no so I'm
I'm trying to just understand
what the former the mode that
the ruling of the chair so
that's where that is I'm not
sure if there was different in
rules are utilized in the house
and the Senate it's always been
the challenge to the ruling of
the chair.
we're going the determination is
going to be made by you as the
presiding officer thank you Mr
Senator Campos again this is
something that we haven't
basically not approving whatever
the motion was in this case is a
motion to adopt the committee
report the committee report was
rules by the name is of not
in favor of the ruling of the
chair if you vote no you're
voting to overturn the ruling of
the chair.
is not adopted by the body so
what happened there Mr more
Center Morris thank you for
explaining that again this is
something that's new to the body
for the last couple years so
what would happen is a committee
bill then would not move forward
it would be dead for the rest of
the session correct.
Senator twelve correct.
Brandt.
Senator Brandt both snow Center
for center Burt both CS Center
Campos Senator Campos votes no
Center guy across center guy
goes votes no Center Gonzales
new Senator Gonzales both snow
Center Griggs Senator Griggs
both snow Center Hamlin no
both snow Center Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
Those pass.
Senator Ivey Soto.
etcetera etcetera Lopez both
snow Center my Aston no center
my **** votes no center McKenna
no Senator McKenna votes snow
Center of in Neville votes no
Centro now.
Center male votes no center to
the Pino.
Senator Tino Pino votes yes
intrepidity at center video
PO.
Senator pope both snow Center
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez both
snow Center Sancious.
Etcetera smitteez.
share.
Center share both CS Center
Shendo.
Etcetera Saules centers those
Senator Stewart both snow Center
Thoman.
Senator Wirth Senator Wirth both
snow Center what's.
That senator Byrd.
Senator Ingle votes yes.
Senator Ivey Soto I don't know
unless I'm supposed to vote yes.
Senator Ivey Soto votes.
No no.
Senator how do you vote.
adopted.
And that the members of the
offices of the Senate provide an
open session Senate memorial
twelve.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business.
Senator Wirth.
Mr send that order of business
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Joseph Cervantes
chairman.
Senator Hernandez.
going to get it right here
coming down the road any that Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports from the
Senate Judiciary Committee they
be acted upon with one motion
pass Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one do pass.
Senate bill forty three do pass
emotions about the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying.
Those opposed may.
The eyes of the jury port has
recommendation that it do not
pass but that Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
bill four do pass and that's
referred to the finance
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflected they were
acted upon individually hearing
this action the reader to read
what senator William P. souls
chairman Senate rules I move
adoption the committee report as
well a motion to drop to report
all those in favor say.
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill seven has
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it to pass as amended.
Y. Pino chairman Senate Bill.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
Then that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one oh seven do pass
Senate bill one eighteen do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one nineteen do pass
on that's referred to the
support of this committee report
which I now move.
Senator has been a motion.
To adopt the committee report
all those in favor say about us
Reiterate this president your
rules committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill thirty four
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Katie am Duhigg chairman
chairwoman Senator okay Mr
president I moved option the
committee alright that is is
adopted.
Majority floor leader were to
take this on to the next order
of business thank you Mr
president I we're gonna go back
to a couple of announcements
etcetera Pinto has a.
Pinto for her certificate which
the reader will read if you'd
like the reader read that
certificate.
Hearing no objections Senator
Pinto proceed.
And Mister president the reader
please read the certificates and
The reader to read New Mexico
state Senate does hereby extend
its recognition and
acknowledgement to Santa Fe
Indian school day or as the
twelve come from all nineteen
Indian pueblos the Navajo Nation
the heck of the Apache nation
and the Mescalero Apache tribe
responsible productive members
of their tribal and global
communities with a clear
understanding of the issues
facing tribes in the southwest
and a commitment to maintaining
confident independent and
interdependent lifelong learners
who pursue the education and
careers that will benefit them
their families and their people
learning and working
productively with all types of
people and making good choices
and whereas students at the
Santa Fe Indian school are
provided with an academic
identity and whereas the Santa
Fe Indian schools rigorous
academic standards produce high
performing students resulting in
a ninety seven and five tenths
It is graduation rate of seventy
one and one tenth percent and
the most recent national
graduation rate of eighty four
percent and whereas the Santa Fe
ideal graduate end whereas the
Santa Fe Indian school pueblo
education network connects
tribal school libraries with
broadband broadband middle mile
research and education networks
leading Indian educations
adoption of next next generation
technologies and programming
institutions now therefore be it
resolved by the Senate of the
state of New Mexico the January
thirty first twenty twenty three
be declared Santa Fe Indian
school day in the Senate and
to New Mexico signed and sealed
at the capitol in the City of
Santa Fe.
Senator Benny Shendo junior.
Mimi Stewart president pro tem
man's consent to introduce to
guess on the rostrum I guess
here with the certificates and
then a couple in the gallery no
objection proceed Senator thank
you Mr president it's my
pleasure today to introduced
introductions will present this
certificates.
Send you started on the
Just to get that there's a lot
of Santa Fe Indian school has
done for our communities
Fe into school sitting on the
rostrum.
R. Christie Abeyta
superintendent robin Act you are
trustees Monaco with more board
of trustees Fe throws at a high
school principal policy I'll is
our middle school principal.
And with me here next to me is
Jonathan Jonathan Vigil he is in
eleventh grade at Santa Fe
Indian school Jonathan is from
addition and Frederic B. hill
Jonathan as buyers to go to
college and get a degree and
wildlife conservation or
environmental science.
cadenas from the okay when gay
and aim is Pueblo and is the
daughter of Wonda Abeyta and
Lonnie for a a Kate and dreams
of playing but college
Members of the body Mr president
please welcome our guests today
and also Pacific to get to the
Santa Fe Indian school guess
thank you.
I see no further announcements.
Senator Florida Peter wants to
take us to the next order of
Senate bill two eighty seven
introduced by Senator Pirtle and
act relating to time exempting
the state New Mexico from the
Or to authorize counties to
exempt themselves from reverting
to standard time and accordingly
either the state of Texas
exempts itself as part of itself
county from reverting to
standard time Senate bill two
eighty seven Senate bill two
eighty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Public Affairs and health
meal and act relating to law
enforcement require the
department of finance and
administration to establish a
program to distribute funds
allocated for New Mexico law
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two eighty eight.
Senate bill two eighty nine
introduced by senators Gonzalez
and career Hemphill an act
relating to public schools
across subject areas updating
academic content and performance
standards to encompass outdoor
and environmental education
providing for professional
development Senate bill two
bill two eighty nine Senate bill
two ninety inner dues by Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino and act making
appropriation to the Legislative
Council Service to hire a
recommendations Senate bill two
ninety Senate bill two ninety
having been read twice by title
is ordered print referred to the
Senate rules committee that's
the Senate finance Senate bill
support for domestic violence
victims and their animals Senate
bill two ninety one Senate bill
ten anyone having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of public affairs
relating to municipalities
providing a distribution of
gross receipts tax revenue to
the city of Carlsbad to
compensate for certain municipal
gross receipts tax revenue bond
business and transportation
committee.
The amendment Senate finance
Senate bill two ninety two
Senate bill two ninety three
introduced by senator Maestas
for no charge or at reduced
prices Senate bill two ninety
three Senate bill two ninety
three having been read twice by
title is ordered print and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
vehicles amending the New Mexico
partial driver's license act to
authorize the issuance or
licenses to persons without a
commercial driver's license
Administration for the issuance
of commercial driver's licenses
for one year or more requiring
renewal of the commercial
driver's license predicated on a
predicate the license Senate
bill two ninety four Senate bill
two ninety four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee then
affairs there find the process
of solemnization licensure and
contracts for marriage providing
definitions providing a form
providing circumstances for
penalties revising terms that
describe party.
Is to a marriage terrifying
property rights repealing
sections of chapter forty
article one NMSA nineteen
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two ninety five.
Senate bill two ninety six
introduced by senators Moores
and Hickey and act relating to
hospital Senate bill two ninety
six Senate Bill Tennessee six
having been read twice by title
is ordered fair referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee that
the Martin Luther king junior
commission for salaries
contracts or other resources as
needed to carry out its duties
Senate bill two ninety seven
Senate Joint Memorial seven
introduced by senator Tom in a
Joint Memorial urging the United
States Congress to pass HR
finance urgent urgently needed
infrastructure projects Senate
Joint Memorial seven Senate
Joint Memorial seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
memorial proclaiming February
twenty fourth twenty twenty
three as New Mexico's speech
language and hearing association
day in the Senate Senate
Senate memorial twenty two
introduced by Senator Campos a
memorial declaring February
thirteenth twenty twenty three
New Mexico miss day in the
committee to be placed on the
president's table center
memorial twenty two.
Majority floor leader wants to
take us to the next order of
business.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
one that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
referred initially to Indian
Affairs and then finance and
just visit was Senator Ingle
we'd like to change that of
public affairs and and finance
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so that's it for today
will be in tomorrow at eleven
now is the time to wind up.
Thank you that order business
announces miscellaneous before
going to Senator
Senator Baca we first and I'll
Senator.
Thank you Mr president as you
know we spend every January here
but at least the latter part of
together and the support she's a
given me and our family and so
if you could please help me
lieu of that are in addition to
that I'd like to invite the
senator and his wife to the
Comcast dinner which is tomorrow
night and anybody who would like
to intend and and welcome
sure and log on to the social
calendar find out the details
and make sure you get that RSVP
and thank you message Mr
president thank you senator
Senator would fall by Senator by
To let you notice the cheese
from southwest cheese this is
the largest cheese
actually in Senator.
Angles District and let me tell
you he's got a lot to say about
this so I'm going to yield to
always a pleasure to have this
as a something that we bring to
the session every year it's a
very very quality product and it
considering an acreage one acres
forty two thousand some square
feet so it's a huge huge plant
that takes care of of.
and it is a great job place for
for employment the benefits are
greater retirements are great
and it is truly truly a real
asset for New Mexico because
it major shipping and if you
have ever seen a block of cheese
that goes into a box car you
have never seen a block of
cheese because they are ahead
pay for these every year but
this year Senator Woods just
insisted and you know he's one
of the most generous people on
this floor of the Senate if
you've ever been around.
happy to do that and we're both
proud of this company and they
are of great fiscal budget for
our state and our schools and
that we're talking about right
now Mr president I may Senator
Hemphill so I would like to
commend my two colleagues
Senator Woods and Senator Ingle
as I mentioned a couple days ago
invented brick cheese and also
used actual bricks to press the
cheese into the shape that it is
in Wayne Wisconsin I was in the
to this day of traditionally
pressing brick cheese but I'm
always happy when I see cheese
arise when this important
because I have to thank my great
great grandfather for it so
Then again Mr.
In that I just want to to brag
on this company and thank them
for supplying the cheese to us
this year and
you know in the past we've had
great product and we have many
ancillary industries that that
formed around this company to
take care of their way so Mister
I will have it to you shortly
Sir if if you don't have it we
will get you some cheese thank
you so much that it would
Senator Ingle thank you as well.
Senator Ingle present very
to make sure you get cheese and
you won't be like the lieutenant
governor that was here that gave
a Patty and cheese that was half
the size of my Senate card.
that he had to do better himself
so it's Walter Walter was of our
what we call a little snug.
I appreciate as Senator Ingle
Thank you Mr president Senate
education will be tomorrow
morning at nine o'clock in room
three eleven we have built by
Thank you very much Mr president
just to dance consent to make a
little bit of a announcement on
how broadband is going here in
the state of New Mexico.
year broadband plan is finally
put together and we're going to
be bringing in a ton of money
into New Mexico as a result I am
going to spend some time reading
they've set for major goals Mr
president one is universal
availability of terrestrial
based high speed scalable
broadband in their communities
it's also future ready so we
every ten years now and so
that's very what forward
thinking second is widespread
adoption meaningful usage of the
internet three advancement of
helping us to get this work done
this this is a a broadband plan
it will be revolving every year
Mr president three years forward
thinking so I just wanna let you
broadband thank you thank you
senator Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president I just
want to remind you that we are
all invited by the Deming silver
Hamblen thank you Mr president I
just want to announce that the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee will be
meeting today at one thirty in
room three twenty one on the
docket.
twenty one today at one thirty.
Thanks when senator Munoz you Mr
president syntax will go from
the bottom up tell me first got
huh.
To do to get she's are you the
big cities are not the big
cheese and Senator Ingle he's
probably headed Albertsons I
don't see him anywhere there is
to do some cheese and then make
your question what kind you want
follow the guidelines if you're
having trouble go to Senate
finance talk to Adrian or I
don't know if you know our our
our favor staff member is former
me I'll probably quit line with
a shot gun.
And so
make sure your junior money is
done I can't say that enough
Senate finance we're going about
seven go for a purpose here as.
Senator moon moon yo's shield
sent us deal with the present I
will if you promise not to
mention the word cheese.
is he gonna let them out of the
trap before he fires on numbers
he actually gonna let him fly.
Because I know how he hunts
quail.
in the courtroom things years
pile in there and then you know
that's how he limits out.
Senator yes.
next week.
We'll do that and will center
will set our craft early in the
year.
Thank you senator thank you
sending us any further announces
Senator David can you let us
know what room that is yes on
state route three twenty one.
Thank you senator any further
announcements.
in the chamber.
Senator.
for over thirty years for both
ACLU in comic costs time was a
proud Texan you could tell she
was coming because of that
Dallas she started her work as a
supermarket checker and she
joined organized labor and
organized other supermarket
checkers I I met Diane in eighty
everyone can join me in a moment
of silence for Dianne watts.
If you please rises in the
gallery as well.
For a moment of silence in honor
of band with.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
you for leading us all through
that little procedural exercise
I think it is a good thing we
haven't done voice votes for a
couple years and just making
sure we're all on our toes and
unanimous consent the Senate
stand in recess until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning hearing
