Our audience today the reason
why he's here is yes a movie.
The house set up tower bridge
and it's it's a wonderful
retelling of the very dramatic
may have project and so forth
but from.
Interview and native American
point and so it's just really
exciting project in these first
stand up Chris caliphate in the
back.
In the early part.
Right after that.
So if you Mr chairman yeah I
think.
The west.
The.
Well I don't see.
I don't I don't think I've heard
that there's gonna be another
remake.
Of the longest yard.
Don't at the potential New
Mexico they were losses.
Sorry Alec Baldwin.
Okay.
So let's follow the rules.
The
Senator Ivey Soto yes Sir.
Senator Sanchez there Senator
Shendo your.
Senator early on here.
Or.
Great and so first up we have
Senate bill two forty five rural
emergency hospital licensure
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
chair could I have this out
handouts yes out explains from a
social media point of view what
the purpose of this bill is this
is a governor's bill is by
partisan nonpartisan Senator
Ingle is my co sponsor and we
have some a bipartisan sponsors
in the house but this this this
bill Mr chair members of the
committee would assist rural
hospitals that are having a hard
time existing just pulled care
hospitals there is a brand new
CM twelve probably not brand new
but there is that CMS center for
Medicaid Medicare.
A designation that we would like
to put into state law here in
the New Mexico department of
health and they in fact will
then talk about the rules and
regulations that need to be
promulgated today with me I have
Christina Campos who is the
administrator for the Guadalupe
County Hospital I have secretary
Patrick Allen from the
department of health and I have
Chris Burmeister from who is the
director of the department of
health division of health
improvement all of these people
be able to talk about the bill
and the answer your questions
but Mr chair this would help
those rural hospitals who are in
peer closing continue on
offering a different type of
service and existing and
receiving a different federal
CMS of reimbursement rate for
the services they provide so I'm
gonna turn agency Campos to
first explain further about
house my health for hospitals or
other rural hospitals thank you
Mr chair thank you senator
Collins the chairman members
came from studies that were done
by of the federal government's
regarding global communities
vulnerable hospitals I think the
data provide about sixteen
hundred hospitals in the United
the United States that are on
the verge of closure and they
start looking for ways that of
these small rural communities
would be able to afford
essential services to their
population so essential services
meeting life saving of
preventive care and such and
American muscle Association took
the lead on this as well in the
signing two different task
forces one was for insuring
access to essential services to
rural communities and the other
was a feature of rural health of
this new designation is a by
education of falsified Center
Pressly the federal.
it was published last year the
finals Committee member and it
came into being a January first
of my hospital is one of those
very very small hospitals we are
currently the smallest hospital
in the state of New Mexico of
what we're seeing uh in our
community and what we seem to
the last several years is a push
towards health patient care.
A push towards chronic care
management so that we keep
people out of the hospitals
which is ideal for patients it's
ideal for communities it's not
ideal for hospitals because
historically hospitals have
relied on in patient care
however this would give
hospitals a set of bills that
they would get a fixed amount of
three point seven million
dollars I believe it's right in
the three point two seven four
million dollars
and it would be a looking at a
monthly basis but in order to
get that the hospitals do have
to follow certain rules they do
give up the inpatient beds
however we've seen that
happening anyway with my
hospital going down to an
average of forty for inpatient
stays a month where you speak
close to twenty.
we could however keep patients
on observation of an observation
status so they could be there
for twenty four hours on average
that would be an average of
emergency visits and
observations stays and I can
assure you that even of all our
patients stay for five days we
would probably never meet that
twenty four average also we
don't see that it would be
affecting in any way how the
increase or care for our
patients it would also allow us
to justify keeping patients when
the hospitals in Albuquerque or
elsewhere are incapable of
taking or transfers of in
regards to transfers we do have
to have the transfer agreements
with a larger hospital at this
point we have one with
university hospital Albuquerque
and we are in the process of
creating one with St Vincent's
on here in Santa Fe as well
those are two of the hospitals
that we tend to send patients to
anyway we will also pursue
transferred the agency with
hospitals in eastern
of the sense of the state which
would be the Texas the West
Texas hospitals that they tend
to be a good source for us we're
we're overloaded you just a call
for another aspect of this bill
is that it would increase the
outpatient services payments by
five percent so would encourage
for development of outpatient
services hopefully in the ring
of of rehabilitation services
like physical or occupational re
have Services like confusion
which we did a good affairs
chair of during the COVID
The height of the COVID pandemic
and also a patient surgical
services perhaps will hospitals
would be able to put more money
towards prenatal care
and if they could with with a
low low risk obstetrical care
right okay
Mr secretary you have anything
you want and just quickly Mr
chairman and committee US states
like New Mexico and a great job
working hard to keep rural
hospitals open that's not been
the case across the country
where hundreds and hundreds of
hospitals have closed keeping
those portfolios Services
ratification Services emergency
care as well as the simple
existence of that open and
available is critically
important and this is a valuable
tool to be able to do that.
And this is what I think I just
be questionable for questions to
the audience we go anybody hears
support this bill raise your
hand.
By anybody opposed.
Yeah that's a good sign so of
the people that raise your hand
if you could just could you
stand up and say for less than a
minute why is this a good bills.
yes thank you.
By yourself.
Mr chair and representative my
name is Loralai telegram the
current acting director for the
committee and we stand in
support of this bill has was.
Our.
Many things over the last
several years or more possible
the vote for New Mexicans and we
feel that this bill would
continue to support that would
be great as well so thank you.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members Troy Clark presidencies
in New Mexico hospital
association
one standard support and really
expressed the need for this that
we are limit on the number of
hospitals we have throughout the
state already in or rollers
several counties you have a
hospital and this opportunity to
change the definition to allow
specifically to co operate
patient care still remains a
hospital receive reimbursement
in the state as a hospital in
and out of this perceive that
this critical not only for this
campus's facility of others who
are considerations wells with
access.
Right thank you thank you okay
so to the committee we go.
from members of the committee.
This this gentleman I I
I think this is a subdivision
take full advantage of of it's
an option that allows hospitals
to make their own decisions.
And and hopefully keep some of
the roll hospitals alive which
we desperately need the.
Where does this go next by nope
Mr chair goes to the of she
packed the Senate health and
public affairs committee to the
floor yes over
senator Sanchez have anything to
say on this I move to do pass
che said the second from Senator
Shendo
is there any opposition to the
do passed motion.
If you're brave enough to say.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you senator thank you might
commit acts of.
Senator Shendo.
Senate bill thirty three.
All
of the stairs.
Public okay.
What if someone.
The money is New Jersey.
State senator.
Of.
We we did have a substitute bill
so I can
a motion to it is not has no I
will do not passing bills
content.
And the.
And for discussion.
Do.
Committees and all right thank
you.
Appreciate it thank you members
of the committee of I have here
with me in the governor of us
sending Pueblo.
And then to my right is the
chief of police for a Senator
focuses we we.
Of.
A good to the introductions what
what this bill does is.
Comments the state's tax the
statute that provides for
process for commissions I would
believe the pueblo police
officers I authorizing tribal
law enforcement to exercise
similar law enforcement powers
as New Mexico peace officers of
upon meeting certain
qualifications and training
standards of we hope that
through this process we would
improve public safety for tribal
communities by line.
Tribal law enforcement to more
effectively navigate the
criminal jurisdiction of
jurisdictional leverage and
better protect community safety
regardless of Indian or non
Indian says of parties involved
in criminal conduct brings
uniformity imperative tribal law
enforcement officers who receive
the same training and all the
same sort of cases of the
commission's law enforcement
officers and noticed that the
the thorny of the commission law
enforcement officers of the
Pueblo tribe or nation president
legal authority to act as Mexico
police officers attend for state
law similar to all other law
enforcement officers who are
certified The New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy or a basic
training programs but approved
by the the cat.
And so but we've done with the
the substitute bill is we have a
quite a bit of feedback from
some of the other tribes and so
what we've done is taken those
into account some of this kind
of walk through of what we've
done with the committee
substitute is of one of the
things that we did is an opt in
language so if you go to the
subset of Bill Page four on top
the Indian nation tribe or
pueblo may choose to have its
police officers enforce state
law and if often in some of the
other part of of of safety
annually to include the list of
certified a commission police
officers so this is not
automatically try to have the
the the the option to to to look
at this and something that the
we'll have to if they choose to
will often.
Of the liability still the state
and the liabilities of those
states with the the tribe is the
these server was also
commissioned by the nation tribe
or pueblo the grooming for joblo
for any acts of that officer
acting within the scope of his
employment authority when acting
as a Mexico peace officer knew
that this state or any political
subdivision shall be liable for
excess food to act this of the
soft so it keeps the liability
with with the with the track.
The other issue is on traffic
citations in the cell tribes
have
Already a civil courts and and
so transaction see on pace for
the uniform traffic citations
issued by tribal or pueblo
police officers pursuant to
state law shall be to a
magistrate court Mexico and then
the next sentence I think for
tribal civil citations issued to
a non Indian and tribal
citations issued to Indians
within the very boundaries of
the reservation shopping started
of course I think this is
quarter of fees
and then the other of the
language that we can sort of was
on page five under section do
this when officers are
transporting.
Those for percent revision the
sections of the Courts stance
with external batteries of the
tribe or pueblo officers
reservation sits with an officer
me percent proceeds in hot
pursuit of the offender the
objects revolvers of the offers
reservation or may try for
persons who have been arrested
for violation of state law to an
appropriate detention facility
or to discuss any of the state
or local.
Law enforcement agencies so that
takes care of the chance.
That really is the
is the
The amendments or or does
provisions contained in our
committee sept.
That are like to turn over to
the governor of us on a four
four fifty three comments.
good morning.
Meetings of the Pueblo Sandia
Madam chairwoman so gentleman
o'neill and members of the
committee again my name is
Stewart Paisano governor the
public Sandia.
The public seventy S. supports
this particular piece of
legislation in order to improve
the public safety within our
community.
Reservation boundaries under the
current law Senator Shendo has
pointed out that we must obtain
a demo you with the department
of public safety or state police
to enforce to on receive a
commission to enforce state law
on non native Americans within
our reservation boundaries at
times this process can be
delayed for a variety of
different reasons and during
that time there's a lot of
uncertainty with regards to the
twenty six police officers that
we employed published sent via
who can not and for state law it
does not provide justice to
victims of crimes when they
occur within our reservation
boundaries so that is the main
reason why the public saying yes
rich trouble council has
considered formal you which
state police as recently as two
thousand twenty two.
I'm in a public safety revamped
the MO you process early last
year it took months to get done
on again and during that time
period those a lot of
uncertainty if we don't achieve
that it will use process with
the department of public safety
we have to rely on the counties
in order to issue county
commissions which at times even
more challenging than going
through the state process in
particular the publicized here
lies within two counties
Bernalillo county is one for the
reservation boundary and then
the other three four so that is
on the ball County currently on
the sheriff of only of County
issues us commissions and south
county does not during that time
period again we had multiple
officers.
Relating to the issue on the
amendment to a poor state law.
We are of the opinion that the
substitutes that Senator Shendo
just spoke about to
Address some of the concerns
that are are of those and tribes
have ways with regard to
the ability to opt in and or to
remain within the current law
forced the status that they have
on a typically that is with the
legislative affairs also
addressing concerns in regards
to potentially losing the
ability to issue civil citations
we hope that the substitutes
will satisfy the rest of the the
problems and the tribes in order
to achieve what they feel is in
the best interest of protecting
their community within the
respective reservation
boundaries our end goal is to
provide some stability with
regards to this piece of
legislation because right now
there's a there's that could be
on stability as we recently
experienced in two thousand
twenty two
and so the public safety again
respectfully request your
endorsement of Senate bill
thirty three and all stand ready
for quick any questions that you
may have thank you madam
chairwoman and members members
of the committee.
One of I'm mostly open for
questions if needed but I I know
that there is
There are some problems right
now who are unable to enforce
state laws
when they are stopping you W.
wise when they're stopping
others if they call for the
share of the state police there
are times when.
Those agencies not thank you
those cases R. D. W. why there
are funds.
That are not being they're both
justice for the for the they are
releasing.
but that's the main point right
now at and.
Last year I was hired by said
the public.
Hi applied first state police
commission.
Before I retired from state
police I Spence I retired for
twenty years was the I have I
was actually orders seeing part
of the commission Ford
special commissions at the time
but I was unable to.
Get a special commission because
of the employee being re written
so there are several months that
I was unable to and several
officers run to so
I believe this would give
justice to the public to to make
this happen Sen bill thirty.
Thank you.
Those in the audience map show
kind of those in support.
And those in opposition.
Thank you so those that and
support would you like to place
any public comment.
The state your name in your
title will start from the side
of.
The.
My name's bill to.
The governor of the city.
And of.
Our support the pandemic
The decision whether you want to
in the office or.
It is a great benefit to our
police officers to us to have
this.
Especially not.
We have.
Are
Businesses that are being
challenged by.
And they can.
And the best or or anything like
this so.
If.
I do often it's it's going.
Thank.
Sure.
Maybe Mr consul and the need for
hello with the help of the staff
and players abilities the mobile
applications for this is very
very important because we
believe this legislation will
greatly assist our office
number.
We currently after two officers
are also required.
Departments liability insurance.
Commissioning.
Whether the protection of our
officers work forces they lost
in the house on the phone calls.
Provided the committee a few
examples.
That will discuss one of our
neighbors on the communities and
small state or county also be
able to purchase the state and
that local officers.
Has occurred as soon as we go
out to do so.
This model.
Or if there is a drunk driving
crashes with those boundaries
which are tribal group the also
the suspect into a county jail
and file charges magistrate
court.
Issue of the state commissions
to table act allows you to
reserves are starting to again
this is only ten point five
lesions.
A state law committed by law
school admission doctors without
the it's always requirements
that is.
Moreover this opportunity a lot
of travel office we're committed
to public safety within the
committee the committee offers
an action.
I will have the ability to
present cases hold on a lot of
outside state agencies.
Lastly will act lesson would
have the ability to what's are
concerns also additional values.
It's about your special
prosecution of fast bowlers
testified for free but I was
able.
I've been in trouble law
enforcement for close to twenty
years and then the office of the
budget not only are you just for
tribal.
The process.
Four different
uses of force.
All the.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my scholarship.
This.
As well as possible governor
Lujan and house local decisions.
Of the service to percent over
three.
Eight of the bill address
concerns raised centers Shendo
regarding the possible impact of
the still on of these officers
were already commissions state
hospital police officers are
trained for fighting covered by
public liability insurance
vision with the New Mexico state
police impactful was at its
officers or recruitment place.
With the state since two
thousand one.
Right so this bill covers of.
Right do that'll have.
And.
Voice of
all section of of the remaining.
A withdrawal agreement
institutions for the officers
under the new fall river for
often often filled.
Here.
Third
three point.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair in.
Sen and we have Garcia stress
for for this bill thanks for.
Thank you got another
one for the state of the joint
chief of police for the city
with the department of support
the bills seven this I think it
gives us the benefit to address
non native Americans will come
in contact with.
I currently work on commission
so we have to rely on state
police descended County there
has been times would have stayed
too busy to come out handle
calls Senator by a phone call
to be generous so we see.
Basis will be selling walk away
from a crime that you committed
to us that's because I have the
house to us all so we support
this way to help our communities
Thank you anybody else with
public comment.
In support.
Those in opposition if you wish
to get public comment state your
name in your title.
Hello thanks for calling on the
chief judge's proposal drugs
thanks.
The speaker.
With those words talk about this
the reason for you to
go to school for thirty years
now I'm also the director of
global expansions.
All the focal.
to bring that through Congress I
want to talk about this bill
specifically to get money.
The log is.
Following.
Hello you.
The authority of talk to the
supreme court what we have this
case to the Supreme Court.
Come talk often with fourteen it
was.
And so all.
Right.
I want to read you a little of
what we had to prove in this
report and as imports levels
about
jurisdiction of the problems now
what happened was that the state
into a service station over this
within the problems.
They wanted to assert
jurisdiction when many of the.
Assaulted another Indian within
the bubbles one two searchers
section of Indian soldiers in
our to do with the locals when I
had to do it on record was all I
had to go ahead.
proved the state wasn't even
doing all those of formal
vocals.
Santa Fe County let me just this
is from the record chief Garcia
are you asking the state system
from September one two thousand
two to support over twenty five
you're responding forty one
calls involving units two
hundred fifty six calls
involving non that correct yes
there's a total San Pablo.
All land.
There's a typical case arise on
formal walking on land or on
private land I don't know what
not it doesn't matter worst
cases law offices with.
Does your departments require
faced by school yes.
As US attorney told not to
respond to polls current offered
played no one absolutely to full
case either the party called
global dispatch for the nine one
one calls around to fumble so
that we can respond how much of
your department and this is the
important part how much of your
departments funded manpower is
spent I nodded you chases
arising with the public.
I'd say seventy five percent of
the cost and that is this bill
goes far as Marty.
Law enforcement is on my pencil.
I don't want them out there
doing things they shouldn't do.
But I know this is sandy a
police officer says that what is
happening now is that there are
pueblos.
Course.
This bill.
And I know for a fact that Santa
Clara pueblo.
Less do you are you still
because they are backed up
because there's not enough law
enforcement in the state yes
there because I called there's
not a lot of law enforcement.
Through the fence there's not
enough law enforcement the end
the.
With the county.
There's not enough law
enforcement this is always been
a problem for the thirty years
when this came to me thirty
years ago I was discussing with
John we need yes.
What happened is we were sad
this is really good you won't
have to pay for your rules.
Protection.
What what this is the same thing
that is happening now through
this bill goes far
go for.
Because the state has to come up
with some money.
That that's the issue.
The issue thirty years ago.
The issue now is a because I
also wanted to prove it over
along with this.
How much is our.
Yourselves while you were on the
phone in the thirties the
federal tribal governments how
much the state pay your officers
when they testified and go in
the same quarter not you work
closely with all law enforcement
agencies you personally work
closely.
The service department yes.
User sign for the Santa Fe
County one.
One that's what's happening
that's the real problem.
You've heard of from today or
the or the tribe's locals who
have chosen to use this bill to
take care of your problem this
is your problem this is not you
for committing crimes with what
looks.
This is not one of those
problems use Valentine's day
cards every year these folks who
are more I'm paying your bills
that is what is wrong with this
bill I wanted one of the state
this is not.
State I often opt out this no
matter what you says.
This bill that often opt out
bill bill that is awful also
able to discuss it.
All of the parties discussed it.
And that has not happened with
this bill.
There are six providers or six
bottles for as I know.
Two of the chosen this winery
commissioner office this bill I
believe will will take one of
the options out for a lot of the
focus and that's whether or not
the shares of the photos for the
sheriff's and county chance this
call is
what law enforced that districts
that are there's another one of
the ways that the Senate for
locals wanted to the federal
law.
Therefore I was this bill will
be tabled let us go back let's
discuss things don't spring on
this is the last.
And all the bubbles discusses
you have a system the the
Indians Department disposed to
no fires what's happening
disposal.
That's the way to do things.
Right let's get this thing taken
care of I worked on for thirty
years I'm sorry I got so
passion.
Thank you I think everybody else
in opposition to the bill we do
have some people on soon
Sure for us all and we need yes.
And so the only other
observation that I have and this
is really for those that that
may be opting in and this just
comes as a as a practitioner for
about twenty years I noticed
that one of the provisions
discusses specifically hot
pursuit
and so the the state of New
Mexico does have state pursued
Act
simultaneously and acting many
years ago the aggravated fleeing
statute that state pursued Act
does require law enforcement
agencies to develop a pursuit
policy I know that that's one of
the things will be discussing
within the public participate to
make sure that that's pursuit
policies are consistent or at
least don't raise additional
liabilities so that's the only
other comment that I have for
those of tribes and pueblos that
maybe opting in is the hot
pursuit could create
an issue of liability but we do
support the the the bill as
amended and we appreciate the
efforts to to make some changes
based on our concerns and our
comments.
Thank you everyone.
Exactly we have.
Good morning everybody.
At the census at constant for
the public was any the public
thank senators Benny Shendo for
sponsoring SPD during supports
this new stuff to to be for the
following reasons first the
public zone is the largest of
the puzzles and has a police
force that many well trained
officers who have been serving
the public for decades.
Second just the internet
authorized Indian tribe twenty
four state of New Mexico law
without across commission
agreement this new option will
be beneficial for Indian tribes
who wish to pursue this option
they're both on jurisdiction
Indian country continues to
evolve with recent US Supreme
Court decisions such as cash
showing correct to it is
important that law enforcement
agencies continue to work
collaboratively together to
combat the many areas being
perpetrated with Google and
by Indian and non Indians this
is Ernie.
Our relationship with state
police in McKinley county
sheriff's department this
critically important force just
be very three does not require
that public was the need to
waive its sovereign immunity in
order protections of the federal
tort claims act.
But as soon as therefore in full
support of substitute BO and
recommence this committee to
issue it out to pass thank you.
That's it thank you.
Thank you in the committee
members have any questions.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Shendo and
Representative little for
bringing this up forced to us.
Why I support the.
Off the concept of this bill I'm
I'm struggling a little bit with
with some of the language.
And so I just want to go through
a couple things and and madam
chair magically also.
of the state house of the family
to I have is one of our expert
witnesses the.
Hello.
Our governor from said the.
Governor
Governor and I have known each
other from back in the day when
he was a little County sheriff's
deputy.
I used to prosecute this case.
when I was a.
abated.
Districts started and and so the
so this is a I've I've always
appreciated his service.
Our legislative sovereigns and
and what he has done for his
public.
So couple things as I as I look
at this committees up I mean.
the.
The first thing is.
I would I would suggest that
that's if there's a Optiv.
By the nation tribe or pueblo
that language that is on the top
of paid for.
It seems to me.
Actually ought to be at the
beginning of page two.
Of both of section eight.
And and so right now what you
have structurally in subsection
a.
Is individual police officers.
Our certified are are recognized
and authorized to act.
And then the next sentence after
that.
Is going to end up being.
A nation tribe or pueblo make
shoes staff is police officers
and for state law and of opting
in general fund department.
A public safety annually and the
list of survivors of these
officers so this is right that
the exactly the the the the
nation tribe or pueblo opting in
Markham first.
in that in the order that it it
also leads to a second issue.
That was subsection a that I
see.
With.
Can I ask about which is that
subsection eight right now.
includes nations tribes and
pueblos.
But then as I go further down
there's a on page begin on page
five one fourteen.
There's a there's a special
section with regard to the
Navajo Nation.
And and so and so is there so
did it appears.
That there is a written
agreement between the two the
state police of the Navajo
Nation.
And and there's that that we've
identified the boundaries where
we're such.
Of the forty would life or not
life and so and so what the and
that extends also in the in the
aft.
Where where it excludes areas.
based on.
That agreement with the Navajo
Nation.
So I guess my question is does
the Navajo Nation this
nomination.
Have a.
Have its own agreement that is
freestanding from this or with
the Navajo Nation also.
Have to have to continue to opt
in every single year if we were
to adopt this which is the case.
Madam.
Madam chair I I know that the.
I don't know if anybody hears
from.
That was available
I believe this is existing law I
believe they have their own
agreement with the state so
right and and that's about
chairman and social so my
understanding the current
situation I don't know for sure
money sensor instructions if
they have their own agreement
with state police but each
officer individually has to get
cross Commission if we're going
to automatic commissioning of
officers.
Based on an opt in and if
there's already a priest in
agreement that is recognized in
statute.
That's that's my concern.
Is that is that were.
R. four we altering the terms of
that agreement I don't and we we
spoke about it of that whatever
existing agreements are in place
will continue until those.
Expire whatever that year is and
then this will then come into
play so whatever existing
agreements that are in place.
right that's Hollywood Gen in
that section three the tempered
provision and and and and I get
that far.
Right looks like the agreement
with the Navajo Nation though
maybe maybe of some kind of a
kid a permanent treaty between
sovereigns and and so that's
what I'm right because we've got
we've got the whole the.
We've got.
You know right beginning at a
point where the southern
boundary line of the Navajo
Nation reservation or sex with
the western right of way of US
four ninety one and running
thence southerly along the
western right of way of yours
for ninety one normally city
limits available that's easily I
mean that it goes on and on and
on right so so.
It it seems like we have a we
have we we may have a codified
agreement and and and so I just
want to make sure that that
that.
A.
It's possible that they should
not apply to the nation.
So now the nation
If if the Navajo Nation is
already separately covered in in
sections the and after.
Of the state statute
Would.
We can follow up with the
nomination okay.
This is
about.
Yes we are going to do so okay I
do still want to.
Yeah I just a couple of things
what what is what is the
and then the other thing and a.
Is is.
Right so so we're talking about
but there was with.
With tribes and pueblos at the
very least.
But then you have in pain though
the existing language also
includes officers employed by
the B. I. A..
And.
What's that seems to mix between
an agreement between.
A tribal Pueblo and the state
police and the federal
government and the state police.
And so I'm not sure based on the
re writing of this that the that
the B. I. A. ought to continue
in subsection eight of the
section.
it does seem to me that that the
V. I. A..
The very easily be
or just simply handled and
subsection high of the section.
H. U. S. with slightly
different.
Topic but but high is is very
clear I do have a question
because because of the language
is used in here.
And and that is B. I. A.
officers are they.
Are they commission.
By the nation tribe or pueblo as
well or are they.
Knocks.
Leave the of.
Thank you Senator sendo us
Senator Ivey Soto I can only
speak on behalf of the public
sent via the BA law enforcement
officers are not commissioned by
the bubbles and the get thank
you that's those those what I
suspected of the Indian office
nine.
We will make reference to
federal law enforcement officers
were duly commissioned officers
of the police department for in
addition travel problem I just
don't think that that exists not
presented yeah and I don't know
that it's just for the other.
Pueblo.
I'm not seeing anybody in the
room indicated that what exist
if I may very quickly to the
passionate man from Santa Clara.
Like to.
Yes yes that is why we need to
have this.
This body everyone yeah you with
fit in extremely good point
centers of.
To.
Thank you
the
just set aside as a matter of
cleanup although it's not
directly related to this bill on
page eight lines nineteen of
twenty.
Representative Gration
naturalization service this is
matter about that out of the
immigrations and custom
enforcement such as of but the
and I'm surprised that they
depict offices to change but
anyways the up.
The.
The next.
Trying to understand here is.
Of.
On subsection B..
We indicate that the certified
officer commissioned by an
indestructible.
Again I think we with the I a I
think they should be separated
out of the last shall be liable
for any tax.
Of that officer acting within
the scope of this was implement
authority when acting as a New
Mexico.
Peace officer now.
That's a really provocative
statement.
Chair Senator Shendo.
Because because the way I read
that within the context of the
rest of New Mexico law.
Is that that implies the
reclaims Act.
That implies the.
Civil Rights Act.
in the case of the Civil Rights
Act madam chair Senator Shendo.
The provisions of the Civil
Rights Act are that you don't so
the officer individually used to
employ agency of the office or
employment agency of the officer
is is liable and and so.
I read that sentence as as
making any participation in a I
would any participating.
Nation tribe or pueblo as
exposing themselves to the to
the point of New Mexico.
The state court's Mexico.
Four four lawsuits either under
the under the program's Act or
losses under the the state Civil
Rights Act.
And.
And that's I mean like that's.
That's a huge.
A corrosion of sovereignty.
Which fit the.
Nations tribes and problems of
the state are are wanting to
give up in exchange.
It's not for the the side that
but but we just need to be
clear.
That that's what we're talking
about.
it in terms of the section and
so so I just I'm I'm concerned
I'm concerned that there is.
I mean there's a there's a
suggestion here that right the
the nation tribe or pueblo show
some approved the wrist
Management Division.
Of adequate public liability
property damage insurance.
Right but but the thing is.
Of I mean this this goes beyond.
The vehicles at this point the
next this goes to the officers
contact.
Hey losses that could result for
the officers conduct and of
course the astute loans.
and and so that is
That's a place that's a matter
that I just I just think we need
to.
Take a very close look at madam
chair I know that I I understand
we have a hard top eleven we're
coming up to that time.
If I could suggest that maybe
having identified a couple of
these issues we give the Sanchez
an opportunity to
yet to to take a couple of folks
and maybe re write a couple of
things on there.
that might that might be to
their benefit for the survival
of the bill.
I can share with me.
These are the questions.
So did to trying your role with
bill over to the next committee
meeting.
Thank continued from there we
are due on the floor of eleven
PM okay let me.
