Enter Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator about this.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Center my Estes.
Etcetera now.
Center to the Pino.
Senator Padilla here Senator
Pinto.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Center share rural center
Senator Stewart.
Santo Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
everyone back to they would just
the stand for the invocation to
be led today by Representative
economic robin hot robin Dodge
church of the holy faced Santa
Fe and SO you mean standing for
by Senator Hickey.
Let us pray.
by your Providence meet we made
well secure in your piece.
Run to the president of the
United States the governor of
the state and Wall Authority
We beseech you especially so to
god and bless the Senators
assembled and the legislature of
the state that in this
Finally teach our people to rely
on your strength and to accept
their responsibilities to their
fellow citizens that they may
name yours is the kingdom of the
lord and you are exalted as head
above all.
and.
I pledge allegiance.
The model that I eleven that.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr president good
morning everyone hope everyone
had a peaceful and relaxing
weekends I know I certainly did
just very appropriate as we're
at the stage in our session and
just keeping in mind why we're
here and why we do this and it's
always good to take that moment
we're gonna do today today is
New Mexico tech and earth
science day at the legislature
tomorrow we will have a joint
session to hear from our Chief
to do that yet but we all will
at appropriate time head over
the house chamber here are Chief
Justice
tomorrow and Wednesday this
and everyone's responsible for
scheduling your own time so
there's also something on the
web page so that Senator Brandt
can figure out what he should
Wednesday and the photos are
tomorrow and Wednesday as well
tomorrow Wednesday the M. D. D.
will be in the house lounge if
legislators have vehicle title
and registration transactions
documentation you might need any
questions please.
Collie with at our office nine
eight six four seven two seven
in terms of events the Union
County administration and town
Eddy County legislative
reception is at the Rio Chama
from five thirty PM to seven
thirty PM by invitation only and
in New Mexico chamber of
commerce business day breakfast
members for announcements up
front yes interpretive thank you
Senator Stewart center for the I
thank you Mr president Eunice
consent to allow cameras on the
floor and in the gallery.
to draw your attention to a very
nice present that you have on
your desk today from the
certified registered nurse
anesthetists they are here with
us today they're up on the
eighteen seventy seven C. R. N.
A.'s for the first health care
providers to administer
anesthesia which led to the
creation of the nurse anesthesia
profession and in nineteen
seventy one percent across the
entire state they play a vital
role in access to health care
for New Mexico residents they
have been providing anesthesia
New Mexico for over seventy
surgical setting up Citrix
emergency room and across all
age groups they have brought
gifts again Mr president today
so I do want you all to please
take a look at those there in
front of you there's a lot of
a C. R. NA Kerry Hecker a C. R.
NA Amelia Hynes C. R. NA.
Thank you Mr president I
appreciate that.
Thank you senator Senator Brandt
next couple of days I look good
I'm not even letter to my hair
but it's short enough I could
probably handle it now but just
glad she got to join us today
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president are they
here okay well I can't see there
County commissioners and the
mayor councilman and community
leaders and we're so glad to
have you in the Senate today and
I think it's very property I
you're gonna find some spirits
beans but Khan's popcorn many
wonderful items and all of these
things are on behalf of the the
attend and say hello to these
wonderful people from Eddy
County so let's please give them
a great welcome.
senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president just before I go
through a the road map for this
morning I do want to take a
moment and just give a shout out
number one small city under two
hundred thousand folks to live
and work as a movie maker and
Los crucis was named number
that rural film credit in here
we're seeing what's happening in
Los crucis so I just wanted to
take a moment and and really
acknowledge the impact of this
colleagues one thing you may not
know about me is is that I do a
lot of film after see I am
present of a group called film
Los crucis just trying to grow
growing statewide and it's
powerful to see what filmmaking
Namik Lee development can do in
rural areas and Los crucis as
work really hard to help grow
the film industry and last year
areas in the state and we're
definitely here to support other
areas of the state and also
appreciate you I know I've
talked to many of about creating
the roll film incentive which we
as well so thank you for the
word Mr leader thank you so much
etcetera etcetera etcetera Wirth
thank you Mr president so the
Kernan also has some gas that
when they show up will take part
to go back to announcements and
miscellaneous to introduce our
guests and then we have bill
introduction and that's the
Senate to get the executive
message number one the honorable
Mimi Stewart president president
Mexico constitution I hereby
submit to the Senate rules
committee the following
nominations for appointment Mr
Patrick Allen M. Allen for
appointment as secretary of the
reappointment the secretary of
the department of public safety
for a term commencing January
first twenty twenty three to
serve at the pleasure of the
first twenty twenty seven Mr
Becca Wirth burger for
reappointment to the New Mexico
finance Thorpe mortgage finance
authority for a term retroactive
trustees of the New Mexico
museum of natural history and
science for a term retroactive
to January first twenty twenty
three and concluding on December
science for term retroactive to
January first twenty twenty
three and concluding on December
thirty first twenty twenty six.
retroactive to January January
first twenty twenty three and
concluding on December thirty
first twenty twenty six Dr
Lawrence Herald last then for
your appointment to the board of
first twenty twenty six.
Mr E. order to Barack up cal's
good beer for reappointment to
the board of trustees of the New
Mister James Montgomery Bryant
for re appointment to the board
of trustees of New Mexico mute
museum of natural history and
science for term retroactive to
January first twenty twenty
museum of natural history and
science for term retroactive to
January first twenty twenty
three and concluding on December
thirty first twenty twenty six
respectfully submitted Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
The general show that the
message from the governor has
received and that the point was
referred to the rules committee.
Message from the house of
representatives Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the duly enrolled in a
gross copies of house bill one
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
general show the message from
the house has been received.
legislation the reader will
read.
Senate bill one sixty seven.
Senate bill one sixty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee thence Senate finance
others and act relating to death
registration allowing for
registered nurses contracted by
hospice agencies to make death
pronouncements Senate bill one
sixty eight Senate bill one
Senate bill one sixty nine
introduced by Senator Stefanics
and.
Representative Ortez and act
relating to the environment
environmental project financing
program creating the climate
investment center board creating
the climate investment revolving
committee Senate bill one sixty
nine.
Senate bill one seventy
introduced by senator souls and
act relating to courts
Senate finance Senate bill one
seventy.
Senate bill one seventy one
introduced by Senator souls and
act relating to firearms
prohibiting the sale of
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee vents Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one
seventy one.
Senate bill one seventy two
introduced by Senator Ortiz the
agreements with privately owned
immigration detention facilities
Senate bill one seventy two
Senate bill one seventy two
having been read twice by title
senators or Ortiz Pino Griggs
woods and Stuart an act relating
to taxation creating the geo
thermal electricity generation
income tax credit the geo
deductions for geothermal
electricity generation facility
construction projects
distributing the loss of local
option gross receipts tax
revenue attributable to the
tax business the transportation
committee.
That's Senate finance Senate
bill one seventy three.
Senate bill one seventy four
introduced by senators metes and
another batter prohibiting
courts from the line on risk
assessment tools or programs
Senate bill one seventy four
Senate bill one seventy four
having been read twice by title
Senate bill one seventy five
introduced by senators metes and
act relating to elections
allowing voters to vote in the
primary election of a major
political party of their
Senate rules committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one seventy five.
Senate bill one seventy seven
introduced by Senator Hickey and
develop local companies Senate
bill one seventy seven Senate
bill one seventy seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Education Committee
relating to state reserves
providing the tobacco settlement
permanent fund is not a reserve
fund of the state Senate bill
one seventy eight Senate bill
one seventy eight having been
Senate bill one seventy nine
introduced by senators Hickey
and Lopez for the tobacco
settlement reserve.
Revenue oversight committee and
tobacco products that are
stricter them but not in
conflict with the provisions of
the tobacco products act
repealing a section of the
vents Senate judiciary Senate
bill one seventy nine.
Senate bill one eighty
introduced by senators do here
again how to meal.
And act relating to elections
and enacting definitions
allowing electronic nominating
petition signatures creating an
election security program
requiring the use of forms
Board members revising election
board and messenger compensation
requiring training for
challengers and watchers
requiring voter convenience
voter registration processing
procedures amending requirements
for registration of voting
locations prior to voting
revising procedures and
requirements for mail ballots
time frames time frames to fill
a vacancy of the general
election ballot amending the
primary election law revising
requirements for nominations and
Acting and prescribing the order
of offices on ballots requiring
the sending of a notice of
election amending provisions
related to the certification of
requirements for the impoundment
of ballots audits voting machine
rejects and recounts revising
time frames for referendum
related crimes amending the
local election act amending the
lobbyist regulation Act
authorizing taxpayer information
to be revealed to the secretary
conforming changes amending
repealing and enacting and
recompiling sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight Senate
committee then Senator Shuri
Committee Senate bill one
eighty.
Senate bill one eighty one
introduced by Senator souls and
act relating to opioid overdose
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
thence Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one eighty
one.
Senate bill one eighty two
litter reduction creating the
position of the recycling and
waste reduction education
coordinator in the department of
environment requiring the
tourism department to cooperate
dumping at Senate bill one
eighty two.
Senate bill one eighty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
act relating to conservatorship
is providing for waiver of
liability of a conservator in if
a protected person or a person
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
thence Senate Judiciary Senate
bill one eighty three.
bill one eighty four Senate bill
one eighty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee vents
state board to the workforce
solutions department for
administrative purposes only
transfer in New Mexico work in
state board person and property
to the workforce solutions
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one eighty five Senate bill
duties requiring the public
works committee to hear
proposals for an overview
capital outlay funded projects
and make recommendations to the
legislature making an
Senate finance Senate bill one
eighty six.
Senate bill one eighty seven
introduced by senator how to
meal and act relating to
eighty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
committee thence Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
one eighty seven Senate bill one
eighty eight.
Senate bill one eighty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate and in rural and
cultural affairs committee and
Representative Chandler and act
relating to taxation creating a
flat corporate income tax rate
increasing the rate Senate bill
one eighty nine Senate bill one
Senate bill one ninety
introduced by senators Correa
have bill and Stewart and others
the memorial requesting the New
Mexico Legislative Council to
significance of the one
hundredth anniversary of the
passage of the nineteenth
amendment to United States
constitution giving women the
right to vote Senate bill one
Senate bill one ninety one
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and act relating to time exempt
The New Mexico from the federal
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee vents Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one ninety
one.
Senate bill one ninety two
Senate bill one ninety two
Senate bill one ninety two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed.
And referred to the Senate rules
pensions oversight committee and
act relating to retiree health
care increasing employee and
employer contribution rates to
the retiree health care fund
finance Senate bill one ninety
three.
spectacular out of they'll get
because efforts in the planning
and development of an
international mariachi music
call of fame in Albuquerque
affairs committee that Senate
Joint Memorial number four.
Senate memorial two introduced
by senators by the and Ortiz Y.
February seventh twenty twenty
three P. B. and J. date in the
Senate Senate memorial two
Senate memorial to having been
read twice by title is ordered
Senate president stable Center
moral to.
Senate memorial three introduced
by senator Neville and memorial
recognizing cowboys for cancer
research day in the Senate state
memorial three Senate memorial
three.
Senate memorial three having
been read twice by title is
by senators by the and Campos
and memorial recognizing
vocalist and musician Roberto
Griego a New Mexico local legend
Senate memorial I introduced by
senator Tom and a memorial
declaring February fourth twenty
Senate state Senate memorial I
ceremonial I having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed not refer to committee
and to be placed on the
I thank you Mr president M. S.
consent we go about our business
announcements miscellaneous on
that order business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth I
thank you Mr president so we're
if and members have
announcements this would be a
good time to do it so
And committee chairs just might
be a good time to make some
announcement but then what we're
business announces miscellaneous
Senator mantas.
The figures residents president
the judiciary committee will
meet today will call at one
thirty this afternoon will be in
weekend once again we see a
tragic mass shooting of this
case in the state of California
with the very extensive gun
safety legislation laws before
the people of that community but
do more the session and I I
challenge all of you my
colleagues to let's look at what
works and and let's not.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president and the
Senate.
Health and public affairs
committee will meet this
but we are meeting this
afternoon
half hour up to the floor
session.
And we have seven bills so
And to built by Senator Padilla
on marriage the the and and then
one by Senator souls on adverse
childhood experiences will all
be here this afternoon in the
session thank you thank you
senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Further announcements Senator
CENIC's thank you Mr president
the Senate conservation
committee will meet tomorrow
have assume operator it has not
been given to us yet so we have
not posted it on our agenda but
as soon as we know we will
Centerman yes.
Thank you Mr president
those are paying attention the
junior bill just got read out
and so we're looking at junior
and third for the Senate we're
gonna tighten up some numbers
and get you a sheet and a menu
of items on how to how to do it
it is non reoccurring so don't
can score it was probably scored
his nonrecurring so we'll get
you specifics will try to help
you as much as we can like we
did last year but we're going to
around the tenth of February.
For that to be completed.
And and get the bills drafted
and and get down here to the
your go to EMNRD for parks and
and rack you can go to
Environment Department for oil
and gas administration you can
go where everyone inside the
some updates on the financial
system of finances of the state
and then we're start with public
education right after that so
thank you Mr president.
told that the rules committee
reports are on their way down.
Centers we can just hold in
place for a moment.
introduced as Senate bill one
ninety so what I'd like to do is
make a motion to expunge Senate
bill one ninety from the record
and then after that motion will
plaque in the state capital
presented by the New Mexico
state organization daughters of
the American revolution to
recognize the significance of
the one hundredth anniversary
the passage of the nineteenth
Seeing no objection so ordered.
Senator serve on this.
Miss Mister lieutenant
governor's present.
I don't know Mr Senator Stewart
the centers what Senator is
growing a beard I can tell you
what I say I'm really struggling
into the forty niner game which
I'd like to know from my cowboy
friends here in the chamber and
I know Senator Simon is not here
you'll put up a good game but
how about those forty nine it
was present so I I figure that's
why you and I hadn't had time to
shave this morning is as of late
evening and a good game but but
on a on a serious note miss
providers and paramedics to to
save the life of an NFL football
player Mr Hamley and if you
watch the bills gave me just
show you saw him at the game.
basketball game her heart
stopped when she took a charge
those who play basketball note
that if you put err so purposely
in front of another player going
for a layup and she took the
charge and and was struck within
incredible opportunity to save
people and we've seen that with
the Senate also so there's a
learning experience here and I
want to thank Dr Hickey Dr he's
tied up in the moment but but
in this chamber in in this
building that we have the
medical staff here that we need
that we have the equipment here
and that all of us know how to
use it because the people that
my own practice law with with
the right training the right
equipment the right knowledge
we're gonna save some people's
lives with that and so I want to
thank Dr Hickey for taking the
lead on that I know we're gonna
do that soon as present I just
Bowl material to members
present.
Thank you senator Montez.
Senator Steinborn would you like
to.
news.
Sir I'd like to I'd like to
congratulate all forty niner
stance on their newest signee
dak Prescott so congratulations
the committee reports down we'll
get those introduced then we'll
do the confirmations and then
we'll finish up just cleaning up
the table with that one bill
unanimous consent that one
committee has had it under
consideration Senate executive
letter number eight dated March
twenty fourth twenty twenty two
in which the governor makes the
twenty twenty one expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty six your committee
recommends that the Senate to
pass this re appointment
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually
there in addition the reader to
the following reappointment Lee
Adam Elaine Barbero as a member
of the New Mexico school for the
deaf board of regents for a term
Mr president your rules
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
letter number fourteen dated
April twenty fifth twenty twenty
term commencing on April twenty
fifth twenty twenty two expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty seven your committee
recommends that the Senate do
Mr president
Move the committee reports we
have a motion to adopt the Curie
point all those in favor signify
announcements and miscellaneous
run that order business
announces miscellaneous senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
having a limb fifty nine am I
move we adjourn until twelve or
one PM the Senate will come to
