Was appointed by the governor
service on the board of regents
for New Mexico highlands
university in Las Vegas New
Mexico when I think this
committee for having this
hearing so quickly before the
end of the session but Mr settle
The lawyer in Albuquerque of
known for over a decade
and the settlement through
through more various functions
into one of school closures one
of the arson but every time I
met him I just get it a
wonderful impression and feeling
of these just a solid solid do.
But but in addition to that
Madam chair representative
highly educated you grew up in
Vegas highlands is headquarters
the he went to high school
actually in Espanola because got
worked up there so we drove up
there during his high school
years and they went to
California and studied at
Stanford University came back to
you in law school and was a
highly successful lawyer at that
Brody one of the bigger firms in
in town there in Albuquerque and
now has its own law practice but
in addition to being highly
successful professionally he
loves his community he's a
talented musician and he and he
loves Vegas Vegas is a very
special places you know madam
chair so not only would he of
the effect that yes it comes
contributor to highs University
but developing that economy as
it relates to highland so do I
can go on and on but I will turn
it over to to sort of make some
remarks.
Thank you senator.
Adam chair committee members
thank you very much for the
opportunity to appear before you
and and speak this morning it's
an honor to have been appointed
by the governor as the regent of
New Mexico highlands university
I grew up right across the
street from highlands in Las
Vegas and that just have so many
warm memories of highlands and
how important it is to not only
Las Vegas but the entire state
especially the northeastern part
of the state
you know as a senator mentioned
that as I have a lot of
experience in music I started
playing music when I was five
years old and we would have our
piano recitals at the highlands
university music building so
since I was a little kid I
remember walking from my house
over to the music building which
is a few blocks away and playing
and then later on when my father
was the director of the media
need program at highlands I was
would go and and and I was
studying at Stanford but when I
would come on break I would go
in and play we play with the
music students there I share
arrangements and that just saw
the vibrancy of the campus and
what a wonderful place it is for
the students and so with those
memories as a background I'm
just thrilled to now serve
highlands Las Vegas the larger
community and and the whole
state as one of the regions of
highlands obviously with that
with the Senate's confirmation
and I would really like to focus
on the quality of the education
the student experience I think
it's so important that we can
bring that vibrancy and and for
further it at highlands as it as
it has been so successful in
bringing in the past another
thing I would really be excited
to explore is how highlands is a
really and.
Economic driver for that whole
part of the state it's an
important not center and I think
that there could be
opportunities for students to
engage in
Opportunities for
entrepreneurial activity through
my network I you know I've done
some some representation of
start up clients I know they
would be very excited to engage
with highland highland students
showing them what opportunities
there are to think outside the
box thinkers entrepreneurs and
that's only gonna going to
further our state if we can keep
our talent in state and and can
stop the brain brain drain
And
I think those are the the bulk
of my comments I would would
stand for any questions I'd
definitely appreciate all of
your consideration in time and
thank you very much.
Thank you and we're function as
a subcommittee right now will
we'll get someone one more
person there when it comes time
to take a vote but you have
people who are signed up to
speak on your behalf I think
they're all here in person
let's do about three minutes
each doctor Daniel of this.
Madam chair members the
committee I think you're
probably going to think that
I've been lobbying to come and
present on behalf of some of
these candidates but on the
contrary out I've been asked to
come and I was delighted and
honored to come first want to
thank the governor and the
committee for taking this
nomination under their
consideration
this young man I've known for a
good long while and I won't
repeat too many of the of the
comments that the senator made
but I can tell you you can see
from Israel resume has excellent
educational background but in it
in addition to that the growth
that he showed in terms of his
legal pursuits I don't know if
you realize that I didn't see it
in the resume he actually became
partner at a very very young age
and one of the major law firms
in New Mexico that speaks
volumes of his capacity and
capabilities secondly he was one
of our lawyers at New Mexico
tech and he represented us very
well he was always well prepared
understood what he's talking
about and I grew to admire and
very much from that experience
in addition of course he is very
committed to public service and
you can also see that in his
resume you know he does this is
a volunteer with the money
actions he love students so he
dedicates a lot of this time I
was just telling a little while
ago I know you still have to
make a living so somehow you
need to figure out somebody else
to take over those duties and he
is actively looking to have
somebody supplanted.
But I guess in conclusion madam
chair members of the committee
what is most attractive to me
about this candid it is says
integrity
his brilliance his his capacity
for dealing with.
So of all walks of life and his
commitment to students with that
madam chair thank you for.
Thank you doctor and we love
having you here.
This complications
president and.
Madam chair Senators thank you
so much for this opportunities I
stand in strong support of this
nomination incredible academic
background of rock solid
integrity I've talked to several
people who know him of lots and
lots of highlands connections
that's always a plus I I think
as a region that that
institution or any institution
and love the fact that you have
a mariachi connection you can
join our band dies region I
don't think I can pay you but
none the less I'm looking
forward to that opportunity as
well so I stand in strong
support of this nomination thank
you very much.
Thank you president vice
president finance Matt Baca.
Madam chair members of the
committee there's so many
wonderful things said about this
young man and I want to thank
the governor and senator Maestas
for bringing this discounted for
for you for your consideration
highlands university is and his
reputation with his family it
just bleeds all over northern
New Mexico it's such a wonderful
environment for to bring such a
talented young man that's
already traveled the the U. S.
and done so many things at such
a young age site highly endorses
this Canada for region in New
Mexico and university and I look
forward to twenty files a
process to work closely with the
thank you very much.
Thank you region of Frank
Sanchez.
The.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members of thank you
for
hello this speak if you were
since morning I'm a border
region member a lot my name is
Frank centers in the border
region members has University
and have been for the last two
years I'm very excited about
this appointment today
Mr Senator brings a wealth of
knowledge of course like you
said he grew up in Las Vegas
right next door to the campus I
knew his father I've known his
father and his family before
Robert was born and and I'm very
pleased because of their
extensive community service hi
Robert brings a tremendous
background to the board of
regents and I'm really looking
forward to working with him New
Mexico highlands university at
one time was the leading
institution to teach and train
band and music teachers
throughout the state and so if
you would go throughout state
you would find somebody that was
educated a has University we
have kind of fallen off of that
a little bit and our music
department is pretty small now
but with the addition of Mr
Senator to the board I think we
can do a big job and bringing
that back New Mexico highlands
university services a lot of
under privileged membership
students and and I know that
with Roberts background that he
would
stipulate that interested again
and has University so look
forward to working with him I
stand in full support of his
appointment thank you guys for
your
not allow me to speak this
morning and also want to thank
the governor for bringing this
person to to this position thank
you very much.
Suppose you regent William
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the rules committee I
want to thank you for the
opportunity to appear in support
of this nominee for the regents
and highlands I am the sitting
vice chair of the board of
regents you confirm me four
years ago going on for years and
I use the time to really look
into deep dives into the issues
affecting the university our
students and indeed the entire
community and we've made some
real progress I think in that
period of time as I look forward
though to the issues that we
have in front of us I might very
much welcome the credentials
that the that we're Mr Cerro
possesses and I really see that
he's going to be able to help us
move on to the next level so I
thank the governor for this
nomination and I look forward to
working with him and I thank you
for this opportunity.
Yes you'll want to make any
closing remarks you don't have
to.
Just we what I don't appreciate
the time madam chair my
highlands is of your institution
in my heart my dad graduated
from highlands in journalism
degree which which had ripple
effects throughout my entire
family's generations preceding
it or or and then also it's it's
an original territorial
institution is not going
anywhere but it needs more
students need more students to
have that same opportunities
that the current students have
and I think Miss Mister settle
double time and energy and his
leadership to that endeavor as
well as all others thank you
madam chair.
You.
All right
One.
In opposition there's everyone
in the audience Representative
Lujan we're.
The opposition.
Or.
Thank you madam chair.
What a great appointment.
It's great to hear from your
supporters also.
So.
What I liked best about what
they're all saying about you is
your.
Next session to highlight so do
that is then basically all your
life so the fact that she went
away and got a little more
education from somewhere else
and then came back up.
Appreciative I I'm working on my
daughter to do the same thing
right now she's not coming back
but.
Degree in mental health
counselling and I beg her to
come back.
I do want to I want to talk
about a couple things first of
all wanting more students your
last supporter
happen yes of the the incoming
class improved because of the
opportunity scholarship.
I see Mr Fox that Garcia both of
that not in their head so can
you tell me anything about that
that how many new people.
Making records the way you NM is
culturally.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Stewart you I don't have
the the precise numbers at my
fingertips I do know that over
the past several years the
enrollment has dig has been in
decline I'm very pleased to see
that now with this evening with
the new scholarship programs in
place the enrollment is is
trending back upwards and and I
hope to do all I can to continue
that trend.
And that that that one thing I
just wanted to mention since you
mention my ties to the two
highlands I think I've mentioned
it was mentioned that both my my
father my grandfather or
highland allows my my
grandfather
grew up in Las Vegas when he
graduated from high school at
the age of twenty started
teaching and in the San Miguel
County schools and then at age
thirty three volunteered to
fight in World War two he came
back and went to highlands on
the GI bill and I I saw first
hand what it did for my family
how it really put us on a
trajectory for success my sister
went to Notre Dame is a chemical
engineer was worked in start ups
in Silicon Valley you know I was
fortunate to go to Stanford and
and and and experience a lot of
things that have you know what
without highlands I probably
would not have and so I want to
make sure that the university
continues to provide those
opportunities for generations of
New Mexicans.
That's just testing anybody tell
me how many students there are
now Aksel.
The thirty eight hundred Garcia
twenty eight hundred and our
first the increase of this year
for.
And that's what you NMSA.
So I appreciate the opportunity
scholarship fund.
We have just made that funding
reoccurring.
As much in as the governor
wanted which is making her very
happy.
So that scholarship should be
the as as we move forward so but
we also just I just always take
advantage of these times to get
on my soap box a little bit in
twenty ten we passed a H. J. M.
sixteen that that was to look at
the colleges of education to see
how they were teaching reading
highland came out better than
any other college or university
in the state because you had
hired reading first team you
have higher teachers that knew
what they were doing to do about
the sites of re.
I don't know where you're at
right now with that.
You look Colorado Colorado just
passed a law requiring that you
look at Mississippi Mississippi
used to be at the bottom of the
pack we use stable the state of
thank god for Mississippi we
can't say that anymore they've
moved into the middle because
since twenty fourteen they have
focused on teaching teachers how
to teach reading cord to the
science not you know what we
usually get from college which
is kind of a quiver of their
we'll just try that in seat the
spaghetti it's the wall try this
try that there's a science of
how kids learn to read.
We need to know about it when
we're training teachers itself
crisis in this state at twenty
five percent of our kids all
that proficient that just leaves
too many kids and those are the
kids identified in the US to
Martinez so I am.
We now have dyslexia screening
we now have a requirement the
elementary teachers will learn
how to teach reading according
to the science of how kids learn
but with colleges of education
have just been earned willing to
move forward one of our last
regions when I nominees when I
talked to him he's now sending
me a letter I don't know what
you mean what are you talking
about is so shocking so shocking
so other states are are beaten
us on this and their kids are
learning to read it's so crucial
so I implore you to look into
this to make sure that the
teachers up there remember
twelve years ago you're at the
top that I don't know what's
happened now but unless we can
get teachers to understand how
to do this when they come out of
college we're spending twenty
million a year to read train
teachers it's not fair to them
and a lot of them are saying we
love the training I did not get
the same college and that
remains the question so anyway
Representative smart young man I
implore you to get working on
this quickly.
Thank you chair.
If you are still thank you madam
chair Senator yes I certainly
will look into that you know it
it it's not lost on me that
highlands legacy you know
starting as a as a normal school
without was to train teachers
also highlands is older than
Stanford by the way at the end
so so that's a long legacy of
job training teachers and so
it's not lost me how important
this is I'll certainly look into
that.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank
you Sarah Maestas and
hello Sir for being here so your
credentials are remarkable so we
don't need to talk about that
victory well qualified
graduations on all that my
question has more to do with the
environment.
That highlands is in and I'm
talking about the the fire.
And what happened to Las Vegas
and its water I have a very good
friend who is an associate
professor at highlands is so he
can give me some updates about
what's happening but as far as
you know now that you've been
nominated you've got family and
ties there what is.
What does highlands and the
regents have to contend with
because of the ramifications of
the fire and is water supply
Thank you madam chair to have
Senator excuse me.
you know one of the things that
was a bright spot during such a
trying time of the fires was how
highlands responded in terms of
providing facilities for the
community providing resources
and I think that the highlands
has a wonderful opportunity
before it with regard to funding
that's available through the
the
Forest Service other federal
agencies that highlands really
needs to take advantage of I in
speaking with with
the administration you know
highlands has a wonderful
forestry program
and and it has been on the
forefront of looking into
reseeding out rejuvenating the
the forests and I think there's
a lot of work that being kept
can be carried forward in that
regard that I'm very interested
in finding out my just
incidentally my
The the land where my great
grandfather bills is is home it
was right in the fire path and
and and what you know what was
burned through that
fire and so you know I I feel it
with the community you know
thankfully we didn't suffer a
loss of home just as
unfortunately so many did but it
it touches home and so it's very
important to me and I and I am
going to make that one of my
priorities.
Follow our.
All these are.
You madam chair Senator McKenna
so the you know I don't have the
exact data at hand I know that
just since my mom lives in Las
Vegas you know as it is speaking
with her during that that trying
time that you know that the city
was delivering bottled water
because the water supply you
know there were there was there
was ash that apparently was
falling into the reservoirs of
drinking water
and and from all reports and
sort of looking at the city at
the U. city utility website
things are are on upward
trajectory
but I think there's still a lot
of work to be done and that also
doesn't speak to sort of how the
fire has impacted a sick yes you
know just the lack of ground
cover has caused so much
run off that it damage a lot of
infrastructure in terms of the
drainage a second so I think
there's a lot of work to be done
and I look forward to educating
myself more on on that topic in
doing what I can to move things
forward.
Madam chair Senator sister of
wonderful and I did you know
that the university had a four
she program so.
It'll be put to good use.
It could really be a case study
right nationally on how to
recover very good
congratulations thank you.
Senator Ortiz Pena thank you
madam chairman Senator thank you
for bringing this zero to.
I well we're jumping on soap
boxes I jump on my own
particular one which is about
the social.
Because highlands.
Really stepped to the to the
forefront in the state in
preparing social.
And that's one of the I think
the really strong programs at
the university of their with
their branch in.
In in in Albuquerque able to
review.
I would hope that
we can continue to cultivate
that I know we put a lot of
money into social ramifications
last year's starting to pay
dividends and I just wanted to
mention that thank you for being
willing to do all the service
was particularly struck madam
chairman with is is the well he
was at Stanford you to convince
the studies in a cultural
anthropology which I think
probably makes a much better
attorney but also.
Right a great asset as a region.
So I
think this is the right
nomination thank you madam thank
you.
The other members of the
committee.
I.
Those are all the nominations
More as long as they're.
Higher education.
We have had enough.
dollars.
World.
Of course where others changing
around this area are.
A lot of challenges for.
Hiring
more here we are one of the
brightest minds.
What are.
Issue three
Back
on.
That.
Also.
so are the.
Especially.
We're going.
By.
Started out as a normal these
are the rules and.
I.
Training on.
Looking for.
Program which.
I got invited on to.
All of which are there was.
And you don't have.
Service.
I.
Our.
So sampling of.
What are wash.
On without ever so.
Those are.
In order.
Two of the work.
I for your face.
Way issues.
All else the.
Messages.
I was on.
Our our schools losses by.
By a long.
Year on year.
John.
About one.
Senator Sanchez so you're right.
I'll just note that
hi I said I agree with what
Senator masses of the very
beginning that you are solid do.
I went to to we went to law
school together and just
recently we worked together
that I'm doing my my private job
in my in real life
and I've always been incredibly
impressed by by
your thoughtfulness hero is one
of the smartest people in the
room every time I've been around
you so other than having
questionable taste in who hung
out with.
We are very very lucky to have
you in this position and I think
you are an excellent example of
keeping our talent in state
and I look forward to seeing
what you do in this position
position and Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair I forgot
to mention that highlight but
legislative leaders programs
with their students they come up
here every year.
They usually are asking for
something having to do with
capital outlay but not always
but they're an amazing group of
people that change every year
because our students so should
familiarize yourself with that
because they and they they have
some sway here.
They've convinced me to help
them.
Thank you thank you Senator
products passed on and on.
Rockall that.
Senator Baca is excused Senator
Ingle yes thank god yes Senator
Lopez is accused Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino this.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle
is excuse Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes your yes Senator how
to meal is excuse.
And senator do yes.
Yes seven yes we'll see on the
Senate floor a little bit later
today thank you.
Course I got a text saying that
focus on the webcast can hear
use if you just make sure maybe
is the other other my tax time
and this.
Now
they can't.
Senator go ahead okay good
morning madam chair members of
the committee I am so honored
today to present to you the
governor's appointment for
secretary of education.
Dr Arsenio Romero is is someone
that the educational community
all supports we can get behind
because he has been in our
education community is entire
life started out as a teacher
move to principal became a
superintendent is now there a
region at New Mexico state that
getting his degrees from New
Mexico state I thought to no one
because we were in a yearlong
Task Force together on what to
do about school grades and I
would found him just so
visionary understanding
education at a deep level and
able to think outside the box of
what to do he's a collaborator
he's in charge of all kinds of
things for for the PED before
you even arrive says secretary
he services eight superintendent
principal performance coach for
the New Mexico department of
education he's helped create a
COVID leadership issues he led
the DPS through COVID nineteen
gauging over ninety seven
percent of student population
training six hundred fifty staff
staff members and virtual
learning partnered with you just
state to provide breakfast lunch
and dinner seven days a week
everyone under eighteen and
disseminating technology devices
to hundred percent students
wherever he goes he is laser
focused on student improvement
he raced the preparation rates
and Deming from.
Twenty four percent E. LA in E.
LA English language arts twenty
four percent to sixty nine
percent that graduation rates
from sixty eight to seventy
eight percent he just checks all
the boxes on things we want the
superintendent to be able to do
up but the biggest biggest thing
about him.
Is it he's he will work with
other people to make decisions
he can bring those
superintendents and hear the
house he's already been talking
to them so he said he's the kind
of a thinker that we need now
he's the kind of educator we
need now I'm so happy to percent
Q. Dr Arsenio Romero.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Senator Stewart
thank you so much for that
introduction I want to start by
also thank everyone here for the
allow me to be in front of you
today at my entire career I
don't go back even further to
when I was a little boy has
brought me to this moment right
here sitting in front of you
today I thank the governor for
believing in me to take on this
in spirit to steer the ship
forward and I want to thank
senator Stewart for always
taking me under her wing and
allowing me to learn and guide
me so thank you so much for
that.
Member of madam chair members
the committee I have been in
front of you twice before as as
as a region for New Mexico State
University that has been one of
my greatest honor to be able to
do that and I want to thank you
again for allowing me to be here
what talk a little bit about how
I got to this year today and I'd
start from the beginning just so
you get to know me just a little
bit
as a little boy my my my mother
was a first grade teacher I
remember being in her classroom
before school I remember being
there as a student being there
after school and really because
of her that allowed me to you
know to have a love for being a
teacher I knew I wanted to do
that I remember seen this
gentleman walking around the
hallways are members and be on
the playground and
he was somebody that I looked up
to and that was my school
principal I was Mr Chavis and
that's what I want to do when I
was when I was little to be a
school principal and so as I
graduated from Berlin high as an
eagle hi left to Los crucis to
get my degree in elementary
education I started teaching in
Los crucis I came back to the
land and was teaching implant
for number of years I went back
to school got my masters at UNM
so I have so Maggie's I got some
Lobo's and and just as important
for Senator Moores here we've
had many wonderful stations
about that and as I as I
graduated from UNM I went back
to Los crucis initially started
my career in leading schools and
back here I have Mister around
here I yeah he was my
superintendent at this time and
I want to give him a lot of
credit for helping me also be in
this here today he challenged me
with something there I I was I
was you know at the beginning I
wasn't I was a green principal
just like I was a green teacher
you get better and I wanted to
help other teachers I became a
principal House green principal
over time I learned I failed I
got better and he asked me to to
work with some of our neediest
schools in the school district
and that's exactly what I did
and during that time we showed
some really some failing
programs and and students that
were in need of a.
A lot of help and we were able
to get them to be some of the
best students in the district
specifically with reading and
math which I'm really proud of
that one day I get a call from
another superintendent and he
challenged me he wanted me to
come do the work for him and at
a district level and that was a
superintendent from Roswell and
I was really excited a little
scared at first because I've
been in Los crucis and was kind
of my comfort zone I knew what I
was doing I knew everybody there
but I talking to my wife who is
also back here my family we took
that risk and I went on to
Roswell and we took a district
that was the need a lot of
support and within four years we
went from at the time we were
doing report card right from an
F. to an a and I'm so excited
about the work that we did there
because the work I did there is
still impacting that district
today.
That I wanted to just take it
handed it myself when I was
there I went back to an issue
got my PhD and I wanted to
become a superintendent.
Every job that I've had I think.
I have in stock order out it is
somehow found me.
And that was the same thing in
Los crucis in Roswell and now
going to Deming Deming at that
time was the lowest performing
school districts in the state
had a lot of needs and with the
time I was there we took it from
the lowest performing school
district in the state to above
median very very proud of that
the work that's that happened
there I'm everywhere you go you
start to build a family and you
build friendships and I think
back at all those places I've
been and I remember all the hard
work because it was not just me
it was the wonderful work around
this.
I then took on the challenge of
coming back to the county that I
grew up in and that was my most
recent post was being the
superintendent and loss on this
and again we were continuing to
have wonderful growth wonderful
amazing stories that happened
there and also this is a little
bit of a different story because
it's it's a community is growing
so fast we have hundreds of
homes being built we have
industry moving in SO the
challenger was how do we take a
small community because it's the
village of awesomeness and now
it's turning into a large it
large growing community so not
only working with the school
district but also working with
the county and the village and
for all the and must be farms in
helping them get to this point
where they we're all growing
together and making those making
making that move forward.
And then I have this opportunity
to now come in and sit in the
seat right before you today to
hopefully become the secretary
of education and I've been here
now for I think this is daisy
eight for me and it's been quite
an experience I'll probably look
back in the should be like it
was just it was it was a smart
thing to start two weeks at the
end of the legislative session
but it's been very valuable I am
jumping right into learning
everything behind me I said I
have my family here I also have
some colleagues I worked with I
have made a mistake in the
issues the superintendent in
lake Arthur she did a lot of the
work with me in Roswell I have
to give her all the credit for
helping me do that also to my
left behind me I have
superintendent elder of who's
now the superintendent
awesomeness and so I'm very
proud of also helping to develop
other people and make them the
next leaders within our state so
with that madam chair members
the committee I look for your
support today and I'm looking
forward to this challenge of
taking on the city the public
education department and doing
the same things I've done
everywhere else I'm gonna do
here too I'm here for the long
haul I'm not going anywhere I'm
gonna take on this challenge
organised to the ship in the
right direction thank you madam
chair thank you and I you're
very popular you have twelve
people signed up.
Is in support
two of them are are to Senator
so I don't see in the room so
maybe they'll say their comments
for the floor but let's let's go
ahead and get through the the
other ten
let's keep comments to just just
about a minute age
superintendent you said her name
the idea that yes.
One of.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is the
least that big idea and I'm the
superintendent in lake Arthur
schools I'm here to support
doctor Senators Romero's
nomination as the New Mexico
secretary of education I was
honored to work with Dr Marion
Ross will for three years.
During that time I learned many
valuable leadership lessons let
me start a few of them with you.
I learned leadership is an
action not a position I leave
there translates to a vision
into a reality.
I'm either embraces change
creates and innovates.
Ali that invest time in
developing and growing their
team.
I leave their values diverse
city and is highly inclusive of
orders and the donor built a
safe culture when employees feel
safe and empowered.
Madam chair members of the
committee Dr Arsenio Romero
exemplifies all of the
leadership characteristics that
I gesture.
He has spent his career
positively impacting the future
of the students in New Mexico
thank you superintendent thank
you.
All right Terry Cole.
We hear.
She online.
All right.
Dr I'll move on to the stali.
Madam chair I believe she may be
online.
A doctor dentist all if you.
Thank you.
We can go ahead for about a
minute please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee good money I'm
sorry I'm in a really nice place
in New York City but I wanted to
be here today I stand in strong
support of secretary designate
amero drive Mero has of on the
go to sleep inside New Mexico
State University for the past
three years up until the time he
was appointed to the position of
secretary of public education by
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
while I personally would have
been trails to have him stay on
this regents I have to say that
NMSU's losses definitely the
department of public education.
Dr Merrill has the heart of an
educator and the ability
strength and compassion of an
administrator is precisely the
kind of executive head that the
department of public education
needs right now I have to urge
you to approve doctor merece
nomination to secretary public
education thank you for allowing
me to speak madam chair and
members of the community
committee have a great day thank
you doctor merry par Sanchez.
Madam chair me I believe she's
online also.
Look what will come back for the
NC she's on the superintendent
elder.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Deborah
elder and I currently serve the
less than a schools as interim
superintendent due to a recent
vacancy
with the outstanding appointment
of Dr Arsenio Romero to become
the public education department
secretary I've served side by
side with Dr Romero for the last
two years and I can tell you in
every single decision he listens
to all perspectives he considers
what everyone thinks and feels
and wants and at the end of the
day he makes the best decision
for students.
And I know that he will take
that with him into his role to
serve the students of New Mexico
and I know that we could not be
in better hands thank you thank
you and Mary par Sanchez is
online.
Go back to her.
The state address.
Try again later
then aired on.
I want to come up to the.
Madam chair members of the
committee I've made out of what
I'm the executive director of
New Mexico kids can and we're so
excited about the potential
appointment of Dr senior merit
to be leading the public
education department I think you
heard from his comments and
senator Stewart's comments that
he is absolutely the right
person to lead us forward he
acknowledges the challenges in
our education system and is
really honest about those
challenges while at the same
time being very optimistic about
the potential of every child in
every seat in all eight hundred
and fifty plus schools across
the state of New Mexico he is
personally invested in this but
being a student here and
educator here principle here
superintendent here and we just
believe that he has all of the
skills and talents necessary to
lead us forward into the future
of better student outcomes for
New Mexico students thank you.
Thank you Matt Paul.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico all simply reiterate
a number of the things that have
already been set of our Arsenio
I appreciate in the introduction
to focus on what happened to
students when our senior was
leading a school district that's
because the student centered in
the work that he to us those
decisions those actions aren't
always popular with adults.
But that impact on students is
undeniable and so we're excited
for his appointment we're also
excited about Dr Romero because
he's a learner Dr Romero and I
have spent many hours talking
about charter schools when that
wasn't part of a decision he
needed to make in that week or
in that month or in that
semester he wanted to know the
role that we we played in the
system and I think he'll bring a
learning spirit to the work we
think he's the right person to
lead the department and I'll say
one other thing I think there's
a mutual commitment we thank the
governor for this appointment
there's a mutual commitment to
have this role and fulfil the
rest of the term with a
secretary Romero and I think
that's incredibly important for
us as a state and we thank the
sponsors and we thank Dr Meryl
for being here today thank you
Melanie at el faro I think it
is.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melanie minus the Harlem and
I am the math content specialist
for getting public schools I am
also New Mexico two thousand
seventeen million educator award
recipient on operating under Dr
Arsenio Romero tenure with the
district I fully endorse and
support Dr Romero's appointment
at the secretary of education I
personally believe that is most
definitely the right person for
this position and I'm excited
about the direction education
while I introduce our leader
well I work with Dr Romero he
was not only my superintendent
he was also my professor and
mentor during my administrative
licensure camping one of the
things that I would like to say
about Dr Romero that had been
mentioned yet is that under his
tenure academic public school he
did establish to additional high
school early college high school
members valley high school both
of these folders that when it is
today and find alternative
routes to education which
meeting the needs of more
students across our district
thank you for it is important to
note that.
Thank you so much Melanie thank
you thank you
Denise.
Good morning hear me we can hear
you yes great good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Denise and
I am president of any Los crucis
director for any New Mexico as
well as a bilingual educators
for most cases public schools it
is my great pleasure to join you
today in support of doctor send
your letters confirmation for
secretary of education with this
appointment we can be assured
that our state's education
system is in the hands of a
dedicated and capable leader who
worked tirelessly to ensure that
our students receive the best
possible education doctor metal
has a skills experience and
vision to take New Mexico's
education system to new heights
he understands the unique
challenges facing our state and
will develop innovative
solutions to address that for
from early childhood education
to college and career readiness
readiness doctor meadows
committed to ensuring that every
student in New Mexico has access
to high quality education
moreover doctor don't I don't
understand the importance of
collaboration partnerships he
knows that improving education
requires the involvement of
parents teachers community
leaders professional
organizations and unions and he
will work tirelessly to bring
all of these groups together
for.
To support our students thank
you so.
Thank you thank you stand
around.
Thank you.
Madam chair stand around for the
state superintendents
association and the college of
education leaders give her Dr
Meryl hot column Arsenio because
we're good friends and
colleagues for number of years
is the kind of product you want
in the state Hey in in the
secretary of education for the
state he's a hard worker he's a
man of his word and most
importantly as a collaborator
and a collaborator with
communities for those who work
with him and for him and that's
exactly what we need in this
office so we stand and support
of Arsenio and we just this
committee to move from for for
confirmation thank you.
Thank you about thirty seconds
left meals time is more centers
on.
The Sanchez I have it very
briefly please.
Yes I'm
just president of any in New
Mexico and currently serving
jury duty I'm sorry I'm not with
you I first met drive role metal
in two thousand six and he was
fine and neighborhood school
principal and I was a parent of
a student at the school herons
and students follow a line of
support vector amount of he has
a strong belief that families
create strong kids in the
together will move the New
Mexico education system forward
he knows that the values of
perseverance vulnerability
diversity and excellence will
create the system of education
that we need I strongly support
you supported his confirmation
thank you so much thank you.
All right we did not have anyone
signed up in opposition
Federal would like to raise our
hands to indicate support please
do so.
Okay well one verses it's every
time all right I would like to
raise a hand syndicale position
please stand up anyone online
all right members of the
committee Senator if you know I
I center school thank you madam
in Senator Stewart for
sponsoring the doctor Romero
obviously the right person for
the right the right time for
this job my only question really
has to do with you know we've
we've had in the in the
legislature this year a
constitutional amendment that
would change the education
department from a cabinet
position back to a.
Essentially an independent
position with the separate
elected board of education.
State board of education how do
you feel about that and how
would that change your role.
Madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino thank you for that question
I want to again say thank you to
Senator Stewart for sponsoring
it today and I understand the
argument and I understand why
this is being brought forward I
think in my position right now
what I want to try to do is come
into this and be able to
implement positive change I have
a little bit of a worry about
how that will go down if if if
the if that becomes a reality
because I want that would my
tenure to be here to be as
effective as possible so no
matter what the or the
the circumstances are I'm gonna
move forward with doing
everything I can to steer the
ship in the right direction and
I will support this legislature
and I will support everyone I'm
Pat to make sure that we are on
the right track and so they're
going to be lots of obstacles
and a lot of supports and
resources along the way I'm to
I'm looking forward to taking
advantage of every single one of
them so that we can do what's
right for the students of New
Mexico.
That that chairman thank you for
that answer the I think the
support.
It's for for making the changes
that hearken back to the days
when we had a state.
As a result of education would
would provide continuity would
be there for fifteen twenty
years and the I guess I'll hold
that that might be you if you're
in that in that position of not
knowing how that would result I
thought your answer very very
satisfying well you do
everything you can for.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Senator on.
Thank you chair of the Senator
Browne we had a conversation my
office and Senator down I have
thirty or more school districts
nine
On the other line but many
the series calling.
And
the it is of the ninety three
hundred the.
County line for.
Is.
State is a very long the
not on right track those of the
President.
Yeah total of
members of the first version.
As a
lot of those I parses.
Two thousand.
Was
that happen.
Or one of the.
We have well which yes or.
Right offices.
There was.
I.
On all sides.
Where those of the next
generation.
Our vision.
Around the.
Right away.
Stay with.
Our.
Talk about where we are
measures.
Were you see.
Our I do.
There there is a.
We.
That.
Madam chair senator Morris that
is an excellent question that
you have in the line of line of
thinking you're right in in the
past we've had different ways to
be able to measure Health
classroom students are doing how
schools are doing and how
districts are doing
in my short eight days here we
have already dive deep into
working well it may go back a
little bit to be be the
superintendent I think over the
last two years there has been a
need for additional information
about how we move forward we are
looking at any district in the
state is looking about how they
make decisions to be able to
push for district four and
that's all based on accurate
data and an updated data and
coming through the pandemic
coming out of the pandemic
superintendents and school
districts that had a maybe a lot
make a lot of decisions and
choices sometimes with changing
data sets over over time this is
one of the things that I want to
take on right the beginning is
to be able to provide accurate
data the data that's going to
have a high validity data that's
going to help school districts
principals and teachers make
about moving forward and we want
to be able to do it in a way
that's easy for everyone to see
and understand and that is
whether you're a parent whether
you're an educator or whether
you are a student SO you will be
seen some some amazing work
coming out of New Mexico pad I'm
here very soon about how we're
going to be doing that I'm
looking very much forward to how
that's going to help everyone
make decisions and everything
that we talk about when it comes
to education should be based on
data and information about how
we move forward we have to get
away from this idea of how we
think about things or how we
feel about things we have to be
able to make decisions about
what the data and the
information actually says and
that's gonna be everything from
issues with thousand Martinez
two issues with instruction to
initiate issues about chronic
absenteeism I mean you name the
topic we need to be able to have
good accurate data to help us
move forward so said.
Moores you will be seen some
updated
opportunities to be able to get
that data that's going to be
valuable to every educator in
the state every student stating
that every parent in the state.
Senator our version for.
All.
It also the star of the.
Bill
followers.
I.
What else problem this is.
Where do you see that.
Madam chair Senator Moores
I have been part of the this
this this work for the the
better part of a decade or plus
more I go back all the way to
win this this idea started with
K. three plus when I was a
principal in Los crucis and
really taking on the lead have
implementing that across
multiple schools within the
district and we saw amazing
success.
Then that we were able to move
to K. five plus this was because
we started and from the
beginning realizing where some
of the gaps were in it and we
knew that if we had a family
that had a fifth grader had a
first grader well if that first
greater really need the support
wall fifth grader you know
didn't have the opportunity so
we started looking at ideas
about using some are federal
funds to be able to do that we
did that
Santa Fe listen to us LFC listen
to us L. E. S. C. listen to us
and that's where we started to
see this idea of K. five plus
being a Deming we were I was the
absolutely the poster child for
cable plus where we implemented
it fully across the district two
hundred five days and and I
talked about earlier about how
we saw a dramatic change in
Deming in a very short amount of
time this was one of many things
but it was a key factor in to be
able to see that success the
idea is spending more time with
teachers to be able to have
those positive outcomes for
students access actually what
happened I again in less than a
square at we have added
additional time and we're seeing
the benefits of that also and so
I see how this can be a support
for everyone it associated as a
student
now when it comes to some of the
districts one of the things that
we also see here is that and
this is been a conversation for
a number of years is that we
have a shortage of teachers we
all acknowledge that we are
working hard as a state to be
able to fill those we also have
is a shortage of leaders to be
able to take over schools and we
have very new green leaders also
that includes superintendents we
have high turnover
superintendents one of the
charges that I will be taking on
it'll be a near and dear to my
heart is working with every
single single superintendent
expo all of them but especially
our new ones we have a the
majority of them have to rely
less years under their wing and
I want to be able to work with
them to show them all the tools
that are necessary that are
available to them to be
successful and this is just one
of the tools and sometimes it
can be a little scary to have
chain.
but once we implemented you have
the right processes in place to
build the right team around you
it's not that scary which
implemented and then you start
to see the benefits so not only
are we seem budget when it comes
to student outcomes were also
seen additional compensation for
teachers were seen teachers that
Effects their long term
retirement it's going to benefit
them the rest of their lives are
making more money and it also
supports the communities because
there's an influx of dollars
going into the schools which
then goes to the teachers which
then goes to paying gross
receipts taxes and paying
mortgages and buying stuff is so
there these are millions of
dollars going into communities
so there is no downside to doing
this it's only upside and I want
to help superintendents of
school districts make that
possible everywhere I can.
For our.
Masses of our rural.
All of those and I'm going to go
managers or something we
disagree on
this also all of our
representatives
in the area.
Around.
All.
Very hard for prices.
I never had issues opportunities
and I. eighty one or.
More
there is on whether the charter
schools.
Stop.
I just want to talk about our
rules there and.
So.
Of course and our or.
Those.
There.
Russell.
Madam chair Senator Moores in in
every district I've been in I've
had the pleasure of being able
to work with different charter
schools from across the state
and everyone that I work with
and they are professionals they
have a plan in place they are
executing that plan they're
doing wonderful things about
also had the opportunity to work
with that Mr Matt Paul and very
much to be able to support those
efforts in there and the reason
charters existence because
there's a need out there and I
want to be able to support that
because no.
All I Want is for kids to
succeed in the state and if that
means that there is they're
fill in and I gapping and
Services somewhere and then I'm
all for it but this also allows
me the opportunity to work with
the the traditional school
system and and school districts
to help them with billing those
needs also so it's work on both
sides I I plan to continue to
have great relationships with
our charter school networks and
our leaders throughout their and
I also so plan on having a
wonderful relationship with our
superintendents and school
districts across the state to
make sure we're doing everything
we can to support the needs of
every child in New Mexico.
Teachers or teachers or almost
all wish.
Lastly it goes this is the issue
all those.
I don't see a lot of.
One.
Yes thank you madam chair
senator Morris this is.
Huge for our state.
And as we look at we have done a
lot of work in the last few
years to be able to move our
state forward in this area we
haven't seen all the the budget
yet and those are right around
the corner we have seen the work
with the indicating Indian
Education Act we have seen our
work with black black education
with Hispanic Education we're
doing work right now to be able
to support one of our most
neediest populations which is
our spad students across New
Mexico and so I'm looking
forward to being able to work
with that legislation to support
our students across all of New
Mexico there are over fifty
thousand students that qualify
with the IEP or special
education and so the plans have
been made with Pat and I am so
proud of everyone that works
with the department I've been
able to start to meet them over
the last eight days I've got to
everybody at but I am so
impressed with the work ethic
with the smarts with the
experience and now what I get to
do is come in and help implement
everything.
And and so you will see those
results here very soon and that
that is got to be something that
we we do now we can't wait
another year we can't wait for
another covert fix to go by is
something that we need to do now
but with that being said when
the person we have to do is get
our data center right so before
I move forward with any
decisions because there's not be
easy decisions that are this and
there's going to be hard
decisions but I want to make
sure I have the correct data to
be able to move forward with
those and so again I want to
refer back to that the statement
I made of course we've got to
get our didn't status as an in
place first before we start to
make those decisions moving
forward.
Archers.
What like what how would over.
Two years without a long.
What what do you.
I also.
I see ex wives yes Sir we're
going on.
Madam chair Senator Stewart I'm
so Senator Moores
one thing I want to look for is
and I would I would really value
to all of you to hold me
accountable this is that one
thing that we look forward to
his graduation rates that's
important we want all students
to New Mexico to graduate really
that's not enough anymore and
what I'm going to challenge all
school districts across the
state needs to do a little bit
more one absolutely hi
graduation rates we want every
student to graduate with a high
school diploma for New Mexico
but we also want them because
these are all set up in there in
systems within districts the
opportunity to graduate with a
license to go straight to the
work workforce this it's
possible right now we also have
the ability to be able to have
every student to graduate with
multiple dual credit
opportunities that's in place
right now we need to make sure
every student has an opportunity
we also have the opportunity for
every student to graduate
knowing more than one language
this would be huge for our
regard recent graduates to be
able to move forward and be
successful citizens within our
state we want all of them to
graduate we wanted to go on into
the work force go on into higher
ed and we want them to come back
into our communities to be able
to be successful citizens within
those communities that's our
graduates we also want to make
sure that our youngest students
are working and are prepared and
have all the skills necessary to
be successful all the way
through so I'm very much looking
forward to the partnerships I'm
gonna be working on and
developing and improving on
thirty childhood with.
K. twelve and with higher and
and with through the the work
that we do together we're gonna
be able to align our efforts to
make sure that every student has
every tool necessary to be
successful and so when they come
in as as kindergarteners first
graders second graders third
graders we want to make sure
that they are getting the
science of reading is so
important that right there is
the number one key to get them
to be able to graduate and so we
will be working hard and we have
and the work is already started
within Pat through structured
structure literacy programs this
is key this is the science of
reading this is research based
reading we know it works and so
we have rolled out across the
state we had trained all of our
teachers across the state it has
been implemented in the schools
and so we are going to right now
at this moment start to see the
benefits of that of that hard
work across our state so keep
asking me that question and I
want you to hold me to it if we
go backwards you only to it but
we're going to go forwards.
I.
In order to.
The right.
Yes it is already well both of
them and Dr get rested up on the
purpose and mission of baby out
of revenge.
Again I appreciate our
conversation.
See that nonpartisan bipartisan
or nonpartisan that is using
that we.
All.
That's all I can ask.
Overtures.
Yeah right off thank you madam
chairman.
What you think we've had a
improvement in the last year
years and education of parental
involvement with students.
Madam chair Senator Ingle
We have examples of excellent
parent involvement across the
state yes and we have a question
yes or no.
Yes in some places only need to
do is learn from those and be
able to spread that as we have
consistency across the state is
not that's not the case
everywhere no Sir.
It is not K. everywhere that's
for sure I don't know exactly
how we do that but the my years
up here and education is always
the most important issue that
state government ever tackle for
talks about.
And it always seems to me that.
Rental involvement is of very
basic part of it but it's never
mentioned in the.
And I just really hope that it
under your leadership that'll be
something that we can figure out
some way to distant prove it
just a little bit because
without a.
We're all going on an up hill
battle and sometimes that
mountain is so high because
without it you just have a
really hard time.
Because you got to have some and
I I I just wish we could.
And I don't know at all the
states are like that but I just
hope and pray that we can
increase that in our state
because without a resistor
doesn't matter how much money we
pour in here in my first year of
your the whole budget was less
nine hundred million work eleven
or twelve billion now that
doesn't count what we couldn't.
But the thing about it is is I
just hope we can that would be
something that is in the back of
your mind always that there's
there's parents involved in this
and without there's real support
we don't gain much thank you.
I'm sure if I may just comment
briefly.
I agree with Senator Ingle and
we're just very quickly that
will be at the point of my mind
that it's been part of the key
successes and all the other
places I've been planning doing
that you're also thank you.
Rework it I hope this helps
stays that way and I hope which
meant.
Elevators.
Thank you
I can't imagine why anyone would
want to hang out in this
building in the last two weeks
Terrazas.
You are brave man on on many
levels of the US centers the
phonics.
All right so roll call the.
Senator back face excuse Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is accused Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
you're more powerful Senator
Moores yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excused
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes yes Senator had a meal is
accused and Senator do the yes
seven yes we'll see on the
Senate floor.
And so for has been delayed
we're going to go ahead and get
through our last two
confirmations of we have about
half an hour to do so so all
access
conferees and members of the
committee to be very.
And the Madam total us take over
chair.
Thank you.
Click.
All right ahead madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
so hi Mister Doucette will look
very familiar to us all because
we just confirm him last year
and it and another position but
and I was lucky enough to to get
to sponsor him then and I'm
thrilled to do so again now
Mr descent he is a long time
state and county administrator
with over twenty three years of
experience off of last fifteen
months he's been serving as the
director of the workers
compensation ministration he was
the deputy of the US state
insurance he was the deputy
state insurance superintendent
for over six years at west side
it was appointed as the first
ever deputy county manager for
San Juan County he's the first
person in his family to graduate
from college and has a master's
degree in management leadership
he has served our country in our
United States Army as an list of
Serb soldier and as an officer
and he's been married to his
wife Christina for twenty five
years and they have three
children the Daniel Joseph in
Abigail and I'll pass it over to
Mr Fisher thank you madam chair
committees a committee members
I'll be quick
Thank you for the opportunity to
supporting the talk to you and
also for the governor for
nominated me I've been very
fortunate in my career that I've
been in jobs where I've been
able to serve in to serve others
and this is just another
extension for this opportunity
I've been very fortunate
especially maker in the state
here that I've worked with many
wonderful people specially from
the department insurance in the
workers comp and administrative
should because of them I've been
able to get opportunities in
that's never far from my
thoughts and more important very
happy my wife is here this is
first time she's been able to
come to one of these in I've
never been as popular in my
career as a until I was
nominated and getting phone
calls from people I've heard
from in decades so I don't
that's a good sign or not.
I stand ready enter any softball
questions.
Hey.
So you have some supporters in
person some online let's start
with the in person.
Texas.
it's just.
Good morning my name is Jennifer
it touches I'm the interim
superintendent of insurance and
I stand in support of Roberts
nomination I have had the
privilege of knowing Robert in a
professional manner for nearly
two decades from his time of
working for the City of
Albuquerque to the insurance
division to Rio Rancho back to
workers comp he is been and
consummate public servant T. is
always put forth ideas that were
problem solving coming in after
I met the is by staff thought of
him as someone who had an open
door someone who could address
issues that they needed
addressed and actually work on
ways to improve things have
that's that's.
My number my my support.
next the total was here but we
believe he had to leave that
correct so next online we have
Lee Martinez executive deputy
director workers comp.
Hello can you hear me yes I am.
Thank you good morning madam
chair committee members my name
is Li Martinez and I'm the
executive deputy director of the
workers compensation
administration I'm here to speak
in favor of a confirmation of
Representative cabinet
secretaries of the New Mexico
General Services Department I've
worked with Mr just set in
multiple capacities of the last
decade and during that time Mr
to set us an example of a
competent professional
government administrator is a
strong decisive leaders
decisions are sound keeps his
word and perform his duties
consistently and according to
statute and administrative code
above all he's consistent fair
and even tempered regardless if
we delay I believe that GST will
perform well under his
leadership and I recommend his
confirmation without reservation
thank you thank you so much the
next will we're of we'll hear
from Rhonda Gilliland who is
also on.
Okay.
Here full.
Any every
you're you're a little we'll
just keep talking what will hope
we can hear you.
Translating.
run together.
Full.
Mexico allowing the moment.
In.
Rhonda you can't really hear
clearly.
A run that we don't know why
you're coming in and you can't
really hear you.
In the
chair.
I I didn't understand what you
asked Rhonda.
Rhonda we we're going to move on
thank you so much for putting in
your name we apologize for the
technical difficult.
So we have Senator David guy
goes well we can wait okay the
reddit one minute.
See you over there I apologize.
Madam chairman centers I just
want to stand support of Robert
just want to give you a really
quick story my day job I work
for a construction company and
we had a workman's comp issue I
didn't use my title I just
called his office asked him for
some understanding holes going
on he made a trip from the White
I return Albuquerque all the way
to Hobbes and to me that speaks
volumes did not know my title
when he got there we talked
about who I was and and he had
some great opportunities for our
company and I just wanted to
stand in support because when he
left Albuquerque not knowing he
was going to be talking to
Senator he'd already found
resolution endorsed before he
ever met me that's how good
government works and I stand in
support of him thank you.
That senator.
Show of hands for those in the
audience that are here in
support.
All right graced any opposition.
Seeing none online okay all
right questions from the
committee.
Senator the funding.
ET thank you senator for the.
Committees and I have that
opportunity this is a little bit
more about their services all
and how do.
To access the.
And
I.
Chair of those.
Hi
Or.
Thank you very much thank you
other comments.
Or.
Thank you Secretary this is
brought up to respect.
Challengers.
The.
More more more.
Of this is surprising.
Let's talk about.
All.
Madam saw that softball so madam
chair Center and I'm also in the
of my next job.
What I think I bring Senator is.
The experience when I was at the
department insurance I've thrown
in the deep and I work for
superintendent Franchini
superintendent told it I had to
learn insurance and risk
management while I was there
actually
super tenet to Texas it's been
very gracious even when I was at
the at workers called to still
allow me to attend training
conferences the state of update
on insurance and risk management
tools so.
I think I have an idea where we
need to go the first thing we
need to do is make sure we have
the foundation is correct are we
making substance that we're
overpaying or underpaying we we
have to find that baseline for
senators so already started
working on that been very
fortunate to be able these last
few years to stay in that round.
Doctors.
thank you for that the biggest
challenge remember the justice
department one is appropriations
lives on the building.
Also.
Background.
Sure that what we need for this
crisis.
The lights on.
All rights on.
In other areas.
Thank our.
Thank you madam chairman
If you're in your in your.
The person.
Bill that about the job to.
The Energy ours are for new
year's.
Madam chairs Center yes actually
I would say he is a friend I
will say that my department when
I worked apartment insurance he
was the first lobbyist that
never lie to meet your friend of
mine.
So.
The the I think you're good then
I'd.
Thank you for this.
Any other questions.
Okay.
Yes.
Other comments you don't want
clothes or anything.
No
you don't have a lot of time and
we still have one more.
Secretary to call thank you for.
Office excuse.
Yes.
Yes this is.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah Ortiz.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
By seven did not you are proof
that this committee was you on
the floor yes thank you.
This is.
The.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee it's my pleasure
to present one of my
constituents today a retired
colonel from the National Guard
done you can Tana he is from the
east coast area but he's had
quite the illustrious career and
most recently before he went to
Veterans Services and then
received a nomination for this
particular position he was
working as the director of the
local government division at the
FAA and I had quite a bit more
time with him while he's in that
position then prior to that and
he worked very hard in the
position of the local government
division director to assist
rural communities and helping
them with grant writing hiring
and let's person just to work
with their needs and to try to
piece together how rural
communities could utilize
federal assistance state
assistance other private
assistance loans and grants and
so it's my pleasure to turn it
over to done you can tighten to
make his presentation.
Good morning madam chair of
fellow committee members and
again my name is colonel don
to Donna let me begin by
thanking Senator Stefanics for
being a a tremendous asset for
us in our district and more
importantly this morning being
my sponsor so thank you Senator
Stefanics I am extremely humbled
and honored to be before you as
the department of Veterans
Services cabinet secretary
designate I want to thank
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
for the opportunity to serve New
Mexico veterans are heroes and
their families I want to thank
my family friends mentors
partners and colleagues that are
here this morning to support me.
Just a couple quick thoughts of
my philosophy and where I'd like
to just move that to the
Department going forward I
believe if you want to create
positive change you start by
doing what is necessary.
Then do what is possible and
suddenly you are doing the
impossible.
Our goal at DDS is to provide
the best customer service to our
veterans and their families we
will continue to establish a
department that administers an
excuse so user friendly
efficient and effective delivery
and distribution system of
services supporting veterans and
their loved ones we will
accomplish this by being the
catalyst connecting veterans and
their families to the veterans
administration and assisting
them and feeling filing claims
to secure disabilities pensions
or health care benefits we will
focus on ensuring all veterans
are knowledgeable throughout our
outreach efforts on all federal
and state benefits that they or
their respective families may be
eligible for entitled to.
We will optimize success by
working in partnership and
collaboration and coordination
with our nonprofit veterans
service organizations like the
American Legion the D. A. B.
honor flights veteran
integration center women
veterans of New Mexico R. three
military installations the New
Mexico National Guard state
agencies and all others we will
solicit and listen to our
veterans and their families
needs to ensure services and
legislative budget meet those
needs for today and tomorrow.
Just to conclude with the cold
from the American industrialist
known as the father of American
shipbuilding Mr Hary Kaiser.
I make progress by having people
around me who are smarter than
nine then I am and listen to
them and I just assume that
everyone is smarter about
something than I am thank you
for your time thank you for the
opportunity to be before you and
I appreciate your consideration
for the nomination thank you.
Thank you.
We have seven people signed up
to madam chair we've had a
couple had an individual that is
mother got in an accident so he
ended up being at the hospital
for you don't mind if I can
pitch it two of those people but
I'd like to start with secretary
of former secretary Debbie
Romero please.
Regents last secretary for
reasons that.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it's a pleasure
to be before you again today
when I walked out of the capital
in December I thought I would
never be back.
Yeah didn't quite happen I stand
in strong support of colonel can
Tana I've known him for over
twenty five years when we work
together on the first
infrastructure finance
conference which this conference
to help local governments in
their financing needs and we've
been friends ever since and
comments colleagues there's
another factor you know to the
point where he became and help
those brand cattle of the couple
of times so you know that that's
kind of person that Donnie is
you know when you want a job
done or problem solved you said
Donnie that's what I found this
last few years with the pandemic
and emergencies when we needed
something to get some attention
on something we sent on a to do
with of all the contact tracing
originally of when the pandemic
kids and then he he actually
stood up the emergency rental
system program in less than
three months we got that program
up and running many started
going out the door and we wanted
a lot of the actions of for
people you want to think talk
about somebody that's proactive
and forward thinking that's
critically Tana he often came to
me with solutions to problems I
haven't even number problems yet
so that's just the kind of
person and he has a passion for
serving and helping I understand
I know that he is going to be a
wonderful secretary and I thank
you for allowing me to speak on
his behalf.
Thank you for where local
church.
In two.
All right
so I'm not sure who the so if we
can get former cabinet secretary
of and and the first cabinet
secretary of the department of
Veterans Services a Mister John
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee is set on our
privilege to be here stand next
to Donnie can Donna of coral
Donna cassata vers Services
country he's put thirty six
years and I were in the uniform
serving our country you save
over the half of veterans going
off to Iraq Afghanistan he
served on a really there it's a
privilege for me is the first
cabinet secretaries for what was
a the first Department of better
services which allowed my
veterans here the state New
Mexico to have a voice of the
governor stable Donny is a key.
Send a gift for those veterans
in our community that voice of
the governor stable he listens
he acts that is a very proactive
but more importantly you know I
stand here is a Vietnam veteran
and I don't need to go to stores
about Vietnam veterans but I
recognize of the leadership the
Donny has exemplified throughout
his career path he is the
ultimate public service is
served in many positions across
the state of New Mexico but also
we're in the the American
uniforms is a true public
servants he's steadfast he's
loyal he's efficient he's
effective more portly cares
about our veterans and their
families
there's a saying I'd like to
just.
Related to your service if your
actions inspire others to dream
more learn more and do more and
become more your leader and
Danica d'hondt exemplifies those
words he's that type of leader
for the state New Mexico but
more importantly for my veterans
in the state and the family so I
stand in full support of Dr
Donna in the appreciate the
governor's appointment and your
consideration thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair I can call Mr are
Grella next.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is also
for a lot.
As a water veteran and now the
public servant of chronic
internal.
Recognizes the importance of
critical importance of serving
New Mexico and improving the
quality of life.
For each community.
Well that DFA lo Government
Division current content of the
mystery to dispense as a true.
Transaction later.
Birational awareness of the
importance of organizational
values and outcomes creating a
sense of vision mission and
purpose among his employees
encouraging them to present
their own interests.
And provide the highest quality
service this constituency.
Senator cation exchange
extensive military experience in
the middle women in combat
engineer ship rules during the
state or state government
typifies the consummate
professional in my opinion makes
him an excellent choice for the
position of cabinet secretaries
thank you thank you madam chair
I have one more of but colonel
retired at work would you want.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee in response to
a guardian I went to high school
together out in Pecos Pecos are
state champs by the way that's
one of the double a state
championship on Saturday morning
at about nine thirty there were
there were a number of what a
heck of a game by our agency
here in Santa Fe charter school
but got done and I go back a
long way we serve in the
military together
Over the years when when we
service staff officers and
commanders of I was a brigade
commander when Donnie and
approved deployed out to
Afghanistan and you know they
would they want to get the the
tough work out there I mean
decorated veteran and only has
an outstanding.
Of experiencing the in the in
state government and so you know
appointed by the governor that
that excellent choice I want to
go back to back in two thousand
five when we have some returning
veterans coming back from Iraq I
reached out at the time to.
Or cabinet secretary John Garcia
and he came out and talked to.
To some of the soldiers I came
back and because when he came
back that wasn't happening and
so it was a pretty emotional the
event that we had there with the
cabinet secretary but one of
expressed my strong support of
known Donnie physicians.
It's high school I was only a
couple years adamantly but the a
great choice I think you'll do
wonderful job one of the things
that I've done over the course
of my career is is is of ICO
veteran out there you know
there's a crisis out there with
veterans and suicide it is to
help and and and donate does the
same thing and he's and even do
a better job of doing.
Doing that as a cabinet
secretaries of we stand strong
support of going to go thank
you.
Thank you.
we don't have anyone signed up
in opposition what I would like
to raise our hands and knees
for.
Rep which everyone in the room.
All right anyone want to raise
our hand in the.
Sam Nunn.
All right Senator Ingle.
That.
US senator to the payment are
you going to make much as well
the system thank you for calling
one chair Senators thanks and
they're great is
For this.
We just want to mention that for
every for over in the.
Services are.
I think is is very the state is
of the we are.
Four six the secretary or CFO
and and I think that's what
really right is co chair I was
very much struck by.
Reuters is.
Scripture.
The role of the services the.
Secretary was for veterans and
the others a lot of them.
This is really an.
We we hope will be a long tenure
that yes thank you.
All right we're on a motion for
Tupac.
Up to a roll call that.
Senator Baca is excused Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
more.
Senator Moores yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle is sick
to Senator Stefanics yes.
Yes Senator Stewart yes.
Yes Senator had a music center
to yes seven yes we'll see you
very soon on the Senate floor
thank you so much.
And with that so that's the the
end of our survey I I am not
sure if we're going to be
meeting on Friday members so
we'll recess subject to the call
of the chair.
Otherwise rules.
For me yes I want to thank you
all these confirmations that
we've been doing all session she
has been getting is.
If you can keep it down as you
leave it.
Yes.
That was a but thank you so
much.
Thank you.
And then learning quickly.
We making a handful of the
state.
I was totally in rural municipal
level and one of my witnesses to
speak I just want energy Sir
because she drove all the for
all as well as.
That is if you Google words
absolutely I want my back I
really apologize.
But back down to the sea is with
just the most I think madam
chair members of the committee
it's a real pleasure to be up
here from Roswell to talk about
colonel cantata let me just say
that I worked for him and
economic development I learned
more from him than all of the
other jobs other odd non profits
and what have you I've I've
worked for I have always said
that Donna could time it was the
very best boss I ever had in the
past I mean that sincerely he's
a visionary he knows how to how
to play on more than anything he
knows how to involve people in
the activities they're not his
ideas there everybody's ideas
and I think he's a wonderful
