I think that made the copies in
the back I'm not sure but we
ask.
Presenters have to have twenty
minutes to to use as they like
including comments from your
supporters and then if there is
organized opposition anyone who
signed up for organized
opposition which I believe
anyone has on anything we are
hearing today not that I see
the.
They would have fifteen minutes
for mass opposition but no one
has signed up so if you could
just keep your your presentation
with their supporters to to
twenty minutes and then we'll go
to questions committee thank you
thank you madam chair and so
good morning everybody thank you
for joining tested just as a
reminder that we will be seeing
properties that for later this
morning I want to welcome the
center right next to this one
three Christine Harvey who has
been asked the company to
partner
thank you madam chair thank you
senator how to me I first want
to tell you that we did receive
the Committee rules yesterday I
have friends in in my office I
appreciate your respective time
and starting on time thank you
very much it's an honor to be
here and it is honored to bring
forward this nominee a dear
friend of mine from the Luna
County area Christie and Harvey
before you is an impressive
resume I do just want to
highlight some of this I'm going
to tell you that my relationship
an introduction to Christy and
began when she was serving as
the executive director of the
main street program intending
and for anyone who has visited
Luna County recently you will
see great tributes to the
members Indians that are there
are Interstate sites rate
paintings and an infrastructure
that's come in but the work that
she's done on main street with
just a beautiful art the
painting it really transformed a
dying and what to call it the
whole downtown to do something
so beautiful it is something
it's a little treasure and Luna
County that is a testament to
Christy and the work that she's
done there as director of main
street at main street she worked
a number of infrastructure
problems that projects I'm sorry
throughout Luna County and
during her time there she
received the down Sanders golden
with award presented by New
Mexico mainstreet for her
leadership and work with the
Deming Luna county man street
program that was in two thousand
eighteen she later moved on to
work with ludic.
Any in that role she was a great
emphasis on the water Luna
County is the only county that
has a twenty four hour port of
entry and that is the entry
between Columbus and colonus
which is a predominantly a large
agricultural point of interest
the entry there that is open
twenty four hours she played a
critical role in addressing some
flooding concerns that we were
having their in Columbus and so
she spearheaded a project there
a diversion down that the the
state has put quite a bit of
money in infrastructure dollars
into and we needed someone on
the ground to really see that
project through and she did an
excellent job it today she works
as a non profit she works with
in economic development for the
southwestern New Mexico areas
she contracts with a number of
entities there also just putting
economic development to work in
southern New Mexico.
resume is impressive but I want
to say this more than anything
we know that it is a small group
of people that seem to do
everything back in our
communities cristiana so one
percenter she involved herself
in anything she has a heart of
service she loves her community
she's involved in every
organization and every community
projects she spends a lot of
time specifically down in the
southern region with Columbus
not just not just helping
projects and programs but
helping people and for that
reason that's usually when
people have a hard for their
community really really is she's
a champion for public service
and so I don't think she gets
enough credit back home I hope
she knows her appreciative I am
in so many are in her region and
it's just an honor to sit here
beside her today so thank you
madam chair allow her a few
minutes introduce yourself thank
you.
Good morning chair Senators I'm
very honored to be here this is
a a wonderful day for me and I
respect you all for taking the
time to do the confirmation
I am very blessed individual I
often tell people that I'm
living proof that god takes good
care of fools and idiots because
I had the good fortune to be won
most of my life
I had the interesting beginning
I just to give you a little bit
of history Senator Diamond
talked about a little bit here
After I left mainstreet I went
to Luna County and I worked as
their community and economic
development director with the
chair down there Chris Bryson
got involved with several
projects with him and prior to
that I have been attending city
council and the county
commission meetings I had the
good fortune to run for county
commissioner fortunately I lost
by eighty six votes but I'm
gonna try it again
so I got involved with the
Columbus and the twenty four
hour report as you mentioned
here and it's an amazing thing I
see that whole area of Luna
County and I think that's one
that deserves a little bit more
attention from everybody as a
real gateway to the state and a
place for economic development
can happen with the only twenty
four hour point primarily
agriculture
the imports are increasing and
we have an amazing opportunity
with the industrial park that
will start construction in the
next six months to bring
industry across from Mexico and
concentrate on improving the
economy and that part of the
country and that's where I see
the border Authority and the
work that Marco and his team of
done is critically important
they address issues down there
they've been very fundamental
and looking at the things that
need to be done to improve the
situation with transportation
and assisting Luna County with
what needs to be done we've had
many discussions about broadband
increasing that the affordable
high speed broadband I handle
that for the county as well
there's a number of projects
that the border Authority heads
and I've had a
a lot of full time working with
Marco and I look forward to the
future of of doing more there
your help in assisting us and
not being the poorest part of
the state is critically
important to us we feel that we.
We have very good people down
there we have resources we have
transportation and history in
the gateway to Mexico and the I
appreciate the honor of serving
on that committee again if you
confirm me thank you our
reserves are organized support
I'm just ask if there's anybody
in the committee room some parts
of the property of the reason.
Is there anyone on the line in
support of the country.
noted the case of four percent
okay and I'm advocating.
Opposition.
the master anybody
Thank you for that.
Mention some of the stuff and
questions.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for Senator Wirth
bring in the country for I do
have a question do you support
not changing time back and
forth.
Just lots of very deep question
Senator no actually I would
think that we would be better
off if we do not change and then
you're getting close to having
life my support here one.
Do you prefer the hour in the
evening or would you prefer the
hour in the morning.
I'd actually prefer it in the
evening.
Mr Chairman do best.
I have a couple of questions.
First the comments of my
employees state moving was from
coming.
And also over time I really
understood how we have the
capability that part of the
state for Mexico New Mexico and
then my other comment is
recently partnered travels to
Mexico City road to meet with
officials from the Mexican Feb
were interested in working on a
trade agreement with New Mexico
when it comes to we have been
you and I should talk offline
bots are and how the thing they
want to partner with other New
Mexico New Mexico when it comes
to the production and
distribution but my question to
you is what you think is the
number one priority as a member
able pointed to the border for.
I see the number one.
Priority Senators being economic
development and building the
trade between the two countries
are wonderful trade partner and
I see a lot of opportunity for
us all to approve our economic
standing.
Thank you for that my last
question madam chair is would
you bet as part if you're the
one would you then be able to
have the opportunity to work
with others on the other side of
the border on the Mexican side
it to come up with projects that
make the baby without the phone
the United States and Mexico
Adams New Mexico yes center I
would appreciate that
opportunity and I would
certainly give it my best
thank you for the party madam
chair just one last comments of.
Worker conference on the twenty
two maybe it's something into it
talks about border states New
Mexico and how can the best
given the two countries to come
together and work together all
of his information I sent over
to you if you can.
Thank you I would appreciate
that opportunity very much over
the questions about turning over
people.
And and before I go to a do any
other members of any questions I
know I know y'all just just
stepped in the gap.
Thank you vice chair and madam
chair and thank you good morning
San Ramon thank you miss Harvey
I tried to meet with you in I
guess it we we crossed paths on
trying to get a meeting set up
so I'm going to learn I'm gonna
listen very intently to that's a
this is the discussion this
morning and learn more about
border Authority
but I I would I miss that
opportunity to talk with you one
on one so I'm gonna listen
really carefully thank you I
apologize for that Senator look
forward to the conversation
thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank you senator thank you miss
Harvey
something done in a lot of great
work
What you mentioned he'd really
like to see.
See some happen from the
legislature that would would
help Luna County not be part of
the the course part of the state
what would you like to see
happen.
What what do you think would
help the most stressful thank
you I appreciate that Sir I was
up here last week the silver
spikes and we had a meeting with
the governor and I've got to
have a long talk with her about
two items in particular and one
is
Luna County was given the armory
and obviously is proximity to
the border is very important but
the the main reason for that
gift is to create an emergency
preparedness center not only for
communication but for travelers
and people that become in
distress and I think that's a
critical thing for us because
communication in that part of
the country with internet the
way it is in our southern part
is very difficult and one of the
basis for economic development
is obviously health and the
ability to communicate and
educate our people so that they
can do better and with that we
can bring higher wage jobs the
other thing that I talked to
were about was a business
incubator I know that the city
of damning has one that they're
working on but I've also talked
Chris price our county manager
about using a portion of our
learning center that is now
partially occupied by western
New Mexico you to
to do that I also teach a co
starters class with the call
came to go I could **** we've
done that for several years
we're starting it again and that
is a business incubation process
in and of itself we take people
through a ten week class and
it's very intense covers all
forms of Business and all the
staff we connect them with
people and it gives them a road
map the campus if you will where
they can educate themselves and
they can go into business often
in the smaller towns we see
people to go into business and
they maybe fabulous cokes or
they have some thing that they
do well but they're not really
well prepared for business and
they go into business and they
go out of business and hence we
end up with vacant buildings
which is certainly a
disincentive for people that
come into our town that you want
to do.
So that was part of the work and
Senator Diamond talk about that
I've done the infrastructure
improvements downtown but
there's always work to be done
and unfortunately the size grit
and hard work which will supply
it does take money and we have
been successful with all of you
in obtaining money and Senators
been wonderful about the work
that she's done so we appreciate
your support we know that you
don't forget us down there but
we want to grow and be an
important part and contribute to
the state's overall economy
thank you for the question
center operations thank you and
and you know I think you kind of
in answering that you kind of
answered my next question is
going to be because I know that
one of the.
One of things that the border
Authority is tasked with those
just looking at this in our our
book was to actively recruit
recruit industry and establish
programs that will result in the
location relocation of new
industry in the state so I I
hear you saying that the these
incubators are I think certainly
would be those those programs
what what else do you see the
the border Authority doing or or
plan to do tend to actively
recruit industry tend to
relocate and and our state.
Senator let me address that by
saying one of the prime things
that they have done it is going
to make a big change in our area
immediately is the fact that the
roughly thirteen hundred acres
that is immediately north of the
port of entry and the village of
Columbus is in a flood plain and
that flood plain has been a hold
back for economic development
because it floods and if you're
in an area where flows very
difficult or impossible for
businesses to buy insurance so
Marco has been instrumental in
helping and ended up paying
funds for the county I think
it's about nineteen million
dollars now and that project is
now involved with the Sanders
group in purchasing the land par
or the land parcels that are
needed to go into that that
allows the industrial port in
Columbus to develop because
there was no way to develop that
prior to drying up the flood
because nobody would go there so
they both go hand in hand in the
border authorities work is been
instrumental there
Marco and the governor made
several trips to Mexico they've
worked very hard on bringing
trade here and we see that
there's a pent up demand for
that trade and we're working on
the location and our county to
do that during the chat is
obviously been instrumental in
the work that he's done in order
to put a stop but I often tell
Jerry don't be stingy you know
there is room to.
Last tour you can move things of
we work with him and we're very
excited about the opportunities
that we happen to work at the
border Authority does they've
got very good relations with
people in business and it's been
nice to be part of it and I hope
that I can be part of it again.
Thank thank you so much thank
you for your service
well headed back of the chair
Senators question followed by
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chairman and Senator Diamond
thanks for sponsoring this and
in the and the.
My question Mr Abbey is it is
about what I think is one of the
great opportunities for the
state and that is geothermal
development is taking place
down near the border near on
name us for the first test wells
for really going down nineteen
thousand the and reaching hot
rocks six hundred degree
Fahrenheit temperature
Fahrenheit temperature that
raises the possibility of
generating electricity those is
already being done at let me
drive so I wondered if you're
familiar with that and and what
your comments might be a budget
rural development as a.
This is stable source of
electricity that could fill the
gap between wind and solar.
Should the question center I
don't know a great deal about I
do have a passing knowledge of
the but I agree with you with
our vast open land down there
and our proximity to Mexico
obviously we have wind solar I
think it would be amazing
compliment the production of
energy is critically important
all economic development because
we can't do it without it and
when power is great I think
solar is great when the sun
shines but we also have to have
I think compliment all the way
so we can bring energy together
and that would be an amazing one
unless with deserves
deserves a lot of concentration
I think hydrogen is an important
thing to I'm working with a
company called posso Norte
pipeline now on a fertilizer
plant that is coming to shape
down on about six hundred acres
that the county owns of their
purchasing the property from us
and it's a plant that would
bring about three hundred jobs
create about
eight hundred million tons of
fertilizer a year so they're
using natural gas and water they
can produce your re uh into
fertilizer they can also produce
blue and green hydrogen from
that which is another amazing
fuel so there's a lot of
opportunity that we have down
there is you know we've got
beautiful land we have great
weather
and we we're ready for economic
development Luna County as well
as the border Authority are open
for business.
Thank you thank you very much
thank you senator Senator but.
Thank you vice chair and madam
chair and senator I meant I okay
I'm so glad I thought of
something.
let's see
so miss Harvey
Do you have an opinion about
Senator souls Bill SB fifty nine
the study of New Mexico high
speed railroad transportation.
I'm not all that familiar with
it but I certainly think that
any economic development in any
transportation effort that we
can use to boost our economy
ought to be considered when you
take a look at our neighbors
that are very prosperous states
and we use them as models and we
look at the things they've done
a well as other places I think
it behooves us to study the
successful patterns that other
people have and implement those
are appropriate for our
population.
Thank you for that and vice
chair madam chair and senator I
meant agency sorry we have one
more question
I've been listening a lot on the
radio
more look more radio listening
than reading these days because
of the session and what's really
bothersome is all the smuggling
of.
Drugs especially Fenton all from
Mexico to the US.
How do you see
Your future role working with
partners to help arrest
and stop the.
Transportation of federal to
this country well as we all know
center that is a critical
problem that kills hundreds of
thousands of people and it needs
to be stopped
I think there's multiple ways to
do it obviously
The border plays a critical part
in that most of the drugs do not
come through the port of entry
that come through other areas I
live on two hundred fifty acres
about twenty miles north of
Columbus and there are
situations where the border
patrol finds people and there
are bad people to come across I
think.
I think really a convening of
the mines there's a lot of
people that are very well
educated on that from different
backgrounds ought to be convene
because I'm not sure that
there's any one answer to the
problem I think it can be
addressed to multiple factions
are multiple fashions but it is
a critical problem and I think
we need to intensify I don't
think we need to we do need to
intensify our efforts.
To stop that.
I appreciate your question okay
thank you vice chair madam chair
and senator I'm and thank you
miss Harvey thank you for that
and the other for the questions
of the committee.
Thing that what's the pleasure
of the committee will review
past due passed by Senator
Pirtle second by Senator Ortiz
if you know if I can please have
a roll call.
Thank you Senator Baca is excuse
senator angles excuses Senator
Lopez is excuse Senator McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Morsi's excuse senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senators defending
yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stewart is excuse in
center how to meal yes Senator
had a meal yes then Senator
Duhigg yes you have six yes I
valuation was hardly will be
seen here on the Senate floor
and public comment that you made
that Columbus county for
business thank you senator thank
you all I appreciate.
Thank.
In the room if somebody can send
a text message that we're ready.
The staff.
But for now good at colleges
that
The appointed
for fusion.
The other half Mr Bannon stepped
in as the Senate sponsor good
morning.
Yes my.
Good morning Mr chair madam
chair I am here today presenting
so region nine year I just asked
her how she pronounced her last
name because I know we all like
to be correct I have known three
to for many years I believe her
administrative experience and
skills will bring quite a bit
the department of workforce
solutions I also know that she's
been on the job in different
areas of the department
assisting and has seen some of
the issues that need to be dealt
with I had the opportunity to
talk with her prior to this
appointment concerning customer
service and how many of us
always have issues with some of
our constituents that we would
like to get result so it is with
my pleasure that we present Siri
denier.
Thank you.
Thank you that chair as members
of the committee thank you for
hearing me today you know the
department of workforce
solutions is kind of amazing our
department is about bringing
dignity to the many ways that
work touches our lives we help
people when they've lost a job
when they need to find work when
they need path to a new career
or when their businesses need to
hire folks we help people when
they're not being treated fairly
at work and we help businesses
comply with the maintenance of
work related laws in my almost
six months on the job I've cut
ribbons and I've seen mass
layoffs we handle the good the
bad and the ugly of the work
world.
With the team at workforce
solutions does every day is
meaningful it affects hundreds
of thousands of people and it
can make people's lives better
so if you don't have but mostly
positive.
Okay.
Here.
My apologies.
Thank you all right thank you.
So what the team workforce
solutions does every day is
meaningful it affects hundreds
of thousands of people and it
can make people's lives better
so my goal for the department is
not to do a whole bunch of new
stuff I just want to be the best
at what we already do.
And I like the for this job has
given me some different
perspectives on what being the
best will take I spent a decade
as a private practice lawyer
helping New Mexico businesses
start up wind down and
everything in between I saw that
working with our department can
be a bit baffling at times so we
are committed to continuous
improvement of every interaction
with our department the
department is kicking off a new
round of education and outreach
around paid sick leave and a lot
of folks don't know that we have
thirty business specialists
across the state who are going
to continue to work to make it
easier for businesses to work
with our department.
On the other side of our work in
my time as the chair of
Albuquerque I saw that
individuals have a cute needs
for services that honestly I
didn't even know department for
for solutions provides things
like training and protection of
workers rights to get a fair pay
for Sarah for a fair day's work
so we need to continue to get
more user friendly on the
employee side of our work as
well we will do more to get the
word out about things like
funding for training the work
opportunity tax credit and our
job search tools it's also
important to me to work more
closely with tribal workforce
development agencies to make
sure that we're connecting
everything with as many
opportunities as possible.
Where the business friendly in
the individual service past need
is the number one question I get
from everybody I needs how do we
get more people off the bench
and back into the labor force.
On some level it's a numbers
game we need to reach more
people my teams have set
ambitious specific measurable
goals for doing just that both
virtually and in person if we
know that nationwide programs
how helpful majority of everyone
they work with to find a job
then there is some
straightforward math to on how
to fill some of these gaps but
there's also more intangible
components one of my first jobs
when I was I don't know seven or
eight was in the early days of
computing on the campus of the
college where my mom was a
professor.
Students would pay me fifty
cents to run to another building
to pick up their massive print
outs which came out of the
central dot matrix printer
member they pulled over and they
had a little tear sheets on the
side I'm old and I love having
that little bit coin in my
pocket but I also felt so proud
when I was walking back across
with that our motive paper I was
part of something and I enjoyed
it.
Today families are still reeling
from the pandemic and the
multiple traumas they suffered
the kids are struggling at home
and in school we've lost loved
ones we lost community we've
lost social skills we really
shouldn't be surprised that
people aren't ready to make more
changes after they were forced
to navigate the ways of taking
care of their families we should
be surprised that after
everything in the world became
unstable a lot of folks don't
mind jumping from gate to gate
to make a few more Bucks here
and there so part of our message
has to be about restoring
meaning enjoy to jobs and
careers people in their teens
and twenties have plenty of
reasons not to believe that if
they go to school and work hard
they will have a long career
retire securely so we have to
earn not believe back and build
the kind of work force that can
actually build out the broadband
network that can restore the
baby behavioral health system we
can keep our community safe we
need to make people feel part of
something.
And we have the tools to do that
apprenticeships give folks a
goal a path in the tools to
navigate them especially for
women who left the job market
during the pandemic the trades
and other apprenticeships can be
the bridge back into the labor
force programs for people with
disabilities people re entering
the work world from
incarceration or substance abuse
treatment for returning veterans
these programs meet people where
they are and give them hope and
we help companies with putting
together on boarding programs
that make employees feel
connected to the larger mission
of the organization which is a
really important part of
retention strategies.
The other piece of being the
best is to connect all the dots
to make these disparate systems
work better together the
department has filled gaps
internally including for our
program the cross trains are
staff and unemployment and
reemployment so there's no gap
between applying for benefits
and looking for work another
initiative in this area close to
my heart is the emergency rental
assistance program our role in
that program is to provide
wraparound services to help
people who have unstable
housing.
At the get the jobs and skills
they need to keep those jobs and
keep their families and housing
we're engaging case managers and
behavioral health specialists
because we understand that this
is a vulnerable population with
a lot of different needs like
taking on the job search
component of the temporary
assistance for needy families
program we're moving towards the
goal of a no wrong door approach
to the services that stabilize
our families.
Now part of being the best also
means continuing to clean up
after the hurricane that was the
pandemic and in this regard I
have to thank my predecessor
Ricky Serna who now leads the
department of transportation he
did an absolutely amazing job of
turning around a really tough
situation overnight the
department was asked to get over
ten times its normal not a
budget out to a whole new type
of clean and and in the next
year that doubled again every
labor department in the country
struggled with the demands to
get money out quickly in the
face of changing guidance and
massive massive fraud and ours
was no exception there's still a
lot of work to do but we have
the commitment and the team to
get it done and actually that's
the great news about all of
these plans is that we have a
really really strong team we
have talented every level of our
department and one of the great
things that Ricky did was to
help the team regain a sense of
pride in our department after
the struggles of the pandemic.
When I left my last job I was
really lucky to have some time
to think about what I really
wanted to do when I realized a
few things I love public service
let fixing problems and love
being on the frontline of
helping people and this August
it'll be twenty five years since
I moved to New Mexico and I love
this place so I feel very
blessed that this job connects
me to all of those labs I'm
excited to see what we can
accomplish and I humbly ask for
your support thank you.
Thank you so much.
Organized support which is gonna
be part of your presentation and
so there's who are here stop
John.
Right.
That was if you are in the group
that we can come to the table
set and have user making copies
we'll start off with job.
That is why the last.
Thank you madam chair members of
Canadian journal of shoots here
representing the New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO
we have had the pleasure of
working with three to four a
number of years now beginning as
her role as the CEO of
Albuquerque I can tell you that
she has been exemplary in
working with us in listening to
our needs and our concerns and
really trying to understand what
the workers are all about the
certainly in her role as the
head of DWS she will be our
point person on the front line
to ensure that again workers
voices are heard and that you
know bad actors when they do
either make mistakes or violate
the law are held accountable and
that is very very important to
us so for those reasons we
highly endorse her appointment
to the Department and we hope
you will stay as well I will say
unfortunately the one thing I
can not endorse about her is her
ability to at the U. Kerr table
where it is suspect at best to
sell just want to put that
caveat in there thank you very
much thank you for the.
Madam chair members the
committee on the table that they
are here there you go madam
chair members committee my name
is Mike Polley currently with U
and M. but I'm here today in a
personal capacity on equipment
and honor to be here and I'll be
brief I wanted to be here today
because I was at the City of
Albuquerque got a chance to
serve with secretary designate
more and my tenure there with
coincided with the arrival and
handling of COVID and what I
learned working with that
secretary doesn't dare one say
it correctly is if you're
looking for a manager that
displays grace under pressure
number one she sitting in front
of you for sure and I knowing
some of the challenges that the
department has since had over
the years you have the right
person that's number one number
two her attention to detail
having worked with cerita over
the years hearing that she has a
quantitative approach to
problems boy do I know that and
I want to tell you that given
some of the I. challenges again
that we face as a state and with
our employment situation having
an analyst and I think current
manager likes to read it would
be a great benefit to the
citizens of New Mexico.
And third she mentioned herself
so she beat me to the punch but
she cares about people that's
authentic you see it every day
when you work with cerita and
but my favorite thing was our
sense of humor because even
amidst all the challenges and
all her hard work and attention
to detail she also just really
makes it fun to be in place so
I'm a little envious I will be
working with a further.
My hope I can still in certain
capacities and I really hope
that you folks will support her
in advance in this cabinet posts
thank you.
Thank.
Hi my name is soon lay Stewart
madam chairman Senators I've
known three to for about eight
years now four years as a
colleague at the state auditor's
office in the City of
Albuquerque
she's somebody who I think is a
perfect example of the public
servants that we want to see in
leadership in government you
know when I think of what that
means I think of somebody who
has integrity hard work sound
judgment and strategic vision at
three to has all of those
qualities and she's also just a
great person she's able to build
teams and I just really Jr your
support thank you.
I said this.
Mr chair madam chair and Mr vice
chair and members of the
committee much Senator test was
almost important either we are a
statewide workers rights
organization an immigrants
rights organization and we
mostly organized in rural
communities throughout our state
and in the last few months
months we have been able to work
with secretary designate and I
here and really have been able
to see first hand not only all
of the things that have been
mentioned here about the
analytical skills in the
competence and the ability to
really think about all how to
solve problems but a real hard
for excluded workers workers low
wage essential workers in rural
communities who may not have the
same voice as others in urban
communities and that's really
what we're excited about working
with secretary more in the
future is really trying to think
through how we can provide
services and support to excluded
workers and vulnerable workers
are in every corner of our state
and we've seen that in the last
six months and we've also seen
that in her capacity in the and
at that in her work that she did
an Albuquerque so thank you very
much that's why we fully support
this nomination.
I was there is organized
opposition so just by show of
hands.
The chamber and support of the
for.
Thank you for that are there any
opposition in the in the road
for the country.
What about one point.
This chair now online the state
support for office and that was
that since there's no one online
and those go to questions and
comments to the committee.
Senator followed by Senator.
Thank you vice chairman madam
chairman Senator Hamblen and and
miss my here I'm really
appreciated meeting with you
yesterday.
Thank you for give me some of
your time.
I'm curious if you would be
willing to share with the
committee and the public
Something that we talked about
yesterday you've already been on
the job as acting and we talked
about what you went through what
you and your team have been
going through because of the
pandemic and the fraud could you
share with us.
What you been contending with
and perhaps your plans for the
future
To.
So I just let it go at that
because of we talked about a lot
about about it thank you.
Thank you and chair and you know
Terry do you think Senator
McKenna.
The the fraud that occurred
during the pandemic with respect
to the federal unemployed
employment unemployment benefits
was just unprecedented in and I
and I wasn't there but I don't
know how it could have been
predicted what happened was that
hundreds of millions of dollars
flowed into the system to give
benefits to people who work
traditional recipients of
unemployment really if you they
didn't necessarily have to check
all the same boxes and it
coincided with the technology
for.
Who knows we still don't know
who but people entities to
pharma employee databases from a
lot of different organizations
and then submit false claims on
behalf of those individuals so
they were real people in fact
when I was at the city I got an
email from the department of
workforce solutions saying we've
received your unemployment claim
and I thought a lot of and there
was a hotline and and all of
this the got set up there was a
massive cyber security effort
they did a a ton of work in
invested a lot of dollars in
making the system more secure so
much so that now we start we're
starting to see some problems on
the other end where folks are
getting locked out of their
unemployment accounts because
they're logging in from a place
different than their their town
of residence and that's getting
a flood of fraud flag and so
we've got now some secondary
effects of having to clear up
locked accounts but it wasn't
any different in New Mexico than
it was in the rest of the
country and in fact
congressional congresswoman
Melanie Stansbury sits now on
the oversight committee it it's
Congress that just heard about
nationwide unemployment fraud so
what was challenging for my team
was it was really demoralizing
and difficult's to be to have
all this pressure to get these
benefits out to get dollars into
the hands of people who needed
them and then at the same time
the rules were changing and then
at the same time there was fraud
and so again I have to think
Ricky Serna for not only
cleaning up the fraud and
cleaning up the processes and
procedures to detect that fraud
but also for bringing the spirit
back to that team so that they
can continue to do the great
work.
Thank you vice chairman madam
chair Senator and miss more
thank you because I think it's
really important to
expressed to the committee and
the public the university been
doing the work that we we now
will be confirming you today so
thank you very much thank you
senator Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
sent a strong supporter of St in
iris confirmation
She has been working with our
ragtag group of individuals
around the state to look at and
help us craft our family medical
and paid leave act she she's not
endorsing it but as the
secretary she's been invaluable
to tell us what will work and
what won't so we we went to her
for her advice Schistosoma easy
to work with she's just on solid
footing with her values and
working with others so it's just
been a joy to work with her and
so I certainly hope we will
confirm her thank you for being
willing to up to do this job
this is not an easy job what
you're going to do so she will
assemble people that will work
with her that will work well
she's a good manager so I'm
really looking forward to you as
a secretary not secretary
designate thank you Mr chairman
hippos thank you Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and
chairman and senator Hamlin good
to see you and the miss more.
I really enjoyed our
conversation the other day good
chance to explore a lot of
things the one thing came up
that I wanted to ask you about
on your on your professional
experience can you describe the
current job choose the the
department besides unemployment
benefits in Wagner Peyser
employment services and
workforce innovation and
opportunity act you also listed
temporary aid for needy families
and I thought that was under
Human Services Department ten
what's what's the relationship
there.
Two hundred chair Duhigg Senator
TCP now about a year and a half
ago our department took on the
job search function associated
with tentative so if you
remember back when it became
tentative and it became the
welfare to work model and for
years the Human Services
Department had been contracting
actually with that out of state
company to do the job search
component in the results had not
been great and so when that came
up for bid our department did
for it and one and we had our
performance targets for last
year that previous engagement
rate had been point five percent
so point five percent of TANF
recipients have been engaged to
to do job search and and now it
is up to sixteen percent which
is nowhere close to where we
want to be but it dramatic
improvement and the two main
programs are they are are the
wage subsidy program and the
CareerLink in both of those
places tend of recipients and
jobs one of that is for jobs
with government agencies and one
of them is for jobs in the
private sector and everybody who
has a wage subsidy or CareerLink
We can't say enough good things
about working with these folks
to have so many good reasons to
excel at work they just need to
take care of their families and
so it's been a fabulous
partition.
Mr chairman and and the fear of
that thank you that the that's
really great Senator Lopez and I
are sponsoring.
The attendant reform bill and I
don't know if you had a chance
to your department sent a chance
to review that I think the Human
Services Department responded
that it would make some
significant changes in the
penalties for non participation
and so I would hope that that
would further increase the
likelihood of people being able
to participate in in this
I think one of the things that
we've been surprised about is
have families in this state or
taking advantage of the
availability of tennis right now
means a hefty C. used to be.
You talk about public benefits
of was one everybody talked
about ten it is almost no.
And and this under ten thousand
families participating in that
program right now anything we
can do to make full use of it
and to fully we don't even spend
the the block grant that's
available which is.
Yeah hopefully Senator Lopez is
bill will change that so I think
I I hope you're you're
supportive of it and and thank
you for the work you're doing on
the on the job search I Mr
chairman I just want to comment
that this is an incredibly
talented nominate the I look
forward to seeing the the
continued improvement in the
performance of workforce
solutions which is been a vial
but everybody's account a
troubled Department committee
years so thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Lopez followed
by Senator Baca.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I lost people just because this
whatever I have
contagious.
He's.
The.
Was there.
Mr chair.
I wanted to say thank you for
your willingness to step into
this position it's not an easy
job is a job for the secretaries
that have challenges
I know that the talent you have
to fight with you since you were
a state auditor's office
I've seen progress through and I
just want to say thank you.
is another table with all the
questions that in Astoria
the.
I think what is of most value is
how we respect and treat our
employees because they do such
wonderful work even though we're
constantly are
Asking questions to see where
the accountability board but we
also have two thousand or please
so I I just want courage that.
Your shift to the work is done.
And I know you mentioned in your
opening remarks about the
relationship of the tribal
communities I just want to ask
Mr chair what is your plan to
strengthen the relationship of
the department and for tribal
communities in the state.
Mr chair and madam chair Senator
Lopez thank you for that
question
I I again this was one of the
things I didn't know about how
workforce programs work before I
started in this job but Senator
tribes have their own workforce
dollars that come directly from
the Feds in the largest
independent workforce program
would be in the Navajo Nation
but for most of the public to
get money it is barely enough to
staff one person let alone to
provide the level of services
that we really need so I have
talked to my initial
conversations have been with
some of the nonprofits that work
in that coordination F. north as
well as with the the chair of
the all India Public Council to
say let's connect really that's
the first step there never has
been a strong connection between
our department and those
workforce programs let's make
the tribal programs part of our
statewide workforce plan and
let's try to match dollars
wherever we can whenever we're
at a I don't think there's any
prohibition of us using state
dollars for people who are also
eligible for tribal programs and
so where they are stretched thin
and trying to you know make a
dollar out of fifteen cents if
we can give on the other eighty
five cents we would love to have
that type of production.
Mr chair actually I appreciate
you see the has.
For those of us who have some
institution.
Is there a long time coming in
trying to establish a
relationship between the state
and our tribal governments and I
appreciate you staying right
here today and of course we're
here to assist.
just eight as the Legislature.
Because in order for communities
to be successful and it's not
just because they're in other
jurisdictions or other than the
supplement to go.
That needs to continue and
relationship distributions.
Congratulations thank you thank
you pop up.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for a thank you for filling in
coming through the the gap of of
the issues that were being had
and workforce solutions during
the COVID time of that was
mentioned earlier some of the
fraud and stuff like I can
remember a number of times Mr
chair the
my own office was inquired about
receiving benefits it will never
applied for through another
business of minor contact many
times must have been very
challenging so I appreciate you
stepping in for that just for
disclosure purposes I wanted to
ask what some some sometimes my
counterparts ask your and that
is have you made donation to the
current administration and to
the or to the governor's
congressional race at any time
have you have you made any
donations at Mr Chairman chair
Senator Baca I checked double
checked this online but I can
figure out how to get out of the
system I think I've given two
hundred fifty dollars in the
past six years I'm not a huge
political donor.
I guess my my next question
would be given the.
Given the past the.
Series of departures all state
by the secretaries of the
cabinet lately I wanted to ask
you if it was your intention to
maintain this position
throughout the remainder of the
administration.
Mr Chairman chair Senator Baca I
serve at the pleasure of the
governor but I don't have any
plans to go anywhere I served a
full term as the CEO of of
Albuquerque and I I don't like
to leave unfinished said that I
do appreciate Mr chair that
you've lived for twenty five
years that means something
usually you know we I like to
see people that are are very
familiar with the culture and
flavor Mexico isn't you
certainly do check that box so I
appreciate that lastly I wanted
to ask you one of a one of for a
the background checks flag to a
case on that you're involved
with it doesn't seem to be
anything of any consequence but
I thought I'd address it was a
and and maybe it's not even you
what we don't have her birthday
to that we can verify it that
way but you have a very unique
name we'll see New Mexico and
and that would be a case of tear
tier of the cerita more do you
recall that in twenty twenty
one.
Mr chair Madam chair Senator
Baca are there a lot of cases
where I'm named as a defendant
in my capacity as a C. A. L.
pretty much anyone who says the
city is going to name the more
in the CA so that's probably one
of those cases I think it was an
office of law enforcement
officer but I don't remember the
details so nothing comes to mind
of any real importance or
something that should we should
be concerned about and your
confirmation here Mr chairman
and chair Senator Baca now okay
well I I appreciate the that
answer appreciate your you're a
candid answers and everything I
asked
and the.
We'll see out on the floor sure
thank you.
Thank you senator I have a
question of the it's more of a
common question I heard that
when the pandemic and it was
like the game of the hungry
hippos are people trying to
replicate workforce solutions
come to everything down over
there was a process and take a
look at that so that was just
one.
I'm proud to have several tribal
nations within my district and
went back what I was gonna ask
is with Senator Lopez asked is
how you would work and
collaborating with tribes and I
just want to make sure I heard
you correctly we would do three
things that one would build a
relationship with tribes of
problems so connecting the
second thing I heard you say is
that you would work on timing
and tribal packages with
workforce solutions and then the
third thing I heard is that you
would try to match state dollars
with with tribes are currently
getting to assist with issues of
that my practices.
Mr chair chair yes that's right
and I I think it sort of
embedded in that second one was
making sure that the tribes are
invited to participate and join
in the statewide workforce
development plan which will be.
In together throughout the
course of this year and it's
finalized next year thank you
madam chair just if I could
operate out if you haven't
already the level foundation can
be a perfect connection northern
Mexico that works with local
governments in my area could be.
but that I don't know for the
constant questions about chair
and we do have Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you this line here
right that they get that right
Mr chair madam chair it it's
Neier rams fire there we go.
Questions what is the current
unemployment rate in New Mexico
and then how do we compare to
other states.
Mr Chairman chair Senator Pirtle
the current the last published
rate was three point nine
percent which is a historic low
for New Mexico I think it's
since two thousand eight or so
we are a right around the
national average I don't have
that number in front of me but
we're no longer you know
significantly higher than the
national average unemployment
rate for.
Mr chair and this is
how many people have been kicked
state off of the unemployment of
right count because if quit
looking for work.
Mr chair Madam chair Senator
Pirtle
that's a difficult question to
answer sort of numerically but I
think your point is that we have
a we do have one of the lowest
labor force participation rates
in the state in the country
which is the at the employed
people than that unemployed
people who are looking for work
and divide that by the total
population of
non institutionalized adults and
that number has historically
been below the national average
and continues to be one of the
lowest in the country for New
Mexico.
Okay I you know because I I find
it it interesting many of our
restaurants and places are still
looking for people so either a
ton of people left the state
during
comment pandemic which I guess
is possible or we just had a lot
of people that.
After the COVID just decided not
to go back which is it's it's
concerning so I hope I hope
We can figure out what we can do
for the small businesses I mean
they've they've suffered enough
through a lot of the mandates
and things that were put in
place and now this paid sick
leave and then it looks like
this paid family sick leave is
going to.
Pass the legislature like gas
through a final so you know I
think there's a lot of things
that we're doing to the small
businesses and unfortunately one
of the biggest things now that
they have is finding people to
show up.
And that you know I I think
The more the more we do to to
harm these businesses the more
we're gonna see more more that
they're gonna just leave the
state so hopefully we can help
them find qualified people so
that they can serve the public
thank you Mr thank you for that
madam chair before I had to you
there is one person who's online
Mr Robert the last for the New
Mexico chamber of commerce asked
to be listed as that support
with no confidence at the
center.
Thank you Mr vice chair thanks
senator thank you.
Mr Neier and I apologize because
I have for years been
mispronouncing your last name
But we.
I got the opportunity to to work
with you when you're at the City
of Albuquerque we are very lucky
to have you in this position
thank you for for stepping into
a of of.
A big agency that's dealing with
a lot of a lot of issues
I I actually I was one of the I
also someone applied for
unemployment benefits in my name
as well hi.
Having to do a number of us
but also what one of the things
I noticed most and I heard
someone else say something
similar to the other day which
that previous in in my role as
as senator the vast majority of
constituent service calls that I
would get would be something
about workforce solutions.
And since you've been there I
get almost none I think I've had
one
and that that tells me that that
my constituents are are being
well served by that departments
and are not running into the
same roadblocks I think
difficulty is that that they
have been Reese in the past and
so I I really appreciate that
I have a question one of the
things I I got a lot of calls
about during the pandemic
because this issue where where
people were basically overpaid
unemployment benefits and then
asked to pay them back can you
update us on what what has
happened with that situation
absolutely Mr chair madam chair
and I I think it's just that
everybody has my phone number so
they just call me directly.
The problems and he's taking the
calls but at yes so overpayment
is is something we've really
been unpacking and it appears
that there are a bunch ways it
happen but basically didn't the
main scenarios are there was
again a lot of pressure to get
budget out the door as soon as
that money our account and so
unemployment also always has a
sort of pay first ask questions
later orientation that's
federal.
So what happened was there were
different requirements that were
put out and people got at yeah
cat the state the benefits of
here's how much you get and that
statement would sometimes be
followed by five or six other
statements that had different
numbers on them it had to do
with those six hundred dollar
digital payments that three
hundred dollar additional
payments remember all those
strange little plus that
programs that came across.
And then they're all changes in
the requirements so you know
there is normally an
unemployment requirement to
recertify that you're able and
available for work and that sort
of fluctuated over time so
people are filing it they were
not filing it there are
questions about what date their
budget should have taken to
their non monetary and monetary
issues and after getting several
statements of different amounts
of benefits some people
unfortunately then got a
statement that says you've been
paid twenty thousand dollars so
far you actually only are should
have received nineteen thousand
and now you owe us a thousand
dollars which came to shop to a
lot of people as a shock they
never had understood those
statements a benefits as they
got them and they continue to
not understand what was
happening when they were told to
overpay
I think maybe the the good news
about the system being so over
loaded is that not all of those
overpayments actually translated
into offsets a budget or
collections I mean some of them
are just sitting in the system
as over to you and overpayments
but for some people and
fortunately there was either a
reduction of their benefits
going forward they were asked to
repay in some other way.
We know it's a problem we're
working on really identifying
the universes and we're also
working with the department of
labor that all that come further
complicating the issue by issue
in all these different waivers
of overpayments but you had to
apply for a waiver so you know
if it were me and I was at home
getting seven different notices
from the departments with
different numbers on them and
then told you can apply for a
waiver I probably wouldn't have
even known to do it and we think
only about ten percent of people
eligible for a waiver actually
applied for one so we're looking
at a whether we can reopen the
waivers be whether we can apply
them and in a more consistent
way if we can publicize it if we
don't have to make people apply
for it and and all the different
strategies for for fixing that
problem but it remains sort of a
something that we're working on.
Right thank you and I I
appreciate that explanation
and we are very lucky to have
you thank you for your service
that's all I have Mister Mister
and so.
Have you want to make if I could
do for you all take a vote you
know I I have and thank you
madam chair Mister vice chair
and committee for this and and
the the the conversations you
know misfires al just a fire
because I've got more rhymes
with fire to make sure because
names are important getting
people's names are important and
that so I certainly I'm the
state cerita if that's alright
with you
and so
you know it's when but in my
capacity with my job is is
running the green chamber of Los
crucis and especially during the
pandemic working with other
business serving organizations
together to make sure that our
small businesses is Senator
Pirtle talking about making sure
that they had access to
everything making sure that
employees had access to
everything you know Mr stern a
did a great job of really trying
to keep that ship right but I
have to tell you that in my
years of working in the
community there are times when
you see the appointment of a new
head or new executive director
and if you know them you're kind
of like okay you know I wish
them the best of luck and then
there are others that you
breathe a sigh of relief that
they've been appointed the head
of the position or department
and wouldn't cerita was
appointed that myself and my
colleagues all breathe a sigh of
relief and and me just because
I've known three to a lot longer
than in this capacity is is
deputy secretary cabinet
secretary and so I I would like
to to share my confidence and
and she the so with great
humility of accepting all the
great comments that people have
said but you know it's it's.
work ethic in just the the way
that she commits and cares about
people and making sure that
people have the resources that
they deserve is I think by far
some of the best that I've ever
seen and so I breathed a sigh of
relief when street was appointed
to the position and I continue
to brief it easily when knowing
that she's going to continue to
oversee this department that is
so important to not only our
business community but to the
residents of our state so I
think you and I'm honored to be
heard sponsor.
Thank you for that.
Representative thank you for
joining us this morning in the
committee of the backs.
Thank you Mr chair madam chair I
would move consent of the
appointment of Serena Neier to
the secretary of the department
of workforce solutions.
Thank you for that to have a.
The local.
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca
test center in goes excuse
senator Lopez yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris
excuse senator Ortiz he Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Pena yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Pirtle yes
senator.
Yes and to spend it yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator had a meal yes Senator
had a meal yes and senator do
the yes Senator Duhigg yes yes
nine yes and two X. nine inches
is that what also welcome at
representative Armstrong because
with us today if this is the.
And so with that you have to the
Senate floor will have more
debate with the leader this
morning.
Which is perhaps.
This is being appointed to the
Department of Health Senator
Stewart is Senator Sanchez good
morning and thank you for
joining us.
Senator go ahead.
The madam chair members of the
committee I'm here to sponsor
Patrick Allen are governor's
nominee to lead the New Mexico
department of health.
So our department health is a
centralized system of health
services organizes are thirty
three counties into I public
health reasons we have regional
directors and staff to provide
services to every county within
their rations through fifty two
public health office that we
have around the state these
local offices partner with their
communities to meet those
community specific needs so
courting to the CDC there are
three primary core functions of
public health with ten
corresponding essential health
services are New Mexico
department of health is the main
public health into the in New
Mexico charged with providing
these three core functions
assessment monitoring and
assessing health problems
diagnosing and investigating the
solutions like we did with
COVID.
Policy development informing
educating and empowering people
mobilizing community
partnerships and developing
plans and policies around read
upon health efforts and finally
assurance enforcing laws and
regulations that guarantee of
competent workforce and evaluate
service deliveries affected
agency to ensure the provision
of public health services and
ensure the pop public safety so
that's what we have in New
Mexico that's what Patrick
founded in Oregon he served
under the leadership of Kate
brown for five years as director
of Oregon's health authority
that states braille health
agency he is responsible for the
delivery of health insurance to
over forty percent of Oregonians
through Medicaid our we've got
fifty percent here in New Mexico
he's responsible the state's
health insurance marketplace and
health insurance benefits for
state employees and education
please and he was responsible
for the statewide behavioral
health system including the
Oregon state hospital a two
campus seven hundred that
psychiatric facility Mr Allen
also oversaw the state public
health system health policy as
well as health facility
regulation he was responsible
for leading Oregon's overall
response to the COVID nineteen
pandemic and the Commonwealth
fund rated them as fifth best in
the US wonder what New Mexico's
rating is so Mister Allen has
been in service for thirty years
including six years running
Oregon's department of consumer
and business services he help
stabilize the individual health
insurance market through the
affordable Care Act under his
resume he's got selected
accomplishments I just want to
point out three of those which I
think really matter for New.
Mexico he led the implementation
of a body of work and anti
racism principles and
applications and really his anti
racist agencies worked on
eliminating health inequities in
the state he championed efforts
to close the COVID nineteen
vaccine distribution to
communities of color in Oregon
eliminating that faxing gap by
April twenty twenty one and he
helped achieve health insurance
coverage for over ninety five
percent Oregonians ninety eight
percent of children.
So madam chair this nominees
just highly qualified set of
valuable range of experience
that will help them succeed I
believe New Mexico really needs
secretary of health like Mr
Patrick Allen and I ask him for
his opening statement.
Thank you so much Senator for
the for the gracious
introduction madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Patrick Allen I have the honor
of being the governor's nominee
to be the cabinet secretary for
the department of health and I'm
I'm really happy to be here and
at Preciado all of all of your
time quickly I just want to
start by acknowledging my family
my my life down thirty eight
years are three grown kids
without their love and support
throughout my career wouldn't be
able to do any of the things
that I've that I've been able to
do or or worked on my wife and I
are excited to be moving to New
Mexico I've been here a living
here now for the the last month
she and she's home I getting our
house ready to for us to move
it's amazing how much stuff you
can build up over twenty years
with with three kids and all
those all those kinds of things
I'm just Senator Stewart
indicated that a public servant
for over thirty years all that's
been an organ for the past five
years I have run the Oregon
health authority a big health
agency that has a lot of
similarities to the department
of health in New Mexico but also
some pretty significant
differences
in in all the work that I've
done I've tried to be committed
to transparency to
accountability to health equity
and I'm really looking forward
to being able to do everything
that I'm able to do to help to
help achieve a healthier New
Mexico I'm also really looking
forward add to working in a
health agency and if not quite a
post pandemic world certainly
for lack of a better phrase
calling a trans pandemic world
where the nature of of what we
care about about COVID has
certainly has certainly changed
I have a lot to learn about New
Mexico how things work the
people the culture and I really
look forward to being able to to
do that to the do that learning
as much as I have to learn on
some level health is health and
the issues that health agencies
deal with and the way and the
tools they used to deal with
them and the structures all
across the country have some
broad have some broad similarity
in the.
Are some areas where were as
different as organ is from New
Mexico being over seventy
percent non Hispanic white
it it's got some broad
similarities the percentage is
relatively small but organise
one of the top ten states in the
country for native American
population it's a state that has
a significant rural pardon me
rural urban divide with with
issues in rural parts of the
state being dramatically
different and eating different
kinds of attention from state
government and then more urban
parts of the area
I've had lots of help even just
in the month that I've been here
to learn to learn about the
state the people always kind of
asking are you drinking from the
firehose and and the
It is full blast as it might be
in some cases as you heard of
run at been responsible for a
state psychiatric hospital a
regulated health care facilities
are run public health programs
and I've lead pandemic response
in the in the state of Oregon
all those experiences and more I
think it helped me get up to
speed here in New Mexico and and
be able to be effective leading
the agency really from from the
get go.
If I'm confirmed I'm ready to
work with all of you with our
state leaders it has to be able
to help ensure health equity for
all the people of New Mexico
as as I as I learned the state
you you'll I think all are able
to be maybe my most effective
teachers living and working in
the communities that you do and
I look forward to the
opportunity to work with each of
you to learn what are the issues
in your communities what do your
constituents care about and how
the department of health can
help it help you in your
communities achieve a healthier
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you for that we do have
some for my support and so this
several people that likes Energy
half and so I have a column for.
Hired to come to the table that
always stated today that we can.
Thank you Mr chair Madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Alyssa Kenny Geiger rhymes with
fire.
and it's a pleasure to be here
I've met a few if you have
testified in a couple of things
and I saw save the bees this
past weekend I am a former state
legislator in Oregon so I may
know Mr Allen longer than anyone
else in this room possibly I was
on I served in the legislature
from twenty eleven to twenty
twenty one I was on the health
care committee that entire time
face chair for part of that time
I chaired Human Services and
housing for from twenty fifteen
to twenty twenty I was on the a
joint committee of ways and
means on health and Human
Services so I so Mister Allen
come in front of our committee
repeatedly
his career as director of state
agencies actually paralleled my
own time in the legislature
completely he became the head of
the CBS department of consumer
business affairs in twenty
eleven which is when I started
in the legislature and then
about five years later twenty
seventeen became the head of
Oregon health authority so I
some come in front of us I saw
him when he was running the CBS
that that one of the departments
in that are one of the divisions
and that was the insurance
agency and he knows insurance
backwards and forwards or again
I think was rated number one in
transparency in insurance rate
setting the so to the extent
that that is one of the things
on his charge here to make sure
that we have as full full
coverage as possible for health
care private and public for New
Mexicans he knows that issue
backwards and forwards what I'd
say in terms of health care is
we worked a lot on deepening our
diversity equity and inclusion
work as was mentioned by Senator
Stewart
he especially for white guy.
I think he did an incredible job
he's a great listener he has
incredible values I just want to
speak a little bit to you
mentioned your family and how
important that is and I know his
values come through and
everything he was a coach who
was on the school board he did a
whole variety of things that
showed he really cared about the
community not just his job
he really got the big picture
when COVID first happened and
there was a lot of debate about
whether kids should not be in
school he wore both his health
path we don't want transmission
to spread but he also was the
first person that I remember
that came to the table and spoke
to us about the concern he had
for children not being in school
and how that could affect mental
health and learning so just
really you know one of the few
people that I saw out there
wrestling with this we did these
really hard issues he has
incredible integrity he's honest
and direct he's an incredibly
hard worker very responsive
unflappable very steady and all
the chaos that we had during the
COVID and I was on daily calls
with him at three PM every
single day for the first year or
so of of COVID and I just want
to quote because I've been gone
for a year and a half and living
in this beautiful state I did
reach out to my former colleague
Representative Rabb knows who is
the current chair of behavioral
health and health care he's also
on the business and labor
committee and he is also on the
house rules committee and I
asked him if if I could quote
him on anything and he was very
receptive to that he said quote.
That didn't often need staff for
other people to accompany him to
explain things he knew how to be
different so the politicians but
also not to be bullied by them
when they had to hear something
that didn't want to hear or get
an answer they probably didn't
agree with he's had a long
career as a professional
director of two state agencies
and we are lucky to be getting
such an experienced person happy
to answer any questions thank
you so much for the opportunity
to testify in support of Pat
Allen.
Two and a half but it's on this
organized.
Large enough to have this is is
that when I've got
Representative in the.
If you copy.
Staff.
Thank you madam chair Mr vice
chair and committee members
the Debbie Armstrong and I'm
currently on detail the
governor's office governor's
office for the session working
on health care and is all of you
know me I've.
Care deeply about the health
care system in New Mexico and
providing access to as many
people as possible and I've had
a.
Some opportunity to work with
the secretary designate Allen
already to talk about health
systems to talk about health
care and I find him a very
knowledgeable very easy to talk
to very calm
which is important excuse me I
have terrible allergies
So I sympathize Senator
I also no have known him by
reputation potentially for
decades
a good friend and colleague of
mine.
Who ran the high risk pool in
origin worked with of then
secretary Allen in Oregon and I
knew of him by reputation about
the working in collaboration and
support from the state.
That he had and so I'm really
happy to welcome him to New
Mexico and I'm particularly
impressed because this is really
hard to find here we haven't had
someone in the secretary of
health that I recall that had
both the background in public
health and facilities.
That so that and that has been
hard to come by and so someone
coming in who understands the
operation of facilities as well
as public health I think it's
really important and I'm I'm
glad to see that in him and
welcome him and I hope you'll
support him for secretary of
health thank you.
Russ.
The question is is this the last
two.
Public quick.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
vice chairman and members of the
committee it's good to be back
in front of you
Talking to you today both as
former superintendent and
somebody who's spent their life
from health plans and health
insurance and all those sorts of
things and I want to call your
attention to something that I
think is for pretty rare
unfortunately and that is packed
and just run a program that
covered one out of three
Oregonians.
His focus and that plan which
came in a national reputation
was to focus on outcomes.
Far too many plan of
administrative singling insurers
focus on how many claims that we
process what do we pay.
But he's asking the right
questions as a public health
person what did we buy.
How do we improve health where
did we miss.
And that's exactly the kind of
person we run point running a
public health agency is well
qualified to do that the health
authority had over.
Five thousand employees have I'm
not mistaken.
The job he did and COVID earned
a national reputation they had
the second lowest rate of
infection in the country.
This number yes No little fine
that was a big deal.
And frankly the budget for the
Oregon health authority is
larger than our state budget.
So he's got experience in
managing money and that but the
importance of managing money if
as I said is buying value.
And I think that's really
critical and it's one of his
best attributes and I commend
them to you for confirmation
thank you.
Budget carrier.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carrie
are me how I'm acting secretary
of the Human Services Department
and on behalf of the Human
Services department I'm here to
enthusiastically urgent
appointment if Pat Allen is the
secretary of the department of
health there really three areas
I wanted to highlight in which I
think it's clear is that his
leadership will benefit the
people of New Mexico under his
leadership at the department of
health first Mr Allen has proven
that it's possible and actually
necessary to organize the health
care system in a way that
delivers greater integration
better access to care and
improved performance on health
outcomes specifically Mr Allen
has experience convening
different health programs and
getting them to work together
including Medicaid behavioral
health public health and
benefits for state employees and
educators if we can do the same
thing here in New Mexico we will
be able to deliver a more data
driven easier to understand and
better performing health care
system for all New Mexicans to
be successful we need Mr Allen's
leadership second out like
Senator Stewart I was struck by
Mr Allen's demonstrated
commitment to eliminating health
equity his body of work in anti
racism principal principles and
the work he did an organ to
focus on underserved communities
New Mexico's cultural and
economic diversity requires this
level of understanding three.
Copy this.
and depth of commitment I look
forward to working with Mr Allen
to learn what we can do better
at the Human Services department
and across all agencies to
advance these goals and reduce
health disparities for New
Mexicans and third I just really
want to highlight Mr Allen's
experience and record in
supporting health insurance
coverage for nearly one hundred
percent of New the population of
organ.
Okay I'm so sorry okay thank you
sorry Mr chair.
Thank you madam chair Mr vice
chair members of the committee
my name is Dan weeks it happened
a long term lobbyist for the
hospital association in New
Mexico stand in support of this
nomination Patrick Allan we've
done some background research of
course and talked to various
people in Oregon as well as
watching Mr Allen's performance
and from this legislature in
terms of his budget
presentations etcetera.
the department of health is been
a relatively troubled agency
over time we have not had a lot
of consistency we look forward
to working for with Mr Allen and
providing some stability to that
organization I think from my
experience and and listening to
him he's a good communicator he
listens and we look forward very
much to establishing a very good
relationship over time.
And with that we support this
nomination and urge your support
as well thank you.
Nobody in favor opposition.
If the federal reserve in favor
of the property this is a half.
Thank you for that are there any
opposition in the country.
Thank god I'm not gonna go to
questions or comments from the
committee.
Senator Ortiz.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr vice chairman and senator
Stewart.
And the Mr Allen thank you for
taking this on
I can think of one other recent
high profile twenty two a
position here in New Mexico who
recently been let go in another
state.
And that was the UNM basketball
coach.
Who have fired by the university
of Minnesota to the on the job
you and is that really a job
there so I I would expected if
your performance with would be
every bit the equal.
hi I just want to ask you about
facilities because it's been a
the in our conversation we we
also discussed that and wondered
if you share with with the
committee your own views on on
our secure and state facilities
are you just getting familiar
with the physical plants but
it's been a concern of mine and
and several of legislators that
so many of our facilities have
been operating at less than
capacity at a time when the need
is so great for precisely the
services that they make a I
wonder if you could comment
about how we can go about fixing
that situation yes thank you
madam chair Mister vice chair
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and this
is an area that got my attention
it immediately inserting at the
agency as well realizing that
we're running most of our
facilities on average a little
bit more than fifty percent of
their license capacity some more
some less yeah a and I do as has
been indicated have some
experience running facilities
though not quite the breadth of
facilities that we that we run
here one of the first things
I've implemented is a change to
how we're assessing our capacity
so that when we're looking at
not our license capacity but our
operating capacity we actually
look at what is the real
capacity that we have available
that based on the staff that we
have a facilities to be able to
maximize the staff capacity so
that we've got as many we're
serving as many New Mexicans as
we can safely serve and all of
our facilities and what I found
is there were a couple of out
liars in that kind of analysis
where we're even after allowing
for staffing were well below of
what we could as who we could
serve to safely serve in those
facilities and so I've begun an
action plan to be able to
increase not only the the Cup
have the the actual residents in
those facilities but then look
at a staffing plan to be able to
over time increase all of their
operating capacity to get to a
place where we're maximizing our
license capacity in the
investment New Mexicans of made
in those for.
So it is there's a lot of
complexity wrapped up in a
couple of sentences I just
tossed off but is one of the
critical areas I'm focused on
because we have people who have
need of those facilities and
it's up to us to make sure we're
meeting as much of that need as
we can this thank you very much
for that answer that Mr chairman
and and the fact I think I can
for what you just said is
because
there's talk about the new new
state hospitals or new regional
hospitals and all sorts of we
had a need but if we're not
fully utilizing.
Her voice lodges in the sequoias
and the
we have center and Rosalynn all
of those facilities are not
fully utilizing it makes it real
hard to justify building new
ones are starting new ones and
then we need to we need to serve
the people so what you said is
important because I think Mr
Chairman this is the largest
the state department terms of
employment in the state we fact
checked all the employees of the
oil over that is comparable to
what you've you've supervised in
Oregon yeah I think just shut
just shy of four thousand
place him so it it this is a
incredibly crucial position I
was very impressed with our
conversation and your.
The ease with which you bill you
know you might be able to to
help us fix some of these things
and experience you bring to the
job you've done it before.
If you'll be able to do it every
bit as well here so thank you Mr
thank you thank you so much.
Thank you vice chairman madam
chair Senator Stewart and Mr
Allen wanted to share with the
committee and the public how
impressed I was when you came
to meet with me it was so you
and your some staff members miss
lamb and it wasn't about your
upcoming confirmation it was
about helping me with the
constituent and her at point
therapy needs
I'm still working with your
staff to resolve the issue but I
was just so impressed about your
openness and approachability
about my about trying to solve
this small problem when you've
got a vast problem and I am so
thankful that you have taken
other requests to join New
Mexico and look forward to your
wife joining you.
And you have my support thank
you Mr thank you vice chairman
and madam chair Senator and Mr
Allen thank you senator Senator
Baca.
Thank you vice chair thank you
for thank you for.
Our self to this to this job
inquiry that you have here today
I want to ask you a little bit
about your departure from Morgan
in your departure from Morgan
and I read that you had resigned
from there seem to be rather
rude abrupt resignation can you
expand a little bit upon some of
the reasons you laughter if they
are non personal
I'd like to know a little bit
more about that circumstance
sure madam chair Mr chair
Senator about thanks for the
question Hey you know I think
it's it's it's not a great
secret that there was a
governor's election in Oregon
and that fairly late in the
process all three candidates it
was a legit three way race for
governor in Oregon this time all
three indicated that they want
to make a change at the of the
health authority yeah and and I
would say that they were
probably two main factors for
that first we've talked about
the the pandemic and I and and
pandemic responses work that I'm
incredibly proud of
but I was one of the main faces
of the pandemic response in the
state
and you know while I think there
was a fairly United approach to
the to the pandemic early on it
became quite a bit more
defensive and and quite a bit
more contentious is the pandemic
war on and you know I think I
think it's so it's a it's a
reasonable notion that someone
who is going to start a new term
as governor in an area that's
not as dominated by the pandemic
as as their predecessor is gonna
want to bring make a break with
that and I think I think that
having the face of the pandemic
continuing in that role is as
problematic probably the larger
issue was around behavioral
health in the state and the fact
of the matter is in five years
running the agency I didn't
solve the behavioural health
crisis in Oregon you rhyme I
think that there are reasons for
that is a complex problem and
problems that have been around
for a long time are often there
for you know good reasons but
you know the voters don't care
about that.
And they shouldn't have to care
about that they see an organ you
know people sleeping and openly
using drugs on the streets in
downtown Portland they're
frustrated with family members
who can't get services and and
so you know a candidate running
for governor saying I'm going to
clean house and and and start
over again on behavioral health
I you know I've told people of
are running for governor IDA
probably fired me to but you
know I think that's I think you
want that level of
accountability and leaders who
are running for office and
that's a visible public thing
that that makes sense to do and
so I you know I think those were
the the two main factors that
led to the and I appreciate that
and it we we did Mr vice chair
Mister Allen you spend some time
with me my office and we touched
on that a little bit and I
thought it was important for the
public to to know exactly what
what those circumstances were
and it was the reason for for me
asking that question you know I
I I think point of when a couple
of things I I look at Oregon's
response to to the pandemic and
I think it was very similar to
New Mexico I unfortunately we're
very critical of of was very
critical and still am critical
of of how Covid response was
implemented here I felt that it
was very heavy handed and there
was a there was a toll exacted
on a populace for it especially
in the small business community
I have where I saw you know
little provable results in its
effectiveness and and so I think
that we share of basic
philosophical difference on on
that and so I just be up front
with you on that I I look at the
high vaccination rates that that
were identified in work and you
know how the and and some people
may think that's positive in
some ways it is and for some
sectors of the population I
would say it is however in other
ways I would say that there must
be some input to serve.
Motivation to get those types of
vaccination numbers and the
those would come through Mr vice
chair on the implementation of
through heavy handed policies
from from the government and and
so those tend to to make me
apprehensive in a way
additionally I I would say that
the the
the mention and the the in
injection of race and ethnicity
into things like health care
to to some degree make me cringe
at times and the reason is is I
have kids in the state and the
it it bothers me when
I feel that there is an applied
entitlement that that you want
to give or that the government
wants to.
To ethnic and racial minorities
it's essentially telling my
children that they're not good
enough and they need a hand up
and that's not what's expected
at least in my household and so
so some of those basic
philosophical differences are
the reason I can't support your
confirmation today but I think
that you know on the plus side
your resume is very impressive
and I do think you have the
capability to do a good job here
and I hope that you would do to
do so and I would hope that Mr
vice chair that you would
maintain independence and
autonomy within your within your
position that allows you to make
wise decisions value based
decisions and not just
necessarily be impressed upon by
by external influences I I do
wish you luck going forward
though thank you thank you I
could just respond quickly madam
chair Mister vice chair
appreciate those comments and I
appreciate your candor in terms
of of a vaccine equity I I do
just quickly want to say I think
what we found early on in the
vaccine rollout is that our our
Latino Latino population and our
black population in Oregon we're
getting vaccinated at much lower
rates than the white population
that wasn't because of some set
of mandates for lack of Mandy to
those kinds of things it was
because of the way we were doing
business we were primarily
delivering vaccines through
large vaccine center at the
state convention center in
Portland lots of interactions
with hospitals and that what we
really need to do is change how
we did our work to be able to
meet people where they were in
the black community it meant
working through faith
communities and and and pastors
and and eight am working at much
smaller scale on a neighborhood
basically in the in the Hispanic
community in Oregon it meant
working through market places
and festivals and those kinds of
places where people ordinarily
congregated in we're gonna end
up in a place where they could
take time to interact with
people and and get their
questions and concerns answered
and and so those really more
than anything.
I mandate where the keys I think
an organ to being able to get
everybody who wanted to be
vaccinated regardless of their
race ethnicity where they lived
in the state that and that a at
degree of access and and I I I
appreciate your answer I I would
care to characterize some of
those approaches a little bit
differently but I do appreciate
the answer came thank you thank
you.
Thank you very much
I appreciate at our time in the
office seems like just a long
ago time goes by quickly appear
I want to wish you well in your
job and as has been mentioned
previously
there have been several persons
not just with the current
administration but prior
administrations could have a big
challenge ahead of them with the
department of health.
As I mentioned previously the
previous nominee to be secretary
of your billing are for use and
so forth and because of the work
that they do and have done in
the expectations placed on them
so I would hope that you also
have.
The plans to appreciate.
And work with and listen to many
of the persons who are on the
front lines doing working of our
communities across the state Mr
chair.
It is you and as I have shared
with you when I worked at birth
at State University yes Oregon
does have some similarities
yeah the side of the state on
the other side of the mountain
very similar to our state here
I did some work with our with
tribal communities on the border
towns so we do have those here
in the state of New Mexico.
but one thing that is important.
And I know this too is that New
Mexico has a mix.
At the city's though we have a
higher percentage of these
bundles letting us and you know
other diversity that we have in
our state.
The one thing that I have had
experience Mr chair is to say
that
There is an experience
themselves that the New Mexico
where training was happening.
And the training was in the
primarily Spanish speaking
community.
And the training that was being
held.
Was preceded in Spanish because
that of course is the way that
you connect with community.
And that the person who is
working for the department of
health stopped the training.
Because in her words and I still
have the email if you'd like to
see that I did save it is the
language should have been the
creation of an health and Willis
because this is an English
speaking state.
It was very detrimental in the
training that was preceding
there with regards to health
in southern New Mexico and of
course you know other things
happened after that.
in a conversation with the then
secretary they don't see any
problem with that.
So I would hope that in your
outreach as you work across the
state that you value the
different languages that are
spoken in the state of New
Mexico.
because that's so important
there are those of us who do
speak Spanish in my community
the self value of Albuquerque we
do have a population that does
speak Spanish still.
southern New Mexico has an
influx of more of a heat gun
influence and they're still a
very strong contingent of
Spanish speaking or The New
Mexico and you'll learn the
different pockets that we have
here in our state but I would
hope that you and your
department would continue to
value the bilingualism that
exists in the state of New
Mexico and also working with our
tribal communities.
because I think it's it's not.
A detrimental when we have
persons within state government
who don't honor and understand
what we have here within our
borders of the state of New
Mexico.
There are there's there's a
whole list of issues that I
think you and I had a brief
conversation on that but I look
forward for us to sitting down
to chat in later after the
session is over and some other
areas of importance that
especially affects my community
and others like it across the
state.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Senator Pirtle certain
could just quickly check respond
to that members shared you madam
chairman Richard Senator Lopez I
can't imagine trying to.
Defend that kind of language
access approach organise about
fourteen percent fourteen
percent Latino in in in working
on at the state's Medicaid
waiver I I director staff not
only to go out and and do of
broad set of community
engagement means but that we
target those particularly to our
that our Latino Latino
population and that we do them
in Spanish and I attended those
and you can imagine a state
that's relatively minority
Latino translation is a thing
that happens within the sessions
I made sure that they were
delivered in Spanish and I was
the guy with the headset
listening to live transfer
translation.
Experiencing all the problems
that occur with that and how
ineffective that is as a way of
communicating with making sure
that the actual message in the
actual engagement in the meeting
were in the language of the
trying to service I would like
to try to bring that same
approach.
Thank you for that Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you Alan I do have
a few questions how long was the
process
replacing Senator Scrase from
the governor's office.
I I'm not familiar I'm not
familiar with a that process
center.
So Mister chair how long from
when you applied for the job I'm
sorry at the job.
Yeah I'm sorry
chair Mister faced here Senator
Pirtle I think I had my first
contact regarding this position
in a sometime in in November
after the election to recall
exactly where they were
conversations over November and
December.
And Mr chair throughout the are
you aware of how many other
people applied for the position
no Sir.
Thank you
I do I do have a few questions
there are similarities Mr chair
and Mr Allen between New Mexico
and Oregon especially with
regard to to comment response
and that is the
how student learning loss has
affected organs students and how
student learning loss has
affected New Mexico students do
you think now looking back I
know it's easy Mr chair for us
to sit and play with the
Superbowl coming up Monday
morning quarterback
but after seeing some of the
responses what specifically
would you do differently
during that period of time
because we don't learn from this
that we're we're doing to make
the same mistakes the next time
this happens what would you have
done differently to ensure that
students were able to learn at a
level that state students from
Missouri we're able to do our
Iowa that
only shattered school for one
semester and then wait for back
full attendance yes madam chair
Mister vice chair Senator Pirtle
a couple of things first
at the very beginning of the
pandemic I brokered a deal with
with Education community labor
school administrators
take to keep schools open
despite the fact that there were
COVID cases in schools
are are and actually an organ
oddly our first four or five
cases had some kind of a
connection to school as a
custodian a student someone
attending a basketball game
those those kinds of things and
I were sitting with the
superintendent of one of our
largest school districts who had
a student who tested positive
and we work with them to keep
the schools open despite that
they had the absence rates above
fifty percent the next day a and
one of things that would have
done differently was fight
harder to keep that deal in
place it only managed to last I
think less than a week when
school districts and their other
parents are voting with their
feet just simply not showing up.
And school districts
individually began to close down
second thing would have been to
advocate harder around and a
decision that the governor at
the time maybe to prioritize
teachers Stewart for
vaccinations then in the in that
in that decision there wasn't a
corresponding deal with with
with Education you set the time
to to basically have a okay
you're going to get practice for
vaccines and then we're gonna
reopen schools on you know a
particular fixed schedule there
was no particular language and I
think that was a mistake the
last thing is I think we got a
little bit bullied honestly by
our media into into a a very
strict metrics based decision
making structure for that what
was the infection level at a
particular time in a particular
place and I think in retrospect
there should be a lot more art
to that then just numeric
sciences I think there were a
lot of circumstances I believe
we could have gotten schools
open and once we got them open I
think we learned a lot about how
you could keep schools open to
have it be I have it be safe for
them to to be able to operate
and not contribute over lead to
to transmission so those are
three things I think I would
look at differently.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that answer yeah we live through
this
criollo box coloring of them of
a map that still.
Haunts me in my in my sleep
sometimes how that was come up
with but that's that's what they
did here and and it definitely
did not work and it makes sense
especially for my community but
I do appreciate that that answer
I do have I do have a question
moving forward in in the
post pandemic as I can for the
term you use transplants
pandemic and and the issues that
we're seeing
afterwards whether it's caused
by the vaccine or by the virus
we still don't know with my
Walker died is what what can we
do especially for young athletes
a at our universities what can
the department of health due to
help ensure their safety we've
seen it
all of the news it's it's not
something that that we're not
all aware of sometimes we don't
like to talk about it because it
makes people uncomfortable how
many people are.
Sing out on soccer fields or
tennis courts or the football
field that that the whole world
got to see those types of issues
that we're seeing what what what
are we gonna be able to do at
the department of health with
regard to that yes madam chair
Mr vice chair Senator Pirtle for
every first I'm not a
practitioners that I want to try
to hold myself out as one or
more speak with medical
expertise at all I would say it
at the department of health and
our job is to it is for the for
the the the medical and
scientific gets experts at the
agency the the to understand and
and incorporate all of the
emerging research that comes out
on topics like that are you know
I think one of things that that
it's easy to now that you're
aware of an issue you start
seeing things that look like
evidence of that issue and you
kind of forget that that sadly
young adults propped of heart
attacks
occasionally before the pandemic
that you know there are issues
of people young people had
myocarditis before the pandemic
and so it's really important I
think for those experts to
really understand the totality
of the scientific information
and figure out how we can how we
can incorporate that there's a
vigorous debate as I understand
it going on right now about
and as a vaccine boosters for
young people based on some of
these very risks that you're
talking about it the it's a
debate I don't think there's a
subtle answer to that yet but I
think our responsibility at the
at the health department is to
is is to pay attention to that
debate to that emerging data and
to be able to make
recommendations when we think
there will supported by the
evidence.
And.
Mister chair Mister Allen with
your policies or mandates in
court again what what were they
with regard to vaccines was it
pretty strict as far as having
to show proof for those types of
issues with with with the people
of the organ yes thank you madam
chair professor Senator Pirtle
there were a requirements for
various subsets of the
population to be vaccinated
state employees health care
workers those those kinds of
things there was no there was no
government mandated any kind to
require evidence of vaccination
to enter any public or private
space there was a little
confusion over that because we
did create an organ create a
what tronic vaccine record if
you got vaccinated as I did
mostly at at Safeway they'd send
me a digital record could show
that to anybody who you know
wanted to ask for it but is
there were people who would get
vaccinated pop up clinics in
those kinds of things wouldn't
have that so we created that
capability to get that the
digital record and there were a
number of private entities many
restaurants in the Portland area
of trailblazers timbers those
kinds of things who required
proof of vaccination but the and
I I think in every case that I'm
aware of the paper card would
work a digital digital record
would work
and so there wasn't any kind of
a of an organized mandate around
vaccine for vaccination Mr chair
thank you for for clearing that
up because that is something
that has been.
That's that was in there
probably was quite a bit of
confusion along along those
lines but you know I will say
Having traveled quite a bit
during the COVID and and going
states that that word is
shuttered you know scene the
other states were able to manage
and do I would say in my opinion
just as as good a job
having some some sense of
normalized what moving forward
we try to balance
some of those issues and
understand that that it's we
have to take everything into
account that was one of the most
frustrating things to me here
and I imagine was very similar
as it's been stated it was very
similar for in that there wasn't
a larger bigger picture type
approach to it
you know and and I can say this
is because the day after of
things shut down I put my boots
on and I went to work in my life
didn't change and so being one
of the essential workers
And and agriculture being
essential to to life in general
I guess see first hand that that
you could balance both we could
be safe we could be in the
workplace we could continue to
grow the people's food that the
oil patch was continuing to make
the fuel in that we just don't
make the same mistakes that we
can do it we can have the whole
we can send the kids to school
in a safe way we can go to work
we can work remotely if we can
because just from my personal
experience and and this this is
something that I think and and
I'm I'm sorry to interrupt you
but the sponsor of this country
needs to be on the floor in
about three minutes so we need
to get to about madam chair
maybe we should brought it first
because this is a very important
apartment one of the largest
budgets within the state.
With now we have with the
legislation that that we saw
that was used during the the
pandemic very large powers I
think it's very important that
we we
go through this and and give the
hearing that it deserves and and
senator I think the argument the
hearing it is there's a and and
I appreciate the points that you
are making them I'm not trying
to to cut you off on any policy
basically just that the pro time
is presiding on the floor in
about three minutes that's the
issue so if we could we could
just wrap it up I appreciate it
so we rolling it over managers
now I'd like to go to a vote
that if Senator Pirtle few could
could conclude your comments we
will move to about.
Mr chair so what I was gonna say
is it having experience all of
that and being in the business
that I'm in I can tell you the
unintended consequences have
been great and.
Working on a farm we we.
Cannibalized many a quick then
we continue to do that just
because of supply chain issues
because of states that that
closed down the way that they
did and I think we we really
need to be careful moving
forward doing those things
because it's a very well oiled
machine I mean it's to the point
now where we order at an
injector for tractor something
super simple and it takes six to
eight weeks to get here will my
hardest time Mr chair is is look
two weeks so I on this piece of
equipment tax on I do all these
things and I can't use it and
grow the food for the country
has been very very problematic
so I think we need to learn from
these take them into account for
the for the next time.
And my next my next question Mr
chair it in Mr Allen do you feel
you can be independent from the
governor and make decisions even
if they're not popular.
safe with the governor.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle at
each I think I've got
for the decade running state
agencies and experience bringing
difficult issues to to a
governor bringing them
information they can help may or
may not want to want to hear and
I'm I'm confident that in New
Mexico I'll be able to do the
same and be able to have candid
and direct conversations on one
issues that may come up.
And Mister chair and Mr Allen
just I know we've had a quite a
few shake ups within
different departments
secretaries leaving
you know I hope that you're able
to even disagree with some of
the policies you're making we
have to have some consistency
and I'm just afraid if you book
the system too much you may not
be around long so but I hope
you're able to do that I have I
have hope for you
but just just know that that's
always a possibility we see it
and it's been in the news for
for weeks now of all the
different secretaries having to
either step down or be asked to
leave or or what have have you
so I hope I hope very much that
you're able to have an
independent stance on whatever
issues do come up and you know
we also have a very large mental
health crisis within the state
of New Mexico and.
Where we work we work in Oregon
maybe this is the second time to
charm
but I'm I'm also Mr chair going
to have to vote against free
today just because want to get
another shot at at getting my
vote back for Dr Scrase.
In my area was a not a very
popular thing the the the
lockdowns for the extent that
they were early on we we
supported them but it was the
extensive nis and the over
reaching that I think drove a
lot of my area to a point of of
losing much faith in government
so for that reason Mr chair this
route I will be voting against
the confirmation today thank you
thank you senator flexibility
commitment.
Twenty.
And I because we have to get to
the floor I I have some
questions I was going to ask you
that I'd like to talk to you
about offline primarily about
the fact that I my understanding
is and this might not you said
that you ran a state psychiatric
hospital I understand is that
you and Ms like there's no word
to discharge folks to
and and that's that's a real
issue so I I'd be interested to
hear from you know offline what
DO H. plans things to do to to
help address that issue and I'll
just mention that I know of
despite some of the as Senator
Baca it described as heavy
handed the responses to comment
as relations here from Mr till
that you had the second lowest
rate of aspirin protection in
the in the nation so I think
that's a heavy hand that I
personally appreciate
with that
ahead of back to Mister chair
Mister vice chair of the.
Motion.
Senator yes I move for a do you
pass on the confirmation of his
nominees but I cannot by Senator
Google please.
This Mr vice chair Senator Baca
no Senator Baca no Senator Ingle
six Q. Senator Lopez yes Senator
Lopez yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris is excuse senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle no
Senator Pirtle no Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart has been
excuse Senator how to meal yes
Senator had a meal yes and
senator do yes thank you for the
kids to have sixty two now three
thank you for that revelation.
Please.
