Thank you to the fierce
champions and advocates who
helped bring SB 283 to the
floor, and, uh, I'm happy to
answer questions when we're
done.
Thank you, Amy, senators. Thank
you and so I'm just really
quickly gonna hit the high
points of this bill and pass it
to to Miss Kreka. So this bill
requires that the department,
uh, only use those funds to pay
for those unmet needs that Ms.
Herfeld was, was talking about,
um, but not to pay themselves
back for anything they are
already required to provide. It
also makes the department, the
representative pay of last
resort.
rather than a first resort, if
there is someone else available,
uh, to be that representative
payee, um, is appropriate that
they, they do that, not the
department. Uh, it requires
that, uh, kids get financial
literacy training, um, so that
when they do get these funds,
they are well prepared to, to
use them wisely,
and it also creates a reporting
requirements, uh, so that we as
a body know what is happening
with these benefits, um, and how
they're being
handled.
