Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna.
Here senator Morris.
Senator then yes.
Senator Neville
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pulp.
Senator Rodriguez.
Etcetera etcetera yes.
Senator Shendo.
Etcetera so
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You do not have a quorum Mister
president I'll send this to the
chamber we're lacking a quorum.
All senators to the chamber
please.
We're still needing a quorum.
Thank you I'd like to ask that
all the members of the body
please rise of those joining us
Really just do that today by
Senator Schmedes.
Federal agents and Spanish to
that today by Senator how to
meal in the salute to New Mexico
flag to be led today by Senator
of you who are engaged in public
service in a very important way
for the good of this whole
state.
At the church that I serve the
United church of Santa Fe United
church of Christ we begin
a moment and breathe in deeply
let us breathe in deeply the
gift of god's peace.
I just read in the gift of god's
hope.
The use of seniority the spirit
how should die I don't know why.
snow and rain in the thirsty
land.
We thank you for the blessing of
democracy.
We pray that those entrusted
with leadership and we ourselves
the governor and also with their
families the sacrifice of time
and energy they're giving for
this work to which they've been
called.
those who feel phone calls
maintain the building provide
food and welcome visitors.
How important to know that their
work is essential and valued.
In this land of in the sky
teaches the boundless most of
your beauty and love.
In this land of little rain
teachers to share the bless what
you have given us.
Finally in this land of many
cultures and colors give us your
infinite imagination.
And teaches to respect and value
So that in the words of the
great profit mica we might do
justice love mercy and walk
humbly with you and with one
another in the sacred land.
But I'm at the less than.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the Z.
assemble a perfect friendship
next order of business Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
good morning to you and good
morning to everyone unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection we're in that order
the Arnold is here and I just
think
Take a pause taking some deep
breaths
And just really appreciating
process has on all of us and our
families and we certainly have
them in our prayers and we thank
them each and every day for
letting us serve and we thank
students providing lunch at noon
it's a hot lunch it'll be in the
lounge so you're welcome to go
eat there or you could bring it
back here if you want but we're
not gonna serve it on the floor
that and introduce some guests
today also is Rio Arriba county
day the legislature in Santa
Hermio
is ready to rock for free Arriba
his home community that he care
so much about talks about all
the time.
The president's unanimous
consent to remove Senate
memorial fifty seven recognition
on today's calendar and Mr
president you can see we already
have guests up in the gallery
our expecting up to seventy
different gas for that memorial
memorial today on the floor Mr
president's I have a special
guest today if you could stand
up Angus McGinnis is a senior at
Santa Fe high school and as a
board including Angus who let me
know what's going on from a
student perspective I think it's
such a great thing to have our
young people serving on boards
science bowl he's passion about
science and loves working at Los
Alamos national lab researching
Jen not genomics so I think
Our thank you Mr president I
believe a Senator Pinto might
have some gas they may not be
here yet but when she does
they're here so.
excited to introduce to use some
guests of mine very special
people in my life my my mother
Kathy who's retired pharmacist
and my step dad bill who is a
if you could please welcome them
to the Senate they're enjoying
their time in Santa Fe getting
some good food and seeing the
side so you could welcome them
please.
cameras in the Senate chamber.
no objections cameras are to be
allowed in the Senate chamber
today.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Eunice consent to excuse Center
center Ivey Soto has a very
special guests so I would be
able to him Senator Ivey Soto
thank you very much Mr president
was present many of you remember
the very first and my second
In the third grade and they I
was very fortunate today because
they have no school today due to
parent teacher conferences and
please welcome a livia.
Thank you senator Ives of the.
the floor session in the Senate
lounge.
Thank you center PO for that
announcement.
Si no further announcements
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president so I think what we'll
we're waiting for the C. N. M.
folks and will jump in for that
so with that Mr present you'll
send Hotmail thank you were on
that order business announces
miscellaneous and we'll to
center how to meal for the
we're brown we're down and we're
low to the ground.
And so it's an amazing place for
B. that more I home county is a
place that I not only call home
but where the rocks in northern
the Rio Grande is like a ribbon
cutting through New Mexico where
the heart of northern New Mexico
is the birthplace of North India
culture and to my brothers and
sisters on the Public that he
of who we are as people for
agriculture and cultural
heritage and innovation four
counties in the contribution to
the national security through
For the integrity of its artists
for midwives include on that I
just for educational
achievements to northern New
Mexico college for teachers
New Mexicans for the identities
and culture that we share with
okay we get and something a lot
of pueblos and he could be a
nation for Land Grant Merced
domestic as where we believe
who are with me today which are
from Rio Arriba County I have
commissioner voice that's what I
less I have the county manager
Jerry would you Maestas deputy
so just ending in this Mr
president you're going to see
that I'm wearing so much today
the budget to be as an honorary
sheriff today the tag to me as a
volunteer firefighter today but
Thank you senator mir for that
memorial just before we do that
though I've been told that the
lunch has arrived in the lounge
so members can go grab a bite to
eat and we certainly appreciate
central New Mexico community
announcement.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president it gives me great
pleasure to announce a novel has
just been published by a really
based on loosely based on his
his life and his experiences as
a teacher in the north valley of
Albuquerque where he started out
there because they among his
so I would like to encourage
people to beg borrow steal or
buy it and then share the really
that wonderful story of a
Albuquerque thank you very much
Mr president thank you Senator
Lopez.
Any further announcements
Senators.
to center o'neill for Senate
memorial fifty seven run that
order business third reading of
legislation center mall fifty
seven and several nail present
the special memorial center
o'neill thank you Mr president
members I move that sent
to its final passage the reader
to read.
Senate memorial fifty seven a
memorial declaring March second
twenty twenty three recognition
of fallen firefighters day in
firefighters risk their lives
every day by protecting and
rescuing people and animals and
whereas firefighters are an
fires per year and whereas
firefighters complete extensive
training and education to
perform an abundance of society
whereas firefighters dedicate
themselves to keeping their
community safe and whereas
firefighters work tirelessly to
manage the horrific wildfires
that plagued New Mexico and
firefighters commonly experience
over exertion stress exhaustion
dehydration posttraumatic stress
disorder and other mental health
disease cancer hypertension and
heart attacks and whereas for
the greater good firefighters
and their families choose
adversity uncertainty and
firefighters fall leaving their
families behind.
And whereas it is important to
embrace the memory of those who
have made the ultimate sacrifice
as members of the state's fire
services to comfort family
be forgotten now therefore be it
resolved by the scent of the
state in Mexico that March
second twenty twenty three be
declared as recognition of
distribution to The New Mexico's
fire departments signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator Bill B.
president I move that sent
memorial fifty seventy put on
its final passage subject to
debate amendment or substitution
seeing no objection center on it
to explain the memorial thank
their lives to keeping our
community safe many of us can
never know what it means to
protect and serve.
Us in this chamber and for the
firefighting is a thankless job
firefighters are the leading
providers of emergency medical
services and have some of the
most hazardous and sensitive
toxins they are constantly
exposed to you know we'll get to
roll specific intelligence of
who's here today but I do want
to just acknowledge the families
silence as we remember their
sacrifice.
We can have everyone please
stand for a moment of silence.
Thank you Senator now thank you
Mr president members and now
I've really able to other
members that want to weigh in on
this memorial think that Senator
is we're in center more fifty
and thank you senator o'neill
for bringing this memorial for
it especially when we talk about
the relationships that are built
with in this specific career
Under lights as they go and
protect each other in a manner
of speaking to and if we are not
doing the justice the you know I
the some of these fatalities and
even to the families that if
we're.
More can be done please let us
know.
And that are.
talk about protecting not just
our families but all those
communities all those that could
be affected if a fire got out of
control and I think a lot of us
especially large communities and
a big big section of our state
and it's not just the people to
it's also low Lara livelihoods
you know in such an occurrence.
And it's always a well not
cultural site that you respect
fire it is something that gives
preventable in that sense
you know there are still the
victims within that and some
people are victims of a lifelong
debate and support for the
memorial that it would like to
introduce but that are here with
me and I will introduce you
after we have our discussion
thank you Mr president and
president I like to thank the
sponsors Center o'neill on this.
You know
We talk so much about the
service of our first responders
We all understand making that
sacrifice taking that oath.
To really protect your
community.
they go all around the state
even you know go out to other
places.
For fires natural disasters a
lot of times they're the first
on the scene.
to harm them later on you know
which could be a disease or
something from the chemicals are
the.
Substances that they are
exposing themselves to and they
Because they do that for us they
do that to protect the
community.
And so.
It's important we knowledge them
we have to do what we can do.
To support them but also their
families.
because there is going to be
some long term consequences do
respect their sacrifices and
what they do but at the end of
the day we have to do all that
we can do to support and protect
them as well thank you Mr
Lopez thank you Mr president I
stand in strong support of this
memorial and I really think the
sponsor for bringing it my
father was the founder and first
chief of the Los Chavis
really connected to his life
experiences and the things the
thank you know the things that
might have contributed to that
cancer
lives on the line but they do
though they do so in more ways
than one.
And so this bill is very
important to have us reflect on
that and I hope we have the are
serving us now and have served
us as firefighters
they deserve our enormous
respect and are are enormous
gave their lives to protect all
of us right every day they go
out and the make the commitment
to save New Mexicans and so I'm
thankful for them and us that
volunteer firefighters from the
to meet the fire department they
came in honor of recognition of
fallen firefighters day and with
them is our matriarch Mrs Irene
sponsor for bringing this
forward thank you Mr president
thank you center how to mail we
do have further discussion we
have Senator Gallegos.
had a cousin that jumped into
force fires I had some who were
volunteers and even a fire
chief.
all in all the trucks that are
happening but the one time that
I think that I really really
appreciate them is when they
come to our homes when they come
to do their job to protect us
their families have that they've
given selfless sacrifice for
their communities our state in
our nation I stand in in
president I really want to thank
senator o'neill for his passion
with everything he does but I
know that this is very important
him any did a wonderful job of
introducing us to exactly why
about to happen to them and so I
think we should just be ever so
grateful we are working very
hard in my area Mr president we
have the southwest Minnesota
which is one of the fastest
growing parts of New Mexico
street I think I see some
nodding over there from so my
folks friends over at C. N. and
they know exactly where that is
and we you know kind of a public
safety desert or island out
there and so in a lot of ways
this facility is going to be
keep themselves safe as well as
keeping our community safe so I
just want to stand in support
and thank them for the work they
do in town we will bring that
fire station online it's the
first thing that's going to go
into that public safety center
Si no further discussion will
have Center o'neill close then
we'll introduce the guests who
are here with us today Center
o'neill thank you Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
thanks for seeing no objection.
By a vote of forty three in the
affirmative on the negative
Center more fifty seven
recognition of fallen
southern pueblos agencies of the
BA for displaying their fire
trucks in front of the west and
east entrances of the capital
the memory of all these fallen
fallen fighters organization if
if those up in the gallery can
stand when we talk about your
organization center for the
funds for tribal members of the
Rhea county and finally for all
the family and friends of New
Mexico fallen firefighters
members can we stand and and
give them a welcome of clause
An ideal now to Senator Pinto
Senator Shannon Pinto thank you
thank you Mr president and the
grandfather's that served with
the Navajo Nation wild fire
department but I never had the
chance to thank them so I'm glad
you are here today they can
snowy weather and thank god for
that so we could have a very.
So we don't have a wildfire
season like we did in the past
ranting as who was the squad
fire department fire management
fort defiance Arizona and those
with us today hi Mr Robert
Wagner engine module lead Navajo
Hispanic and these gentlemen all
worked for the southern pueblos
agency branch of wildfire
management and we have Darryl
Martinez regional forester D. I.
Thank Senator Pinto.
Mr president so we're going to
go to Senator Hickey for their
certificate but just before we
do plan today on the floor for
third reading is items one
M. certificate and I will just
say before I do that that the
green Chile stew in the lounge
delicious of COVID site is there
for all of us ago tried out
introduce some the board members
and the president of C. N. M.
but first I I want to say that
CNN has you know just been
incredible in New Mexico
number one among eight hundred
and thirty five public two year
colleges for the number of
associate degrees and
certificates awarded to native
incorruptible track record.
C. N. M. has been changing lines
building the community building
our future together I was a very
programs that do holds a some of
the keys to the future of the
state and the training of the
workforce that this state needs
to capitalize on all of its
stand and that Chavez E. della
Cruz Nancy Baca.
For junior Trujillo.
And president Tracy R. Hartzler
and colleagues if you could
majority floor leader Peter
Wirth will take us to the next
order of business.
Thank you Mr president so we're
president so Center pretty
you're on deck you just can't
with consent we know that our
business third reading of
legislation and I yield to
Senator Padilla for item number
one Senate finance committee
you very much Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions for placing Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty.
that and the chamber that we do
have an amendment that I am
bringing on all talk about that
here momentarily the cyber
security I think we all know has
begun to creep into every
within state government etcetera
and so as a result we have come
to find out Mr president that
we're in a situation where about
a hundred and seventy five
either departments are state
goals that that's for cyber
security to protect us from that
kind of stuff we do need to have
some uniformity and some minimum
standards that's essentially
what the legislation does it
security officer and allows that
team to get busy and do their
work set those minimum standards
set New Mexico up for success
that way so we're not asking
even for any additional dollars
agencies to help make this work
possible for the state of New
Mexico.
And with that Mr president I do
want to say that we got some
excellent feedback while we were
in the finance committee and
Council the legislation does one
of the tasks of the Advisory
Council is to advise on the
hiring of the chief information
security officer we
the amendment what it does all
move a Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate finance
committee says two percent of
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty and I can
explain it whenever you're ready
committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty amendment
sponsored by senator Michael
Padilla.
Center for their native explain
amendment thank you very much
for that I move Senate floor
association of counties to
appoint those three members that
are established in the act for
the advisory commission or
council and then also the second
piece is to have the chair of
the board of directors of the
of cybersecurity the way we have
a design and allows for greater
autonomy and hiring firing at
center of the chief information
security officer that's all the
amendment US.
close on the amendment thank you
very much Mr president I move
Senate floor amendment one to
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
The eyes have it senator member
number one has been adopted the
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty we are back on
the bill center for the thank
essentially if you're gonna do
tranny transaction whatsoever
with state government you will
have to adhere to these minimum
standards in the legislation we
also have for the New Mexico
significantly higher than ours
and so we exempted them from the
legislation so they can continue
to meet the requirements that
they have to meet at the federal
level and that's essentially
what the part of the legislation
you very much Mr president on
the move that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty as
amended do now pass and ask
All Senators eating green Chile
stew we are voting.
Mr present us and consent to
just you senator Ortiz Pino
until he returns the chambers of
the purposes of a call thank you
senator for the.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
By a vote of twenty two in the
affirmative nine in the negative
next item it's item number two.
Senate bill two forty six as
amended all yell to Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much miss
present was present us as
because some of the some of the
amendment or substitution no
objections Senator Ivy Soto to
explain thank you very much miss
president was present couple
years ago we did the revise
uniform law on material acts is
take a on a class before they
they activate their automatic
status as well as having to file
their their sealed with
and then making sure that we're
consistent throughout in terms
of when we make a reference to
no republics noted notarial
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
Centers we're debating.
I see no debate Senator Ivey
Soto to close on the bill thank
And I ask that the unanimous
consent that the record reflect
that the rules been called and
all those present voted in the
majority except for those voting
in the negative slide show fans
Senators tier seats where
By a vote of thirty two in the
Fuhrman is there on the negative
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
reminder to the presenters
sponsors of the bills we have
been improvising a little too
much with the scripts please use
the scripts to ensure that we're
doing as a quorum with the
Senate.
the rules be suspended the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate bill three ninety
one on final passage have been
taken and that the bill is now
subject to debate amendment or
board is responsible for
determining the priority and
allocation spending of water on
water projects around the state
this year they'll be responsible
for deciding the fate and
sixteen members.
It's important recognize of
those sixteen members seven of
them are agency appointees of
the governor there either
cabinet secretaries or agent
agency had seven of the sixteen
trust board the goal of this
bill is to bring the legislature
into the process a dialogue of
how we spend money on water and
so the bill would at change the
legislature and the governor on
matters of water and to give us
a seat at the table so we would
have six of the fifteen right
now we have none Mr president
this also make some changes with
pueblos the agricultural
communities all water and so
districts and others this is a
broad perspective on water that
gets just be on who is the
governor at any given time or
I see no debate Senator want
this to because this president
move the Senate bill three
ninety one do now pass I ask
seats where voting.
All Senators chair seats.
If you wish to vote now.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative during the negative
Senate bill three ninety one as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator mantas.
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president colleagues this is a
bill with Senator Diamond and I
to of sorry I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the rules
be suspended the record show
that all actions for placing
you Senator I wanna feel explain
seeing no objection if you
explain that to build as thank
you Mr president college this is
a a bill that I worked on we
worked on with the department of
environment and tourism
more resources going to our
communities for these purposes
with that happy to answer any
questions Senators we're
debate colleagues I appreciate
that and now I move that sent
ability to slice then to do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the record show
the role as been called all
those present but in the
By a vote of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
Senate bill one eighty two is
twice amended has passed the
Senate Senator Steinborn thank
you Mr president going on to the
next item that's going to be
let's.
We'll get some more ice cream
and that way a look this
direction.
No I I wanted to ask the sponsor
we're gonna make those trash
bags really I used to have
litter control trash bags that
Senator Steinborn for present
and I doubt it I think that the
anti donation thank you.
We are the next item that's
gonna be is item number five
Senate bill to twenty two as
amended Senator Pirtle.
amended on final passage is been
take is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution seeing
no objection Senator Pirtle to
explain the bill thank you Mr
president Senate bill two twenty
required all the records to be
digitized this will ensure that
while those records are being
copied that we due to an
amendment in Judiciary that will
at least have a copy of those in
renovating Senate bill to twenty
two as amended anyone wishing to
debate.
I see no debate Senator Pirtle
except for those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senators we're voting all
senators here suits.
By a vote of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
Senate bill to twenty two as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president finally
amended with emergency clause
and I yield to Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president I just an
absent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
clause on final passage has been
taken that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
seeing no objection Senator
Shendo explain the bill.
ministering of our our tax
collection as well as
ministration and so it's it's
pretty self explanatory it's a
simple bill.
I know stand for SB for since
substitution debate I'm I'm
ready for there's any questions.
Senator debating.
deal yes I know you miss
president sponsor will you
please explain the amendment
some page three of the bill.
Any further debate centers.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president with the
president Senator yes this is
the little clean up fix up bill
to so that we are efficiently
administrator in our tax
programs collections as well as
all the things we do with an TRD
decrease in the tax revenues.
There might be a little bit in
section ninety with the cannabis
But is Mr president senator
Shendo but the net effect is not
much of a hit on the budget
practically zero yes.
Thank you thank you Mr president
Any further debate senators.
Senator Ingle.
Representative would Senator
Shendo yield center send a
detailed.
Shendo I heard this bill
described in a rather unique
way.
That this was a.
This resembled a small bump.
German to Senate finance suicide
a bump on a pickle.
Well
Say no further debate.
Senator Shendo to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate finance
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
records show the rules then call
in and all those present voting
affirmative examples ability in
the negative bushel hands and
the Shendo if you can please
to center for the.
I thank you Mr president just
consent to skew Senator Vontaze
and souls until they return the
change to the chamber's are for
the purpose of the call no
objections session of you can
stay in state the the title once
One forty seven as amended with
an emergency clause thank you
centers before we take the vote
I yield to Senator Brandt.
As I like to excuse our normal
course of the first call and I
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty five the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
Senate finance committee so it's
two percent tax business
transportation committees of the
two percent of the one forty
seven as amended has passed with
program schools etcetera have
been could entail thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
have to explain the bill thank
you Mr president so Senate bill
two seventy is an appropriation
bill for two hundred thousand
dollars for schools wishing to
this provides the a lot of
experience with research and
presentation and they present
bill two seventy and we're
Senators share.
Thank you Mr president so
actually I think the the program
itself is good idea of but I am
concerned about what is history
what what's happened no way
any one person or probably
anyone institution can know what
happened in in China in
seventeen seventy six versus
wanted to give a history lesson
so that I could get go to this
this program.
So as you know Mr president I'm
just going to start off with the
declaration of independence just
one phrase in there which which
creator with certain inalienable
rights among these are life
liberty and the pursuit of
happiness I would like to point
out that we're endowed by our
creator not by the governor
president speaker of the house.
Well as we know there are also
women in the country at the time
and still are.
But we also know that there were
slaves in the country.
And so this created some kind of
And so this was a this was a
problem of course the slaves
have been here for a long long
time before this was written
about two hundred years or so.
Constitution by the way wasn't
supposed to be re written as a
constitution it was supposed to
fix the articles of
thought of themselves as
independent.
And that the federal government
would just be a little bit out
there yes national defense and
it was really set up in the in a
So it kind of brought us
together like that.
But slavery was still an issue.
And so the first thing that was
proposed as the proposed the
But certainly we have two
senators that represent New
Mexico which is population wise
significantly smaller than
California.
The larger population states
like New York and Massachusetts
and Pennsylvania did not want
the small population states like
South Carolina to have the same.
Legislature were each state had
equal representation in the
Senate.
But proportional representation
in the house.
Are but that would be good
Well that became a contention
because now all of a sudden the
slave states had more power than
the free states in the north.
And that was unacceptable.
weeks in hot conditions in small
print from provide rooms where
they closed the windows and we
could hear what was going on or
see what was going on.
And T.
it wasn't really about the
slaves it was how do you get
representation how do you
balance that.
free states.
And the real problem here Mr
president was if we didn't
figure out how to solve this.
France fights the Italians
everyone's while the Spanish
fight the Dutch every once in a
while and in in the fear was
that we would be the same way
that all of a sudden
Pennsylvania would be at war
So we're not fighting with each
other.
Like they do in Europe.
For most the rest of the world.
How we solve that.
slaves but between the states so
this three fifths wasn't that
blacks were three fifths human
it was how do we keep the slave
In the later on in the eighteen
twenty we ended but in our
constitution ended the
out instead of just have this
weird fight right then is a
brand new nation they could
barely hold its own anyway.
Could just barely stayed
Decided to attack us again in
war of eighteen twelve.
And I know not only we're here
for the for my explanation of
the national anthem the sparks
could save the hireling and
slave from the terror of flight
from the gloom of the grave and
so.
Because we get ourselves all
I say not true.
I see not true.
The British troops that came to
America to sees us as a colony
The Americans were fighting for
home and country.
Home in country.
Show leave us no more.
Because we can defeat the
hireling and slave so who is the
Any skin in the game here
they're just they're just rate
they don't care who are fighting
for their hirelings and who are
the slaves conscripts.
Conscripts are slaves.
Hirelings are mercenaries
conscripts are slaves and in
fact that was a common insult
for much of many of the European
See also though I didn't have
volunteer armies today we have a
volunteer military.
We are not slaves.
But at the time.
fighting for home and family and
country beat.
The conscripts and the
mercenaries.
terrible on civil war.
And after the battle of
Gettysburg most of you've heard
this after the battle of
Gettysburg.
President Lincoln.
ago our forefathers four score
and seven years ago our fathers
brought forth on this continent
a new nation conceived in
liberty and dedicated to the
proposition that all men are
created equal.
and so dedicated can long
endure.
We're met on a great battlefield
of that war we have come to
dedicate a portion of that field
as a final resting place for
those.
But in a larger sense we cannot
dedicate we cannot consecrate we
cannot hallow this ground the
brave men living and dead who
struggled here have consecrated
never forget what they did here.
It is for us the living rather
to be dedicated here to the
unfinished work.
Which they who fought here have
Devotion to that cause for which
they gave the last full measure
of devotion that we here highly
resolve that these dead shall
It's interesting Mr president
that in American history.
American history only.
But never has a nation stood.
To free their to free slaves in
their own country except here.
twenty thousand soldiers were
killed six hundred and twenty
thousand soldiers Americans
whether they were from the north
to the south died.
But it's also estimated that
somewhere between twenty and
forty thousand other people
died.
Mostly southerners.
So let's just rounded off to six
hundred and fifty thousand
Americans died in this on civil
war.
We're free white men killed
other free white men in order to
Inaugurated.
I'm not going to read his whole
second inaugural speech but I'm
gonna read this part here.
Fondly do we hope fervently do
fifty years of on route
unrequited toil shall be sunk.
And until every drop of blood
drawn by the lash shall be paid
righteous altogether.
And then he ended with malice
toward none with charity for all
with firmness in the right as
going to.
But Lincoln what really that
good guy.
He actually talked about moving
blacks to a colony to a colony
In yes in fact those
conversations did happen.
They happened before the war
ended.
President Lincoln was trying to
And that did happen.
But Martin Luther king said
this.
Are truly great presidents.
Is translations were facts.
His hesitancy had not stayed his
To see if this was possible he
ultimately did not pursue that.
And I can say that in this very
Because it doesn't make sense
because it's not right.
I know that there's a lot of
history out there and I know
that somebody out there is is
already writing about the evils
of America because well I don't
the right let us strive to
finish the work.
To bind up the wounds of the
nation.
If Mister president if that's
How this nation was built with
all of its bumps and bruises but
with all of its glory glory as
well.
It's both.
and we have glorious bright
shining stars.
I want history taught.
to show the glory.
And the brightness.
But only the negative point.
You know it's interesting Mr
presented to me I knew about
Lincoln's efforts to move it
least the thoughts to move
blacks to colonies.
according to them is all
negative history.
We have been a great force for
good in the world as a nation Mr
against against our god
absolutely we have.
But all in all America is a
great place.
America didn't.
We did not.
Turn Europe into a colony we did
nineteen forty five.
Nothing stopping us from doing
that.
Except for the goodness of
America is herself.
But America herself.
Was good.
What about the atomic bomb with
that evil.
Maybe.
Or on mainland Japan.
Our own.
Statistics are only looking at
the way that the Japanese had
at that point estimated that
they would have had another five
hundred thousand casualties.
Maybe it's the right thing.
Maybe it's the right thing.
So two million Americans and
two hundred thousand Japanese
did die.
You know the Tomek bombs used
once more in war Mr president
most people don't know that.
And he did not want World War
three here was a man who who was
the supreme commander of the
He literally sent a message to
China.
It said you have until Thursday.
To stop.
The Chinese stopped Thursday at
noon.
That was how the nuclear weapon
was which used for good the war
ended.
America.
Isn't perfect how can a nation
of unprepared imperfect people
be have be a perfect nation.
Not continue to pick at the
scabs.
If that is the national history
that we're talking about.
I'm all in favor.
Understanding the true history
understanding what happened.
But history is huge we can't
wrap our mind around all of it.
Thank you Mr president I think
my.
Colleagues are share for him is
great history lesson and maybe
if my history teachers have been
And fifty years or a hundred
years.
history gonna write about this
world at this time.
And I appreciate my colleague
bringing up.
The slavery that we saw.
any other time in world history.
And yet we ignore it.
We all like our cell phones.
Our mind in China.
By people that are held in
slavery.
In fact if you want to look at
slavery all you have to do is
look.
Place no big deal.
Yet.
Third sex slaves are there put
in into people's homes to.
Clean their homes are to do
their dishes are cooked their
meals.
So it's really bad it's really
easy to look back in the past
and blame our forefathers and
blame our predecessors.
Around our world.
We all continue to buy our
things from China.
We'll continue to wear Nike
That are all.
Maybe through slave labor.
It may not be happening in
manufacturing here in our
country.
What's happening in horrible
ways in our country.
For some perverted.
Well I can't use the word I'd
like to but let's just.
Say a whole.
Twenty thirty forty years down
the road.
Those that are participating in
the national history day don't
For allowing the cartels.
Do not just symbolically enslave
people in drugs they're doing
that to but to literally in
We do have further debate we
have center gave us.
This provision would the sponsor
hill for a couple questions
members on our side on on just
history Mr president center I I
actually like your bill I think
national day of.
Mr president etcetera etcetera
so Mister president and senator
thank you for the question so it
there's an annual theme in the
history people places ideas and
students are encouraged to
select a topic in history where
frontier has been crossed to
because once that frontiers
of New Mexico Mr president.
Senator okay this this presents
centers that I thank you for
that that actually helps me out
so in twenty thirteen when I
before the Catholic Church would
clear lands all the way up to
Rio Grande ended up in Colorado
but along the way they would
Clear ways just to to build a
in the whole then we look at all
the negatives all that we've
seen recently were they're
tearing down all confused the
Bernalillo county and I'm trying
to think you know to me that's
not the message I would want as
a state for our nation to
understand so I'm grateful that
came in my family
had properties that had nineteen
sixty four date on the second
addition to our house and our
recently sold a couple years ago
I think there's a lot of good
that happened as the Spaniards
came into New Mexico I think you
can follow their tracks all the
way across the state and I take
your your bill that that they
could choose on the frontiers
finally I would just say that I
know every day we do the salute
to the state New Mexico disease
cultures different heritages we
blend them together to be our
state so I appreciate there
again that you would have this
in there because I think as we
sees the value in this what that
all yield thank you.
Thank you senator goes any
further debate senators.
Senator po.
will say is.
You know.
We should be held accountable in
history.
Even what we do in this room I
hope we are.
I'm just happy I live in the
state we can have these
discussions we can talk about
history we can talk about it in
context.
So we don't hide from.
Thank you Mr president we do
have further debate we have
centers committee members
present I just want to thank the
sponsor bill I don't know about
currently reading from a formal
I'm Seckel story the world.
And the kids love it they just
do and so I'm I just want to
thank you and I I think you know
little young to be writing stuff
like that but you know it when
they're little older were I'm
gonna remember remember this and
any my children that I think
want to take a bigger interest
awareness to this program thank
you Mr thanks committee.
Si no further debate.
Senator could I have a close on
I ask unanimous consent to the
Senate but the record show that
the role has been called in all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
By a vote of thirty four the
Fuhrman is there on the native
Senate bill two seventy national
The vote count has been thirty
three affirmative zero the
negative Senate bill two seventy
has passed the Senate Center
Kaname Mexico thank you Mr
president thank you members of
the Senate.
in that order business messages
on the house the reader to read
the message Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one seventy three
concurrent resolution one and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk journal so the message
reports we're in that order
business committee reports
before we go to the committee
reports again just a reminder to
all the committee chairs and
vice chairs please have your
scripts available.
The reader to read.
consideration and report same of
recommendations that it do
passed as amended respectfully
submitted senator George when
you also chairman Senator Woods
no objections the reader to
read.
Senate bill three twenty nine to
pass.
Senate bill four seventy four do
pass as amended.
committee report centers we have
a motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those propose name the eyes have
it the committee port has been
consideration reports say with a
recommendation that it do not
pass but that **** Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty nine do
act on them with one motion but
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually no
objection the retreat Senate
bill four zero four do not pass
Joseph serve on this chairman
Senator mantas would ups
committee reports centers we do
have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye
This present your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
sixteen has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
acted upon individually.
See no objections the reader to
Senate bill of four oh nine do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
finance committee.
Senate bill for twenty three do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill four fifty four do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill four sixty seven do
House bill seven as amended do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
chairman.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I move the
adoption of the committee report
centers we have a motion to
adopt the committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
Senator Majority Leader Peter
Wirth thanks to the next order
of business thank you Mr
president Ms consent we go that
our business introduction of
legislation run that order
business introduction
House concurrent resolution one
introduced by Representative
McQueen and Scott a concurrent
resolution amending the joint
rules of the house and Senate
resolution one house concurrent
resolution one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate rules committee
that's house concurrent Center
rural housing current resolution
to motor vehicles altering the
restrictions on sun screening
materials used on motor vehicle
windshields to align with
federal law house bill two
House Bill two oh nine
introduced by representatives or
taz Armstrong and their non
this.
An act relating to student loans
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee that's
house bill two nine.
House Judiciary Committee
pretrial statement or pre trial
interview providing for the
admissibility of a child
forensic interview in certain
circumstances amending repealing
ended acting sections of the
substitute for House Bill one
seventy three having been read
twice by title is referred to
Senate Judiciary Committee
that's House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty four and act relating to
crime amending the elements of
shoplifting creating the crime
of aggravated shoplifting
creating the crime of organized
For house bill two thirty four
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
Judiciary Committee thence
Senate finance committee that's
House Judiciary Committee
president Ms consent we go back
to that order business messages
from the house or on that order
business message from the house
the reader will read Mr
president I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the house has
amended by the house.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirteen as amended by the house
house bill two forty as amended
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
Mr president Senator share.
That were amended in the house
and Senate back for concurrence.
Just thinking.
No.
When those are concerned these
are all House Bill Senator.
Senator like that to be re read.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
committee reports
that was read out of finance for
house bill one twenty six and it
was read out as a Senate bill
and so the journal showed it is
six Senator Peter Wirth you have
the title that bill.
Scratch it's the graduation
graduation requirements.
will be in at eleven o'clock
tomorrow so now is the time for
committee chairs and for any
other announcements senators so
we're in that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Senator.
and I refer you to the house
Senate basketball game seven
o'clock Thursday okay no
coach coach soules has been
speedy the bookie has us as five
point underdogs.
And and I was worried I've I've
been worried because we don't
you know I didn't think we had
realize that I Senator Hermio
not only as a cheerleader but he
played basketball for coach
Lenny Roy ball it is high school
but but we got mow my S. this as
our point guard we've got
schools underneath we got Joshua
the man Sanchez
And turtle deal yeah that guy
yes so so anyway just note that
we're game is going to happen
it's a wonderful charity event
like because a certain what is
echo whatever happened a few
years with the call of the
Senate I please use your head
with us scheduling a ride okay
Mister present we've got depth
we I'd we have more depth than I
thought and so of course they
don't know what to do with our
immediate defense you know which
like awesome so thank you so
much.
Thank you for that as a senator
nail this president Senator Ivey
Soto will center o'neill yield
Senate o'neill deals.
Senator.
I I don't understand your
question thank you for the love
of the ad by the way and we're
gonna be coached by a guy the
is the house Senator no I Mr
president New Mexico state but
Mr president does New Mexico
state have a basketball team
right now.
We do have further debate we
have center Shendo.
No debate just announcing
Senator go ahead.
a Centers souls.
Thank you Mr president first
comment about the basketball
game we have been playing in the
morning some and senator Sanchez
is becoming quite adept
plays this morning and I often
if you watch the game in the
past I get fouled a lot and this
morning just one report to you
you Mr president that I made let
to.
Two out Rocke shots at the the
freight from the free throw
line.
Thank you senator sells me the
Senate session that you are
what's the percentage of
Senate rules committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at
eight thirty in room three
twenty one we're gonna be doing
confirmations of the
reconfirmation of the secretary
rules committee procedures on
the what's happening page thank
you senator Hicks sentiment us.
Thank you Mr president I don't
have a what's happening page
gonna wrap up house bill two
over the weekend.
And so we're gonna be tightening
down Senate finance watching
bills that need to come out and
share so well he's on the Mike
I'm gonna grab his bag Jr of
jerking share with everybody
that we learn how to share not
just the ordered over there and
in Senate tax.
meet after of the caucus fifty
minutes after the caucus.
Thank you senator Senator souls
thank you Mr president that
please education pay attention
education will not start till
This present I need to announce
the Republicans will not be
having.
A caucus.
That will not be having a caucus
after the floor Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president I'd like
to move that we remove the
committee referral to rules for
president Senate bill three
seventy three relating to
families and acting the office
of child advocate the current
referrals or to rules then
judiciary and the Senate finance
going next and I believe it's
all right with them as well.
Senator is that a unanimous
consent request Mr president I
ask unanimous consent please.
Seeing no objection.
think that is been very cordial
the decorum has been.
Extremely well respected and I
think members of both sides I
want to thank all the staff for
the work that they continue to
that and I yield to senator
Peter Wirth to close this out
thank you Mr president thank you
for the way you run this chamber
and sets the tone that you set
which of course is actually
morning I see no objections the
