Thank you, Madam Chair and good
morning, we're gonna go to the
first item on the agenda as a
subcommittee is saying Mr. Lance
as a reappointment to eastern
New Mexico University's Board of
Regents. I want to welcome my
good friend and your sponsor,
Senator Woods. Good morning,
Senator Woods. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman.
Today, uh, I have the honor of
presenting to you a Mr. Lyn
Paul, who was a little bit of
his
History.
Uh, he was employed with Curry
County for the last 26.5 years.
17 of those years he served as a
county manager.
He has kept the county strong
financially and focused on
improving infrastructure,
service, and quality of life.
received a designation as a
credential manager through the
International City County
Management Association in 2017
and 2021, he completed the
National Association of
Counties, I performance
leadership academy.
While working at full time in
Curry County, Mr. Paul earned an
associate's degree in business
administration with honors.
And a master's degree in
business administration while
majoring.
And human resource management
with he started out serving as a
Melrose City Council.
And the mayor of Melrose being
the youngest mayor in the state
of Mexico at the time.
His passionate about making our
county and our state a better
place by serving several local
and state boards.
Mr. Powell has served on the
board of regents for NM.
You for the past 6 years in the
university has made great
strides, such as
Hiring and negotiating the
contract with the best
university chancellor and
president in the state.
Mr. James Johnson.
They also approved zero tuition
increases in the fees for the
last 5 years. Think about that a
minute.
Mr. Paul has served on the audit
and the finance committee in the
past 6 years and EMU and a
strong financial health reserves
are healthy, adequate for
current operations while
allowing the necessary
investments and ongoing
activities, revenues continue to
grow due to continued
Enrollment growth and state
support, the most recent audit
continues to be a trend of
unqualified or clean audits.
Bo developed a new master of
social work degree that is
needed in our area in our state.
This is also instrumental in to
serve the regional behavior
health facility that is being
construction and collaboration
with 5 counties.
In 3 cities in eastern New
Mexico.
Mr. Chair, I can go on and on. I
have more stuff to say, but I'd
like to give Mr. Paul a chance
to say something, so with that,
I will allow him to say, and
sure, I would like for him to
introduce his family.
Who are in the audience today.
Very good. Good morning. Good
morning. Um,
Madam Chair, Chairman, committee
members.
I'd like to first introduce my
family. I have my wife here. We
just uh
Celebrated our 15th wedding
anniversary chrissa pile.
And I have my two daughters,
Lakin, who was in the 6th grade.
And my youngest daughter Lexi,
that's in the 4th grade.
It has been an honor serving the
past 6 years as a regent for
Eastern New Mexico University
that I graduated from 20 years
ago.
Um,
as Senator Woods mentioned with
my bachelor's degree in human
resource management.
I have again, over 26 years of
county and municipal government
experience.
And I'd like to continue serving
as a regent for Eastern. During
the past 6 years, we've
accomplished a lot. A lot of
those items senators would have
mentioned, but a few others I
would like to note.
NMU
It's up for the past 3 years in
our enrollment numbers. We have
5,0378 students.
Undergraduates were up 3.7%
graduates were at 9.6%.
And this spring semester, we
have the most graduate students
enrolled ever at Eastern.
Eastern has done all of this.
Um, and I like to say we do
more.
With less.
And I'm proud of what we've
accomplished.
Again, I'm also the local
region. So for the past 6 years,
I've been the local resident
that has bridged the community
with ENMU trying to attend as
much of the NMU events as
possible, engaging with the
students, faculty and staff.
In closing, again, I would
appreciate the support and
serving another 6 years.
And I'll stand for any
questions.
Thank you so much for that, we
do have a few people who signed
up and support who are going to
speak on your behalf, and I'm
gonna give them a couple of
minutes and I'm gonna ask them
to come forward, starting with
James Johnson, the ENMU
Chancellor President, followed
by Tony Major, the EMU vice
president for administration and
finance, who's also the system
chief financial officer, and Joy
Esperson, who's the New Mexico
County's executive director, and
although I've called you up by
name, if you can restate your
name for the record, good
morning.
Good morning, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is James Johnson. I have
the honor of serving as
Chancellor of the Eastern New
Mexico University system, and I
stand in support of the
reappointment of Regent Pyle. He
brings years of leadership and
management experience to our
board, as he stated, he's he's
local, he understands and
recognizes both the
opportunities and the
challenges, not only of ENMU but
of our region and has been a
great partner with me and taking
advantage of those opportunities
continuing to grow.
the university, the system, and
being a good community partner
and uh growing the economy and
and lastly is our mission
providing access and opportunity
for higher education to as many
students as we can, so it is uh
my distinct pleasure to again,
support the reappointment of
Regent Pyle. Thank you. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
again, my name is Tony Major,
I'm the vice president for
administration and finance and
chief financial officer for
eastern New Mexico University. I
have worked with uh Regent Pyle
for over 5 years at Eastern.
He's on our audit and finance
committee, as was mentioned,
many of the things I was gonna
say have already been been said,
but we see him at many of our
activities. He has very
pertinent questions. He, he
keeps me on my toes, which I I
appreciate and I think one of
the
It really important things that
he does is is he knows the role
of a regent and and knows when
to let, let, let us handle the
operational things and.
And ask, ask some very good
questions and follow up. I can,
I fully support this
reappointment.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Joya Sparson. I'm the
executive director for New
Mexico counties. I am honored to
say I have worked with Lance for
almost 22 years. I believe he is
currently our longest serving
county manager, and in that
context, he is relied on heavily
by other county managers for
expertise. They want to know
about how things work, and Lance
is always willing and helpful to
each and every one of them. One
of the things you'll see from
Lance's resume is he's one of
those individuals who has public
service in his blood.
I don't know anybody else who's
both the county manager and
decides to run for mayor at the
same time. Um, but you'll see
from the committees he served on
that he's engaged not only in
his local community, but he is
also looking at serving
statewide as well as nationally.
His engagement in the ICMA as
well as NACO. He's involved in
steering committees. He is an on
the spot guy, and if that wasn't
enough in the daily task, he's
one of those individuals who
reaches out regularly with great
and innovative ideas. So he's
constantly looking
For ways to streamline and fix
things, and those are some of
the things I truly value about
lambs. One of the most important
roles he serves for us is he has
been the chair of our New Mexico
County Insurance Authority since
2020. This is a very serious,
very complex role, and he serves
as chair in a way that really
upholds the different integrity
that we expect to see from our
counties and really tough
decision making on litigation.
So with that, we would certainly
request your support. Thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
Now, Mr. Pyle, there were 3
others who are who.
Signed up to show support, but
who are not going to speak and
that Sean Powell, the EMU
Roswell president, Debbie
Zamora, the Clover City
commissioner, and they'll cover,
a retiree healthcare authority
executive director, and now when
asked by a show of hands how
many in the committee room are
in favor of this reappointment.
Wow.
19, including your daughters.
Any via Zoom who are in favor of
the reappointment.
I'm gonna ask the committee now,
any in opposition of the
reappointment?
No, what about in zoom on Zoom?
ign an I will then go to members
of the committee.
Unlock.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam
Chair.
Congratulations, Lance.
Good to see you, my friend.
Um
Lance, I have known you now for
almost 8 years, uh, when I
served on the uh.
Multi-line board that New Mexico
counties.
And um
I just got a few questions for
you. First of all, I want to say
that you have a resume of
service. You graduate from high
school in '99 and.
decided to run for city
councilor right after you
graduate from high school.
Certainly not on my mind after
high school, but
Um, that just shows you, uh,
kind of a weird guy, and I like
that about you.
I know you did a phenomenal job
at city councilor and as mayor.
Um
You have greyhound DNA in you,
your wife is a graduate of
Eastern, she's getting her
master's as well, so.
Pretty impressive, and you're
currently a region. I just want
to ask you a couple of
questions. I really appreciate
you, um, um.
Talking about
Uh eastern cause it's in our
rural communities and enrollment
is growing.
Because I firmly believe in
Portalis that, uh, Eastern is,
is.
A major economic, uh, lifeline
to the town, and when it's
growing, that's great fortalis.
But, um, tell me what role, if
any?
Does a region have when it comes
to economic development between
the community and the and the
school, the university.
Um, Madam Chair, Chairman, um.
Senator Block committee members.
I think it has a lot to do with
economic development within the
community.
Um, you need to be able to
Work with the community, make
sure you're providing the
degrees and the talent that's
needed within those communities.
You also, one of the things I'm
proud of with Eastern is our
internship opportunities that
we're looking at. And I think we
can even grow and expand more on
the internships, and when
students are getting closer to
graduating, try to keep them
within the state of New Mexico,
eastern New Mexico, within the
community.
Um, but no, I think it plays a
vital role, and you'll see that
as what Senator Woods mentioned
on the regional Behavioral
Health facility.
We knew we needed to have a, uh,
the workforce to support that.
And Eastern stood up masters of
social work degree that we
started offering that the fall
of 2024. And I think that's also
addressing an economic
opportunity and a need within
the community.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Pyle.
Um, where, where do you see or
where would you like to see
eastern in 5 or 10 years from
now.
In 5 to 10 years, Eastern, as I
mentioned earlier, we do a lot.
With less. And we have
infrastructure on campus that
was there when Easter and
First open.
And I want to see us put
Uh, more energy, more resources,
maybe look at grants and other
things that we can improve that
infrastructure. I also would
like to see the tuition
continuing to um, to increase.
And I think we're making great
strides on that.
We're also re-engaging, um, we
have a new office, um, that is
engaging with our alumni, and
we're seeing our alumni get more
engaged, making contributions
and giving commitments back to
the university and I'm excited
to, to see that.
Um
And then, um
Which just went blank. Senator,
I'm sorry.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, Mr. Pyle, I appreciate
those answers.
I, I gotta tell you these
confirmation hearings, the
quality of people that we have
during this confirmation
hearings, Mr. Chair, are just
phenomenal.
Um, I am just so proud, uh, to
see great New Mexicans step up.
And, uh, and
And be on these border regions
for our university, uh, system
around the state and.
I know you're a county manager
of of one of the great counties,
uh, Sandoval.
Um, or is it curry?
Sorry, I, it should be Sandoval.
Um,
but you and I have had that
debate many times. I want to
thank your sponsor, you've got
an incredible sponsor there, uh,
Senator Woods, who's extremely
well respected and well liked in
the in the uh
Are there and around the state,
so I I don't think you could
have picked a better sponsor
than Senator Woods, and I wanted
to just say congratulations, uh,
Mr. Pyle to you and your
beautiful family. Uh, you guys
are greyhounds.
Through and through, and I think
you're going to keep doing a
great job serving your community
as a county manager and serving
the university as a.
border region and you have
Absolutely 100% of my support
and I thank you for staying
involved and and just being a
great New Mexican, a great man,
a great husband, a great father.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Chairman, Senator, and it's good
to see you here today. I think
in recent times we've seen the
value of Regents and a lot of
times we've overlooked the role
that they play in New Mexico,
what's playing out in many cases
around New Mexico, um, it, I
think just demonstrates the
importance of your role, so
thank you for serving, thank you
for what you're gonna do. I know
that it's a family anytime you
take on a task like this, it's a
family affair and so I recognize
that you will stand for the
accountability and the oversight
of that, often in a region to
you, you just simply.
also just need a cheerleader,
right? And I don't know about
you, but it's the hair bows over
here that did it for me, so I'm
sure those two over there are
gonna kinda, kinda bring it in
here. I know that uh my girls
have had to put on the Aggie
gear far too many times and and
where my da campaign t-shirt,
same t-shirt for 3 months in a
row, but I know how that goes.
It's a family affair when we do
something, so thank you for
bringing them, and I wish you
guys all the best of luck.
Thank you, Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, Mr. Pyle, um, yes, I
do. I love it when people bring
their families, so.
Thank you guys for being here
with us today. Um, did I hear
would say that you guys have not
increased tuition or fees in 6
years,
5 years. That is, um, that is
fantastic. Um, how, how did you
accomplish that?
NNMU has an outstanding.
Um
Chancellor
Staff, faculty, we work
together.
We worked together on ways to
find ways we can cut expenses.
And we know that we're there to
serve the students.
Eastern
It is the best university in the
state, and we are leading.
Um
There. It's just working
together, communicating, and
finding ways to make it happen.
And Mr. Chair, I, I see that the
Wall Street Journal rated you
all as the, the, the best deal
in, in the state, um, and you're
in the, like in the 60s of the
top 500 in the country,
universities, that is.
That is a quite an
accomplishment. Um,
I, I know a number of people who
have
Uh, gone through graduate
programs at ENMU, um, and
they've all done remote
programs, uh, and it's worked
out really well for them. Uh, is
that
What, what
Is, is the
The remote programs that you're
offering for for graduate
programs, part of the, the
growth in that area or what,
what, what do you think it
explains your growth.
Uh, chairman, committee members,
yes, I think the online has
aided in growth, but also with
Easter and it's the hands on
approach.
It's the faculty that cares
about the students and works
with the students. Um, my wife
will be graduating with her
master's in May.
And it's the flexibility that
Eastern works with.
The students. If you're working
on a master's degree, and even
in my case when I worked on my
bachelor's degree, I had to work
full time. I was the first one
in my family to get a college
degree.
Eastern made that happen.
By working with the students.
And Mr. Chair, that's what I've
seen everyone I know who has
done one of these programs is
working full time and the
flexibility of these programs is
has been key to their, their
success. So I really appreciate,
uh, Eastern taking that
approach.
Um, I'm not asking about any.
Any pending. I'm not, will not
ask you or, and I'm gonna ask
this uh question of our NMSU
region as well, so I want to
make clear, I am not asking you
to comment on any pending
litigation involving the
university. Um,
But in both universities, there
has been some some controversial
allegations, uh, around your
athletic departments. What do
you see as your
The Board of Regent's role in in
oversight and accountability,
um, to prevent misconduct and
ensure the safety of student
athletes.
Um.
Uh, Chairman and committee
members.
Border regents approves the
policies and procedures.
We need to make sure those
policies and procedures are
being
Complied with. If there's
modifications that need to be
done, then we need to work with
our chancellor, our legal
counsel, and get that.
Also training is key.
And, and training needs to be
continual training.
Annually
And then when we have these.
If we have an issue.
That would come up. It needs to
be addressed. Um,
And Eastern has done that. I
just, I can't comment on items,
but, um,
Eastern is leading the state.
And, um,
Thank you.
And it's, I'm I'm, I'm asking
you hard, a hard question to to
answer publicly, especially if
if things are ongoing, so I, I
appreciate you.
Taking a stab at, uh, probably
an unfair question, uh, in this
setting. Um,
But I
I, I know that, uh, I know that
you have a, a personal
commitment to, to ensuring, uh,
But, uh, misconduct does not
occur, and I, I look forward to
seeing, uh,
What the the university does.
And going forward, uh, around
issues like these.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
And so I have a couple and so
mine is, um, when you speak
about enrollment increasing, are
you attributing that to the
opportunity scholarship or what
is it that's helping with the
increase in enrollment.
Um, uh, Madam Chair, Chairman,
committee members. I think it's
a
Variety of items.
Um
Of course, the opportunity
scholarship that's, that's
available, but also I think our
online degrees, I think are
flexibility.
And I think the one on one, the
personal connection with the
faculty.
And the students.
And it's Eastern's reputation.
We're leading in the state. We
have an outstanding reputation.
People want to attend ENMU. They
want to be a part of it. And if
you look at our alumni in the
past.
Um, you, everybody will know
someone that graduated from
ENMU.
It's a great university.
And then just one other
question, I was a recruiter for
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
and we'd come to eastern and
we'd work on getting your your
business students to come to Los
Alamos.
Is there still, do you know if
there's still a pipeline between
Los Alamos and Eastern, I
haven't recruited in about 12
years, and I, I can't remember
if there's still a pipeline.
Chairman and committee members.
I'm not sure on that, but I will
look into it and send you an
email. Thank you that was a good
if it's not there, I'd like to
work with you on reestablishing
that pipeline to ensure that we
keep students who have gone to
an in-state school working in
the state. So if that's not
established, I'd love to work
with you offline, so we can see
about re-establishing a
relationship between eastern and
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
just two comments and no other
questions. I'm also a first
generation college student who
had to work, so I appreciate.
that, because you understand the
struggles of students who are
first gen or who might not have
the means to be in school. And
that means you're going to be a
voice for those students as a
board of regent. And then the
only other comment I wanted to
say is I like that you have a
connection to campus. When you
have a connection with students
on campus and have your ear on
the ground, do you not only
celebrate the successes, but you
work on finding solutions to
problems on the campus. And with
that, Madam Chair, I, I, I will
recruit your two daughters to
cheer someday as a former.
Cheer coach, I can see the cheer
boat to Senator Bradley. What's
the will of the committee.
OK, so we see that you have made
a motion that we move you
forward to a full Senate
confirmation later this morning,
and I'm gonna ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
Oh
I
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
With the vote of 8 in favor of
your reappointment we'll be
seeing you later this morning in
the Senate chamber for a full
Senate confirmation. Thank you
for joining us.
I'm gonna move on to the next
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Emily Brooke
Wilbanks to the eastern New
Mexico University Board of
Regents, and good morning,
Senator Boone.
Oh
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, I'm, I'm very
pleased to be here performing
this duty this morning. I, I,
uh.
It came about kind of, kind of
in a hurry, but I'm, I'm really
pleased to be here and uh it's
my pleasure to introduce Emily
Brooke Wilbanks.
A dedicated and accomplished 19
year old student from eastern
New Mexico University.
Emily's on the verge of
graduating with a bachelor of
Science and communication
specializing in broadcast
journalism and public relations.
This May she'll transition to a
full-time graduate student
pursuing a master's in
communications.
Emily's journey's been marked by
a series of valuable experiences
that have equipped her.
For the role of student regents.
She has served as a
communications manager for a
local city commissioner.
Actively engaged in and hosted
numerous campus life events.
And gained hands-on experience
as a news producer.
Despite the diversity of these
roles.
They all share a common goal.
Serving diverse communities with
transparency opportunity and
growth.
Emily's excited to represent the
student body and be a strong
voice for her peers.
With that, I
I give you Emily Brooke. Thank
you, Senator, good morning,
Emily.
Good morning Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and members. Um, thank you
for having me this morning. It's
an honor to sit in front of you
all today, um, and deliver this.
Um, also, thank you, Senator
Boone for the support.
So, um,
Why, why am I here, right?
That's what we're all wondering.
Um
As a student of eastern New
Mexico University, I'm not gonna
lie to you all, it wasn't my
first choice as a young high
school student.
I am from a long line of
greyhounds going back to 1968.
And it was kind of.
As if I was committed to eastern
New Mexico University.
I wanted a little bit of a
change.
But as a 17 year old, um,
graduate of high school, I felt
that I wasn't ready to move.
Away from my family and away
from my support system.
So I started at Eastern New
Mexico University.
I first started um as a public
relations emphasis, a
communications major.
I started with public relations
because it gave me a chance to
advocate for future clients and
for businesses that I could
represent in the future.
Um, I very quickly.
Added a broadcast journalism
emphasis because I realized how
important telling the stories of
New Mexicans was.
After starting at Eastern New
Mexico University in 2023.
The decision was made clear
about why I was there.
The chance to serve as a New
Mexican and as a greyhound.
Was immediate and it was
something that I.
Observed right away as I hit the
ground running.
Um, as a news producer and as a
news anchor at KNW on campus,
um, I was able to serve the
community and tell those
stories.
Even at events, um.
That
At volunteer events at Eastern
that we do for the student body,
there was an obvious need.
For me to serve the community
and to be in a place that would
help me serve the community.
I'm thrilled, um.
To have your vote, if you will
have me, um.
To be able to serve this
community.
Um, I come from parents who
dedicated their lives to
serving.
My mom has been in healthcare
for over 25 years.
My stepdad was a paramedic and a
firefighter for over 20.
Um, my father was a blue collar
worker. He still is. I'm sorry.
Um
And my stepmom served in
Roosevelt and Curry counties for
a very long time.
So it's something that has been
embedded in me, and it's
Something that I would choose to
do nowhere else but eastern New
Mexico University.
I'm proud to say that I am
graduating at 19 years old with
a bachelor's.
Although that may make me young,
I feel that.
My age doesn't matter in that
situation. Um, my vote is of
equal value as my peers.
And I plan to use that honestly
and in the most genuine way
possible.
I stand here before, I sit here
before you as a dedicated New
Mexican and as a dedicated
greyhound. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you so much. Now we do
have one person who signed up in
organized support so I'm gonna
ask Doctor James Johnson, the
Chancellor President of eastern
New Mexico University to come up
and speak on your behalf.
And although I stated your name,
if you'll restate your name for
the record.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. I am James Johnston.
I have the honor of serving as
Chancellor of the Eastern New
Mexico University system as with
great pride that I stand in
support of the appointment of
Emily Wilbanks. Uh, she went
through an internal process
first and has the full support
of her student peers of
administration, and she
represents those leadership
qualities that we try to grow
and instill in our students, uh,
as she mentioned her why when
you, when you talk to.
Administration, the faculty, we
often say that we see our lived
stories in the students that we
serve, and I think she's a great
example of that her, her story
is, is being lived today, but I
think you will see years from
now after her service as a
regent and what she does in her
career that she will continue to
give back to, to the state, to
our region, and to serve Eastern
New Mexico University well, so,
uh, again, it is with great
pleasure that I stand in support
of her appointment. Thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
Now, no one signed up and
organized opposition of your
appointment, but I'm gonna ask
by a show of hands in the
committee room, those were in
favor of this appointee.
22
And are there any online?
on any in opposition in the
committee room by a show of
hands.
not any online.
Very good with that. I'm going
to go to questions and I'm going
to start with Senator Townsend.
Thank you.
Sure.
Emily.
Yeah
Released
right resume.
Um
One thing that I noticed that
You probably
are aware of is.
Eastern has attracted.
A significant amount of young
females into their school,
higher than many of the other
colleges, including UNM and New
Mexico State.
Why?
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um, Senator
Townsend, thank you.
I think
That
Eastern New Mexico University
has attracted a diverse female
population because.
Of
How safe women feel at this
campus.
Um, I believe it was last year.
The eastern was awarded the most
um secure, safe campus, and I
think that's very important to
consider and talking about
college aged women.
Um, being from 18 to 25,
sometimes older.
A lot of the time women that age
no longer feel safe in public
spaces. So I think it's very
important to consider that
Eastern has created a safe place
for those. And uh Emily, I, I
think you're probably right, but
I think uh
Young ladies may have recognized
that.
But I think a lot of that.
recognized that.
And I think that's really
important.
And I think it's kudos.
Um, or the university to have
Created and
And um
And relayed that.
To, to a student body.
I, I think, uh,
You have a strong support.
You ought to be very successful.
And uh I look forward to
supporting. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What
great presentation. Uh, I just
wanna thank you for your
willingness at such a young age.
To be part of basically public
service.
That's what this is. You're not
paid.
you're going to be asked to make
all kinds of decisions, and
there's one that I'm gonna ask
you about. I don't know if
you've been following the news
about what we're trying to do at
the state to improve.
The way we graduate teachers of
reading.
I don't know if you've been
following that, but
So
We are trying to join about 40
other states that have made
significant improvements in the
way we ask our colleges of
education to produce teachers to
teach reading.
Um, it, it's going to require
some changes.
At the professional level for
the teachers who are teaching.
Teatures how to teach reading. A
lot of teachers, but
Uh, so I don't know if you've
heard about it, um, but the
regions are probably going to be
having to weigh in.
At the university, all of our
universities that have colleges
of education, but we've been
meeting with the deans very
regularly, the Dean's understand
what we need to do.
Was really the deans who said,
you'd better put it in statute.
Because I just can't tell
everyone what to do. It's going
to have to come from the state,
so.
Um
Are you familiar with that? It's
fine if you're not, cause pretty
soon you will be pretty sure.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
Um, I'm slightly familiar with
it, but I can't say I'm
completely familiar.
All right. Well, slightly is
good enough.
It's gonna be front and center
for the next several years. We
just were not
We're not teaching.
Significant number of young
students were not teaching them
how to read.
And
I believe it's really at a
crisis level after the pandemic,
um, other states have managed to
climb back up on their reading
scores.
Our NAP scores, that's our
national assessment of education
progress. It's the only score
that scores every uh state the
same, and we're at the bottom.
We've been struggling between us
and Mississippi and Arkansas.
Uh, we now are thoroughly at the
bottom, um, so we're really
trying to change the way we
teach teachers at the source, so
you'll be hearing more about
that. I'm just so thrilled with
your comments, your growth, um,
telling us
story, very pleased to support
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
I certainly appreciate, uh,
those words from Senator
Stewart, uh, talking about that
cause obviously we gotta.
Change our education system
around, and I think you're gonna
be a part of that as as a
region.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Miss Wilbanks
Emily, do you have any family
here today?
I don't have any family, but I
do have my boyfriend in the
audience, Hunter Andres.
Very nice. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Emily, um, you're 19, right?
19 years old. Alright, let me
make sure I understand this
straight here. Mr. Chair and
Emily, you have a 3.5 GPA.
You're 19 years old.
You're expected to graduate in
May.
You worked as a
The broadcast news there KENW
with different.
Different jobs from producer to
anchor to receptionist.
Involved in your central
Christian church.
You were also involved in the
2024 elections as um
In nonpartisan election
observer.
You also were a reporter and
photographer for the eastern New
Mexico News.
He also ran for office.
Because you were a
Were you a candidate?
Never mind, sorry, C, yes, City
of Clovis commissioner
candidate. Was that you?
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
members, I was actually, um, the
communications manager for the
candidates, Mr. Chair.
Swo banks
You were also involved in some
Extracurricular activities as
well.
Um
You ever, you ever think about
maybe trying to be an
overachiever.
Well, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
I grew up being told I was an
overachiever, uh.
I also grew up with an anxiety
disorder, no, I'm not gonna lie.
And that was a lot of
There was a lot of overachieving
that led to that, um.
But I think
For the life that I wanna
pursue, I have to be an
overachiever.
And for the people that I want
to represent.
And make feel.
Good about living their lives. I
feel like I have to be an
overachiever for them.
Thank you.
Very much for that answer, uh,
Mr. Chair and Emily, that was.
Uh, best answer I've heard
today.
Um
Let me just ask you real quick.
Regarding your role as a student
in a region, what, how, how do
you, do you see any conflicts
there as a region and as a
student, or do you see that as
as a good thing and why.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
Senator Block.
I think conflict is a
Normal part of life.
And it serves as a crucial part
of life as well.
But specifically at the
university.
I think conflict serves as a
teaching moment for many.
Obviously it gets to a point
where it's not good anymore.
Um, when it becomes
Physical or when it becomes
emotional.
That's when it starts to take.
A bad effect on the students,
but I feel that even in our
classes.
They encourage a little bit of
conflict. When I sit in class
and they encourage discussion
between two different.
You know, maybe political sides
or two different sides of
anything, it encourages
discussion, because it
encourages a little bit of
conflict.
It it teaches people how to
grow, I think.
Thank you for that and um
lastly, Mr. Chair and Emily, let
me ask it this way.
I, I think your role, you as a
person, you're basically a
liaison.
Between the student body and the
leadership of the university.
Uh, how was that a good thing?
Um, how was that, how is that a
good thing being a liaison
between the student body, the
needs of the student body and
and what the regions and the
leadership are looking at that
they may not see.
Madam chair, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
Um, I feel that having a student
representation on the Board of
Regents is crucial. Um, I, I.
Honestly, if a chance ever.
Came up for more student
representation, I feel that we
should take it as a university.
I think it's important to show
how.
The students are living.
And to have somebody who is a
student to show to tell how we
are living as students and how
we are learning and how the
world is affecting us.
I think it's very important to
have the student representation
and to be the quote unquote
liaison between.
Between the student body and the
Board of Regents, that bridge
should absolutely be gapped
between the two.
Thank you for that answer. I
greatly appreciate that answer.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, you, you have my
full support, Emily. Um, I
certainly don't see you being
anxious. I see you a very young,
confident woman with a very,
very bright future ahead of her,
so I wanna say um thank you for
stepping up into this role. You,
you're gonna do a great job. You
really are.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Dohe.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Excuse me. Thank you, Senator
Boone. Miss Wilbanks.
Um
Yeah, I think uh overachieving
an anxiety.
Go, go hand in hand. You are in
good company, um.
You, you mentioned that you're,
you'll be graduating at, at 19.
So when, when do you graduate?
I graduate in May. In May. OK.
And you're gonna be continuing
on there, uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, members, I actually
turned 20 a week after I
graduate. So, um, yes, I plan to
continue after that to pursue a
master's in uh communication
hopefully with this same
emphasis of public relations and
broadcast journalism.
Great.
So, Mr. Chair, Ms. Wilbanks, uh,
As so, so you'll be there as a
graduate student. How will you
make sure that you are
representing the, the needs and
the views of students, all the
students at Eastern from the
from undergraduate through the
graduate programs. Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I feel that being the
representation.
That's why I want this position.
That's why I pursued it, um.
As a 19 year old, I feel that I
can confidently represent the 19
year olds, but also as a
graduate student I can represent
the graduate students.
As far as filling all of the
gaps between those.
It's a matter of listening.
And it's a matter of hearing
from your peers and making
friends with the people around
you.
Um, I currently serve as the
podcast producer for a health
and wellness podcast through the
counseling department at
Eastern?
And that gives me the
opportunity to bring on students
who
You know, our our showing
strides in their field or
professionals in the community.
Who have something to say and
have something to advocate for.
I feel that listening and being
able to be there for your peers
is the most important thing in
this position.
Yeah, you said something that
that's really important, which
is that your vote is of equal
value to everyone else on this
board. You might be the student
member, um, the student members
votes.
Count just as much as every
other region's votes, and you do
not strike me as someone who is
afraid to speak up, uh, and, and
jump in and and be engaged, so
I, I think you're gonna be.
Uh, a great, great student
regent, and I thank you for your
service.
Thank you, Senator, and what I
failed to mention, Mr. Will
Banks, is there's several
letters that came in and your
support, and I'm gonna just read
who they came from for the
record, OK, Mr. Tim Gutierrez,
who's the news and public
relations director, um, at
eastern New Mexico University,
Riley Everson, who's a licensed
clinical social worker, and I
hope I'm pronouncing this name
right, uh Ray Diesel costs from
who's the director of Campus
Life, and you also got a
lecture, a letter from Doctor
Donald Elder, who's a.
Professor of history at Eastern
New Mexico University. I don't
have any questions, but I just
wanted to comment that I think
it's really cool that you're a
legacy and that your family has
been tied to eastern New Mexico
University since 1968. That
means that your family is also
invested in the health and
wellbeing of that campus and so
you'll be able to take their
historical knowledge and bring
that as a student regent into
what you're doing and
representing students. I like
the fact that you said you come
from a line of servitude
leadership, that means you're
not afraid to roll up your
sleeves and.
get to work. And that's exactly
what needs to be done when it
comes to regions. I like the
fact that you're a broadcast
journalism major cause so am I,
and I wanna give a plug out to
Conroy Chino, who's in the
audience. He and a man named
Nelson Martinez, were the first
two people I saw on television
who looked like me and my
community, and there were major
reasons why then I went into
broadcast journalism, and I tell
that to Conroy Chino every time
I see him, because
representation matters and
seeing him on the news meant
that one day I could be on the
news and.
So I tell him every single time
and I'm gonna tell you something
funny, Emily, sometimes I look
up at the screen here and I told
Senator Duig I think she and I
would be perfect co-hosts for a
morning news show. I look up and
then sometimes think about
Senator Stewart as our weather
and so I do look up
So for those of you out there,
if you ever see me looking at
the screen, I check to see if if
the senators and I match it if
we'd still make a good morning
show.
I don't have any questions, but
I think you're gonna be great
and your comment about
overachieving is you can never
overachieve, right, you can
continue to move that goal line
and keep trying to reach for it.
And once you've done that, you
set another goal, so with that,
what's the role or what's the
will of the committee?
That are black.
I moved for a due pass.
So there's been a motion to move
you forward to a full Senate
confirmation later this morning,
and with that, I'm gonna take a
roll call.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefaniks is excused.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig.
Well Miss. Will Banks with a
vote of 8 in favor of your
confirmation. We'll be seeing
you later this morning for a
full Senate confirmation in the
Senate chamber.
Thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Thank you,
Senator.
We're gonna go on to the 3rd uh
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Ricardo Floyd
Gonzalez to New Mexico State
University Board of Regents, and
I want to welcome your Senate
sponsor, Senator Pete Campos.
Good morning, Senator Campos.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
Senate Rules Committee, it is
indeed a pleasure and an honor
to be here with you this morning
to present uh the credentials of
uh Ricardo Floyd Gonzalez, uh,
for consideration, uh, as in uh
appointed member to the New
Mexico State University Board of
Regents.
I've worked very closely with uh
Mr. Gonzalez over the past 25
years.
And throughout that period of
time, and those of you who know
me well.
Know that I'm constantly
observing.
Individuals in terms of
Who they are, what they
represent, and this individual
when he worked as an analyst for
the Senate.
As he's moved through his
career.
I have always recognized a
couple of things.
Number one is that he excels in
everything that he does, and #2.
He's very responsible in
whatever tasks he undertakes.
So whether it be as an analyst
for the state senate, whether it
be working with El Paso
Electric.
Working with New Mexico State
University with the Department
of Agriculture.
And all the way through, he has
been a role model to his
siblings.
He continues to go ahead and be
a role model here in the state.
And as he continues to further
His career
He always places
Transformational leadership.
At the onset, at the very
beginning of everything that he
does.
He responsive.
He's analytical.
And most importantly, he's
articulate when it comes to the
issues that
He represents and the groups of
people that he also represents.
If he's given this opportunity,
I believe that with his
background, his education.
With a master's degree and a
bachelor's degree.
Along with his myriad of
experiences.
He definitely would be able to
serve.
The students at New Mexico State
University.
The faculty at New Mexico State
University.
The people of Las Cruces, of
Donana County, the state of New
Mexico and globally.
And then lastly, that he would
be an individual that we
definitely would have pride in.
As he moves forward to make
difficult decisions on behalf of
New Mexico State University.
So with that, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
if I could, I would like to
defer at this time to Ricardo
Floyd Gonzalez.
To make his opening statement.
Thank you. Very good. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Gonzalez. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Um,
I'm gonna preface what I say
with
A lot of you know me, have
worked with me, um, I wanted to
give you a little bit of my
history.
Uh
Good morning, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, committee members.
Family, friends, and Aggie
nation.
I am humbled and excited to
begin this new journey with you.
With all of you.
I am Ricardo Gonzalez.
And what you see in the room
online and those in thoughts is
who I am.
I want to thank Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham for this
opportunity.
I really never thought about
being a regent for New Mexico
State University.
But I gladly will move into this
role.
With who, with all I am.
I'm not your typical college
student.
I'm a story of pre perseverance,
trial and error.
Growing up, I had the most
loving family.
And together we made it through
some unfortunate times.
Today, along with my beautiful
wife Amber.
We have built a home of love,
caring.
And I put in here a lot of shit
talking, I know that's probably
the wrong word to use in this,
in this forum, but we do, our
family does have a good time,
um, my, my mother.
She is here today as well.
She has a super talent.
To unconditionally love her
sons.
We always knew we were wrapped
in a blanket of love with her.
Also had a grandmother, a high
school grad.
And a grandfather, high school
dropout.
Both expected all of us
grandkids to go to college.
And luckily I have my aunt here
and my uh and my cousin.
I had high achieving ants who
were college graduates.
They got to wear expensive
clothes, drive new cars.
And who showed us that education
was a way to make it out of
poverty.
Unfortunately, my father was
cursed with many demons.
But I always knew in his way he
loved us. I'm lucky to be
married to a great woman.
She comes from a family of
teachers, 6 generations deep.
She's a teacher
And has been the sport
throughout my adult life.
Education is her second nature.
And in fact
I have sat through many tables
listening to many teachers talk
about how to teach and what
students need.
So
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator Stewart, I'll let my
wife answer your question.
Truth
Truth is, the gov should have
named her as border regent, but
you're stuck with me.
I have 2 great daughters.
If you don't believe me, ask
them.
There's 17 and 14, Avo and Emma,
Avas and Crusus getting ready
for district basketball
tournament, go Bulldogs.
And Emma is here with us today.
Rest assured
Uh, chairpersons.
Uh, if this region thing goes to
my head, they'll bring me back
down to earth.
Our family is just beginning
their journey into adulthood and
university.
Without the land grant mission
in my life, I would not have
been able to help them.
Find their road to the
adventures that await them.
Um
As you can see, women have been
a driver in my life.
They have propelled me to
believe in myself and to love
and give me an occasional kick
in the Comoseyama.
Even professionally, women have
been my best bosses.
Senator Cynthia Nava, who I have
here today.
Senator Mary Jane Garcia.
Margaret Laragoite, who if any
of you worked with Margaret
Lotterway, you know, she taught
you how to do it right.
Uh, Mary Kip, Cynthia Henry.
Nancy Burns
And Callie Tomlin.
All that pushed me to be the
best that I can be and support
me.
Sure, there have been some great
dudes in there too.
But I've been lucky.
To generally have great women
leaders in my life.
Men like Senator Campos.
Who, um,
Uh, chair chairpersons.
Um
Every time I introduce myself, I
say I'm Rico Gonzalez with El
Paso Electric.
And the first cup of coffee that
I ever got as an attendant or,
or uh a senator was for the man
sitting to my right.
And he gave me that lesson that
first day.
And I've used it ever since.
And it's meant the world.
Uh, Doctor Miley Gonzalez,
Doctor Lowe Catlett.
Tom Shockley, Tom Bagwell,
Adrian Rodriguez, and Clay
Doyle.
giving me chances to shine as
well.
What a great life.
Chances given and accepted. But
the really big chance in 2nd and
3rd chances.
Were given to me by New Mexico
State University.
Our land grant university gave
me remedial classes to take.
And mis, you gave me a second
chance to make school right
after I didn't make the grades
the first time, and you let me
take a sme trough when I was out
of money.
I got a chance to work with all
these great people because NMSU
gave me a chance, a second
chance.
A 3rd chance
I want to say something to you
about trauma I faced as a kid.
I don't know
If I'm
I don't know if I'm much
different from a lot of kids in
New Mexico.
I think drama in New Mexicans'
lives above all challenges.
Is the courage sucking events in
our lives.
That holds so many of us capable
New Mexicans back.
I hope that I can bring to the
leadership in New Mexico State
University is a voice for those.
Who find courage anyways.
Find the courage to get therapy.
NSU was the first place I found
a successful therapist.
Gain the courage to love.
Themselves
And the courage to forgive.
Any wrongs
That will hold the students and
future professionals back.
The land grant mission in New in
New Mexico from Fabian Garcia to
me sitting here today is a story
of a Hispanic serving
institution.
Animus animusU status as an HSI
and a Carnegie Research One
University
are going to continue and thrive
under my leadership.
I'm a competitive person.
And a strong advocate for those.
entities I represent. My
expectations for the president
and NMDA director is to match my
commitment to our great
institution and the agrarian
culture and industry we we
represent.
Being part of the land grant
mission.
is to educate the masses.
Give chances to those who
otherwise would not have had a
chance to continue their
education pathways.
NMSU Global is one way NMSU is
opening education pathways to
students and other higher
education institutions, which
I'm really excited about.
I'm excited to help grow this
new leg of
Our education stool.
Our campus is a tradition is the
is our traditional pathway to
education.
But my community can expect from
me is to focus on building a
campus that is open to the
community in Las Cruces.
In the state
And the world
Mr. Gonzalez, you have about 4
minutes left and we still have
some people signed up and
organized support.
I'm a, I'm a converted
infrastructure dark. Thank you,
mister.
Mr. Chairman
I love infrastructure.
I know from my experience
traveling throughout Mexico and
work I do today.
It is a main tenant we have
gotten right in the United
States are.
great campus needs to be
refurbished, and I intend to
leave the campus in better shape
than what I find it if the
Senate I could continue talking,
um,
Mr. Chairwoman.
Chairman
And members of the Senate, I
promise you to be a good steward
of our school.
Our student time.
And grow your institution's
reputation in a positive manner.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez. Mr.
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Senator. Now, you do
have some organized support and
I'm gonna ask them to come
forward and speak, and they may
be joining via Zoom.
Sylvia Oloa.
Eric Enriquez.
Eric Enriquez will not be
joining us, Mr. Chairman, but
Sylvia Will and Senator Navas
here, and Senator Nava, if you
can come up as well, and
although I've stated your name,
you each have one minute and you
can restate your name for the
record. Good morning, Senator.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity for
coming today to speak on behalf
of this um.
Uh, recommendation for Ricardo
Gonzalez to NMSU.
Many of you know that I had the
opportunity to work with Rico in
my Senate office for many years.
I not only worked with RICO, I
then worked with Reese Gonzalez,
who's also here, and Nick Taus,
the brother-in-law, and I also
worked with his mother, Cecilia,
in Gaston. So we've all had a
long career working together.
Rico is a great nominee.
He is a curious person. He has,
he's an old soul. He makes great
connections, he holds them
close. He understands the
workings of government and that
intersection with business. What
I like the most about him is he
puts a premium on education.
When he worked for me, he would
talk about how he would try to
discourage his family from
watching any TV.
They would do family projects
and they would hurry home after
school to build uh a miniature
golf course in their yard, and
they had things like that going
on all the time. It's always
been a great supporter of
education. The other thing I
want to say is I want to commend
the legislature.
Because this is an example, we
do tremendous mentorship here.
We don't talk about it a lot,
doesn't get a lot of focus, but
I think it's one of the
strongest things that we do.
Mentoring somebody that comes in
right out of college, a student,
and now it's going to have a
huge uh public service position
in the state, and we have
countless, all of you have
people like that. So I think
that's really tremendous. So I
commend you and I commend the
governor for this appointment.
Thank you, Senator, and then
Sylvia, I'm gonna give you one
minute and we're gonna have to.
Stricker in the minute so we can
stay within our agenda. Good
morning, Sylvia.
Good morning, uh, chair and
committee, um, I wanna, I stand
in, um, oh sorry, um, my name is
Sylvia Uyo. I'm from Las Cruces,
New Mexico, um, and it is an
honor to stand in Puerto Rico
Gonzalez for the NMSU region.
Uh, these are times of great
uncertainty and change for New
Mexico State, and it could not
ask for a better steward than
Rico to store it through the
next few years. Uh, I've known
Rico since 2013 when I became
editor of the Las Cruces Sun
News, and I'd see him at
community events around southern
New Mexico and I saw the care
and the love that he brought to
his job at El Paso Electric, um,
and it's place in our community.
When I became a field rep for
Senator Martin Heinrich. He was
just a knowledgeable resource
for me to understand the
complexity of the energy
transition and how best to
strengthen our grid to meet our
renewable standards goals and to
work to electrify everything,
and of course, as you heard, we
all know what a proud Aggie Rico
is and how much he loves that
school, um, I believe he would
bring that love.
And the care that he's shown in
our community to the Java
region, and I strongly urge you
to approve his nomination. Thank
you so much. Thank you so much.
Enrico, man, I've never seen
this many letters of support
come into a committee, and I'm
gonna hand them over to the
committee secretary so she can
log them, but just so you know
26 letters came in in support of
your appointment, and I've never
seen that many come in.
Thank you.
You're welcome. But with that,
I'm gonna ask, um, is there
anybody by a show of hands in
the committee who's in support
of this appointment.
23 any online?
With 3 online, and then I'm
gonna ask, are there any in
opposition of the appointment in
the committee room.
Saying none any online.
Now I'm gonna go to questions to
the committee and I'm going to
start with Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, you're making me cry up
here. I don't like that. Um.
Thank you for talking about your
family.
And your early life.
And trauma.
And, you know, cause we don't do
that enough.
I think there would be more
humanity up here if we all knew
each other's backgrounds, like
you have just shared with us, so
I really appreciate that. I'll
spare you the education
committee. I do want to talk to
your wife though, so bring her
around if you would.
Um, you know, it's been, we've
known each other a long time,
and uh sometimes we're on the
opposite side of the issue.
You're always respectful,
articulate, uh, intelligent
about these issues. So I've just
appreciated you and your efforts
for many years. And I am so
happy that you're being elevated
to this kind of public service,
so, uh, I still call you Rico,
uh, and
Uh, just thank you for, for what
you did this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Rico, I, I, we've been friends a
long time.
And I know that it will be shock
you.
all of us up here on this side
of the Ross from He perfect
lives.
We had no challenges.
Uh, everything in our lives just
went.
Perfect. It was storybook.
We all know that's not true.
And I think uh I, I, I too
appreciate you sharing. Um,
I've known you a long time and I
didn't know.
Many of those
But I will tell you that.
So, so.
Opportunities that you had.
Going there.
Um
Prepared you for what?
You will do in the future, um.
I don't think you being here is
a
A coincidence or a chance or
Or uh not to be expected.
Um, you can.
This integrity.
Are you come?
With a lot of support and with
those two things, you will be
successful.
And I know our colleges, um,
All
Including the Mexico State and
others.
will be um affected by your
leadership.
And I think that is important.
So, I, I do appreciate you, uh,
sharing um your stories this
morning.
Um, but I do, I honestly do
believe.
That those life experiences.
As tough as some of them may
have been.
Prepare you for what you're
going to do in the future, and
that has value.
Lots of
I look forward to supporting
you. I don't know what you paid
all these guys to raise their
hands. But uh I uh I do
appreciate and I'll be right
there with you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
And thank you, uh, Senator
Campos, got to thank Senator
Boone earlier for sponsoring our
previous one.
Uh, Rico, you and I go way back.
We just met the other day.
Uh, in the office, and, um, you
know, when you've kind of first
meet somebody, you can, you can
kind of tell, uh, their
character, and you are a
character.
Uh, I appreciate you opening up
your heart.
Appreciate your, your family
being here. I think your, your
daughter's in the yellow sweater
there.
Um, you got a lot of friends in
the room.
Met your brother.
Uh, your mom is here, your aunt
is here.
Your wife kind of reminds me,
Rico, of
The movie My Cousin Vinny, my
mother's a teacher, my father's
a teacher, my aunt's a teacher.
My uncle's a teacher.
So you have that education in
the family.
Which I appreciate.
And the one thing that you've
shown, in my opinion, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair Enrico, is that
you're resilient. We all have
gone through some challenges in
our lives.
Um, like a couple of senators
have, have
Talked about everything hasn't
been unicorn and roses for all
of us.
And sometimes
Um
Sir, I think you have to
What we used to say in the
military embraced the suck.
And that's not a bad thing,
because I firmly believe you.
You are stronger man today.
What you went through.
Growing up.
I think you
That being said,
Greatly appreciated. I want to
say congrats to you and and your
family.
Your resume is
Again, I think a a solid fit. I
love land grant universities.
I went to one.
North Dakota State, um, the land
grant schools are something
special.
Um, not saying that the
universities aren't, but there's
something really special about
the land grants.
And your background.
Mixing politics and business.
Having that solid business
background with the chamber.
Working up here at the
roundhouse.
Teaching outside the country.
I, I think that really is a, a
well-rounded resume that will
help you.
Help the university.
Because it is a fabulous,
fabulous university.
And
I think you are exactly.
What New Mexico State needs.
So
I'm not just gonna support you
over a long 48 hour history.
I'm going to support you, sir,
because
Like Senator Townsend said, I
believe you're a man of
integrity. I believe you care
deeply, deeply, deeply.
About Aggie Nation.
And I think
You are a man who not only
Loves his family but loves the
university as well.
So with that,
Um
Very happy to support you.
And I think uh you're gonna do a
phenomenal job there.
And you're gonna bring in a
great perspective to those
students who might be going
through some issues.
Well, not my.
Who are going through some
issues.
So with that, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
Rico Suave.
And
Mr. Chair, if you could indulge
me for a minute, I enjoyed your
shit talking.
And because of that,
You got my support.
Thank you, sir, and best of
luck. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Gao is followed by Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Turn.
Senator Enrico appreciated we'd
had a little dialogue out in
front of her.
out in the hall, but, uh, I, I
want to tell you first off that
I really appreciate you standing
up as Hispanic, into a position
like this, uh, my granddaughter
is now gonna be graduating from
junior college going over to
nursing.
And um state and, and my thought
was just knowing you personally
and, and seeing you lobby both
for electric and for the
college.
Uh, I'm, I'm wondering what your
expectations. I, I think it's
The great organization that's a
great school.
Uh, but I'm wondering if you
have some change expectations or
or your focus would be as you
get into be a region.
Yes.
General Rico.
Right
Chairpersons and uh committee
members.
Uh, my, my thoughts on this is,
is, is the long term.
is looking at the 6 years and
And
How do you eat an elephant?
And so, um,
My focus definitely in this
first.
The year is going to be.
Understanding
How we're
paying for and doing capital
projects on campus.
fully understanding that.
From a
From
From a
Project decision to project
financing.
Um
That's, that's the first. I'm, I
live in in Las Cruces.
I see the campus.
I know we've got issues there.
Um
I, I know that that some of the
The deferred maintenance isn't
necessarily um a, a, a topic
that, that grabs headlines.
But I'm hoping that I can bring
to the regents.
That
person who does see that as
being.
topic.
Number one
Uh, and then number 2 is our
relationship with agriculture.
Lucky I get a little bit of a
head start on that. I've worked
at NMDA.
I worked at the College of Ag.
Uh, we brought together a
cooperative extension and the
Department of Ag.
Uh, to look for for budget
increases back.
Back in, in my day.
That was a tough session because
the department hadn't received.
Uh, budget increase in many
years and.
Without state help.
We were on the precipice of
needing to
Downsize our employees.
And so I, I got to really see
that from, from the basic
levels.
Um
And then working with the
Department of Agriculture and
and and with Doctor Lou Catlett
at the College of Ag.
Uh, I, I got to understand.
Just how deep rooted and and and
just the the salt of the earth
of of of folks that we get to
serve there. And I do think that
there is a 21st century mission
that we can help.
The administration find
The right path to, to engaging
agriculture at a much higher
level.
And so those are my two top
pieces next for for the coming
year.
And then, um,
And then we'll continue going
from there.
Thank Mren
Rico and I'll tell you the
Of the discussion I just heard,
but I like the most is one bite
at a time, and how to eat an
elephant, uh, and, and it goes
back to watching you here in the
Capitol where there is lobbying
for a past electric or for this
uh
And MSU, uh, you've always been
steadfast in, and, and honest
with you, with the dialogue is,
uh, I think for me the reason
I'll stand for you in sport, uh
just cause you're Hispanic, but
is the fairness in the
stability, uh, it, it is hard.
To find people who are going to
be long term in your resume with
El Paso Electric, you're not
looking to leave.
And, and it is really hard.
In our state, think about
Secretary, Secretary of.
When you're changing
continuously.
It's hard to build that long
term stability and for
State, the Mexico State
University, they've gotten a
good reputation, a long lasting
reputation that as you look
forward to your, your daughter
going there, we need to be able
to have that quality education.
For generations. And so because
I've seen you work here in the
Capitol, I think you'll bring
that to that university, and
you'll be able to continue the
good work that you do here.
Also their state, so, uh, with
that, I'll yield, but thank you,
thank you, Senator, for bringing
forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Campos, and it's good to
see you, Rico. I've known you
for quite a while and I knew we
were both Aggies. I did not know
about how in the world did I
miss that you also went to
Cruise's High, but I was, I was
still a bulldog puppy when you
left there, so you should know
that. That's why our, our paths
didn't cross there, but it did,
it did it stay, we have a lot of
the same contacts and I think
that's from, you know, being
from, from Las Cruces and
staying in Las Cruces to go to
school there. You mentioned Tom
Bagwell, who I think is an
amazing advisor.
Lol Catlett is still my number
one top professor, him and, and
Bill Gorman, who has since
passed. A lot of people who
influenced, I appreciate your
experience and background from
the College of Ag, and this is
gonna maybe upset some people
from the university, but our
roots of that university are
still ag um and engineering and
so I think it's important that
we hold, hold tight to that what
we're kind of built upon. So I,
I appreciate your background
there. I just appreciate
conversations that we've had
about recruit
from rural New Mexico. I think
that's where our clients, our
students, um, you know, we, we
need to put an emphasis of how
we bring them, encourage them to
stay in New Mexico and to attend
New Mexico State University. On
a serious note, I also think
that we need to continue to
stress the importance of having
stability in that president's
office and making sure that that
office is clearly represented by
someone who shares the same
values as Las Cruces, um, and in
New Mexico.
And we've had some struggles in
recent times, I would say, um,
we we seem to be doing pretty
good. We, we're, we have the
wheels on the bus back, they
have, you know, maybe running a
little low at times, and I think
you're the one that can help us
kind of get us on the right
direction. So I'm, I'm happy to
see you in this role. I'm gonna
ask you a very, uh, direct
question and probably the only
um.
Concern that I have heard
floating around about your name,
and that is, um, your role as a
lobbyist, and how that may have
some uh conflict of interest or
maybe your political uh
connections that may be
inappropriate. Can you just
briefly address that and, and
how that will not interfere with
your role as a regent.
Yeah, chairpersons and uh
Senator Brantley.
Um, I, I appreciate the
question. I'm glad you, you
asked it cuz it's obvious. I'm,
I'm, I've, I've
Um, regional vice president for
New Mexico and at El Paso
Electric University or El Paso
Electric, um,
And
And in that role I I serve both
in regulatory and government
affairs.
And we and NMSU is a is a client
of El Paso Electric.
And so, I think the the
The issue that that
could come up or issues that
could come up or any kind of
contracts kind of like Aggie
Power, we built out the, the
solar facility at NMSU. Uh, we
have a, we have a rate that's
set with NMSs you on that.
If an issue like that came up as
an example.
Um
I think from my perspective,
I would
Definitely talk to our general
counsel on on those issues of,
of, of any kind of conflict and
And then
Look at myself and decide
whether or not it's a conflict
and and and maybe that's a vote
that I excuse myself from, from
that end.
Um, here in in Santa Fe and in
the roundhouse or at the public
regulation commission or
anything to that end.
The truth is, is that is that I
have the experience now, um, to
know that that.
That
That the two are
Separate issues and how to deal
with that in a very mature
manner, moving, moving forward.
I can honestly say in the time
that I've been with El Paso
Electric, I cannot remember a
time where we've had
Um
Um, crossings with NMSU on any
kind of real um uh policy or
budgetary um
Uh, issues
Um, but
But I think
The only way I can, I can deal
with it. And I think any, the
only way that anyone can deal
with this is their own integrity
and
And
To me, that's the most important
thing that I have here.
For you
And for the committee and for
the Senate, is it, I will always
serve in the way that I see is
as as holding up my integrity.
Moving forward.
I think Madam Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, I think the concern
would be to weaponize as, you
know, political beasts in this
realm that weaponize our
contacts or to uh make sure that
we are not influenced by
political pressures from those
around us, and so I think if you
can pledge to do that, like many
of us in different roles, I
think that would be the greater
concern. Um, I'm happy to see
you before us today. You're a
good fit for this. I look
forward to working with you in
this capacity. Go, go, Aggie's.
Aggies.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Compass. Um,
So Mr. Gonzalez.
As you well know, from, from all
of your, your time and
experience uh here at the
legislature, um, and with NMSU,
uh, universities get significant
state funding, uh, given some of
the uh financial
scandals that we are seeing with
univers other universities in
the state.
What kind of financial oversight
reforms, do you think are
necessary?
Um
Chairpersons and and committee.
I think I'm in a
hunt a little bit on that
question from what I see as a
individual who has a
relationship with NMSU right now
as a community member. And and
that's why I'm not asking you to
speak on behalf of the Board of
Regents. I'm asking for your,
your personal opinion.
On, on
Well, I think that that from a
from a university perspective.
Well, I will be looking forward
to looking into our committee
structure, how those committee
structures are set up.
And, and how the functioning of
of fiscal oversight is seen from
the inside.
Out and so I think from from
From my perspective of, of where
universities are today on how
they use their money, I really
have not got a a really good
event, other than some
anecdotical.
Concepts here and there. But
what I do see is, is, is our
role and what I would see as my
role.
Border region
Is
To ensure that
We have reviewed where our
fiscal uh um oversight is.
How our rules and and how our
policies have been, have been
Maybe need a revamping, looking
at again.
And
And from that perspective.
Uh, rolling up my sleeves and
and working with the likes of
Debbie Romero, who is here today
to, to be. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, and I'm Mr. Gonzalez,
I'm, I'll ask you the same
question I asked, um, uh, Mr.
Pyle.
So, given there have been uh
some controversial allegations,
uh,
surrounding, uh, the athletic
programs at NMSU. I am not, if
anything is pending, I am not
asking you to comment on that.
But what role should the Board
of Regents play in an oversight
and accountability to prevent
misconduct and ensure the safety
of student athletes before you
answer that, Senator Campos,
they're waiting for you in
finance for a bill that you're
presenting, Senator Bergman's
will step in and sit in your
place.
Sorry for the interruption.
Thank you.
Um,
Uh, chairpersons in committee to
add a little bit of levity. I
just want to add a ditto to what
uh uh Regent Pyle said.
Um, but, but I think he was spot
on, uh, you know, I, I, I think
that that that the border
regions are the policy makers.
And, and.
And our role is to ensure
Again
Outside looking in, right? But.
Is, is to ensure that anyMSU
that what we have seen from the
Attorney General and what we
have seen in, in that report
that we're following up with the
state and for the state to
ensure
Those issues that that we are,
are given, are
Not challenges, but
opportunities in strengthening
athletics on.
OK, thank you. I, I would hope
that at all our campuses, uh.
If any of our regions are aware
of.
The kind of misconduct that we
have heard about happening that
that they would step in, uh,
Immediately. Yeah. I chairwoman
and members of the committee, if
I ever knew. Yeah, for sure.
Thank you. I, I had the same
question as, uh, Senator Brantly
about how you will balance your
position as a lobbyist, uh, with
this position. Um,
And I just, I just want to make
clear cause I, because I think
this is what you were saying,
but you had said that if, if
there was uh a potential for
conflict of interest, that maybe
that's a vote you excuse
yourself from.
But, and, but I think
I think maybe it was thrown in
there as a qualifier, um, am I
correct to assume that if there
is a conflict of interest or an
appearance of conflict of
interest, you will recuse
yourself from from those votes
Madam Chair,
thank you. I, I, I assume that,
that, that was the case. So
thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Stephanics.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and
senator, sorry, I was uh.
for this. Um, I believe that uh
Rico came to talk with me a
little bit, and I believe that
his expertise is going to
actually assist the university,
uh between his traditional
energy focus and the renewable
energy focus. I think that the
um university is poised to work
on several different projects,
and I realized the regions are
at a high level and not getting
into micromanagement, but I
think he's, he can lend some
advice.
So, uh, I support this. Thank
you.
Thank you, now there's no
further questions, but I just
have a couple of comments for
you, um, I've invited the NMSU
president to come to northern
New Mexico to see the work that
extension offices are doing and
we Riba in Santa Fe County. And
so in Santa Fe County, we have
Mr. Tom Dominguez and Riba we
have Donald Martinez, and so I'd
like to offer you the invitation
to come and see how we're
working with the NMSU extended
extension offices to work on
climate change and the effects
on our seass and what it's going
to do to our crops.
We're looking at ways on how we
continue to grow, let's just
say, for example, Apple's in
Belarde with less water and what
we can do to adapt to climate
change and the role that New
Mexico State University is
helping us in Rio Riba in Santa
Fe County, we're working with
the master gardener's program,
but then teaches locals how to
do community gardens or gardens
in their own backyards, but they
can start growing their own
food. I'd like you to come and
see the work NMSU is doing in
northern New Mexico, and that's
an open invitation.
For you to come with the
president to see what New Mexico
State University is doing in my
neck of the woods.
Maybe after.
The vote on the Senate floor we
go today, is that what you're
saying?
Only if you treat me to lunch
since I wasn't on your list of
those you acknowledged on your
screen.
With that, what is the will of
the committee?
that attempt.
Thank you, um,
I moved uh proudly.
That the Senate Rules Committee
support the nomination of Rico
Floyd Gonzalez to New Mexico
State University Board of
Regents.
Thank you, Senator. So there's
been a motion to move you
forward to a full Senate
confirmation, and I'm gonna ask
for a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. Senator Block is
excused.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley is excused.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am,
I'd like to explain my book.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend. Yes, ma'am.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator Doig.
Then the guy goes to explain his
vote.
Mr.
Enrico, I just wanted to let you
know center block and Brentley
had to go. The Center Block
wanted me to make sure to let
you know he was in full sport
would recognize that on the
floor, so.
I just want to make sure that
got out. So, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Thank you, Senator with
a vote of 7, yes, you will be
moving forward to a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Thank you for joining us.
And a correction on that.
All right.
I almost, I almost missed your
vote, er, so 7 is is the vote.
Congratulations.
I'm gonna have to gavel over to
our madam chairwoman for the
remainder of the.
All right, Senator Thornton,
come on up.
All right, Sandra, you're here
on Senate Bill 257.
And we use largely the same
procedures in here that you're
used to seeing in uh judiciary.
So
You'll have uh 15 minutes total
to use as you like. We did not.
I'll let you know we did not
have anyone sign up and, and
support or opposition on this.
So, take it away. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, before
discussing Bill, I'd like to
make an amendment to the bill. I
think you all have that in front
of you. And I suggest that you
give an overview of the bill and
that give an overview of the
bill and then describe your
amendment and, and I'll, I'll
move it for the purposes of
discussion. Very good.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee.
Um
protecting our borders from
illegal movement of weapons,
drugs, contraband, and people.
While still promoting lawful
trade and travel is essential to
homeland security, economic
prosperity, and our state
sovereignty.
We know that is the
responsibility of the federal
government.
The purpose of this registration
is to create a temporary 4-year
Office of Border Security in the
governor's office.
Staff it with the director
selected by the governor and
approved by the Senate.
And to support border security
activities by coordinating and
integrating efforts.
Between federal, state, and
local agencies.
The office is authorized to hire
staff.
Coordinate eminent domain and
enter into joint powers
agreements with the federal
government.
The office's tasked with
coordinating collaborative
efforts between federal and
local governments for border
security.
Uh
Adam Chair and members of the
committee. This is not an
enforcement office. Uh, this is
an information and integration
office.
So, uh, so the office would
provide border security
activities, including things
like locating emergency medical
services needed for individuals
in medical crisis.
Supporting law enforcement
response to unintended deaths.
Serve as a centralized border
security hotline and integration
function to support humanitarian
efforts.
Including the provision of
transportation, housing,
healthcare, and other community
services.
Identifying resources to clean
up illegal dumping.
Support state and federal drug
trafficking task forces.
And support border patrol
efforts by identifying local
resources such as specialized
equipment necessary, including
ATVs, trailers, sensors.
And local temporary detention
facilities.
And with that, I'll, I'm open
for questions, Madam Chair.
Great. Thank you. As I
mentioned, no one had signed up
in support or opposition members
of the committee. Oh yes,
you're, so you're
You're my match. Go ahead and
tell us what it does, and, and
then I'll, I'll move it for the
purposes of discussion, Madam
Chair, the amendment basically
takes uh page 3.
Line 16 and 17.
It strikes for the construction
of a fence at the border of an
inserts in lieu thereof.
To secure the border between.
I, I didn't want the committee
to think that for the small
amount of money that we are
asking for, that this was going
to build a border wall.
This is not the intent.
that the amendment has been
passed out, uh.
I think you
So I'll go ahead and
and move the amendment for the
purposes of discussion. Any
objection?
See no? OK, go ahead. Um, let me
ask this, uh, is there any
debate on the amendment? Is
there any opposition to adopting
the?
See none, the amendment is
adopted. We're on the bill as
amended, members of the
committee.
The Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Thornton. So
have you, you had a discussion
with the governor about this
bill.
Madam Chair, I have not.
Well it's a freshman man of
chair. It's probably your first
mistake because you're giving
her an office and an appointment
confirmation by the Senate that
it really kind of doesn't work.
To have our part of the
government imposed something on
the governor without her working
with us. So I understand what
you're doing and why, but I just
don't think this works unless
it's comes from and is agreed to
by the governor.
mean, uh
But you, you, you know, you're
giving her basically you're
telling her what to do.
And um I don't think she
probably would appreciate that,
so, uh.
You know, I suggest when you
want to do this in the future
that you just go talk to her,
she likes to talk. She likes to
discuss things like this, so,
uh, she certainly would have
talked to you about it. Um, you
might have been able to convince
her. Maybe not, but at this
point without the governor on
board, I can't support this.
Thank you, ma.
Other members of the committee.
Sir Townsend.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Um, Senator.
Or this, where did this come
from? Where did
What drove you to present this
piece of legislation.
Madam Chair, Suli Townsend, uh,
this came as a result of, of
some work I did prior to uh
becoming elected official. I, I
attended a, a board meeting with
the Texas border czar,
essentially they, he had the
same role, uh, not to do
enforcement, but to integrate
all the various activities that
occur to secure the border in
Texas, and as a result of what
we saw in the um I guess Senator
Galgos was part of.
That that group as well, we, uh,
participated in several
activities where they integrated
the local law enforcement, the
National Guard, um, it had uh
They, they worked with, uh,
enforcement folks, Customs and
Border Patrol, so there was an
integration of federal, locals
and state officials all working
together to secure the border,
um, the intent here is to allow
for, as I said, this is an
integration and information
function is to when issues come
up on the border, and I believe
our governor needs to be aware
of what's happening on her
border. At this point, it's not
clear that what, what's going to
be happening at our border. We
know that our federal
administration has already
agreed to.
An agreement with our
With with our um New Mexico, I
mean not with New Mexico, with
Mexico to basically
They have designated the
Mexican cartels as terrorist
organizations.
That means there's going to be
all kinds of operations across
borders. It could be either
military operations, it could
be uh intelligence operations,
but all those are going to be
occurring. They may also require
local law enforcement
involvement, state, state and
federal, as well as uh
Local law enforcement. And so as
a result of that,
Someone needs to be apprised of
all those activities that are
occurring at the border and
borders are for New Mexico,
couldn't keep the governor
informed as to what is happening
on her board.
We have about 180 mile.
Uh, border with, uh, with
Mexico, uh, most of it
unsecured, and as a result of
that, there's probably a lot of
traffic going back and forth,
and as we know for a fact, we do
have uh human trafficking
occurring, uh, fentanyl
trafficking occurring, and as a
result of this, uh, this was a
way to help ensure all these
activities are working together.
That was the point.
This our office does not do
enforcement. This office
basically is an information
center.
Oh
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, uh, a
few of us, uh,
Have the opportunity.
To attend a briefing with
Homeland Security, um,
a couple of months ago, um, and,
and I think, um,
I think something from New
Mexico has to occur.
Um, after watching.
And listening to Homeland
Security officers described the
challenges that they were
facing.
The um
The the amount of, of illegal
substances coming.
Uh the main arteries.
In 25 285.
Uh, 62 and 80. I mean, it is
amazing and um
And
And we have um left the border.
Um
Open.
Um
When our present administration
started um
Um, she
Made the decision, which is
totally within her.
Purview to uh remove what
Um, National Guard efforts that
we had down there trying to
protect the border.
And, and I personally think that
was a mistake, and I think many
of the communities that
Yeah, um, I represent and ones
that I have had the
Opportunity to visit with have
felt.
Neglecting
Uh, I think sharing the
information, making uh
You know, there's a lot that
could be done with
Uh, surrounding counties, um,
Oche County in Texas has uh has
worked pretty hard, I think, uh.
You know, we've all been aware
of what has gone on in Texas on
border security.
Um
So I kinda understand why you
might have not gone to the
governor, although it might have
helped as Senator Stewart said.
Uh, she had already pretty well
decided, and we all knew about
her, her position was. You have
every right as a senator to
bring anything forward.
And uh I think um
Having the opportunity to
discuss it, present it.
I've already had
One newspaper.
Call me or text me this morning
wanted to make sure you were
gonna be on them. I'm sure
they're watching right now. So I
know you'll have some media.
Questions as soon as this is
over.
But worst curry is really
important. There have been
people that have lost their
lives because of it and families
have been ruined and and
businesses have been ruined.
And, and it's not that it's bad,
it's just
We're about the only nation that
I know of right now that
It just
Um
stopped protecting its border
and, and so I, I appreciate your
interest, um.
Appreciate the bill and uh
I look forward to supporting
you. Thank you.
Other members?
Gallegos.
thinkman Senator, uh, I do, I do
agree with you on the importance
of this going through what we
did.
With borders are and seeing the
opportunities Texas is.
Uh, taken care of to not only um
Control the border and the
fentanyl and everything else,
but even the.
Health and well-being of those
that are crossing.
Um
Madam Chair and Senator, I know
you're there when we talked
about this and just the amount
of people are devastated or die
as a cross after we left that
meeting, I went to Santa Teresa
and had another meeting uh with
Border Patrol, and they talked
about all the people across into
New Mexico and die in the
desert.
As they're crossing, so it's
very important for us to be able
to give them uh adequate care as
they come through, uh, you know,
the, the actual port.
Be able to do this, but I had a
question and I chair Senator, it
comes to uh
To see if this is actually a
saying you didn't go to the
governor, but have you heard
about the Mexico executive
Reorganization Act and does this
fall into that on what we do to
protect and, and serve our
state.
and
Madam Chair and senator, I am
not.
totally familiar with this
reorganization Act, but I, I
think what you're referring to
is that it does allow.
Uh, for the executive office to
restructure things to to meet
special needs. Uh, this is a
particularly a temporary office.
It was a 4-year office, we're
only asking for $1.5 million
for.
4 years, so $6 million total.
And again, it's more of a
communication sort of a hotline,
uh, to the, to the executive
office to to inform her of
what's going on, and to actually
be an integrating function
because of the things I
mentioned earlier, because of
the humanitarian efforts needed
along the border, uh, because of
the cleanup of illegal dumping,
things of that nature. And so
this
Restructuring, if you will, is a
temporary office to basically
secure the border and to work
with federal and state offices
to ensure that uh she's aware of
what's happening on our border.
stands right now. It's not clear
to me that there's anybody
designated to inform our our
governor on what's going on at
the border, and whether there's
a dumping.
Trafficking, whatever, uh, right
now we have no way of
consolidating all that
information and then keeping her
informed of what's happening
along that border.
That was the intent of this
bill.
Well, thanks for that center
and, and I guess um I'm not a
freshman, but it's one of those
things that often, I guess my
question to you, Madam Chair and
senator, as the governor staff
reached out to you on this.
Madam Chair, senators.
They have not.
And, and just my chair and
center, the reason I asked that
is I get comments on my bills.
Before filing and after filing.
On support and or
dialogue on whether it will be
signed.
So I would almost guarantee you.
Almost, 99%.
Uh, that the governor knows when
chairing center about your bill,
and I would like to see the
dialogue from what they would
consider uh the value of this,
uh, I hope as you go forward.
Uh, the next committee that that
would happen because, uh,
It would be importance for her
to understand and participate
with the
Um, growth of this.
for not with that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Harmi.
Thank you and good morning,
Senator. I'm not sure if you had
the chance to look over the
fiscal impact report before you
came in. But there were several
significant issues that came
out, and I just wanna go over
the final one, and it's just a
comment, and this is the one
that really stood out to me, and
it reads the Department of
Public Safety noted that the
Constitutionality of Senate Bill
257 would likely be challenged
in the courts of past.
Congress assertion of exclusive
authority over immigration as
derided by the supremacy clause
in the US Constitution, which
provides that federalizes the
pros the supreme law of the
land, state and local
governments are preempted from
making laws in an area where the
federal government has a
asserted its authority. Um, did
you by any chance?
Look at that in the.
The school impact report and
maybe you want to comment on it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator Harvill, uh,
yes, I saw that and, and that
that implies that this office is
enforcing immigration law. That
is not the intent of this, as I
said before, this is an
information and integration to
work with local, state, and
federal. So this is not an
enforcement activity, and so
there's no violation of
constitutional law in that
regard.
Thank you for that, Senator, and
no further questions, Madam
Chair.
Center block, did you wanna,
were you raising your hand
before? Uh, yes, ma'am. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator.
Uh, I came in a little late
here, but I, I did read the
bill, and, um, I heard Senator.
ho ' s comments when I was
coming in.
Um
Did, did you, who did what, how
did you come up with this idea?
Madam Chair and senator Lo, uh.
Again, as I mentioned earlier
before you came in, uh, we, uh,
as a group went to um
To border towns in Texas, and,
and spoke with the Texas border
czar at the time, his name was
Michael Banks. He's now the.
He's now head of Custom and
Border Patrol for the federal
government. The time he was the
Texas border scar, and he showed
us how his operation worked, and
basically, he, he basically had
the same integration function
was to work with all of these
different entities, uh, he
wasn't law enforcement himself.
He was basically working, he was
serving as a role to integrate
all the different activities
that are going on, and keeping
the governor informed as to what
was happening on the border, and
that would be the role that this
particular office would play is
to keep our governor informed,
so that's.
Where I got the idea from after
going down and seeing how, how
effective they were in uh in
working with the local and and
state agencies to basically
secure their border. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Did you know that Arizona has
something similar to this as
well, Senator, I did not, but,
uh, it wouldn't surprise me.
Do, uh, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So let
me, I, I've been to the border
as well.
Several times uh with the Border
Patrol, uh, and with law
enforcement in New Mexico and
Texas.
Um, I will tell you in areas
that are unsecure, talking to
the experts down there who are
doing this every single day.
Um, it is totally misinformation
that drugs are mainly coming in
through the ports of entry. Uh,
the cartels are, are uh going
through the unsecured border
areas of our country, uh, even
today with the new
administration, we're still
having issues, um, Madam Chair
and Senator, I think you would
agree with that. I'd also.
I think you would agree, Madam
Chair and senator of the
Human tragedy.
Um, along our southern border of
more women.
Uh, more people, more children
actually dying in record numbers
in the past 4 years trying to
get there in the amount of
sexual assaults on women, trying
to come here has just been
atrocious.
Which is why the border patrol
has been asking for a lot more
resources, and I appreciate what
you're trying to do here. Um, in
regards to the amendment, and I
apologize, I wasn't, I was up,
upstairs.
In regards to the amendment, um,
Madam Chair, and um Senator,
just, just work with me on this
one here. It
You crossed out for the
construction of a fence at the
border, and then you put in to
secure the border.
Between
Uh, New Mexico and the country
of Mexico, uh, what, what do you
mean secure the border?
You're talking about, I mean,
you don't have a lot of money
here to build anything.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, uh,
that's, that's exactly right.
That's why I crossed out the
border fence. This is not money
to build or construction. So
when we talk about border
security, there are several
different activities one could
talk about when we refer to or
security. We can talk about
physical barriers like a wall.
One can also talk about
technology, sensors, video
monitors and and things of that
nature, night vision scopes. We
can talk about.
The personnel.
Deploying agents to patrol the
border by foot.
Boat, vehicle, and other means.
And then we talk about the
actual enforcement, which is
immigration law enforcing
immigration laws, and of course,
the key thing to all of that is
the is the cooperation. That's
the planning with federal and
local law enforcement to enforce
the immigration laws. And so
that planning activity, that
that integration between all
these different entities that
are involved in in in um.
Border security would have to be
communicating to one another,
and I see this office is a
facilitating that. And so it
really is a facilitation role
that we're asking this, uh this
group to support and uh.
And I think it would give the
governor a lot more credibility
with her role, uh, to secure the
public safety and as far as the
crime bills that she's putting
forward, this would say, make a
statement that says I am
thinking of the people of New
Mexico. This is important that
we do this and, and, and she
would be making a statement that
she sees this as part of that
crime package that she's putting
together. So
with that, a
Madam Chair. Senator, are you
aware that the
You are aware that the governor
of Texas.
A Republican
Has deployed the National Guard
to the border between Texas and
Mexico along with.
Other National Guard units from
other states, you are aware of
that, correct?
Madam Chair, Senator Block, yes,
I am. Uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
you are aware of the governor of
Arizona, Democrat.
Deployed her National Guard.
Last year to the border.
Because of the surge in legal.
Illegals and cartels crossing
the border you are aware of
that, correct? Madam Chair, said
Dulo. Yes, I am.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
you are aware Governor Newsom,
Democrat, also uh deployed the
National Guard, Senator, stay on
the bill. Come on, I'm giving
you some leeway. Come on.
Thank you.
So
Would you, would you?
With this bill
Help augment the National Guard
to the border.
Would would the governor have
that option with this bill?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, the
governor has that option with or
without this bill to deploy the
National Guard. This bill has no
effect. And then lastly,
Senator.
If this bill passed, would it
help in combating drug
trafficking, would it help in
combating the human trafficking.
That's currently entering our
country.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
definitely, I absolutely believe
that, that to be true or else I
wouldn't have brought the spiel
forward.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Senator Burtons.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Senator. I am curious if
you had secured funding for this
in House Bill 2 when it passed
the House earlier this week.
Madam Chair, Senator Bergman,
uh, no.
I have not, but because it's
such a small amount of money.
Uh
I'm sure we could find it.
OK. Thank you for that. And then
my other quick question is,
Do you envision with the powers
and the joint power agreements.
Stated in the bill and with the
supremacy.
Of the US government, do you
envision the federal government
being able to direct the work of
these potential state employees.
Madam Chair, Senator, would you
please clarify what you mean by
direct the work.
I'm just curious if you had
envisioned that.
Given that
You want a power sharing
agreements between the federal
government and the state. If you
expect directives to come from
the federal government and
direct the state employees.
No, I, uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
I do not believe that's, that's
the way it would work. I think
state employees would report to
their reporting organizations
just as.
Uh, federal employees report to
their federal employees. So no,
there would be no.
Directing of state activities.
OK,
thank you, that is why I see
this integrating role to make
sure that those
Lines of understanding are, are
in place.
OK. Thank you.
Right, Senator, I don't have
anyone else on my list, um, so
you have uh
You have some issues with your
bills.
Um
First, you are saying to us,
this is not an enforcement
agency. There's an information
center, they're going to provide
medical services, a hotline,
humanitarian aid.
A clean up illegal dumping. Your
bill doesn't say any of that
anywhere.
So what you would actually be
passing would not say any of
that. It's not reflected here at
all.
Um
It doesn't say and, and then I
heard you saying,
That part of the coordination
would be
Would be coordination for
planning to enforce immigration
laws.
Which then you are getting into
the plenary power of the federal
government.
And, and you can't do that
either, so I hear you're saying
both this is not about
immigration, and we would be
coordinating.
to enforce immigration laws.
It can't be both, um, and the
bill doesn't say.
Doesn't make it clear that it's
not, uh, and, and you are giving
us information that, that you
would, it would be getting into
some immigration laws, which,
which that is the exclusive
province of the federal
government. Um,
You said that this is a
temporary office.
Because the funding, and hold
on, let me talk about the
funding real quick. You create a
non-reverting fund.
For the purposes of carrying out
the provisions of this act.
And then you do 2 reverting
appropriations.
From your non-reverting fund.
So it can't be, it can't be
both.
One, but also you're saying that
that this would be, would be
temporary because the the
appropriations you're asking for
here would expire in 2029. If
you want to make a temporary, a
bill temporary, you have to put
in a sunset provision in it.
Just getting rid of its funding
would not make this go, does not
make this temporary and would
not make this go away. So
anytime you want to create a, a
temporary provision in our laws,
it needs to have, it's usually
the last section, um, in the
bill.
Uh, saying that that this is
automatically repealed. So you
would need a provision in here
saying this is automatically
repealed in 2029.
To in order to achieve that.
Um
I, uh,
I will say
Uh, I really don't like us
using.
Calling human beings illegals in
this committee, and I will ask
our members to have a little
more respect for fellow human
beings. Um,
One other thing, you are giving
a joint powers.
Uh, the, the ability to draw to
do joint power agreements. Did
you know that under our joint
powers, uh, Act, um,
That would then give this
office, the ability to issue
revenue bonds?
And is that your intention?
that is not my intention.
I suspect, I think.
I think
I think, I think a lot of the
implications of what you have in
here were not.
Probably weren't, weren't
spelled out for you, um, because
I don't think that was your
intention, um, and I don't think
it's your intention.
To
To, uh, violate to violate.
Uh, the federal government's
province over immigration, um,
But
But I practice that is what,
what is happening in this spell.
Um, so I, I can't support it.
Um, and
Senator Stefaniks, I believe you
have a motion. Um, Madam Chair,
I moved to table. All right,
that's a non-debatable motion.
Let's do a roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Brantly, Senator
Brantley is excused. Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefanik, Senator
Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend, Senator
Jaramil.
Senator Duha. Yes, with 5 to
table 3 now that that bill's
table, but thank you for joining
us and rolls for the first time,
Senator Thorn
I appreciate it. Thank you very
much.
All right. Next up, we have
senators Nava and Charlie on
Senate Joint Memorial 3, and I'm
guessing.
Unless this is super, super
fast. Uh, I'm guessing this is
probably gonna be the last bill
that, that we get to today. So,
uh, everything else on the
agenda will be rolled over.
Oh yeah, and, and just as a
reminder to members, we, we
generally don't doy analysis on
memorials because they don't
have a course of law. So in case
you're looking for.
Oh, I'm sorry. We, we, we don't
do analysis on memorials because
they don't have the force of
law, so just in case you were
looking for that.
All right, senators, go ahead.
OK. And senators, I think you
have a number of folks signed up
on, oh no, just one person
signed up on this one. so you
have 15 minutes for your
presentation, uh, which includes
any public.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee, thank
you for welcoming us. Buenos
Dias, uh, Minhombresindinava
yo so una persona estudiantela
ringlesina
so I, my name is Cindy Nava and
I am an English language
learner. I came to this country
when I was 7 years old, and
learning English was essentially
the epitome and the opening of
my, my life, uh, as an English
language learner, as a learner.
Um, and
I'm very happy to sit before you
today to present Senate Joint
Memorial 3, alongside my
colleague, uh, Senator Angel
Charlie, New Mexico, as you all
know, is one of the most
linguistically diverse states in
the nation, yet our education
system has not fully embraced
and supported bilingual
multicultural learning. So then
it joined Memorial is a bold
step toward equity and justice
for bilingual and multilingual
students by addressing the
severe shortage of bilingual
educators, expanding faculty at
our universities.
Our students' languages,
cultures, and assets are to be
celebrated, not barriers to
overcome.
This memorial will help ensure
that higher education
institutions invest in bilingual
education and train the next
generation of bilingual leaders.
More than 1/3 of New Mexico
residents speak a language other
than English in their home. Our
classrooms should absolutely
reflect and support that
reality.
We have it in research and it
confirms what we all know,
bilingual education improves
academic performance, literacy,
and graduation rates, and it
supports students' identities.
New Mexico is facing a critical
shortage of bilingual educators,
as we all know, making it
impossible to fully implement
bilingual education programs and
the shortage also hurts
indigenous language preservation
as we lack trained educators to
teach native languages in
schools and tribal communities
by expanding bilingual faculty
in our higher education
institutions we can build
sustainable pipelines of
bilingual teachers who will
serve future generations, and I
thank you for your time. I will
pass it over to my colleague,
Senator Charlie.
Good morning, Gowai Hauppa or
Swename Angel Charlie, Senator
Angel Charlie.
Diamihanohua.
Um, happy to be before you this
morning. Senate Joint Memorial 3
calls on the higher education
department to work with
bilingual education at the
University of New Mexico, NMSU,
NMHU and western New Mexico
University to establish joint
bilingual education degrees
across these institutions. It
requests increased scholarships
for students pursuing bilingual
education degrees and funding to
expand bilingual faculty in the
state universities.
cities. It asks that students
who earn the state seal of
bilingualism and bi literacy
receive college credit for their
language proficiency. It also
urges PED to fully address, fund
and support the linguistic
rights of bilingual students
under the New Mexico State
Constitution, the bilingual
multicultural Education Act and
the federal and state court
decisions, including Yazi
Martinez versus New Mexico.
For too long, our education
system has failed to meet its
own standards.
The Yazzie Martinez court
ruling.
Made it clear that New Mexico
must do more to support
bilingual learners, but we have
not done enough.
And in New Mexico, schools are
struggling to meet the legal
obligations under the Indian
Education Act, the Hispanic
Education Act and the bilingual
multicultural act, federal law
and court rulings. This memorial
simply helps ensure that our
state invests in the educators
who will make bilingual
education a reality for all
students in our state.
Um
Madam Charan members of the
committee, this memorial is
about ensuring that language and
culture are recognized as
strengths, not obstacles. By
passing this memorial, we are
helping to build a stronger,
more inclusive education system
that values and supports
bilingual students. I urge you,
my colleagues, to stand with our
bilingual and indigenous
students and support this
memorial because every child in
New Mexico deserves a high
quality culturally responsive
education. Thank you.
Would you like to introduce your
expert?
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Elizabeth Valenzuela,
and I'm an assistant professor
at New Mexico Highlands
University. I've also been in,
um, so I'm bilingual so is my
area of expertise, and I am
actually just finishing up 25
years of service and education.
I started out as a first grade
bilingual teacher and the
International District, La Mesa
Elementary School. Um, it's
gonna be 26 years this fall. So,
yes, so I'm here to just
Um, you know,
Provide any um responses to
questions, inquiries you may
have. So thank you for allowing
me to be here.
Thank you. Um,
Are you ready for us to, did you
want to make a wrap up call for
the
Are you ready for us to, did you
want to make a wrap up call for
any questions
that the committee may have. We
had one person sign up and
support Loretta Trujillo.
Uh, but I get that microphone
right there.
Pass your name who you're with
and you guys are good on time,
so we still have.
Oh, hello. It is working.
Apologies. Um, good morning,
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Loretta
Trujillo and I'm the executive
director of Transform Education
in Mexico, where statewide
coalition that uh stands in
service of the student groups
named in the Martinez Yazi court
case. I want to thank the
sponsors for supporting us in
this effort to draw attention to
the need for the development of
a a greater and deeper, um,
bench, if you will, of bilingual
educators and native educators.
Um, currently, if you're a
pre-service teacher, in order to
become bilingual, uh, and
endorse teacher, you have to do
extra steps. And the beauty of
this memorial is that the course
progression has been designed to
encompass 4 institutions
collaboratively, and the reason
that that was necessary is
because at this point we stand
with about 4 or 5 bilingual
educators total.
Across our educational landscape
and higher education that are
able to support and enhance, uh,
the development of the bilingual
teacher workforce that we need
and native workforce as well. So
I stand here in full support and
ask that you, uh, stand by
students who have told us in the
last year and a half, that this
is an incredibly important um uh
element of their education that
they would appreciate being
built for them. Thank you.
Thank you. We did not have
anyone sign up and support on
the list so far. I have Senators
Stewart and Harmeo.
I thank you, Madam Chair.
Such an exciting joint memorial,
and why haven't we done this for
now. I mean, we needed this
degree for a long time. So I, I
really like several aspects of
it. Um, I really like using the
students to graduate with that
seal, giving them step up. Um, I
really like adding the faculty
lines we've needed to do that
for a long time. Um, so this
just very exciting. Ma, makes me
want to go back.
to school and get this degree.
So just very supportive of this
Madam Chair.
Want to move to do pass, but I
can't cause I just talked about
it, so.
All right, Senator Harramio
followed by Senator Gallegos.
Madam Chair and senators, I'm
also proud to support this
memorial and so just so the
committee knows, Senator Nava
and I have decided that we'll
speak Spanish from time to time
to practice, so I just want to
say as importantteno sotros
recuer demosis Ramos
nest idioma nativa de novoco
then Nativos americanos in the
los espanol stamien. So what I
told her is it's important that
we celebrate and recognize the
native languages of New Mexico,
both from Hispanic communities
and native
communities. And so this is a
great memorial and so the one
thing I want to say is how times
have changed in the 1960s while
my parents were in high school,
they were punished for speaking
Spanish, so their native
language, which was taught to
them both in Rome, New Mexico
and El Rito, New Mexico. They
were punished for even speaking
that.
Because of that, then
generations after we understood
Spanish but didn't speak much
Spanish because they were afraid
we would be punished. So to see
that we're going to protect
native and Hispanic languages by
ensuring that they're taught
means a lot to me, and I'm sure
when I go back and tell my mom
about this, she's gonna think
about herself as a student in
Pecos, who wished she would have
had this protection to keep our
language going. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
You and games.
I'm sure, thank you and
senators, I appreciate this. um,
I guess I'm a little bit
confused, understood there's
only 5.
Bilingual teachers in higher ed.
If I understood that right, we
do this in public school.
Make sure we have bilingual
teachers, uh, do you know, Madam
Chair, and senators, why there's
a breakdown between public ed
and higher ed uh for them not to
have teachers capable in the
facilities, and Madam Chair,
Senator, I'll defer to my expert
witness.
So, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. Um, so thank you
all for, for your support. Um,
there is a great book that
actually Doctor Rebecca Blue
Martinez and Mary Jean Haberman
wrote a few years ago. Um, it's
called The Shoulders We Stand On
A History of Bilingual Education
in New Mexico, and actually in
um 1963, 1964, pickles, New
Mexico was the first, um,
district that implemented a
bilingual education program and
just, you know, we know since
Then and even prior to then
correct the research that we
have in regards to the
importance of uh really
supporting bilingualism and
multilingualism.
Uh, among all our students, but
specifically those that were
coming at that time with Spanish
to to the schools.
Um, so the reason that that has
happened, um, you know, we also
had, um,
Um, the, the, the Tora Maria
Dolores Gonzalez from Pecos, New
Mexico who was the first
bilingual uh professor at UNM in
the early 70s, and so she was
the one who really brought in
and uh started to mentor and um
actually some of the professors
that I had at UNM were all her
former students that had gone
on, received the mentorship,
gotten scholarships, got their
PhDs to be also bilingual
faculty at the university. And
so what happened is that
as they started to retire as
those faculty that were in
institutions in New Mexico
Highlands and um UNM and New
Mexico State. They started to
retire those faculty lines were
not filled with bilingual
faculty, and so that's how we've
come to the shortage of
bilingual faculty in higher
education. And so one of the
things that is also that we are
asking in terms of moving
forward, correct? Or we have
outlined in in the memorial,
it's outlined in the
Memorial is also um
You know, and I'm, I'm sorry to
take so long to answer your
question, but also because I
think it's important to have
that historical context is that
um in 1968 when the federal
bilingual Education Act was
passed at the federal level. So
those uh funds through Title VII
also helped support, um, you
know,
Students to be able to get their
PhD degree in bilingual
education. And so when we no
longer have those funds,
correct? We also were not having
as many, especially in Nuevo
Mexicano, um students go on to a
master's and then eventually a
PhD to be able to then become
the next generation of bilingual
faculty at our, at our
university. So
I hope that addresses, um, and
answers your question.
It does give me history, man
turning centers, so we have
nothing in statute.
That
Makes a pipeline from
Uh, public ed to higher ed.
Madam Chair, Senator, we're
going to defer to our expert on
this as well. No, there's
nothing in statute regarding
that. Now when we, I mean, we
have our, our, right now, one of
the things that we do in terms
of
Bilingual, um, you know, to get
our high school correct work
working as faculty to establish
um educator rising chapters at
our universities and then those
are working with high school
students, um, and so we're
trying to build that pipe
pipeline at that, but at least
in in in terms of my knowledge
and my institution, I know that
there's no scholarships that are
um there to be able, that I know
in terms of in statute to
provide those funds.
Senator Gays, I think Senator
Stefaniks might.
On the way in on
that I'm sure, um, the speaker
is correct, there's no
scholarships, but I would like
people to remember uh House
Representative, our House
Representative Ray Ledger.
In the past is the one who
codified in our statutes
bilingual education, and he
happens to be the father of um.
Our congresswoman, Teresa
Ledger. So he was one of my
predecessors in San Miguel. So
that is how I learned about him
and his work in our own state
legislature.
And that of course was before
the time that everything was uh
put on computer here at the
state legislature. So the
librarian would have to help us.
Thank you.
So you
feel for a question.
Certainly, Madame Cheriineric if
I understand, if it's codified.
How would we do a memorial.
Of something that's codified in
law. Well, Madam Chair, uh, the
higher education part isn't
codified. It's about the
bilingual education.
Thank you. Thank you for the
clarification then, Madam Chair
and the ladies and, and I guess
I'm still
I've got family in Pickles. I'm
originally from Antonito, I was
born in home. So I understand
northern New Mexico. I guess
I'm.
Beside myself to understand that
northern New Mexico hasn't
filled their own pipeline.
And we have to go to a memorial
to get people to understand the
need, uh, uh, that it, it breaks
my heart because I really expect
the Highland, Highlands to be
the
Most
Hispanic school in this area.
Um, but Madam Chair and, and
senators, so what
In in filling the pipeline, what
are you trying to get?
From your memorial.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you. That's a beautiful question
because what we're seeing here
is an intention to have more
bilingual speakers throughout
our state, both Spanish and our
native languages and what this
memorial will do is one, raise
awareness for all of the
brilliant questions that you've
asked this morning, but create
that pipeline to have real
access to our language for all
of the students throughout New
Mexico who don't have it right
now.
Madam, Madam Chair, uh, senator,
thank you for the question as
well. Um, I think the memorial,
it's intention really is to
invest and be.
Really intentional about driving
resources and acknowledging the
things that are missing and the
reality is right now we are at a
detrimental time where we are
concerned about federal funding,
we are concerned about resources
and allocations to our
institutions. So we are hoping
that not only do we raise
awareness, but that we drive
resources to ensure that we are
building the future, uh,
educators of the, you know, of
tomorrow, uh, ensuring that
language is uplifted.
And um really just prioritized
at the state level.
Manure
centers. I appreciate that. I'll
yield. I, I was actually hoping
to get to the next memorial
today, but um,
And I apologize for my
confusion.
I really thought this was
already addressed.
I, I don't like.
Personally, because northern New
Mexico, I wonder why we need a
memorial. It should be a
function of, but with that are
you?
said. And just so members know,
I, so we're on the floor at 11
today. I let senators Worth and
Padilla know that rules can be a
little bit late, you might want
said. And just so members know,
I, so we're on the floor at 11
today. I let senators Worth and
Padilla know that rules can be a
little bit late, you might wanna
let your uh weapon leader now.
Um, center Block and Senator
Burmans. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, panel. Um,
looking, looking through this
memorial, how, how come northern
or eastern isn't included in
there in here.
Madam Chair and um.
Committee members, so this has,
this, the funding for this group
to come together, um, was given
uh through HED through to UNM 10
years ago and so it was my
understanding cause I came in
later. Um, it was my
understanding that um eastern
came, but then um there was
faculty weren't there, so
bilingual faculty, so that they
didn't continue with the work.
And so, that's the reason, the
only universities that are there
are
because we are the ones who have
been working the last 5 years,
um, to get this degree where we
would like to be able to move
forward with it.
Madam Chari, because Eastern has
elementary at secondary ed,
early childhood ed as well and I
was just surprised not to see
them and, and northern uh on
their, uh, especially northern,
um.
I, I really like this. I'll
support it. And the reason why
is um living over in Europe for
several years, Madam Chair and
the panel, um.
A couple of different countries,
especially the Netherlands.
Everybody is speaking so many
different languages over there,
um, in the Netherlands, it's
Dutch, it's English, it's
French, it's Flemish, it's
German.
Uh, and, and they're way ahead
of us on
Mul multi language proficiency
and um my kids that went to a.
And IBS school in Eindhoven, the
Netherlands were picking up uh
languages, um.
Which was just impressive,
unfortunately, you come back to
the stage, you kind of lose
that.
But um I think this is great and
Happy to support it. So thanks
for bringing it forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That was
also my question actually, so I
think my questions have been
answered and maybe I don't
think, I think it'd be strange
to me and amend a joint
memorial, but maybe we want to
think about one in the future
that encourages northern and
eastern to develop these tracks
as
real briefly before we get to
that. So, um,
So I, when I was a freshman, I
was surprised to find out that
memorials are strongly worded
suggestions. Um, they do not
have the force of law, and so
have you all talked to the
higher ed department and, uh,
and PED about this memorial, and
are they willing, and, and UNM
too, I think, or, or all these
universities, are they willing
to to do what you are asking
them to do.
So I know that at least um the
time that I've been at New
Mexico hasn't been involved with
our group, um, we have mentioned
it to pet, and we have mentioned
it to HED throughout these last
5 years. Um, the memorial kind
of just happened, but we're
still, uh, we're still working
with HED and HED in terms of the
goals for the funding that they
gave us, they know that this is
one of the degree was one of the
goals on there.
Madam Chair, I would also add,
um, I believe you all have an
FIR for this memorial, um, and
in terms of where we are with
the state budget, there is a
$500,000 allocation for, uh,
public education purposes
specifically pursuant to
bilingual multicultural
education, which I think, um,
aligns well with our
suggestions.
Yes, I makes makes it more
likely they will, they will
follow that or listen to the
strongly worded suggestion. All
right, Senator, uh, Stefaniks.
Uh, thank you, madam.
All right. Uh, is there any
objection to that motion?
See none, please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative, and senators, you
have a due pass. I think this is
your first presentation in
roles, so thank you for joining
us.
Thank you all very much. Oh, did
you, I'm sorry, Senator Stewart,
was there something?
You know, Madam Chair, I think
one of the most significant
things this joint memorial says
this is a references our
constitution, which we have
ignored for many years, so, and
really the purpose of this is
to, is to set up this degree
program in these land grant
colleges, so I think it's a
perfect way to do the beginning
force of it, and this goes to
education next, I believe,
right? So, so I, I think this is
a good way to get us.
Started on this.
Thank you. Thank you, senators,
