sponsoring to the conferees and
he has to get to another
committee sorghum starting with
Mister Martin.
Madam chair would you like to
take the role before.
We're we're we're starting as a
a subcommittee will wait until
we have a quorum to take any
official action but we can go
ahead and get get started thank
you so madam chair members of
the committee I am happy to
bring forward to one of my good
friends who has been working
through northern New Mexico
college who is the proud
resident ability to a and let's
just say you can't hide his
eagle pride when it comes to at
M. C. and so he's a lifelong
resident who wants to ensure
that our schools that are
northern college is taking care
of no he's really made some
major differences when it comes
to northern he helped with the
passage of the bill levy and
creation of the northern in New
Mexico branch college ability to
which was vital to northern New
Mexicans he helped with the
reintroduction of the trades
programs that deal with the cap
is trades are coming back and
are important for Los Alamos
National Laboratory and northern
New Mexico so this trick
programs are going to do is it's
going to ensure that we have a
workforce who's gonna be able to
come up to Los Alamos to get
high paying jobs for those who
don't wish to attend college the
one of the certified or given to
trades program he worked on
hiring our now president Hector
Balderas as our brand new
president did with that madam
chair I want to yield to Mr more
and for some comic.
That this record madam chair
members of the committee
center I'm effect thank you so
much for the very nice
introduction Sir I'm very
honored to be here want to thank
the governor for pointing me to
this position for another six
years I've enjoyed my four years
as a region to of stand for
questions.
Thank you very much Jim.
We have two people signed up to
speak in support of your
nomination Leo Valdez.
The online.
marks a major.
We've got.
Times of.
Right the point thank you madam
chair members of the committee
marks a rather on the directors
executive director New Mexico
State University president's and
I stand here in support of the
nomination for Mr Martinez
region of northern New Mexico
college I'm I've been working
with them for the last four
years and I've been able to
enjoy experience such a humble
person in terms of his role in
this leadership for the college
and for his community born and
raised up in that area they'll
rebuild and work and seeing what
his father did and following
those footsteps and one B. on
that it says in his bio with in
terms of the numbers we garnered
says his he is committed to
providing educational
opportunities everyone in
northern New Mexico I think that
says a lot he helped with
on his presidency he's worked
for three presidents since he's
been that been on the board and
as the president of board he's
helped to reinstate dual credit
for that community up in
northern New Mexico sport
athletics for that community
which is important for that
Mexico try to work on housing
for the college of their hello
this college is actually also
works with the associations in
the community colleges that
helps university presidents the
hybrid regions council try to
bridge and develop those
relationships when you do meet
with the commission more in the
center of your realize what a
leader and with all the things
he's done because he is such a
humble human beings so he brings
that to the to the to the chair
and with that I don't think the
sponsor and I look forward to
hopefully some the committee
supported nominating Mr more as
that as the region for the next
four years from northern Mexico
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Yeah.
And Mister Martin all ask that
you have.
Quite a bit of time left if you
if you like to use it and for
your presentation either as
there anyone else here who you'd
like to have speak on your
behalf.
For off course they won't want
to raise their hand or come on
up if you'd like to.
Madam chair when I mean thank
you.
If you don't mind using the
microphone to focus on like
thank you madam madam chair and
an honorable members of this
committee I guess
A lot can be said about
president Martin's leadership I
will divert diverge a little bit
into more of a personal anecdote
many of you all know that that
your role is to to really vet
competence and that you're
hoping wishes to to give our
students some of the best
leadership I will say that not
only does the of meat that
competence level
the other facet that I like to
share with you personally is
it's really rare when someone
has a high high level of
confidence and yet a supremely
high level of trust from those
communities in the Martin family
being very humble
his family runs in in really
founding that that college in
the original vision of early
homesteaders to have
opportunities in rural America
to have education his key comes
from the bloodline that was one
of the founders of the school
and therefore are Hispanic and
tribal communities really trust
this man in a way that he
deserves a lot of credit and so
I really want to convey to this
committee is the rare honor to
to not only point somebody's
competent but to somebody who
has the the trust of the local
community he's at our basketball
games and as senator will attest
to really we we love and trust
this individual in the way he
leads and governance and that's
kind of rare sometimes and in
rural New Mexico and so many are
moving to the urban areas so
madam chair thank you for
letting me share that and do.
You.
I would anyone in the room like
to raise our hand to indicate
support for the.
And you want to speak as well
very quickly.
Madam chair Senators and you
want to keep him in New Mexico
tech regent but I've been the
immediate past president of the
higher education we regents
council and at we've had great
support from Iraq and he's been
very good in collaboration with
other regions making sure we
have education that's uniform
across the regions so I just
have to say he's perfect and
wonderful for this position
thank you.
Yes
there is someone over here that
raised their hand of if you want
to speak or not but do we have
anyone online our reserve.
Anyone want to raise our hands
in the K. opposition.
The non anyone online.
And members the committee
senator if you know Senator
Stewart.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you senator how to me for
bringing Mr Martin to us I
remember very well you're you're
last appearance before this
committee and and how impressive
the you were without even trying
to the that clearly you're
devotion to the campus came
through
I wonder if you could share with
us your attitude about the
retail campus for for northern
and Andrew what's planned there
I know for years of my good
friend Ted Martinez would would
go up there the couple of times
a week I think and and.
Make furniture
do leatherwork allsorts of
things that were available there
is is that part of the when
you're talking about.
Developing some trades there is
that the kind of thing you're
thinking over what are the plans
for delivery to campus madam
chair members of the committee
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank
thank you Sir I want to thank
you you introduced me four years
ago at this hearing and I
appreciate that of the two
question we have established a
plumber plumbers pipefitters
program in legislation program
and with you know we don't with
the great pipelines those almost
national laboratory we're hoping
to expand into more arts
programs that's I think this is
the first things that present
older sis looking at is is
expanding the opportunities and
offerings that we have the right
to campus right and and madam
chairman David with the the
Espanola campus be more of an
academic setting in the trades
are all the of their or or
what's the what's the plan madam
chair members the committee
centered he's been of that still
still here from the state so
we're we're trying to see what
which is the best fit for retail
and for the students.
And
then just one quick very
personal question for you do you
explain to me your relationship
to cam Martin.
And and.
This issue your niece madam
chair members Senator she's my
cousin Sir because okay very
good Ken Martin and I work
together madam chairman at the.
Part of public welfare inTaos
county in the.
Late sixties will serve as
it thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair.
So first of all thank you so
much for your service that is
always impressive when people
say such going things and then
you want to do it again for
another four or six years so.
I do have a couple of particular
questions and not normal.
And and one is do you have a
program to train people to be
teachers public.
Madam chair members who sent yes
ma'am we do it at the Madam
chair in undergraduate program
and madam chair members
committee center street yes
ma'am it is so I don't know if
you know but
have you all tried in that
training to better teach
teachers how to teach reading by
using the science of reading.
We talked about madam chair
members we met no ma'am I'm
sorry I do not.
so four years ago we passed a
bill to ensure that that first
grade students with free for
life.
And that their teachers would
first grade teachers would take
a course in what's called
structure that is thanks for
reading.
For the most part are colleges
around the country are not
really teaching.
They have much more of an
eclectic style.
What we're finding is that those
states that focus actually
leaders are making huge game.
Remember how we used to say at
least there's Mississippi we New
Mexico was in the ranking for
education now Mississippi is in
the middle of the ring.
Because since twenty fourteen
they have required.
Teachers elementary level.
To take courses instructions.
So that they're teaching kids
according to the science of how
kids learn.
And so that six seven eight nine
years there now in the middle of
the pack.
And they started to Katy third
rate that.
Right if they're not ready that
that's something that we chatted
about here for a number of years
I've always been on the side of
I don't think I think third
graders is that I.
but now since we started to
students twenty million dollars
a year to read train teachers.
A lot of our following not being
able.
We.
They're not getting that now you
only have a four years and if
they're in the tier programs
really only the last two years.
But
I have spent my twenty nine
years here trying to get us to
teach reading that and so what
happened in twenty nineteen with
that bill is that we have
started to reach right all of
our elementary.
These so far we've done up to
your training with first grade
teacher and we're just finishing
up kindergarten and second grade
we're going to move the third
fourth and fifth and then we're
going to start over again and re
train all the teachers who
didn't get to the.
It's expensive time consuming up
most teachers are saying it's
the best professional
development they've ever had I
took this trading about fifteen
years ago like.
I've been doing it.
I wish I could redo my entire
teaching.
So we are bound and determined
to try to bring this type of
training to our colleges and
universities in their education
so I just urge you is to reach
out at try to join that group
that is trying to get our
students able to read.
It's really horrible how low our
proficiency.
Must do something about and I
implore you as a region to start
this half at north and for your
educators try to understand what
we're talking about and do that
training with their.
So
I'll get off my soapbox that let
you answer a little bit and I
have one more I.
Madam chair members the
committee Senator I don't think
that that can move will work on
them thank you for making me
aware of it all right so I have
a whole library books to
suggest.
Health for go that.
So I I guess
I've followed you over the last
few years and I guess I I'd like
to hear from you about.
What changes and have for for
North are you all doin.
What what's your vision for what
you want to change what you want
to see that college other than
being able to teach teachers how
to teach reading that.
Madam chair members committee
senator let personal goal for
the next six years would to be
expand our relationship with
with the native American pueblos
and.
Senator serve their educational
needs more it also led to really
reach out to the K. to twelve
and then we can.
I envision a more holistically.
Solution to our problem and
just.
When when we receive students
and then they have to meet your
work to get to our level so I I
hope that with our new president
boulders that we can.
Work with K. to twelfth work
with native Americans and.
And so some of the problems our
area with education.
That sounds great I appreciate
that very much I appreciate your
service thank you so much.
Members of the committee.
Also note that
Simon very I haven't had a
chance to to get to know you the
way that the some of my my
colleagues have but but it's
great hearing about the the high
level of trust there is
communities for our former AG
that sounds like
And it and then and see that's
hard to say eyes in very good
hands thank you for your service
we do have a quorum now so what
is the the will of the
committee.
All right the store off.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle and
Senator Lopez are excused
Senator McKenna.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores excuse it or TCP yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator pro yes Senator Pirtle
yes Senator faxes excuse senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart yes Senator huh
yes Senator had a meal yes and
senator do the yes with six yes
we will see you on the Senate
floor later on today thank you.
but he's the.
The house I'm sure I'm
mispronouncing name I apologize.
Members of the madam chair
members of the committee I am
really excited to bring forward
Cassandra of the State douse who
is a true reflection of who we
are as northern New Mexicans a
first generation college
students whose eager to earn a
degree and understands the
education will be the key to her
success like a lot of northern
New Mexicans she has her family
has seen some struggle but she
continues to be a champion to
ensure that she represents her
family her community and in this
case for college with pride she
is a shining light in the
Espanola valley and I'm gonna
let should let her speak a
little bit about herself and her
story before we get to anyone in
the committee would like to
speak on her behalf.
Madam chair vice chair and
members of the committee good
morning I was born and raised in
the beautiful valley of Espanola
I graduated from walk in valley
high school which actually made
me the first high school
graduate in my family after my
brother I am also first
generation college student I
have experienced a lot of
struggles in my time in northern
between working and school and I
have also seen the struggles of
other students I spend my days
working in the pantry at the
college I've seen the struggles
of many single parents walking
and trying to feed their
children and to school as region
I would work with those parents
those students to ensure that
they could keep in education
because I believe education
should be available to any
person the matter their age or
their struggles thank you madam
chair vice chair members of the
committee I now stand for
questions.
Thank you we have a couple
people signed up to speak in
support hi Springfield.
One of.
Again we had available here
you're all recognize for at up
to to five minutes each is three
people.
Madam chair members of the
committee I've been friends with
cash for the better part of
three years now and ever since I
make sure that it's on.
Just because just to speak okay.
Really use my voice here.
I've been friends with cast for
the better part of three years
now and ever since I matter
she's gone above and beyond in
what it means to be a friend
everything that I've ever needed
of her she's done with.
Her whole heart.
Anything that she thinks I need
or if I need someone to be there
for me she's there instantly in
a heartbeat and not only issue
like this with a friend she's
like this in her school work and
with her fellow classmates as
well and with her community
she's there in the pantry at the
college every day she hasn't
missed today and she's there
nonstop I haven't.
I haven't seen it take an early
date do something that would be
considered lazy in the pantry or
Just.
Do anything that she wouldn't do
herself.
I she's gone to multiple
businesses local businesses fast
food chains all ask them for
support for the pantry for our
community and for those low
income families that we do have
and no matter what their answer
issue always gets up goes the
next one immediately if it's a
no she moves on if it's a yes
fantastic she moves on gets the
support from them to the pantry.
And it's fantastic day for
everybody because we got a test.
Thank you so much next we have
Luke Baker.
Good morning madam chair vice
chair members of the committee
my name is Lou Baker I was born
and raised in Espanola and I
just want to share my story
because it's going to be Mr
Sanders story.
I'm high school dropout.
Northern change my life.
At in my neck mid thirties after
raising my children that are
very very young age I had two
children.
I went back to northern in my
mid thirties got a GED and right
now I have a graduate degree
from MIT.
That's what Martin has done for
northern New Mexico for us I am
proud of college it's changed my
life it's changed my family's
life and I have known miss
Cassandra since she was an
infant and I'm here today to
support her one hundred percent
and I.
Thank you to please consider for
the student regent position I
know she will do an excellent
job thank you very much thank
you.
And the passion.
Director of admissions.
Generalizing.
Please go ahead up to five
minutes.
Hello everyone.
Can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Awesome so thank you for having
me
I have no cast since I started
in my role as the director of
admissions and recruitment she's
probably one of the first
students I even met here I've
seen her in a bunch of different
capacities here as a student as
a student worker and as a friend
and she shines in all of her
roles she really is a student
with integrity and hard work and
determination I am so proud of
her for doing this role as a
student region I think she will
really do wonders as a student
region and Representative
northern students extremely well
I've seen her grow over the past
year and she is developing into
a bright employment and I think
she has a great future ahead of
her and I'm really excited to
see what she does so I'm really
proud of her and I think she
will do great in this wrong
thank you.
Anyone in the audience like to
raise their hand to indicate
support for the conferee.
The everyone online.
But anyone like to raise a hand
in the off position.
I see none and little.
All right members of the
committee.
There is a beautiful by Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chairman Senator
of India for months during this
the young woman as candidate to
be region to your amendment the.
I'm really struck by the fact
that you use are you still
working at element of those.
Madam chair members of the
committee and senator Ortiz
taking on yes I am still working
and we address the care givers.
The madam chairman at can't
think of a better.
Operation for life than than to
work with those with
developmental disabilities and
the work you're doing there and
the fact that you've been doing
it at least this seems to
indicate you've been doing it
for over a year and a half now.
The.
What's it like.
Madam chair Senator it is
actually really fun I'm grateful
for every experience I get I'm
learning from the past
generations to avoid making
mistakes in my lifetime the
lessons I have learned from my
clients have taught me to take
life for what I have to make the
most of it because it could be
over in the flash I take care of
a lady named Gail she is the
sweetest lady you'll ever
possibly me and she has stories
that has given me so much
encouragement to want to
continue to pursue my passions
in life in immigration law and
to help make the world a better
place seeing how she sacrificed
nineteen years of her life to be
in our and and the story she can
tell them.
The madam chairman and and to
Senator I've.
I live alright for the time and
Dixon we have a house in Dixon
with almost half time they're
not and a lot of people that.
My age that live in Dixon worked
at development of the years ago
and it was a it was the it was
the place for you could.
Find jobs are always looking for
employees and the stories they
tell about how that affected
them very similar to what you
did it really did
Change their view of the world
of their role in the world and I
can't think of a better
preparation to be regions in the
fact that you're working there
if you're able to continue doing
that that would be great thank
you thank you madam thank you
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair
of the for.
Committee.
I am a proud walking over.
So that is okay.
I really enjoy your.
Really remarkable I think you're
balancing.
Have.
So that.
Volumes about your character
years.
And there's.
Proud of you.
The
again.
Yeah.
And unfortunately I have lost a
quorum
Away nope.
Because of that.
Yeah well no I was I was just
texting Senator Pirtle saying
can you come back in and I was
telling him.
As I was looking through your
your packet and I I see that
you're registered Republican has
time.
You're someone who they should
really invest in and build a
bench with because hi.
Not that I'm.
Part of.
By but you're clearly a very
smart very hard working and very
compassionate person who who
really cares about her community
and works incredibly hard so I'm
excited to see what you do in
this role and going forward
but with that unless.
Senator Moores has any questions
Education.
No no I appreciate you coming in
was the will to committee.
All right zero public.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle and
Senator Lopez are excuse us
Senator McKenna.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris yes senator Morris yes
senator Ortiz Pino yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle
is excuse sectors to provide
axis XP Senator Stewart yes
Senator Stewart yes senator how
do we have yes Senator have
nearly expensive to do that yes
twenty six yes we will see you
later on on the Senate floor.
Right and next we're is Senator
Campos care center have health
is here Representative health so
we'll we'll go to the service
the last street.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee it's an
honor to introduce Adrienne
Celeste read this morning for
the appointment for our student
region at New Mexico institute
of mining and technology Mr
Celeste three stands out as one
of the most outstanding
hard working accomplishing
determined students in New
Mexico he's an electronic
electrical engineer student at
New Mexico tech he attended
university of Texas at Arlington
and university of Connecticut
but he's very grateful to be
here in New Mexico and said that
he prefers it here so we want to
definitely encourage him to stay
here he likes to write about
engineering philosophy and art
he's an Eagle Scout he was the
senior patrol leader for Boy
Scouts of America also he was an
electronic electrical engineer
the first senior year.
And he if let's say he worked
for New Mexico tech visual light
communication lab as an
undergraduate researcher handed
up work as a freelance
electronics technician and I
have no doubt that Mr Celeste
really uses skills talents
experience and intelligence to
change the world and continue to
make New Mexico crowd and with
that madam chair I'd like to
turn it over to him to say a few
words.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee on thank you
for so much for coming out here
to you know folks for this on a
like for sick think Center and
health for a for the very
generous introduction
So yes as she pointed out I move
around a lot of I started out
going to school at a technical
high school in a location high
school learning like collections
of those long with like a
lecture sins and carpenters
things like that on that I went
to university of Connecticut
where I worked on materials
engineering that I went to the
university of Texas Arlington
rate in mechanical and now I've
finally landed in New Mexico
tech on the logical engineering
and the reason I point that out
because I'm very excited for
this opportunity to possibly
contribute to our system because
I have I guess it's like a lot
of perspective on what other
school systems are doing what's
going on no joke that you know I
say New Mexico tech is highly
functioning and everybody's like
box at that level you haven't
seen university of Texas
Arlington.
The so yes I'm very excited you
know for this opportunity if you
choose to seventy.
Without all stand for questions.
Thank you and we have the number
of folks signed up to speak in
support of president well.
Say this for people signed up
the deal still have plenty of
time to take up about that thank
you madam chair it's my pleasure
stand here one of the things of
a growing to deeply appreciate
as president here in New Mexico
is the voice of the students as
regions and I believe I just
heard this morning that king was
one of the people who created
the student region so we sit
here in the with this which is a
remarkable we did not have this
and that we did not have student
voices and so I look forward to
working with Adrian to see what
the evolving challenges needs
and aspirations are for students
and to address those in a
meaningful way to improve the
quality of life for students so
I stand in support to the
fragrance and hope that you will
positively for him so thank you
very much thank you president
Jennifer Chapman dean Chapman.
You madam chair and and
Committee senator committee
as a dealer students I get of I
get the wonderful pleasure of
working with our energy students
every day and there is
outstanding brilliant bunch of
the individuals but after
extensive searches I got to be
the chair this looking for the
new for the first time the
newest
The region and after extensive
search for seven candidates
qualified candidates Adrian was
chosen not only about the
committee but our governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham agers
passion about improving the
student experience in New Mexico
tech is dedication and
compassion for mental health
issues facing our students is
what sets him apart.
and I supported looking very
much forward to working with him
in that connection with the
student please indicate and even
on the right up here it was just
wonderful having dialogue the
entire well about anything and
everything from what's the maybe
alien America to what we can
actually do together at New
Mexico tech and I highly support
him as someone who gets to be
around our students on a daily
basis thank you yeah.
region are you located.
I just want to say that it was a
mix or looking.
I want to say wasn't that wasn't
yeah.
No
I didn't hear you.
Flexibility.
I thought it was a not loud
enough you're gonna get okay
thank you
it has been a mixed sorely king
effort to bring Cisco was back
in the house to put student
regents on the point that it's
been a great pleasure having a
student regent for the four
years that I've been in New
Mexico tech on the board of
regents and that voice of the
students is so important and
especially to have an Eagle
Scout so we're expecting great
things he is a great background
and I think is very interested
in furthering the voice of the
students and we need that on the
board of regents I appreciate
your consideration.
To the region I and I applaud
I'm gonna mess I'm going to
mispronounce your name region
let let program.
Thank you madam chair and
members finishing up my second
years a region to New Mexico
tech and when I went through
this process it happen virtually
I wish I'd had the opportunity
to visit with the committee in
person
I fed I did speak with Adrian we
got to know each other a little
bit I would say that he's an
exceedingly intelligent young
man with a great back on he has
educational experience in this
family believes grandmothers and
we're educators he's an
independent thinker which is
very important serving on a
board and so I endorse this
whole heartedly and and support
him and hopefully one confirm
look forward to working and
serving New Mexico tech and
beyond Mexico tech the community
in the state.
while I'm here if I may want to
mention to Senator Stewart.
My younger son is an elementary
school principal.
As a teacher specialized
literacy in teaching reading I
don't know what the
methodologies were but as the
instructional leader of the
elementary school that he eight
he to pay directly interacts
with the teachers at those
schools at that school and it is
the only high achieving school
district so the impact of
focusing on literacy in the
teaching of reading is very
evident in the public schools as
a former school teacher myself I
wanted to mention that to you
with that said I'll stop and say
that I think Adrian could be an
outstanding region if confirmed
thank you very much thank you.
I would anyone in the audience
like to raise your hand indicate
support.
Anyone online.
But I would like to raise a hand
to the opposition.
Another one online.
All right members of the
committee there Stewart Senators
if you thank you madam chair and
thank you to you a transfer
wanting to work in this area
with adults and.
You know what punishment to
shape we we need young people
these days we're getting old and
tired and we need new ideas
so so I have I have three
questions for you.
One is so.
Give us a flavor of what you all
decided was ailing the U. S. on
your conversation up here.
And the short term.
madam chair and members of the
committee and the Senator
Stewart
all.
Public a long story
We know we.
We mostly focused on not just so
the whole entire country on I
tried to keep the specific to
education stay focused
We talked a lot about early
about god gender diversity and
how early childhood education
the facts of what's going on you
know in the higher level
university systems
and the because like for example
I went to a talk on by Qualcomm
executive and the who is the
former like up on the board of
the girl scouts and she argued
that you know a lot of this
gender disparity in
engineering comes from the fact
like for example that in very
early childhood and I'm students
male students will be giving
legos where's the Austin school
not which that very early
differentiation has a cascading
effect for example like if you
look at you know early education
like
engineering like programs over
to learn how to use engineering
in like middle school to play
with legos so what that means is
that a all the boys to play with
legos have lots of experience so
they just automatically so they
everybody at the leaves that
they're causing the link better
engineering where is the with
that kind of gets it and the
girls are lacking not because of
anything on the selves the
experience so on the because the
general ideas one thing is that
on.
Really underestimate how on how
you know early education Prof
policies propagate forward not
only to higher education but to
the whole country.
Thank you so much for that.
Very interesting conversations.
I've had a few.
So my next question to you is.
What kind of work are you
interested in what you have like
all the junior.
Areas about you know how many
divergent paths we have a lot of
grief that.
Madam chair and members
committee.
Senator Stewart on fire most of
the lot times of my screen like
to the like outreach they have
the call the students from high
school come in and talk to to
talk to the kids about
electrical engineering and the
one of the main points I try to
beat into there had to Cellectar
point here is very very general
degree like if you get
electrical engineering degree we
can pretty much going to do
anything like I know that like
kind of a jewel engineering who
went on to be additions or
theoretical physicist also can
be very practical work as new
intellectuals on the.
You might need specifically I
don't know exactly what I might
do it for a long time I thought
I was going to go into more
technical fields but at this
point time it you know
especially given recent events
on the interim going to more on
public service work for
something were maybe this higher
leverage on on making a
difference.
Right one thank you for that I
issue sort of answering my
questions I just want to say
that the.
Independent thinker.
It's going to be.
Just hang on to.
It's an important skill.
A lot of independent thinkers on
this committee and it means we
have better conversations and
more fun that is so just hang on
to that and.
Thank you.
Senator Ortiz Pena thank you
madam chairman and Senator
Hemphill thank you and and if
you and thank you for being
willing to add this to
everything else you're already
doing.
Addict that might make increase
in it that meant to just the
other student regions this too
is is there a mechanism on the
campus for you to regularly meet
with others to get their input
as well the need to become the
voice of all the students not
just your own particular
interests on the board.
Thank you madam chair members
committee and Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino
on the yes there is the past
region regularly held office
hours where students could come
in and talk about whatever their
issues you know you know in
general that's you know it's
probably not sufficient because
you know people sometimes you
know all the issues they don't
even know the half so it's a
very important for the region to
get out there engaged into which
is which is.
Socially possible.
That gentleman is there is
student government at the New
Mexico tech that you could use
is a vehicle for that are and
are you involved with the.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Senator Ortiz
you yeah there's there's quite a
you know there's both the the
like undergraduates government
association there's also the
graduate student association
which is equally important on
gathered I dealt with him quite
a lot specially.
The club funding and things like
that you know there's a lot of
very smart people on both of
those.
Stations that should leverage.
And then to that of the chairman
to Senator Hemphill I would be
remiss if I didn't throw in.
Which for the the new center of
excellence in geothermal
development Mexico tech is going
to be the seating and just that
maybe electrical engineer might
be just the this is the kind of
person to work in that field we
were very excited about the
possibilities.
Thank you madam chair members
committee and Senator Ortiz you
yeah.
Excuse talking independent
thinking and stuff with the
needs of independent thinking
around solving our energy
issues.
They can go through.
Here Senator McKenna.
Thirty may have.
Yes.
Those are others.
More intently.
Right right.
Yes.
For all of us.
Representative really fast.
fascinating.
And
Right
yeah.
Obviously as it is let us for a
long.
But.
Place.
Station manager for.
That.
I
have.
And I also yes.
Hello.
And I really.
Reviewed almost.
To
were in different
states.
That's.
of
World so.
You.
Also.
Express sport that's
representation and one.
General.
Mr king.
Thank.
at some point.
C. as.
Representative.
Have.
As.
There are five years.
We're right.
What
I
want to.
Chair and representative so I I
do from hello thank you here.
You Senator Moores sure there's
right here on one moment
one of your resume chair
Senators on for you right are
you ready.
I thank you madam chair and
senator Morris I'm an undergrad
at the moment but I'll finish up
the rest my term as a a graduate
student.
Representative.
Rest of your.
Years later.
thank you madam chair and
senator Morris at yes.
On
the size of what.
Hello.
Representative.
I can't speak for Representative
time.
The.
There's a section where we sent
one over here is a lot of
writers officers and our rules.
Or.
Vibration issues really are of
course we are also populations.
Very important.
All of what senator Wirth.
One of the major.
Underground.
More of that.
I appreciate.
So as a
Or the usual with the way the
reserve times says
they were constitutional.
Sure.
I.
By this board are present on by.
All the way through to.
Well we're here to I right for
more costs so you know our calls
and messages.
Recover loss over the years they
ask you so.
Remember your jobs our service
writers are on the students.
Also not politicians on the
governor there is a general
education I just wanted to
Representative.
Some time ago the use of the
runaways also your phone calls
our.
Remember to do what's right.
That was.
second and which time we will
have a four
But in the meantime I'll echo
what Senator Stewart was saying
about holding on to that
independent thinker
appropriation.
It really
When when we're all talking
through the the issues facing
our our state hand and for you
the the issues facing tech
there is whether you agree with
them or not independent thinkers
are are full I think often some
of the most valuable voices in
those discussions because they
Office for creativity and and
the different purchasing have
through throughout the spectrum
of education.
Senator McKenna at I have lots
of legos of my house so.
But
Sir Michael should be here soon
I think what we're gonna do is
we're going to move on to the
the next appointment and as soon
as we have a quorum we will will
revisit the vote on on here.
Ointment and make sure we get
everyone done at once so.
Now all we'll take a possible
madam chair.
All the back.
All right
Center complex.
With that doctor.
With a model that yeah I
apologize if I mispronounce
that.
thank you very much madam chair
members of the Senate rules
committee with us we have sure
sure any of us quemada is a Ph.D
but more than that he's an
individual who has a very strong
commitment to dealing directly
with innovation with finding if
you will those solutions to many
issues but it particularly in
cyber security he is a a
technology leader he's an
individual who continues to be
recognized as an authority in
artificial intelligence and he's
he's been a part of more than
one think tank over the years
and it's always great to go
ahead and visit with him because
he brings many interesting
concepts he has a depth of
knowledge but more importantly
he continues to ensure that as
we all move forward what he
brings to the table is very
significant as concrete and
along with that it that provides
again those solutions that help
us to move forward when we deal
directly with cybersecurity
center to the individual that I
am sponsoring let him make a few
remarks as we move forward if
Inequality in artificial
intelligence in cyber security
two years later prior to this I
give a keynote at DL and this is
not common rate we do that
federal and state but very good
for diabetes I I joked that all
the time so it gives me an
immense honor to so madam a
matter and I truly believe
that's a jewel and we need to
take the work we're doing from
the center for excellence and
Office intelligence and create a
lot more opportunities here in
the state to be a little class
it's to do thank you all madam
chair and members of the
committee thank you madam chair
members the Senate rules
committee were available for
questions.
If you have six people signed up
to to speak in support president
wells and let's do about two
minutes each.
Madam chair committee members
it's a real honor to have one of
our lines so distinguished
return to our universities
regions if he's confirmed and I
hope you do that I I have to
tell you he said a key word
that's resilience our students
have to have resilience but not
only resilience intellect in
innovation and he is going to
take those to heights that so
that they really strong example
or university of what the
graduate can do I got to know
and I first came and work
together and watched how he of
all the business and he was
essentially sort of the platform
for me to act consider a
trademarked
for the university instead of
stem stem to the power of the to
the power to for both the
hearing not printers and we have
built on printer listen into the
campus thanks people entry of us
and his vision of what he's done
so I stand and support I want to
thank Senator Campos for his
sponsorship yeah they do you
consider very strongly for next
region thank you very much thank
you thank you thanks
region army how.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Gerry army hello I am the board
chair of New Mexico tech I've
been a reject that tech for
twenty years now
I had I had the distinct
pleasure of having known trend
of us for for gosh fifteen plus
years
we started the.
Through our New Mexico tech a
research foundation
one of the first companies that
was formed on campus was was
wrists acts and should've also
is one of the co founders of
that company I was the board
representative because the way
these start ups work the
university and the founders
worked together to grow the
company's and I was attacked
representative on that company
for for several years so I had a
close working relationship with
front of us and we all know
about his his professional on
experience and pedigree that he
brings to the board I want to
touch though on as work ethic he
works tremendously long hours
and does so year after year of
whatever endeavor he sets his
mind to doing.
he is also very committed to the
university and and very low oil
and wants to provide public
service in his role as reject on
a personal note
should of us is is very
unassuming he's a he's a humble
person and he's very
approachable he always has a
smile on his face he's easy to
work with.
And one of the traits that I
think that he's going to bring
to to the university as a region
is the ability to listen and to
form relationships with all of
our stakeholders and with that
hi and and on behalf of the full
board we fully support this
confirmation of shred of Oscar
and we know that he'll be
an excellent board member thank
you thank you.
Next year then.
I need an electrical engineer.
Madam chair members of the
committee it gives me great
pleasure to stand in support of
doctor McCollum will come along
let me tell you just a quick
story on I only have two minutes
his persistence is best
demonstrated by the fact that I
wasn't the one turning him down
for a meeting with the it was my
executive assistant but what do
you figure it is what my pattern
was at noon I was always jogging
so he waited one day forming at
what towards the office and I
told and we just kept on talking
about sounded very interesting
we went right into the office
and he never left my office
after.
In the second story is that he
hadn't finished his PhD and it
came to me says I want to start
this company I said no I'm not
going to help you start a
company and to finish UP and see
if finishes Ph.D he came back
and that's the kind of
persistence and of course we
would help them
actually invested fifty thousand
dollars just so he could hire
some other graduate students to
expand the idea that it had and
complex that it is systems
no Dr Comilla for since he
arrived he arrived the ten
dollars in this pocket after
paying the taxes director.
So he was washing dishes at my
house for.
When we had dinners with the
board the students would get
paid to to go help and engaged
in the conversation there and I
could see that this was not an
ordinary student that he really
could see way beyond his
education and what is possible
to the extent that this company
when it was converted to
RiskSense then at one point had
a hundred and twenty five
employees in New Mexico a lot of
them New Mexico graduates and
then secondly even after he sold
the company one of the.
requirements that he put on the
company that was buying them is
that they keep a presence in New
Mexico and today they have a
very significant workforce in
New Mexico
There's so many things that
could say he just came back from
Israel a couple of the a week
ago
he travels consistently there in
thirty five countries and up
after that trip and he's showed
me the the black to feed the
people that were there they were
the top owners and the co
founders of similar companies
from across the world and they
invited him to make a major
address so you really have a
champion here and to the extent
that you can support this
nomination I would encourage you
asking any question he'll
probably talk longer than you
want to listen but.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Okay Mister cells are.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is John
Salazar I am the former cabinet
secretary for the New Mexico
department of information
technology.
I am honored to have the
opportunity to speak in support
of doctors who knew us Mocama
law.
Appointment to the board of
regents for the New Mexico tech.
I will refer to Dr Makamba law
as Sri has we all know him.
I've had the privilege of
knowing tree for close to twenty
years have been being introduced
to him by my fellow team members
when I worked for New Mexico
taxation and revenue department
I made him at a security summit
at New Mexico tech where he was
one of the speakers.
As I heard him speak I knew
there was something special
about this young man his
knowledge his passion and his
method of communicating for
items that stood out to me.
At that time she had a whole lot
of more here than he has now and
it was a lot to enter.
But I remember thinking to
myself this individual is going
to accomplish great things and
here I am twenty years later
testifying on his behalf I want
to just talk too much about his
academic abilities because you
guys are hurt that but there are
three things that stand out to
me.
Related to Sri's appointment as
a region and the first one is is
a no on this to use committed to
ensuring New Mexico tech
continues to maintain its
reputation as one of the best
cyber schools in the U. S..
He has made it his top priority
to contribute to the growth of
the school both in terms of its
academic programs and insights
entrepreneurial spirit.
The second item Sri's
experience operating his own
business organizations.
Has given him unique insight
into what it takes to run a
successful.
Operational efficient
organization he has pledged to
bring this experiences to the
university to make New Mexico
tech a model of efficiency
efficiently run and operated
facilities in summary as an
alumnus of New Mexico tech
mystery has a vested interest in
ensuring the success of the
university.
His commitment to growing the
school's academic and
entrepreneurial programs and is
experience running successful
businesses make him an ideal
candidate for the board of
regents.
So with that thank you so much.
Thanks thank you Mr cells are
Ricardo Gonzalez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Ricardo
Gonzalez IBM registered lobbyist
without pass electric but really
I'm here today to speak on
behalf of my friend three of us
will come along.
I don't whole list of things to
tell you about I thought I was
going to be the first on there
but as we just as we went
through the list you've heard it
all
there's just two things that I
think that have been left off
one is that when I went to a
possible like trick sure any of
us had been working with them
for some time and we are now
moving on to new technologies in
out el Paso electric with smart
meters and the like and it's
with the diligence of what
RiskSense brought to to our
I. T.
cybersecurity that we're able to
do what we're doing today so
there's a direct correlation
between what New Mexico tat tech
taught him his tenacity in that
and how we're seeing uh folks in
New Mexico
lives being a little bit better
due to that
so that's the first and then the
second probably is you for all
the professional stuff I'm just
gonna tell you about a friend.
in many situations in my life
sure any of us is been there for
me professionally personally
with great integrity and
steadfastness and so from that
and it's an American.
Rehm story the training of us
brings to you today as this
nominated region so I think the
governor did a heck of a job
with this nomination I hope you
all are able to support him and
sure any of us you only five
dollars for all these nice.
Thank you Mr survey.
And
Thank you madam chair seven
point.
Madam chair members carry marks
of address I'm here on a
personal note thank you Mr
Gonzalez this is a friend of
you've heard shooting and Dr
street laws street any treaty
number different names we've
known each other for roughly
over fifteen years
those you've worked Lara Patel
when he helped create the
evaluation unit which is now
John doctor Courtney oversees
the LFC is how I was first met
treaty and if you work with
money you can see right off the
bat you know in terms what a
great source that is and and
what kind of person Srinivas and
of course my brother who's been
in New Mexico for number years
but also he talks about recenze
talks but I costs you know yep
he was doing this proven
cybersecurity was yes what we're
trying to hear about it setting
that cost when it comes to
protecting us when it comes to
other criminal elements besides
cybersecurity but that is a
really critical things that he's
put New Mexico on the map for
and then also his heart into
support for New Mexico tech
business because all cities is
also really good person what you
see is what you get restraining
never change as long as I've
known him I've been doing this
for about twenty seven years now
and stream is always been the
same person year after year so
just want to be able to just
stand in support of him and and
I think New Mexico tech is
receiving a great person is a
reason on as as a member of of
of a good board of regents so
thank you madam chair members
the committee extends Porter
street.
Thank you would anyone else like
to raise our hands indicate
support for the country.
Right anyone online.
But I would like to raise a hand
in the opposition saying none
anyone online.
All right Senator Baca.
Thank you and thank you thank
you doctor for a for wanting to
support.
Mexico tech in in this way I was
really impressed with your
resume on I'm excited to you'll
be there one of them one of the
reasons almost excited as your
business experience I think that
is so necessary coupled with the
technical experience that New
Mexico tech offers all that so
nine I have a vested interest
there I have two children have
graduated from New Mexico tech
and I have one that's entering
this next year and she will be
attending their new business
program and that's why I'm so
excited that that you're there I
your influence will help the
business side of it I I.
Yes and what I've seen here is
gonna well compliment of that
school and so I do apply to the
selection that that has been
made here and I am comforted by
by your current to your current
members in the in the region to
and
president of the school as well
and the ticket's gonna this can
be a great great experience for
everybody.
Thank you.
Senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you madam chairman Senator
Campos Dr thank you so much for
for being willing to tackle this
I've been reading over your
resume.
And as I read it I had to re
read it and re read it again
because I I don't understand any
us.
I don't know if patch management
is would be via an is it the
risk based vulnerability it just
sounds terrific the.
But I did run into something
that I did understand madam
chairman and that is.
That you're invited to the
company that you currently have
a has.
Forty thousand customers.
In ninety seven of them are from
the fortune one hundred.
And I don't know who the other
three are that are part of your
customer base but that's
incredible the statement of how
valuable what you do is not just
to the state which is it's great
that you're you're here but to
the country you really are
helping us work on things that.
Most of us don't understand it
but take the liberty is saying
we don't understand exactly what
artificial intelligences what
was cybersecurity involves but
it's clearly something that is
very valuable people are willing
to pay a lot of money to have it
done and thank you for being
willing to do it here in New
Mexico I wondered if you could
if you could share with us what
you see as some of the the
things that this legislature
might be able to do to further
this whole incredibly important
area of technology.
Transfer yes transfer that that
that I think is going to be the
key to our.
Sustainability is an economy
because we you know our water
shortage is going to make
agriculture very difficult
are minerals are are financially
going to be depleted but we need
something and then you I think
you're you're the key to it or
what you do is the key to it if
you could share with us what we
could do to to further that tech
transfer it aspect.
So madam chair members of the
committee senator Pino I think
that question first
if you remove the mumbo jumbo
all the do is protect normal
people from bad guys end of the
day that's what it is that means
something to us and you talked
about an excellent thing New
Mexico is going through an
amazing face in its the journey
we have enough wealth when
everybody else is hurting.
And I truly believe in
inequality.
We need and knowledge economies
one thing that empowers minerals
you can spend them today but
they're not going to last
forever so one thing I believe
New Mexico has is we have the
labs where we haven't done
enough from a tech transfer we
do a lot of basic research but
we don't convert that into
applied the same thing with
universities.
Why is this sense only the
successful IT company in New
Mexico then you have four
research universities that
puzzles me every single that.
Why can be fifty Stream masses
here why can be fifty to census
and that's what we need to stop
using yes there are barriers of
entry yes it's hard to do
business here but don't give up
right I think that's what we
need to do bring back
entrepreneurs have them come to
New Mexico should the journeys
they don't have to be from here
every entrepreneur needs unique
but how do you bring them back
to our universities and have
them share the knowledge so I
firmly believe in that that's
what I was telling Senator mod
and
I mean hundred last night in a
flying back together and I was
with the you know I mean one of
the US senators Metronomy is an
entrepreneur by himself and was
spending sometime this Tuesday
with him on what can we do and
that's actually inviting him to
come down to technical about
become important to one of these
days but I want you to come down
and see what we do at tech so to
answer your question straight I
think we need to bring a
readiness first that will lead
into inquisitiveness and show
them an example you can make
millions and millions of dollars
sitting in New Mexico and give
them some examples that's what I
believe in madam chair members
of the committee and senator
Pete.
Right thank you very much drive
and thank you madam chair and
great answer.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair I'm having
difficulty understanding your
resume also get some of the
what's this happens on alleged
agents for created through
action actions that Act.
So S. seven madam chair members
of the committee today we need
talk about artificial
intelligence it is that thing in
two thousand it was not the
thing people knew about neural
networks that thought that is
that from a not for the child's
perspective what proved to the
world is no networks will not do
good for cybersecurity because
we don't have enough data we
don't have enough expertise so
we can train it so I discovered
an alternative method called
support vector machines very
would drop a piece of software
on a machine into a loan you'll
behave here and help you
projects on the back guys three
years later today that is one of
the most widely used artificial
intelligence methods in the
world and it's a case study in
Harvard you I see Stanford
Berkeley you bet twenty seven
universities use that as a case
study how can you think twenty
years ahead so that's what
happened we wanted against
Google and that's the story a
member of and madam chairman
members of the committee Senator
Stewart trying to get my head
around.
What's really started to happen
the after the rules.
Is it I'm almost in tears
because I so proud.
Of New Mexico I am so proud of
our universities I'm just so
proud.
In the next now thank you.
They were out.
So the level of expertise that
receive.
Michael and but I want you to
we've got and the the head of
our servers.
The.
Why do we we need your expertise
there so I'm assuming we're
getting into like the mall here
for the reason that.
I
just think you are at thank you
for being that you are claiming
that station on.
Thank you.
Senator Moores.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator appointment because we
do offer.
The doctor once the water you an
all the challenges.
Madam chair for me senator
Morris we we go back with a with
a long standing friendship as
well as you can tell and so
that's the only reason I really
apologize but what we're gonna
do we get to the floor if you
will I would like you to go
ahead and carry this nominee
Madam sometimes to apologize for
six dollars.
This.
Senator Dr very very impressive.
Really mention of one of the
callers witcher's really
Americans.
On this is that is what this
country about.
Your.
you Mr chairman Senator and you
currently have any like
contracts with businesses are
consulting that we receive
Everyone that Collison you were
so madam chair members of the
committee senator Morris now.
and I really appreciate your
emphasis on.
New Mexico.
Six you are able to change not
only provide for your children
one the last New Mexico very
hostile.
Creation also this legislation
on.
What would you recommend we do.
Things that we.
I would try to Mexico better on
so we would like to order have a
great idea started right this is
gonna sell those jobs in the
state.
So madam chair members of the
committee senator Morris I think
there are three things I would
say we can do better the first
the perception is New Mexico's
hostile.
I've never felt that way this
that this is a great state for
me who I am is what the status
and then people say I still
seven five New Mexicans.
And the reason I say that is I
give you for nations K. lucky
Center Fidel said about our I
was a young kid.
At in this with the stalwarts of
this legislature I suggest
wanted on them asking for money.
Literally to the point to give
me million box that million
transformed into hundreds of
millions of dollars.
So there is opportunity to
provide divide legislators and
get into the ecosystem so what
we need to build as a pro.
Want to partnership so we need
to create an ecosystem it's hard
to get to the people there's no
doubt about it we need to make
it a little bit more accessible
the second one is we don't have
what I call it capital ecosystem
we don't have angels we don't
have C. we don't have CD's money
that we have just I see and some
mounted we talk about we want to
debaters we actually don't
understand what this capitalize
we don't understand what on the
ship as we need to fix that.
Right it's very important
they're not saying just throw
the state's money but do make
risk capital available and
you'll see the success that's
really important the second one
is mentorship.
We do a terrible job of
mentoring fellow entrepreneurs
we don't have it I couldn't find
anybody who can mentor me in New
Mexico when I started and Dr
David said will allow you to
stop I was introduced to month
Fidel as he's somebody who is an
attorney and a business you can
then to you absolutely that's a
stop for us that's what we
funded the company but you need
to paid up somebody quickly says
the basic knowledge but we need
more than that so we need to
bring one mentorship back to New
Mexico the thing that really as
I was fortunate I can't speak
for others I've known governor
Lujan when she was a congressman
I worked very closely with
governor Martinez and I was on
both sides of the aisle several
years really taking New Mexico
first attitude what can we do to
the state that allowed us to
take up knowledge delivered to
the state and build a business
here and then became worldwide
so I came so that's why if you
look at me I'm an independent
right I work with somebody who
believes in cyber NA I that's my
relations that's my party that's
my application and that's what
we need to bring back cut the
body lines focus on the mission
and really get into it don't
laugh New Mexico be a barrier
but you can bring that back here
if you have like mentorship
those are the three things have
to madam chair members of the
committee and sentiments you're
almost on the.
For more conversation
everywhere Senator.
We respect working on.
Or S. or regulations.
Taxes.
Thanks for the.
Thank you.
Alright.
Right.
Thank you at all you know
Senator Stewart beat me to it I
was thinking about that
cybersecurity bill we heard and
hear from Senator Padilla a
weeks ago and.
The employee be great if we
could put you
Two members of the committee and
deeply involved so I work with
our state information security
officer Raja and I do work with
our chief of staff and several
CIO's and CSO's incentive pretty
as well so with the building
it's true national asset
vaccinating the nation on how do
we bring a statewide program a
lot of states talked about it
this type of bill is actually
going to put back on the
pedestal for leading the nation
on how can you build a national
program with very little
investment so I'm actually
deeply involved every week I
meet with the team dole red iron
that will actually make time for
that and I truly believe in that
that's the best way we can go to
every child every city every
county every higher education
and all the state agencies well
I'm thrilled to hear that
yeah present wells that students
that tech folks attacked nida
resilience intellect and
innovation and and you are
absolutely at amazing example of
all three of those so you're
very very lucky to have you with
that what is the will of the
committee yes right but still
roll call vote on on the drive
and then we're going to move to
a roll call vote on our student
regent who we don't have a
quorum when you've heard we
heard him student doctor first.
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca
yes Senator Ingle with Senator
Lopez or excuse Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle Essex fused
Senator fan.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator had a meal yes Senator
had a meal yes and senator do
the yes with a yes we'll see on
the Senate floor later on today.
Thank you madam chair members
the Senate rules committee thank
you Mr Celestica come on that.
Yeah.
All right that'd do pass let's
do a roll call the.
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca
yes Senator Ingle is excused
Senator Lopez is accused Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator more yes Senator Moores
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excuse sectors
defending yes.
suspended yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes center
how to meal yes thank you how do
you test and Senator yes AS well
see on the Senate floor leader.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair may please
a committee for for you today I
I have Kerr Anthony summer for
confirmation for the state
investment council tell you a
little bit about Mr summer he's
a shareholder and managing
director of the law firm somber
you Dolph law firm PC located
right here in Santa Fe he
practices in the areas of the
state trust planning the state
interest administration income
the state give taxation for
individuals and family owners.
Real estate law.
And business transactions.
is a current president elect of
the American college of trust in
the State Council he's been a
fellow since two thousand two
he's been chairman of the New
Mexico Bar Association section
on taxation two times is a
member of the American Bar
Association taxation section and
real property in probate
sections Kurt is also past
chairman of the Santa Fe estate
planning council and a member of
the New Mexico state Planning
Council Kircher the probate
court rules committee for the
New Mexico Supreme Court from
twenty fifteen to twenty
seventeen he received his degree
in economics from Georgetown
University in nineteen eighty
one magna **** laude and his law
degree from the university of
New Mexico I'm proud to say he
is a fellow alumni of money his
written articles on tax loan
speaks frequently on the subject
in this position for state
invest investment council of per
will of fulfill the mission of
the state and be a fantastic
addition to the council and with
that I'll turn it over to Kirk
to tell a little bit about
himself to the committee madam
chair madam chair members of the
committee I'm very honored to be
here and thank you very much for
this opportunity and sent thank
you senator Akaka for this
opportunity and this nomination
I'm a lifelong New Mexican my
mother this from northern Mexico
my father's from Ohio I was very
privileged to go to Georgetown
university for undergrad but
decide to come back to the
universe in New Mexico for law
school.
ranks very high great student
professor relations and it gave
me an opportunity to study law
in and of jurisdiction which I
want to come back and practice
in I worked in SportsCenter
Domenici's office as a as an
undergrad for four years and
decided that it was best to come
back to New Mexico to job
opportunities serve the state
I'm now at a stage in my career
where I can give and devote some
time and expertise to help in
assisting the state with
something that's very important
to the state and that is the
state investment fund as you all
well know it is a single the
largest third largest in the
state in the country it is an
extremely important to the state
I think that fiduciary
distribution obligation of the
state is important as well in my
capacity now as president of the
American college of trust and
State Council which is a group
of people of twenty four hundred
lawyers throughout the country
who specialize in the state
planning the fiduciary planning
and taxation I have the unique
opportunity to lend my expertise
from thirty nine years of
practice and fiduciary practice
with in the state to the state
to state investment council fund
nominated and if if I'm
confirmed and I appreciate the
spreadsheet this opportunity to
do so and I stand for questions
thank you ma'am madam chair may
have one thing I wanted to give
a special thank you to our
Senate pro tempore Mimi Stewart
and senator Peter Wirth for
helping me make this connection
with Mr some.
Thank you madam chair.
Here to have anyone that you
want to have a because of what I
have one percent.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jamie
Clements I am president of the
museum of New Mexico foundation.
I'm delighted to stand here in
support of my dear friend Kurt
summer I have known Kurt both
personally and professionally
for nearly a decade.
There is no person I know who
has more integrity than Kirk and
I mean that sincerely his
counsel to the foundation is
always thoughtful and wise and
my eighty five member board of
trustees which believe me runs
the entire political spectrum
has tremendous respect for Kurt
and trust in him Kurt is an
outstanding choice for the state
investment council and I urge
you to confirm his nomination
thank you.
Thank you and I cannot.
The five member board.
We would like to raise raise
their hand in the case support
the conference rate anyone
online.
Anyone with anyone like to raise
our hands in the K. I.
opposition see none anyone
online all right members of the
committee Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair so at
thank you so much for wanting to
do this.
You know Senator Paypen I sort
of had.
Twenty hours thank you counsel
sometimes it just takes
a long time.
Perfect for the job and I we
both agree that we were
successful in finding the
perfect person so your
background is just so impressive
and once again want to thank you
for wanting to stay here in New
Mexico and for doing this job
because you're right is is very
important our our vestments in
line from from phone
number.
Has made the state work in a way
that other states don't of we've
been able to keep taxes paid for
education will work and other
states up most of them.
Property tax which is in itself
at this equalizes school
districts all over this.
We don't do that.
so we.
Of these assessments to pay for
upwards of a quarter to a third
of our budget every year Indian
Education so
So it's important that we have
people like you a healthy are
already breaking director to
make sure that we continue that
thank you so much for wanting to
do that and if you want to
respond here.
Madam chair members of the
committee Senator Stewart I
thank you for this opportunity
and Senator Baca when the when
the question came up from Peter
Senator Wirth could I help
provide Republican in Santa Fe
County to assist we kind of
joke.
We could a joke because Peter
Senator Wirth that I have it on
good joke in a very good
friendship that is hard to find
somebody in New Mexico who's a
Republican whose whose moderate
so I I said well I would be
willing to do it and would be
honored if if so appointed and
Senator Baca was gracious enough
with your consent as well to
appoint me and I is my honor to
serve the state I think it's a
extremely important fund it's
extremely important that its
integrity be maintained and I
truly appreciate the fiduciary
obligation that you're placing
in the and the members of that
board so thank you Senator
Stewart madam chair.
Yes.
Senator.
For his opinions that the
Senator Moores Representative
aka just so I understand this
both this is our appointment
your this is this is my
appointment but I was introduced
by him budget by Senator Stewart
and and senator Wirth and I got
to speak to him at length for
some time and was very impressed
with him and my dad it's even
harder to find a Republican
attorney in Santa Fe that is
truly a unicorn.
But I he's he's well qualified
thank you so it's it's a
Legislative Council point that's
one but because of that is we
yeah I want to make sure I see
the letter of appointment or so
so I just want to make sure this
is one of ours and our promises
I for us to review there's two
parts of the legislature and
make sure our interests as
Legislature protected areas are
for sure and to give a little
more clarity on that
traditionally what we've been
doing is if we have appointments
it is a joint appointment but
usually one person take the lead
Madam pro tempore sometimes
myself senator Wirth and the
minority majority in the house
as well.
Sure.
Thank you Sir thank you.
And I'm curious you are here for
the for Dr.
With the model three and
actually before I make comments
that listeners funds go ahead
thank you
Senator.
Disappointment
I just wanted to mention to the
committee that this is a great
reputation here and community
and
Thank you thank thank you yeah
I'll note that
I've heard only glowing things
about you from absolutely
everyone who have who is it has
has spoken to me about you but
I'm I'm curious to know your
thoughts on some of the the
comments that that the good
doctor made especially around
kind of the need to grow
it risk castles in New Mexico
yeah this madam chair members of
the committee that's a very good
question I was Exene you are
really impressed with the doctor
and what he's done and he is a
perfect example of why risk
capital is important to the
state if you will note that
there is a the the the state
investment fund delegates
roughly up to eleven point some
eleven percent roughly of its if
it's capital for these ventures
they're difficult of that
and as you might well yes but
that's why you have people like
Mr Maurice who hire people who
are able to vet those
industries and capital ventures
and risk capital for the state
to invest the long term future
of the it's part of a balanced
portfolio and a portfolio of
this size I think it's important
to have some of that risk
capital in as well and in as
part of that mix so I personally
couldn't believe that what what
he was describing and how
successfully once but it is a
perfect example of why it's
important to invest in in the
state.
Thank you hi months ago I had a
conversation with someone who is
a is a venture capitalist here
in New Mexico and was expressing
frustration to me that the S. I
see.
Didn't.
It didn't work with that and I I
you know this woman is probably
one of like three in the state I
think we're we're not flush with
venture capitalists in New
Mexico issues expressing
frustration that the S. I see
didn't kind of go to local folks
first and that they were
primarily dealing with with out
of state folks
I don't know anything about that
other than this ten minute
conversation with this person I
just met
but but is there.
What is the approach what is the
approach to this as I see as far
as kind of prioritizing local.
Capital madam chair
I don't know what the priority
is for for the S. I see having
never had that opportunity to be
involved in the policy I don't
know
there are venture capitalists in
this in the in the state as you
all know venture capital is hard
to attract it's centered and in
big cities such as Silicon
Valley Paul also Boston New York
I do know that from many of my
clients to invest in those
ventures venture capitalists
have a difficult time in New
Mexico I'm the doctor didn't
mention this but we have a tax
system Senator that is very
discouraging for services and
discourages investment in many
respects because of its somewhat
regressive with the gross
receipts so you hear that I hear
that commonly in my practice I
hear commonly from my clients
who do this investment and it
makes it difficult to get people
to the state to make that to put
that risk capital there.
and Services if you know your on
the list but.
It's good over there have enough
someone to I really don't have a
lot to add to Madam chairman of
we've known our families have
known each other for a long time
here in Santa Fe and and the
just thank I'm delighted that
you're in a position to be able
to to to do the service for the
state and to bring all that
expertise and experience.
To the work that we we really
need so thank you that that was
it I didn't have an EC is
Pacific question in mind thank
Senator members of the committee
Senator Pino thank you that was
better for offer.
K. recently.
Senator Stewart.
I'm sure I just wanted to say
that I think we're on the verge
of flooring that to your team
again so just to your comment
we're we're trying to trying
chair of some members of the
committee Senator I I think
that's a good idea I'm I'm not
not weighing in on the policy is
there's just some regressive
aspects the G. R. T. that need
to be taken into account when
you're trying to attract
capital.
I just so look forward to.
I think the the the the director
voices goes to our I popped
Committee patiently so I may try
to serve on that more because I
just want to hear more about
what's going on with this I see
so thank thank you thank you.
What's the will of the committee
I know that you have.
Senator called.
Senator more I mean I'm sorry
Senator Baca yes senator Munoz
Senator Ingle and Senator Lopez
Sir excuse Senator McKenna yes
Senator mechanic yes Senator
Moores with local.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excuse
senators to panic.
Senator yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator had
a meal yes Senator have you yes
and Senator Duhigg yes if yes
we'll see on the Senate floor
leader today thank you.
All right we're gonna go on to
H. J. R. eight.
And members we don't have the
the new agency but you'll find
copies of the bill in FY are
there in front of you from that
now this is being himself.
I share eight.
Representative center you're
free to go ahead and get started
good morning madam chair I have
to start by compliment keen
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino on his
basketball performance last
night and Senator Baca I'm glad
you guys are still intact.
act.
Yes yes Senator Pirtle and and
we really had to compliment
Representative Lord for some
outstanding moves with the
Republican senators so this
amazing.
we're here to date of madam
chair
to present House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution eight.
And this has two sections
section one this is to amend the
article four of the constitution
which pertains to legislative
guidelines about allowing for
provision of legislative
salaries and then creating a
citizen commission of
legislative salaries to Saval
issue establish suggested limit
the salaries of members of the
legislature section one
proposes to add to article four
of that a the citizen commission
on legislative article salaries
is established as an independent
state agency for the purpose of
establishing adjusting and
limiting the salaries of the
members of the legislature of
one B. says that its nine
members and states that the
qualifications appointments and
qualification qualification
shall all be as provided by law
which would become through
enabling legislation and finally
of that they will it has a
reporting dates of when this is
to section two of proposes to
amend article four section ten
which specifically is on
compensation of members to read
that each member will continue
to receive a per deem.
as we do now and that it will be
in the the per diem expense and
mileage at the same rates will
be during legislative committees
during the interim C. as a
salary established by the
citizens commission on a
legislative salaries and Andy
continues with the original that
no other compensation or perfect
we'll be allowed and finally
section three that the amendment
will be proposed by this
resolution to the people in the
next collection I just want to
add to things is I'm a third
generation new Mexican I know
that we have tents twelve
thirtieth generation make
Mexicans but I'm a third
generation my grandparents were
homesteaders in nineteen twelve
when the state was established
and at that time
representatives represented
about thirteen thousand seven
hundred people Senators
Representative wait excuse me I
think I got that wrong senators
were about thirteen thousand
seven hundred people and reps
spoke for six thousand seven
hundred people as you know those
amounts have gone way up the
celery at the time was five
dollars a day and you got ten
cents per mile and I don't know
if that was for buggies and
horse feed cars because cars
were emerging that but our
responsibilities have really
changed and as one interim
person spoke
Last summer he said you know
you're controlling over nine
million dollars in your budget
and then huge amounts of money
and and it's time to add this
professional aspect of a rate
legislature so with that I want
to turn it over to a Senator
Hotmail who will be carrying it
through the Senate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so those of us no
I think the public perception is
that weed we're away from Santa
Fe after the thirty or sixty day
session that our job stops I
don't understand the amount of
calls that we take people who
reach out to us people who need
us to represent them as their
senators or the representatives
not to represent the needs of
our state well the legislative
body needs to reflect and
represent all the people of the
state of New Mexico New Mexico
is the only state in the nation
but does not pay state
legislators a salary now H. T.
R. eight would intend to
increase the access to open
provided service to people who
are much more rooted in
community and are left out of
running of office and
representing their communities
because they can't afford to
work without a salary now I'm
very fortunate to have a flex to
have flexibility in my schedule
and to be able to still work
part time if I wasn't able to
work part time with Los Alamos
National Laboratory I'd have to
be on leave without pay what
does that mean that means I'd
have to pay the laboratory one
thousand seven hundred dollars a
month to keep health care
benefits there's no way that I
can make it I want to share with
you what my day is I wake up at
three AM and I do what I need to
do I feed my cat get the copy
ready and I meditate and I work
from the laboratory from three
AM until six thirty AM after
that I joke with my partner but
with the day's gonna be like and
I'm back in the round house by
seven thirty AM you'll see me in
committee sometimes try to pull
up a laboratory laptop to see if
there's any actions I can take
when and if we have a lunch
break if not so I can mentally
prepare when I go home at the
end of the days that I can
continue to work with my
laboratory duties what we're
seeing now is people like mine I
told you all that I come from
very humble beginnings and I can
be a voice for the people that
can't afford to be in the
legislature and so what this
would do would allow people to
have their
But if I do if I don't do this
make sure that whoever comes in
to Senate district I would be
able to represent the people of
northern New Mexico and not have
to worry about how they're going
to make ends meet and if they
could even do it with the
flexible schedule if they're
currently employed and with that
madam chair I'll take questions
from the committee.
Thank you very much we do have
organized support
in favor do we have anyone
signed up in opposition okay it
looks like there's one two three
four five six seven people who
as the organized support
you also have about thirteen
minutes left so let's do about
men and half per person Mr
Stewart.
Go on up to the microphone and.
Yes your first last name and who
you're with.
Force and all and and and
Sanchez I'm gonna kind of I'll
go ahead and and time folks but
also leave it to you to come
chair your public comments
support yes thank you madam
chair I'll be brief Louis get it
with the Serra club you're gonna
chapter representing our our
thirty five thousand members and
supporters we strongly support
this piece of legislation New
Mexico is actually the only
state that does not pay
legislators and by doing so
we're doing a huge disservice to
to the people of the state many
people are unable to serve due
to financial burden of citizen
legislature by paying New Mexico
provided we can create a
stronger legislative body in
which people are better
represented as senator come here
to said we think the Sanchez for
this bill and we believe that
it's a move in the right
direction and we ask for your
support thank you.
Thank you next we have Mason
Graham I think all the rest of
them are on zoom.
Mr Gramm please go ahead for up
to about a minute and a half.
Check.
Mason go ahead.
All right let's move on to more
to make sure.
I do not see that.
Tom Solomon.
the other that may be a chair
right
Representative Katie.
With our last.
All right Claudia riser.
Okay Philippe of our.
Well.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Li because about and I'm working
for the tourney for the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
we thank the sponsors for
introducing this important joint
resolution we stand in support
of H. J. R. eight New Mexico is
the only state in the country
that does not have a subject
with state legislators
unfortunately this makes it
extremely difficult for anyone
without significant financial
resources to be able and willing
to work for the legislature's
with that of the center for
legislators it's almost
impossible to imagine a scenario
where least Mexican run for
state office get elected in
nineteen eighties as of the
December all of trying to put
food on their tables rate those
to provide for their families
additionally giving all
legislators of the Saturn V. for
them now within the folks in the
issues affecting our state and
not the financial stability in
some ways support was to address
the issue because it proposes a
more equitable political process
that invites Paul New Mexicans
to run for office for these
reasons we support district
resolution and urged committee
to pass thank you.
Great thank you
any of the other folks for more
more people in mind madam chair
the space.
Speaker.
Okay Mason Graham one thing yes
try again.
Hear me yes we can hear you.
You madam chair members of the
committee Mason Graham from
common cause New Mexico we in
strong support of this
legislation this as the speaker
of the sponsor mention Mexico's
the only state that does not
have a P. legislature we
actually did a study on this
through research and polling
shows that sixty four percent of
likely voters are actually in
favor of supporting a
legislative base salary the
secretary did have bipartisan
support sixty two percent of
voters also support having an
independent salary commission as
well and also had bipartisan
support and then one in three
voters are actually on aware of
the current rate structure in
the the two thirds of voters
believe that legislators are
actually paid over seventy five
thousand dollars so is there is
there is a misconception on how
much of legislators are
currently being paid and we do
want to recognize that that
schools with the nanti provided
you keep people from actually
serve in these roles and if they
would please the chair actually
have a comment from former
representative Caitlin to fifty
cents me that I would like to
read if I show up yes please
please go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kay
Bounkeua as many of you know had
extreme honor serving as
previous state representative
for house district nineteen I
don't need to tell any of you
what it takes to do this work
live it every day and while we
only come to this is going to
circle some of these items such
as our deep love for community
and families believe that we
officer to see and make changes
that benefit our people the
places that we're brown and we
don't come to work with the same
type support structures
financial resources health
capacity and demands on our
time.
Well that's all the good of what
we were able to accomplish
during my term I cannot justify
continuing and servicing and
real time poll to say to myself
and my family including my then
three year old daughter for full
time job and put in the work
needed as a representative with
many of you know is in itself a
full time job and wanted to
erect a sacrifice and mental and
physical health feeling
inadequate in both the job I was
being paid to do and my role as
a representative and left
heartbroken was no that was
willingly giving up my
daughter's account at the time
when she needed me the most if
you believe the mothers and
young families deserve the
opportunity to be here if you
believe that people of all
backgrounds including race
gender class age and ability to
serve the community here please
help modernize an antiquated
system infrastructure that will
allow everyone wants to do this
work to do it and do it well
having to choose between service
and the ability to check take
for themselves and those who
depend on them I'm asking for
you to vote of support strong
presumption I thank you madam
chair.
Okay thank you.
All right hunters want to see if
any of the the other folks are
states that are on now Meredith
Meijin Vertol Solomon.
The on here for Claudia riser
yes.
Go ahead Morning madam chair and
committee members playwrights
the navy veteran and chair of
the veterans military families
caucus can't about four hundred
fifty members New Mexico has a
hundred and forty two thousand
veterans which is almost ninety
percent of our clothing
population yet our legislators
are only six percent veterans we
have the second lowest
Legislature inventor and
representation in the nation
even though we have an ample
supply of potential candidates
to our four military bases and
two national research
laboratories the lack of the
salary is a permissible barrier
to entry for many veterans
despite continuing desire to
serve I'll be if in a civilian
capacity many veterans cannot
afford to run for an unpaid
legislative office in New Mexico
and a salary makes serving in
the legislature affordable
representation matters to
veterans into our family he's a
rate legislative body with
eliminate the need for
legislators to be rich
resourceful or retired the
pension it would attract a
greater diversity of candidates
with different experiences to
run for office this includes
many more military veterans
which would improve this
constituency representation in
our legislature our experience
is not the same with committee
as many and they added valuable
voice to the conversation pay
legislators within reach to
field a candidate to run provide
better representation for a
diverse New Mexico.
Unity's bring needed
perspectives which are currently
missing to the body and why the
opportunity for discharge not
just retired veterans you serve
thank you so much to the
sponsors of this bill and for
giving me the opportunity to
testify this morning thank you.
Thank you.
All right
There's no one signed up in
opposition if anyone wants to
raise a hand to indicate support
please do so.
Anyone online can as well you
madam chair okay anyone wants to
indicate residents indicate
opposition please do so.
See non anyone online.
All right.
Questions from the committee I
have centers the phonics
followed by Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sponsors SO nine thousand
quarter of this and we'll wait
to hear all the discussion on.
I.
the question I have is this
would be on a twenty four
ballots and if so.
How
Will the public be educated.
The second part of my comment
and Sanchez is that in the past.
We've attempted anything
connected to the legislature.
If there is a lawsuit trial.
Our conditions provided.
It usually takes.
The initiative could you comment
on some of my questions and
comments.
Madam chair of comment on your
first question Senator the
educate many advocates have
indicated that if this if it
passes the legislature that they
will be running various advocacy
campaigns and educational
campaigns for example the league
of women's voters does
nonpartisan issues and their
voter guide online and offline
where they list you know all the
perspectives
individual legislators who are
committed people like common
cause which is a nonpartisan
advocacy organization have
indicated they'll run education
campaigns as of other groups and
I would expect there will be
groups that may run as you know
campaigns against don't support
it but there's beef as we move
along there's been a great help
point of people who do want to
educate voters both historically
and what the impact of this
would be.
So manager could you comment on
my comment about if there is an
adverse events in the press
You know this might just take
this down again and then we will
have to wait a few years to the
best of the public again.
Madam chair and senators if
something happens and that
affects it then that is a real
out reality we have to face
polling shows that the majority
of New Mexicans favor a rate
legislature.
Okay thank you very much.
Thank you Senator McKenna fall
but Stuart.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Senator Senator bringing this
very timely and I think urgent
legislation.
so I I like madam chair and
Senator I like to sure what my
experience has been since
running for office and.
Serving in the Senate chamber
yes I knew that it's a it's on
rate and that we get per diem
for travel and the session and
the like
but now that I've lived it for
three years I can't really I
really got the inside lands of
what it takes and.
Fortunately for me Madam chair
Senator Representative my
employer allows me to choose
cation time take lease without
pay.
To do this otherwise I would
have said no and I and I always
have wanted to to
to serve the public.
I'm so I'm looking that way so
right now for instance I am
I'm I'm my status is live we
without pay because I use up my
allowance allowed vacation for
the beginning of our session.
fortunately I don't have to put
in extra hours for my health
care I'm really grateful for
that.
So that set aside
I think New Mexico's really
missing out on tremendous
talent.
Madam chair and senator
Representative because once they
learned the terms.
And they talk it over with their
families many of them and their
employers I'm sure many of them
decide I would love to run for
office but I simply cannot
because of the terms and and so
consequently we have we miss out
on a tremendous amount of talent
who would like to serve in the
chambers but cannot.
So maybe about a year ago or so
I was reading in the journal and
for those that study these
things there is a conclusion
from one of the.
The authors.
And here she's wrote that.
New Mexico is two to two and a
half years behind other states
such as Colorado to develop
deliberate and consider
legislation.
That our citizens need because
we're not full time and because
of the staggered.
sessions we have the thirty days
sixty day the thirty days
limiting because it has to be on
the governor's call so a lot of
time two to two and a half years
behind other states so that's a
disservice to our state
We have been writing a lot of
these bills.
I haven't started it all madam
chair Senator Representative.
What what
have we got to the point in the
in the bill language.
Whether or not it would be an
independent board that would
help establish
Establish the salary because
that's what I would be very
supportive of we should not be
setting a salary issue be
independent thank you madam
chair representative madam chair
Senator great question a lot of
this was to enable the
legislation which originally our
bill was I don't know eleven or
twelve pages long but it's a
constitutional amendment so we
put it short are because of this
it's a binding decision made by
that nine percent commission in
other words we would not
determine our salaries they
would determine our salaries.
Madam chair representative and
senator that's that's exactly
what I would support
the commission that studies a
salary surveys around the
country takes in the regional
data and establishes it and we
that's a lot of the we've got a
lot of respect from our
constituents and the public that
we are not
Sen from salaries so Bravo I
really X. I really applaud this
legislation it's long overdue
and I look forward to voting for
it thank you madam chair Senator
Representative.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair.
So I thought originally that
this need to heal the section of
the constitution that I see no
that doesn't so at I'm glad to
get this legislative history
because I remembered three
different times in my career
where we tried this and failed
so now I feel I was right ninety
six two thousand seven two
thousand eight sixteen
I do think that the public in
general has changed their views
I I want to thank the the house
group of women that have been
looking at this and studying
this for several years I think
you've made a dent in the and
tie
anti legislator rate in the
public so it does seem as though
even the newspapers are
suggesting that we ought to get
paid.
You know now that I'm in a
leadership position I have twice
as much work as when I was
legislators if it's never ending
it's really kind of unbelievable
and sometimes after I've spent
two or three days working all
day for three days I think good
grief under a lot of work and I
think it that any for at not at
that time.
But I keep doing it.
So so I do support this you know
when I started ninety four the
pregame is seventy five dollars.
And within several years but we
increase that to more like the
per diem that we have now based
on the IRS
but that language that passed
the fully set up you will we
will limit for tea and.
To a certain amount I think the
public thought that they were
limiting our per diem they did
not realize they were doubling
our per diem so I do think it's
important to be honest about
this ammendment
so thank you for bringing it
that's all I have to.
Thank you Senator Ortiz Pena.
Chair and the both of you for
bringing this forward I think
it's it really is important to
do but I would bring up a couple
of things already the opposition
is mobilizing I noticed the Joe
Monahan
waxing that that great links the
other morning about have have
how dare we pay ourselves when
we get such a lavish retirement
benefit and when we have the
a very hearty per diem and so I
think those are some of the
issues that are going to be
brought up in this is is is
brought before the public and I
do think the biggest argument
for it is.
We would look different it would
be a different looking
legislature we wouldn't be is
old we wouldn't be as as
Wealthy as we are it's hard to
believe that that that that's
the case but I mean I think we
have a different look and a lot
more younger people a lot lot
more people with families would
be able to to to serve and I
think that would be good for the
state.
But I I want to be realistic and
and just save when we talk about
educating the public is not just
about this mean it's about all
the other information that's out
there.
And the issue of our of our
retirement benefit of our of our
P. R. A. retirement benefit is
one that you we probably are
going to have to.
Be really careful about how we
explained it to the public that
that that.
The the in no way does that
replaces salary when you're
living right now it's it's for
the future when you retire.
May have I I just wanted to make
those comments I think it's I
think what you're proposing is
good well one I knew one of the
thing I was going to suggest we
don't have any any capital in
here and.
And that might be valuable to to
consider you know I mean it's
too late now you've already gone
through the house some kind of
an upper maximum you know at
that it would not to exceed
whatever.
just so that the the public is
not.
The believe that this would be a
fix extravagant salary would we
would be talking about New York
levels are California levels
would be talking about possibly
out of Louisiana levels or
something like that any up I
just throw that up that might
help sell it a little more I I
to remember is Senator Stewart
does previous efforts that just
came to not because of the
public's understanding of what
we do is is so faulty.
Mr chair and senator I want to
make one comment on that
Thank originally the bill we had
details like that but it's a
constitutional amendment has
been on the ballot because like
cap the average New Mexico
Health holdings about fifty four
thousand we were talking about
that I have an esteemed Republic
can party leaders my district
and over dinner or nice when he
said well what do you imagine
and I said well you know the
household average is fifty four
thousand he said that's
ridiculous you should be paying
the average professional celery
so people are all over the page
and if we have the current terms
that we have now such as celery
Commission might decide that
it's twenty thousand.
Or you know it's it's something
that has to be decided after the
constitutional minute amendment
is this determined to be come
out positive and then enabling
legislation which that kind of
discussion would take place.
And madam chair Senator we got
to educate the the public to
that we pay into the retirement
right it's not a free benefit
that's given we do pay into the
retirement.
Thank you Sir Senator Baca.
Right sorry redone Center Suzy
can.
Yes I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Representative for
bringing this court I know this
is a much discussed topic.
and and I don't know exactly
where I'm at on this yet a a
there there are some benefit I I
like part of what what I hear
when I heard Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino that's the what what he
said is really the part that I'm
a proponent of a different
looking the legislature but with
that you know
and
we as you said there there's a
lot of people out there who
could serve and should serve and
are restricted by their
employment what not so we get a
certain demographics in this in
this legislature such as you
know mo a lot of retired folks
we get people that can maintain
a flexible schedule so you get
some attorneys in that you get
some business owners
but but it leaves out a whole
slew of people that that does
trouble me but you know the the
thing that some of the
unintended consequences of this
to me that that are negative all
state would be I think pushing
towards a salary
once we do that if we decide to
do that or if the public allows
that I think we the next logical
step is going to be and it's
already here a push for extended
sessions going from what we have
now to maybe to sixty days and
and up I believe it'll be even
pushed higher than that madam
chair Senator Representative to
we're we're here no longer
periods of time and and that
bothers me because I some of
what respect I I have some
respect for the vetting process
we have now it pushes the bills
of importance forward because
let's face it we all know this
happens here in the legislature
provided our sometimes push
bills
to see if they could pass not
whether they should pass so we
see lots of bills here and many
of our most of them all state
are are meritless and we have a
small minority of bills that are
important that gets through I
think with that at a time frame
you will see more legislation
being being pushed through and
and just by virtue of the
statistics of what goes through
we will see much more harmful or
useless legislation filling our
books and so watch our our
statute books grow from this to
this rather quickly.
And I think that's an
inevitability of of us starting
to pay our legislature the the.
The other thing.
Today I really bothers me is a.
I think the per diem we maintain
the per diem in this I think it
kind of needs to be in or I
think you know the per diem plus
the salary I don't know that I
could support that even if we
had to increase per diem I I
think that be a little bit.
Attractive to me using iris per
diem plus some larger percentage
to increase that right the the
other I I think that would be a
little bit more palatable to me
and it troubles me just to see
here and vote on something that
would pay myself one of the
things I value about being
legislators is the service
aspect of it although painful
like like all of my colleagues
it does affect your bottom line
as I see here a lawyer's office
doesn't work very well without a
lawyer in New and and so here.
And so but.
Reflecting back to my years of
service within the military
again very little pay for what
you do some of the most value
time in my life so and and I
think that as years go on I'm
gonna value this time that way
and and so that's that's another
issue to me is that of what what
reason are you here for which
leads me to my next concept of
the career politician it would
it discourages me to think that
a person could come here and
start here rather young and
maintain this as a career right
now we have no term limits you
could go in perpetuity well as
long as your life will let you
serving here and gaining a
salary and that in effect is
your job I I see no problem
right now with people that.
Are here for sometime but
they're getting a per diem
they're serving it would be a
much different story to me to
have somebody here of a long
long time thirty thirty years
more whatever and there.
They're getting a salary for
that essentially their career is
politics we don't have that I
don't view it is that right now
and so for for those reasons
there you know I'm not sure on
there yet but I appreciate the
discussion I think it's a
discussion the state needs to
have but on the positive sites
that were given here just
thought I'd point out some other
aspects may come along that are
unintended that that we may see
I do appreciate it thank you
madam chair and thank you for
bringing this for thank you
thank you madam chair you know I
thought the same thing Baca but
the career politician of of I
thought well of those in my
district would fire me as my
constituents are my prostrate
and so any of us are at will of
our constituents who if we're
not doing a good job or see the
career politician they then
could vote to ensure that that
career politician if that is not
reflecting their values or what
their beliefs Act with then be
replaced by somebody else thank
you for your comments those are
really good points that I wrote
down Senator thank you.
Senator Ingle.
And then to a Centers before you
go I've let our floor leader in
our with know that we are
finishing we're going to get
through H. J. R. eight and that
will be a little bit like to
floor just case anyone was
looking at the time and good
morning thank Senator Ingle
pizza thank you madam chair my
I have been I've been here a
long time and the.
Hi this is come up several
different times and I opposed it
because I think we are very.
Because every salary just like
sure I've ever been around.
Meech way more often than we do.
In the salaries are one thing
but whatever what else happens
you have staff of storage being
hired year round for the
variation Representative and I
have I counties.
No Senator Baca has a couple of
through through free we all have
several.
Representative products that
percent response as I
appreciate.
And all of a sudden I think what
happens is people because of
it's very often like we have in
our are you just Senator stuff
and that's a different job of
course the by the same token our
availability to the public will
be diminished tremendously
because it's the nature of the
beast you go see my staff first
you see this person first you
you.
Communicate for them and it will
happen it's the nature of the
beast and our salaries will
start at a certain level what
will have the ability to raise
them that whenever that will
never change once this is
enacted into law it will be up
to four anymore and it won't be
long before we'll be at a
hundred or a hundred and twenty.
Plus the per diem.
In the for the image.
I live two hundred thirty miles
away in no hours here hundred
seventy five dollars a day and
it was.
It was a tax for and but things
were you know if one somewhat
cheaper we got our per diem up
to federal for the M. and
everything that we do favor the
use up your went out for the
place and that's what this.
Excuse me I'm sorry I've got to
sign the stuff.
But I just I really do fear this
because this will turn us
instead of a public legislature
into a professional group of
legislators it's the nature of
the beast it can't change
because it's just the way it
works and I really fear for the
state of New Mexico were there
and every state that does this
this is what happens I've been
interim stuff all over the
United States I'm sure you all
have to and you'll have a
senator from some state health
they will our staff here with me
they need rooms to and they get
rooms and I go about these
things and it's just pretty soon
we lose our total touch with the
public because that's the nature
of what this is and I I really
fear for the state of New Mexico
when we go there I truly do
because there's a uniqueness
about us that is true a truly
beneficial for our people and
I know sometimes if they're
supposedly this eliminates
people from running but I've
been here and there's been a lot
of different people run from
different stages of income and
when.
And that's the hardest part is
convincing the public that
you're the best person for that
job.
And when you do that is the
reward that you're running for
show that you can serve them and
the money part of it will never
be adequate.
Because it will get to where we
have when I was first my first
year up here I asked for a to be
on interim committee.
And I think there were four
maybe I.
And one of the senior senator
she looked at me and he said
well you get elected another
term Sonny and will maybe put
you on the line.
They didn't have advisory
members you went to the
committee.
You showed up in the committees
and not it just was it was the
way it was and there's a good
reason for that because there's
a learning curve here that we
all have you can read books on
the legislature to your visor
gone and it ain't the same
doctors issues when you're here
because you're dealing with
people from all over the state
from different occupations and
that's the beauty of it.
And I worry that if we're salary
we will completely lose that.
And we will become a group that
is shielded by staff and other
things to where the people of
the state will be will be able
to communicate with us as they
should thank you.
Madam chair I would like to just
make one comment thank you for
your statement Senator only the
commission would be able to
raise or lower salaries we could
not raise our own salaries is
the independent commission could
make binding decisions
and that would be in the
enabling legislation we will
will appoint.
Thank you for your.
You know nothing stays the same.
Thank Senator Moores.
Thank you madam chair thank you
will serve as a result of
reform just on that point this
this this process from our state
our whole important commission
so Senator commission so we
will.
Portal pressure on what those
numbers will be so if I
understand you were one of the
right one looking out of the
house or in the house committee
substitute for calling on.
sort of see it as a we're gonna
have a salary correct I'm not
sure and we're not going to
renew the per diem payments.
for the retirement.
madam chair and senator that is
correct although if you know if
this passes and there's a rate
legislature would have to be re
examined because once you get a
salary you get into other
situations.
That's one of the concerns I
have about chair representative
so that's what we're gonna go on
you know I I think we the
averages thirty thousand also
knows is anyone know what our
our to the is noted changes
before legislation is short
sessions madam chair and then
Senator are we just our research
shows that the average was
fifteen thousand.
For the year for the per diem hi
all of that yes I was I was just
looking at an age the article
from twenty two thousand
fourteen and back then two
thousand fourteen has AP used to
write an article every year like
to get to the gotcha member with
very Masser was over there and
the list everyone's podium back
to R. fourteen point sixty
thousand.
Madam chair of the and senator
that the research I've seen
shows that my personal
experiences that it's definitely
not thirty thousand.
It gets there was people back
then of course twenty fourteen
director thousand this
represents going out so that I
would like to see that because I
think it's a lot higher than the
court with you if you say
so anyways so say it's twenty
thousand somewhere around there
it's been this long or short you
can really get a per diem while
you're still in session chair
representative yes madam chair
and senator and some people do
you use their per diem quite
fully depending on their
committees where they're staying
distance you know from the
capital since we only get the
one round trip if you make more
round trip simulated Hobbs
spending a lot of your per diem
on transportation.
so you're you're for them at a
salary for being up here and one
of things I don't like about
this this is Madam chair
representative senators is still
going to be the higher rest per
diem.
Correct madam chair and senator
yes that would be the per diem
as it's currently figured and
Should know this we also does
what is it was a property in one
seventy eight madam chair and
just went up in March this is
two of seven.
Yeah.
All.
So what madam chairs what is the
per diem for the state employee
who's attended meetings.
Madam chair and senator I do not
know it's usually like fifty
eight sixty Bucks when we are
when we do boards commissions
employees I know our per diem
because for our restless what we
pay state employees is about
three times higher Musselman's.
That we here then the state
police.
Of the now it's it's it's it's
significantly lower six sixty
fifty Bucks or somewhere on
there.
I think we do a fair amount of
actual expenses so when state
employees and of course they
have a salary so there they get
reimbursed for the actual costs
we have to turn in receipts and
get reimbursed for hotel food
sector yes sure Sir member
attend Senator and madam chair
like the one with the board of
regents stabilized you know the
point that we all point to you
point to we do confirmations
here I think they usually get
like sixty seven boxes Public
Service summer on there is there
is based on the per diem rate
mass protests you are right if
you if you're driving panelists
already reimbursement.
Discover should cost correct.
So so that's the day and I've
I've I've always encourage I've
always voted for raising the
state employees programs and our
boards and commissions because
for that very reason that we pay
ourselves.
All the concerts remember that
we passed up it ourselves to to
do three times more so I'm I'm
concerned about that the
consistency with that so and
then nothing changes in the
chairman as you said so you know
say so we're talking about you
know we're just from the news
articles I see numbers anywhere
from fifty thousand to sixty
thousand that we're talking
about for this I know we're not
setting it but that's some of
the.
Madam chair and and senator each
person who wants to go into the
pair system pays a thousand
dollars a year if you're over
sixty five you have to serve at
least five years if you're under
sixty five you have to serve at
least ten years to qualify.
And not everybody makes those
figures because not everybody is
in here for years and years.
So it's it's very individual
what somebody would actually get
for their retirement both
managers Representative and act
a legislature to change that so
that all legislators in our the
full retirement system.
Madam chair and senator that
would have to be through
additional rule making and
legislation.
Yeah so I I think you're going
you're we're not getting with
per diem and and and a salary
you know I know it's just
speculation we're we're gonna be
talking about all compensation
taxes seventy eighty thousand
dollars a year.
Madam chair and senator that
would be up to the commission to
determine.
Then add that to the retirement
benefit it's it's pretty
significant what we're asking
for here so I I oppose this
amendment for those reasons I
think it's just a it's a way
it's a bridge way too far is
gonna be very expensive
And it's not what you know we're
we're not Congress
you know with there's not a
decision obviously you and I
have different our districts and
some of the rural districts so
I've never turned down an
opportunity to make coffee with
constituents one starts to
something we do and it's easy to
get a hold of us and I think
Senator Ingle support is much
press one by this is talk to my
staff for when I'm meeting with
concessions around in the
neighborhood so you and I.
County and so I just worry that
this is going to have the
negative effect of like seen
some of the other states.
Thank you madam chair Senator
thank you Representative.
I just did some arithmetic here
and if if the members on for
interim committees madam
chairman.
Let's say for I don't know some
people some are if you're on
Legislative Council or LESC
you're going to get be getting a
lot more but the ordinary member
that is in on the LFC or the
accountant might be serving on
for interim committees and there
are some who don't serve on any
because there there were
prevents them from but let's say
just to figure out if you're on
for interim committees and you
spend.
The an average of.
Ten days by each of those
committees of the forty days
plus if you take the difference
between the third in the sixty
day session.
Forty five days forty by forty
five eighty five days even if
you're getting two hundred
dollars a day per diem for
eighty five days it's only
seventeen thousand no that
doesn't have mileage that
theoretically at least mileages
covers just reimburses you for
your expenses so I I I don't
think it's going to be all that
extravagant to add per diem to
whatever salary the they come up
with now if you're on.
You're on the LFC reading four
days a month for year round
today you know that's that's a
different matter but most of us
are done LFC and and so it's not
gonna be that much I just throw
that out a little bit of
mathematical.
Measure on a.
This article older because I
remember very masters of doing
all the time and this is from
the last time you did it was
twenty fourteen and there were
Senators up point in over twenty
seven thousand dollars in twenty
fourteen a marker list of names
and the operator of the LFC.
looking at the top.
I see anyone actually in the top
ten.
Eleven twelve hours the first
one up there is SO John Arthur
twenty three thousand of the
eight factors and also at that
time
anyways that was backed in and
says the average was sixteen
thousand twenty fourteen and
those people here almost at
thirty thousand and that should
have been.
Fourteen was a short section.
Right there with the national
session so thank you madam
Senator thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Hi all right we'll get to that
motion but I have the number of
commenters
So I I one of the most states
where they do have a us us
salary they do also have per
diem some don't the majority do.
And I let me start by saying
that I am one hundred percent in
favor of this idea hi I am a
single mom who works full time
and who takes my legislative
duties very seriously aspen
hundreds of hours doing
legislative work during the
interim that I don't get any per
diem for because it's it's
working working on bills it's
working with different
stakeholders it's I can't often
can't go because my job I often
can go to interim committees
that I'm on but I'm watching
them online while I'm doing my
job but I can't claim per diem
for that
my income has dropped
dramatically since we can into
serve and that the legislature
because I think if you're doing
this job right it's essentially
a full time job
and so I I very much.
M. in support of of having a
professional Hey legislature.
That said I have some concerns
with Senator and I want to I
really appreciate the this
committee substitute because
Representative I earlier in the
session I told you about how
much Harper and I had about that
original drafts and the late
we're going to rewrite the whole
thing when I got over he.
and you all you guys have
already done that work and and I
really appreciate that I think
there is still some language in
here that really is enabling
legislation language not
constitutional amendment
language
the language on the first page
it lines twenty four twenty five
who broadly reflect the
political cultural and
geographic diversity of the
state I don't know what that
actually means that is enabling
language it'll enabling late
legislation language not
constitutional amendment
language so I'm going to make a
first.
Motion to to strike.
That language services page one
of the committee substitute
online twenty four twenty five
striking who broadly reflect the
political cultural geographic
diversity of the state.
Is there any and then let me go
to you first is that from there
and friendly yes madam chair I
agree but we would keep lines
one and two on to these
appointments terms and
qualifications this provided by
law we yeah no totally I
understand that's a language
would be put could be put with
more specificity probably into
the enabling.
yes okay is there any so is that
from their upfront it is
friendly okay is there any
discussion from the committee on
them Senator Moores just make
sure you're not striking how
many members so continental the
line about what
was provided all right.
All right.
Any further discussion on the
amendment.
See is there any objection to
adopting them.
All all all all all restated
Senator it's on page one lines
twenty four twenty five striking
who broadly reflect the
political cultural and
geographic diversity of the
state because that's that's
enabling legislation language
not constitutional amendment.
H. madam chairman page two then
would you take up on line one of
the work and to the point just
to work and I think it's still
works because the way it would
read as the system commission on
legislative salaries is composed
of nine members of the public
no you're right we should take
out and thank you.
So that would also be on page
two line one taking out the.
so would be members of madam
chair public who or who's we
would take out food.
Right fund paid online twenty
four.
Members of the public yeah we're
taking a stab yes from from
online twenty four through and
on line one on page.
The district.
There are clear on the amendment
right is there any objection to
adopted that amendment.
Cena of yours into.
Okay please show up Senator Baca
objecting and Senators RTZ ****
a phonics McKenna do hate Ingle
the Moores voting for the
amendment yes.
All right so.
Then I'm looking at page two
that subsection do.
lines fourteen to seventeen.
It says the legislature to
appropriate surface appropriate
sufficient funding in a at
appropriations bill for the
salaries established adjusted
limit is provided by a final
report the commission how is
that not finding future
legislatures in a way that we
generally.
Do not do.
madam chair I think we just put
that in to indicate that that
would be the follow up to the
decision of the commission.
We don't need it we don't need
I'm gonna recommend striking it
because I think I see that as
finding future legislators in a
way that we we reject and all
other legislation that comes
before us so I would strike on
page two lines fourteen through
seventeen.
So it is that so do I is that
friendly for on.
any I would welcome comments
from the committee right.
To me it's kind of a no brainer
that you would have to do that.
And is it necessary in this if
it's not necessary we can take
it out and it's friendly.
Senator Ortiz Pena sometimes
madam chairman the the languages
like subject to appropriation by
the legislature something like
that rather than the legislature
shall appropriate so that it
still leaves the because it's
the reality is every year is
going to have to be a line item
in the budget to.
The following
chair I have seen.
Agencies remain in statute that
have zero in the line at.
So
it is being done to eliminated
four out of five or whatever so
I would say there needs to be
some protection.
Senator Moores sure that we're
the appropriating body
collectively with the program
box so we can go from the future
legislation or side to side and
they'll want to celery I guess
theoretically all of that would
be divided and nothing in this
in the wording says a government
could quit line at this despite
us all so it's not use this
language is our constitution
powers are resorting there the
government line item out the
salaries of members recruitment
school constitutional rights
record but that is something
that's affordable for the figure
out of fifteen to twenty years
from now.
Station address these issues.
There
is.
Yeah I I don't think we need the
language and I think it's
problematic to have it in there
I've been who has you're doing a
presentation I was trying to
look up.
I found one the statute that
uses that language of that the
legislature shall appropriate
money.
But it's pretty specific to it's
from ninety eight close up in
third to and in this language is
an added.
But it's about eight fifteen
dash three B. dash twenty about
the property control reserve
fund and it's about it's talking
about a specific fund.
This can be used in accordance
with the state's four year major
capital improvements plan
that's the but that's the only
way I could find any where in
our our statues that that way.
And I just I think it's that it
would be a real out liar ten
managers would be in enabling
legislation we could put it in
and I really legislation I think
that that could be done very
carefully so as I think any time
we are mining future
legislatures that's good that's
going to be something that
should be it approached.
Given option madam chair can we
keep that in for now subject to
further inquiry with the
Legislative Council Service
that's what I suggest what we
have the chair I am sitting here
with us and that's where this is
headed next so he has heard this
discussion so I'm I'm okay with
that because I would like to
hear let's let's council's
opinion on this as well
he has certainly heard that the
arguments and I think can
address this issue when this
comes to to his committee
as well so I'm I'm I'm okay with
that now all withdrawal any
motion to strike that at this
time thank you madam chair
I will know the irony of that
we're creating assistant
commission on Legislative Salars
who will serve without
compensation.
So we we get salaries but in
this others don't and I wonder
why and and we heard Senator
Stewart talk about this kind of
this actual reimbursed for
expert actual expenses language
that language is throughout.
Our statutes usually say shall
be reimbursed for expenses
incurred pursuant to the per
diem and mileage act this as as
provided by law that doesn't
matter much matter to me but why
why not just give them per diem.
Right and mileage rather than
their actual expenses for for
this.
Of the
regional west up to.
So I was board of regents and
all the rest of them to if you
do this all.
I think Senator Ingle just.
Give a very good answer for you.
That we raised that used to be
nearly nothing but we
registration five hundred thirty
years before I I may be wrong
but we did iterations the last
ten or fifteen years but I can't
tell you what it is.
Madam chair we followed on the
by of our drafter what's
currently in other statutes for
each.
And similar languages and is in
the number of statutes
So I guess again.
Does does what they get need to
be addressed in a constitutional
amendment why why why why isn't
that interested in able in
legislation
I can't really answer that I
mean it's you know our original
piece was eleven pages so we
pared it down to what in
consultation with the draft in
the Legislative Council felt had
to be in it.
All high I will make a motion
about it but I do I do find it
ironic that we are specifically
saying you that no compensation
but you're going to give it to
us
So then I'm gonna get to what my
biggest concern as
That party elections right.
Well it's it's it's section
three it's one this is going to
be on the ballot and.
And center so I just mentioned
some of this
I have real concerns about this
being on the next on the twenty
four ballot and failing I have
said to anyone who will listen
someone please show me your
funding in your plan for voter
education program for this and
no and I have not seen anything
from anyone so surely women
voters and common cost as and
my.
My you know for staff.
the one voters is not going to
be super well funded for that
come costs will probably have
more funding than they will but
but I've been saying the other
groups all the.
People's keep state will look at
the ECC
constitutional amendment that
passed that we did this short
intense campaign around that it
passed so easily and that is
true and that is a very
different issue than legislators
being paid and it is a much
harder want to kill this one is
so easy to kill the majority of
voters don't know who.
Who think that we are I heard
sixty four percent in that
polling are in favor but two
thirds think we already at
seventy thousand dollars and it
is so easy to say this is greedy
politicians who want your money
it is just so easy to kill that
if we don't have a wealth and
well funded and well organized
and very significant voter
education campaign this goes
down in flames easy peasy and
then we have to and then we have
to wait a long time for the
voters to presented to them
again because the you know I I
was having the.
A discussion about this the
other day was someone who's
saying voters have short
memories and yes sometimes they
do I think on this one they want
because it's going to be it's
just so easy and I'll get to
Senator but but I want to finish
my comments first
So originally I was going to say
we I was gonna mention this to
put this on the twenty six
ballot I'm not going to do that
because.
I I think twenty six is going to
be a tough year to pass
something like this and I don't
want this to pass
I flirted with the idea for a
minute point on the twenty eight
ballot and figure that would be
seen as very unfriendly so I'm
not going to do that either
but I.
I do think that we are taking a
huge risk putting it on the
twenty four ballot I I think it
is likely to fail by doing that
and I think that is a real shame
because I think this is
something that that we need and
we should have and.
That
patients would be a real virtue
in this area
That's that I'm I'm not gonna
make that motion
I I am I was.
Very concerned about that
And center to the pandemic you
want a comment well only The
whenever we vote either it's
going to be on about I mean if
you did twenty six would be the
house members of the I mean at
that if it's got to go to the
voters is got to go to the
voters and it's up to us to
education I mean a.
There's no way around it I don't
see I I don't see you're putting
it off into some of the ballot
to others who were and and
senator the purpose of paying
off isn't for tend to not be on
our balance it's to have the
appropriate time organization
and funding for voter education
campaign that will actually be
effective so far I have seen
zero plans zero funding for
anything for for for a
meaningful motor education
program that's good that we act
one hundred percent have to have
in order for this to.
That madam chairman to we can
appropriate money to educate the
voters to vote for ourselves I
mean that that's going to be a
to the people that are on the
zoom thing was a great idea
Senator that is not at all what
I'm suggesting no it's the
people on the zoom.
Have not I've been asking these
people please show me your
plants please show me the
funding that you're getting to
run this campaign they they get
grants and funding all the time
from from all sorts groups the
truth is it's costs that are
going to care about this a lot
when you know some good
government groups like coming
constantly when voters are gonna
care to they're not the ones
with all the funding
so I I I am not at all
suggesting the that that that
the legislature should fund that
campaign and I'm not at all
saying that that it's because
it's going to be on our balance
twenty four that I have concerns
about it I have concerns
because.
This is going to something that
will have to be done with a lot
of concerted effort and
education and I don't see anyone
having those plans in place to
get that done
so I have that's that's my
concern madam chair we've had
commitments from three groups
who want to do it my background
is actually nonprofit PR and so
there is a lot of free publicity
that people like me will be
involved with because it's my
commitment and I I think we
can't base whether we should
change the date based on what's
out there to support it I'm
convinced the support is out
there base from the polling and
from the groups that we've met
with.
Well and I hope you're right
Representative I yeah I've had a
couple groups also tell me like
it we will and I say show me
your plans show me Fund in and
then and then I don't hear
anything else after that so
Senator Moores sure will will
this include Representative Lund
comp so Representative braces
on.
It also
doesn't.
July one thousand.
That's.
Table
that would be all right those.
I I was a little step yet.
But.
Also Sir.
madam chair I was very dedicated
to leader in the sense that with
to cover your insurance broker.
Thanks.
We we need to get to the floor
so let's let's focus
all rights in the.
Is there is there further
discussion from the committee or
what what is the will of the
committee yes.
All right.
All right motion table takes
precedence let's do.
A roll call vote.
Mr although motion to table.
Senator Baca this Senator Baca
yes Senator Ingle.
This is the tabling motion to.
Senator Lopez is excuse to
Senator McKenna no Senator
McKenna no senator Morris yes
senator Morris yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino hello Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino no Senator Pirtle yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Stewart is excused Senator had a
meal no.
Senator had a meal no and
senator do that now that motion
fails
what is the head okay around
motion for it to pass it's call
the roll.
I suspect it will be somewhat
since.
Senator Bob.
Senator Baca no Senator Ingle.
No Senator Ingle no Senator
Lopez is excuse senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator more snow Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz no yes
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Pirtle no Senators
defending yes Senator Stefanics
