Those present in this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that order business
confirmations and ideal to
Senator Hotmail or on that order
business confirmation Senator
regents I now yield to senator a
brother yes Senator Rodriguez
thank you Mr president thank you
senator had a meal pursuant to
Senate executive letter number
seen objections Senator
Rodriguez to explain the
conferee thank you Mr president
Len N. Barbero has been the
history of the school she has
that she can whole life truly
has been dedicated to serving
deaf kids we're fortunate to
have her Mr president.
Thank you Mr president I stand
in strong support of miss
Barbaro's confirmation you know
we had to send amazing tools
Senator Mark Moores family that
had it he had a test and it
Senator Lee a how to meals
family with the nephew and of
three people have all served
without being confirmed I think
Mister Roberts for the longest
is Barbero next I think I have
Thanks Senator we do have
further debate center how to
mail.
Thank you Mr president I also
stand in strong support and so
this morning we heard of the
the deaf hear the work she has
done has been there since the
nineteen nineties and my nephew
Matthew Romero was at the school
while she was the principal
president Senator have any
further debate.
Center for the.
Thank you Mr president you
unanimous consent to skew
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to stand in full support
of a of this a confirmation it
was really interesting to hear
in fact connected in a very
different and special way than
other schools and so I want to
think of for their time today in
their service so far and I think
Miss per barrel for hers
Si no further debate Senator
Rodriguez to close thank you Mr
president I asked that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Lynn and Elaine
Barbero thank you.
To the as a member of the New
Mexico school for deaf border
regions for term commencing
January first twenty nineteen
very much Mr chairman thank you
members of the Senate.
Senator yes.
Thank you Mr president to the
of regents I now yield to
senator Rodriguez senator the
biggest thank you Mr president
pursuant to Senate executive
letter number fourteen date
April twenty fifth twenty twenty
See no objections centers
reduced explained thank you Mr
president we are very fortunate
to have Kristin willing to serve
in this capacity Kristin service
as the requirement to have a
has the other five years to go
and has done a great job we just
want her to get confirm so she
can continue her good work thank
you Mr president thanks center
full support of this country
miss more that shared with us
our experience as a mother
raising a child who is deaf and
on the whole family has embraced
at signing as another language
and thank you Mr president for
allowing me these words.
Further debate.
Say no further debate centers I
tier seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty to the firm
it is here on the negative the
employment of Kristin term or as
a member of the New Mexico
school for the deaf border
regions for term commencing on
April twenty fifth twenty twenty
Thank there is a dissident
members of the Senate and I'm
happy to Kristin stood up to
recognize our thank you.
Senator have you Mr president I
senator Rodriguez center there
yes thank you Mr president
pursuant to Senate executive
letter number right dated March
twenty fourth twenty twenty two
I move that the Senate do hereby
president John Robertson is the
deaf person serving on the board
of regents at the New Mexico
school for the deaf per statute
we have that a deaf person that
in anything his needed for he
has a master's in deaf education
John himself as staff has gone
to the school for the deaf for
many years and to see was
has done and we just appreciate
his willingness to continue to
serve.
Thank you senator Senator as
we're debating the reappointment
of John Milam Robertson.
full support of this concrete we
we had a lot of fun with Mr
Robertson this morning with his
signing he told us all kinds of
so she here is someone who
started his education at that
school he's got two master's
degrees I think he's on track
reads everything I was really
interested in how we learn to
read being deaf I still have not
figured that out so Mr president
Mr president I stand in full
support of Mister Roberts and
for this that appointment he's a
man as a child at the age of
four came to Santa Fe to the
that there had to be something
to help their son communicate
since then he spent his entire
life advocating for those who
can't hear it's a pleasure to
have met Mister Roberts and and
Thank you Mr president I'd like
to thank Mister Robinson he is
my constituents and he is a role
model for all of those here in
southern Santa Fe county and
Santa Fe County as someone who
Senior center three to close
thank you Mr president I asked
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of John
Milham Robertson to the New
Hello this is that.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Campos until he returns to the
chamber.
Seeing no objection.
of regents for term commencing
on January first twenty twenty
one expiring December thirty
first twenty twenty six has been
duly confirmed by the New Mexico
state Senate Senator yes thank
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation and
we're in that order business
introduction legislation the
reader will read.
to install a plaque in the state
capital presented by the New
Mexico state organisation
daughters of the American
revolution to recognize the
right to vote Senate memorial
six Senate memorial six having
been read twice by title is
ordered.
Print and referred to the Senate
rules committee then Senate
health public affairs committee
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
got out of his mouth Smith's and
miscellaneous well that order
business senator Wirth I thank
you Mr president so that's it
o'clock tomorrow so I don't know
if his any chairs that have
introduced but some ideal to any
other members for announcements
before we wrap it up Senator is
one that order business
announces miscellaneous service
after the floor session I didn't
realize you'd be getting up this
fast so we'll meet at one thirty
today.
Thanks Amanda what room number
with that being that's in room
Committee.
transportation committee
tomorrow we're gonna have our
organization meeting and we're
going to have DOT do a
presentation on on on state
whatever was scheduled for
tomorrow to Thursday so just
wanna make sure you're aware of
that so thank you Hey Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo.
What was it do you agree to
following all the teachers now
yeah.
Thank you senator read thank you
centers in the.
Any further announcements
Senators.
