I here's where we are I think
center one you'll see is going
to make a motion with respect to
not gonna do anymore bills on
the floor tonight so with that I
yield to senator Senator worth
of your points on that order
order of Business concurrence.
I will and one more thing and
you Mr president on house at
appropriations and finance
committee for house bill two and
three I refuse to receipt to
them and from the sentiments.
the Senate finance amendments
for house bill two and three.
When that takes place our
president pro tem will appoint a
conference committee Senator
center Brandt I'm sorry Mr
chamber votes to whether we
received or not they're not it's
not his bill we passed it it's
our bill that's correct center
we do go to debate so that we
members have a chance to debate
You want me to restate those.
I move that the Senate.
Senator there's been a motion to
refuse to recede.
Any debate.
Any objection to the motion.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president I'm sorry I I'm I
Senator knows to yield Mister
president center there some
points of contention over the
crime package and Senate bill
hydrogen and where that funding
is going in the house there's a
point of contention on some
money that we funded for raises
that DFA
with me over some domestic
violence money.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr president and thank you
senator I really appreciate that
and and just helps to
understand.
The Senate has failed to concur.
Are to recede.
Senator our president pro tem
will appoint a conference
committee.
Senator Stewart.
Senator crystal diamond and
etcetera Siah Hemphill.
So the conference committee
assignments from president pro
place I guess one there's
communication with the house
centerman us.
Mr present that the Senate is
requests from the house that we
needed a an eight in the morning
on the conference committee.
finance three twenty five.
And that's the plan for tomorrow
morning.
Three twenty Johnson.
So for the members are watching
via webcast that conference
business with some miscellaneous
we're in that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator serve on this the agency
presidents presented Judiciary
Committee will meet now will
need to be up in the usual
I see no further announcement
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so we'll be back on
the floor tomorrow at eleven
o'clock
Education does have one bill
tomorrow that will be hearing at
nine o'clock at nine o'clock in
the morning it shouldn't take
long.
Thank you Mr president with that
unanimous consent the Senate
send recent eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning.
