Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen here.
Senator Hickey here Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna Maez.
Senator Mars.
Centerman yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator pro president Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator sells Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
please rise for the indication
to me that today my revenue
father Richard energy are very
New Mexico state Senate chaplain
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be that
Senator Peter Wirth.
Good afternoon and happy Saint
Patrick's day to everyone.
on this holy day of obligation
for the members of my religious
all Irish.
St Patrick the patron Saint of
the Celts thank Celtic
spirituality itself is marked by
Not only is creation viewed as a
blessing it is regarded and in
essence as an expression of god.
And the book of creation in
an absentee landlord to New
Mexico with the end of the when
the end of the flat world was
thought to be off the coast of
Ireland.
For centuries past in an ocean
unseen of the spiritual world
and the physical world conjoined
simultaneously each of our
tradition search for depth of
relationship between
But by the beauty and wildness
of our our chins our original
blessing.
So today I want to share with
you something you may not have
ever known or heard that goes
beyond the Shamrocks green beer
Many of us are familiar with the
apostles creed and the Nicene
creed used in worship but in
statement of faith that Patrick
used not to get rid of the
snakes but the gives people
vision.
That's pretty gather.
Heavenly father our god the god
heavenly bodies the god of the
lofty mountains the god of the
lowly valleys.
God is above all heaven's he's
in the heavens he's beneath the
life to all things he stands
above all things and stands
beneath all things he lightens
the light of the sun.
Strengthens the light of the
night and the stars.
He has a son who was co eternal
with himself and similar in all
respects to himself and neither
the father older than the son
and the Holy Spirit reason them
You are all children of an
earthly king.
I wish to join you now to have
in the king if you choose to
believe.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Wirth to get started for today.
Thank you Mr president good
afternoon to you good afternoon
everyone unanimous consent we go
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous here in that
Patrick's day blessings and
weaving in Celtic prayers and
stories it's super appreciated
again I just wanna as we wind up
different voices is just really
appreciated let's let's give our
Senate capital hand for what
he's done.
Chinese dinner serve tonight in
the Senate lounge sponsored by
Marla showed and others six
o'clock I believe dinner will be
see she does Senator Padilla do
need new media to you for
Science Center Padilla Senator
Michael Padilla thank you very
much Mr president levy green tie
Mr president units consent to
Eunice consent to excuse
centers how to me and Gonzalez
into the return of the chamber
see no objection they're
excused.
We do have further announcements
Senator Nancy Rodriguez thank
clerk's office and angel has
served as my page every year
from the age of seven to
fourteen and then she went off
to college after she graduated
degrees one in criminal justice
and the second government with a
minor in international relations
as she is just amazing she is
willing to continue to serve and
continue to come in CS and spend
time with us helping us here so
help me welcome and honor angel
Martinez.
well Mr president your honorary
lieutenant governor's today or
from my district and so I'm
proud to introduce a Gustin von
and ghost in the sixteen years
school and so go storm and then
we have Isabella von who is
fourteen and she is an eighth
grader at Mountain View middle
really done thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Brandt any
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth takes that next
order of business I thank you Mr
president so we're going to do
the work on the table and then
there are one two three four
concurrence calendar twelve is
the judiciary substitute for the
she packs up to percent of bill
eighty four that Senator
capital outlay Riaz Senator
Rodriguez and concurrence
calendar number fifteen is
house bill starting with item
seventeen and just work our way
down the list and will announce
who sponsors are
after we get done with the
concurrence with that Mr
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in a gross copies of
house bill eight as amended
house bill seventy six as
amended house bill one eighteen
sixty nine as amended house bill
four sixty six as amended house
agriculture sectors in water
resources committee substitute
for House Bill five twenty five
submitted Lisa McCutchen.
The state Marty's McCutchen
chief clerk.
The journal show that the
message from the house has been
received I'd like to announce to
house bill one forty five house
bill one ninety eight House Bill
two oh seven as amended house
bill two fifty three as amended
Bill five twenty five with
emergency clause.
The reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
substitute for Senate bill
ninety two Senate bill one
thirty six as amended have been
read in full and signed by the
office of the house in open
session return same here with
next order of business I thank
you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee reports we're in that
order business committee reports
the reader to read the report Mr
president your Education
Committee to who has been
souls chairman center souls Mr
president us as consent of the
Senate that the reader to be
allowed to read both of the
committee reports in that we
vote on them with one motion in
do pass respectfully submitted
senator William P. souls
chairman Senator cells I move
adoption the committee report we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
congratulations certificate
number twelve respectfully some
and directs the chief clerk to
prepare suitable documents to
express the congratulations of
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
action upon individually hearing
no objection the reader to read.
Certificate of congratulations
certificate number thirteen.
certificate number sixteen.
Certificate of recognition
certificate number thirty one
number thirty two.
certificate number twelve and
directs the chief clerk to
prepare suitable documents to
express the appreciation of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee port has been
adopted and the journal show
that they were acted upon
individually the reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
The eyes have it the committee
port has been adopted in the I'd
like to announce to the members
of the money that the office of
the Senate have signed an open
session Senate bill eighty three
consideration reports the same
has been do we enrolled in a
gross preparatory to signing by
the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
aye those opposed may the eyes
have it the committee point been
adopted and I like to announce
to the members that the officers
the Senate have signed an open
it under consideration reports
that same is been duly rules and
it grossed preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Senate respectfully submitted
senator Pete Campos senator
all those in favor signify by
saying aye those opposed may the
eyes have it the committee
report has been adopted and I'd
like to announce of the members
of the officers of the Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as amended with
emergency clause has had it
under consideration reports the
same has been duly enrolled in
the gross preparatory the
Pirtle co chairs Senator Hamblen
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report and
there's we have a motion to
adopt maybe report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
twenty one as amended with
emergency clause reader to read.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate bill three
thirty five Senate bill three
senator Pete Campos senator
Kerry Hamblen Senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairs.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee board has been
adopted now like to announce to
the members of the officers of
the Senate have signed an open
session Senate bill three thirty
five and Senate bill three fifty
introduction legislation the
reader to read Senate memorial.
Seventy one introduced by
Senator Pirtle a memorial
how to gain access to the
historical town site.
Senate memorial seventy one
Center memorial seventy one.
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed.
Not referred to be placed on the
president's table Senator moral
seventy one.
Senate majority floor leader
memorial seventy one from the
president's table in place on
today's counter.
Hearing no objection will remove
center moral seventy one it is
now on today's calendar.
Mr president finance finance
consent that the rules be
suspended the journal show all
those present at this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session there is no
there's no objection it is so
ordered Senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so again
we're going to go to
concurrence there are five
chamber will just jump around
and and get to that point and
then again I just give the a
little heads up on the bill
starting with item seventeen and
I'll just go through the Sanchez
nineteen house bill seventy nine
is center Ivey Soto of twenty
house bill three sixty six is
Senator pope a house bill twenty
one is Senator Burt House Bill
Bill number twenty three house
bill two forty is Senate how to
meal house bit number twenty
four house bill two eighty seven
is again Senator Hotmail number
bill three sixty four will be
Senator my Estes just so
everyone's got a heads up with
that Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that order
business concurrence and I would
Mr president I move that the
Senate can Kerr with house
committee sorry with the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House public affairs
I see no objections center on I
also explain what those
amendments were is thank you Mr
president just a couple
amendments from cond from the
house consumer public affairs
one is a technical fix to
clarify the arrest process.
substitute for Senate health of
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four is twice amended.
Say no debate center near close
on the concurrence thank you Mr
eighty four twice amended.
And I ask for a voice vote
house amendments to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill eighty four as twice
amended.
calendar number thirteen Senator
for the I thank you very much Mr
president I ask a that the
Senate do concur with the
Senators are debating the
concurrence Senate Bill to ten
any debate.
And I do ask for voice Senators
motion to concur with the house
amendments all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Mr president next up is
concurrence counter number
fourteen at Senator Rodriguez
Senate finance committee suffer
Senate bill three oh nine we're
in that order of Business
bill three oh nine and that we
do that with the voice going.
Senator before we we take the
voice vote see no objection can
you please explain what those
amendments were of course
Senator Steinborn can you
Council when the bill was
already prepared so we had to
get him corrected for three
projects they just needed to
have the expiration date
debating.
The request to concur with house
amendment so we have Senator
about this.
No agency present would Center
Regus yield please Senator has
corrected Senator yes Mr
president yes Senator that is
one of the three that we put in
here as you requested extending
the date the deadline very good
any further debate senators.
Say no further debate Senator
Rodriguez to close on a
concurrence Mr president I am
move that we concur with the
opposed may the eyes have it the
Senate's concurred with the
house amendment to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three oh nine as
amended.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
that up the house askew that the
Senate do not concur with the
Senate bill two fifty as amended
To do this correctly you need to
move if if your intent is to
asset they recede you need to
make the motion to concur and
then ask the body to vote no I
we've got think we've got that
right so yeah the ideals of
lieutenant governor thank thank
you senator Wirth and Senator
Burt will get your copy we can
come back to that senator Wirth
will give him a copy so that way
the explanation hoping you're
you'll go there I will I like
for senator Byrd to have a copy
of this so that we can go
through that with us and then
I'll explain how the vote goes.
Thank you Senator once you get
that if you just go from the top
thank you Mr president.
The amendment of applied to
Senate bill two fifty as a
member at the amendment on the
Senate bill two fifty from the
amendment yes the amendment was
put on last night
and the problem with it is it
tries to retroactively add
Representative you know the
folks we've talked to I I
believe it is unconstitutional
is what I was heard of was told
also
because you can't retroactively
Wirth thank you Mr just so just
to be clear you would like you
do not agree with this
ammendment you'd like us to vote
no and ask the house to receipt
is that correct Senator yes Mr
leader Mr president that is
I move
Mr present yes I move that the
Senate concur.
don't concur and ask for a voice
vote.
So just to make sure that
everyone's clear.
Is that the recommendation is.
So I just want to make sure that
members are aware if you vote
yes you're voting to concur.
senator Byrd restate the motion
emotion is to concur and asked
the body to vote now.
Yes Mr president the
recommendation is that the the
body concur.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Who does the new managers
The Senate bill two fifty thank
you senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr president body
Senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms that we go back to
is one more Senate bill that he
is going to try our power
through in twenty two hours
that's number eleven on the
calendar the it's a broadband
item number seventeen work to
the house built a unanimous is
that we got our business the
reading of legislation I yield
to center Padilla for item
number eleven centers where that
order business third reading of
bill for fifty two is amended on
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
hearing no objection center for
of that language cleared up so
we've got some definitions that
we put together in the
legislation which is well vetted
through Judiciary Committee want
to think a couple the members
there that helped us do this
they also needed a couple of
heatmaps essentially where is
broadband where isn't it what
speeds what levels uploads
downloads etcetera and then also
we had to do a couple of
cleanups in both the
Mister president thank you thank
you senator for them.
Centers we're debating Senate
house Republicans are Senate how
the public affairs.
And thank you Mr president how
many broadband bills is this to
the floor again.
Mr president there been
approximately seventy seven
as of yesterday when you asked
in today I have eight.
An agency for the Senator why
not an omnibus Broadbent been
bill.
Thank you Mr present because
some of them relate to different
just put those as as an omnibus
broadband bills that having to
do this forty seven times.
I thank you Mr president it's a
Thank you Mr president would
prefer that also any further
debate centers.
Si no further debate center for
their clothes thank you very
amended do now pass and I ask
Miss consent the some of the
record show that the rules and
called on those present voting
inferences those go to the next
slide show of hands Senator is
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president of the body I feel
that the Senate floor Majority
Leader Peter Wirth to take us to
the next item I thank you Mr the
set item number one just came
out a Senate judiciary and he'd
like to run the shot clock with
twenty two hours left and get
that across the line so we're
going to do that one and then
are on the clock the agency
presentation and Senate sent the
record show that all action for
placing Senate judiciary bill
such to bill for Senate but
Senate bill five oh three on
notifying families in Judiciary
we struck a lot of language and
so currently that bill since it
just says you shall notify the
the the facility shall notify a
We're debating Senate Judiciary
Committee subset for Senate bill
five all three you know you'll
to Senator Pinto followed by
Senator about this center Pinto
thank you thank you Mr president
thank you senator but as for
bringing this forward this has
they are.
I've been working with MMI W. R.
and one of the a couple of cases
After a period of time that goes
by the family decides to check
on the because they have not
heard from them.
And that's when they started to
adult and all these age limits
and tacking on legislation some
of it makes sense some of it
doesn't some of it we wanted
So is this really feasible how's
the committee has whoever's been
involved in this really that it
it to see why.
I mean we talk about we talk
public record and all the
details are put out there do we
protect them in that way.
And the money we put that.
well I should say just go I
think it was throughout the
reservation it would those other
places they were picking people
up and taking them down telling
them and offering okay we're
gonna help you wouldn't help you
But the people that work in the
area our particular area they
make sure and they that.
Because I called him right away
I said this is what's happening
is what I heard
following up as as we go and we
follow our our patients and make
sure that they're okay.
So having this brought forward
talk about certain services and
getting help.
And victims of violence human
trafficking of why that
protection should be in place.
You know like I called my people
that I know I emailed that
Senator had tossed me in Arizona
and I'm glad they were able to
jump on it well how come here
Should have been the one not me.
I'm the part the state when we
talk about local control that
phone line that communication
that open line of the email
social media and a lot of what
is happening to is having to go
to social media to get our
attention.
Should it be happening that way.
our children and our young
people in our young adults.
And our marginalized people that
are out there.
Our people but now we say these
We're down to our second to the
last day of the session how much
did we do.
out there that I think more
prioritize that need to be
addressed.
That probably have been going on
for years and years and years
but yet we don't hear.
ourselves up but you will be
exposed.
You will be exposed because that
is what is happening.
Through social media.
Nation actually went and
advocated with Arizona what
together with them.
To find out what was happening
and advocated and right away
they got in here.
Okay the session is this how we
we describe it.
bills of legislation yes you're
going to implement this you're
going to put this into drafted
gonna put legislation we're
going to get it voted on and
supported but yet where is the
We don't have enough DPS well
there's a distinction and that's
where we're going to get into
some funny stuff too who's
really supposed to tell that
well it's not your jurisdiction.
Has that been worked out in this
bill.
Was tribal consultation actually
given in the sense of okay if
they don't tell them are we find
Because we address that because
Arizona did to.
Every good thing we doing here I
try to make sure we communicate
with Arizona state this is what
we have done are you guys with
includes Navajo Nation I I know
I have to communicate with
Arizona.
We do have further debate with
senators about this.
Thank you Mr president present
with the sponsor of the bill
you'll please sentiment us to
in the Judiciary Committee but
they could be useful what would
you explain for me please again
what you have seen with Senator
Pinto describe what you've seen
in your community in the last
senator
my wife actually caught this
happening at the DMV.
And saw some people there
reporter we reported it to the
about what was happening there's
two things two bills that she
was interested in and
legislation model legislation
one was in Arizona which is was
Middle ground how to deal with
this in New Mexico Senate
judiciary and we struggled very
hard in there with a section of
the law in I don't think we
take those people and the law
says it's kidnapping so have the
forty to do that when they can
that people this is a
notification and if this is
where we start this is where we
start but
figured out the best way for us
to start if this is a start this
is a start.
And thank you Mr presence and
semiosis I think you made the
committee hearing is not passed
in Arizona so we have the we
have the opportunity here in New
Mexico to be leading on this
topic and the subject even over
the state of Arizona would that
the issues that we address.
And struggle with but I think we
resolve in the Judiciary
Committee is that this this
issue here does not apply only
to the tribal communities does
individuals in New Mexico to
receive their treatment
including mental health care and
I'll pass.
and this bill we we try to
address the fact that an
privacy of individuals who
choose to ask for that kind of
help and then not necessarily
feel compelled to have to
disclose that information of the
family members so I appreciate
actors who may be coming into
the state and taking people out
of state for outpatient
treatment that they may or may
not even have the capacity
consent to so I appreciate the
Thank you the agency present
with the sponsor mind yielding
for senator Munoz to yield I
yes.
says you know they're not going
to admit without providing
evidence that the facility has
attempted to obtain contact
information
If if these health facilities
are.
As the Senate judiciary chairman
said unscrupulous soaring up
they're kind of bad actors.
subsection a by.
State they could just identify
the patient and they could do
maybe just an internet search.
Communication with the patient.
I'm they they can identify the
family members but they did they
notification in some short form.
Thank you in an agency present
center don't don't get me wrong
here I I'm gonna support this I
I'm reading this and understand
correctly it it just says
they have to provide evidence
that the facility has attempted
information from the the
patient.
But I I think we can still maybe
skirt around there and they can
say well I found out that this
Their their information.
And.
They they've provided
documentation now that they have
we looked you know we live with
the phone but we looked in the
you know whatever and
but it wasn't the patients that
I'm not try and and I I
appreciate you saying this is a
start you know so that's and
that's fine I mean I think the
reality is that this this just
came up it's it's late I I get
explicit I think statutory
algorithm when this the
information of the family member
was not provided by the patient
you know I I don't see that in
treat this person and maybe
they're I don't know what the
you know if it's a financial
motivation or what it is what
what's what's been happening in
your districts under.
patient they can still satisfies
subsection a and they don't have
to notify because it it says
they have to provide these
opportunities for the patient to
that by maybe I'm you know and
you can be disagreement on that
but I I did want to just just
point that out because I I think
the intent of the bill is to
You know anyway I does the rest
of eight on I'm not gonna vote
against the bill but you know
perhaps it could be tied up at
some point if that's the intent
of the sponsor thing is present
thank you senator maintenance
Mr president Senator yes I will
thank you a.
I know that the you brought up
the issue and so forth and I
know that the the notification I
think as you stated the the
question is this this statute I
mean this of a law that we're
going to implement now those
extend to just New Mexico of or
president it would apply to a
resident of New Mexico and and
this is just is it for our
community if someone's having to
other situation picks up
somebody there's a record of
that currently there's no record
of these people going anywhere
and so if if I had a son had
shape or form family so it's in
New Mexico residents law if they
take them out of New Mexico
there but their body by the law
but if they take them out in
facility of would this law
applied to that facility in
terms of what we're putting in
here or is that only extended to
New Mexico facilities sentiment
Senator Shendo okay of the thank
you Mr president on that that's
what I was getting at because of
their New Mexico patient I don't
know if this law follows on to
that and and then the the
Si no further debate senator
Munoz to close in the bill.
In I move that.
Senate Judiciary substitute for
Senate bill five oh three do now
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator McKenna voting no.
for Senate bill five oh three
has duly passed the Senate
cinnamon yes thank you Mr
president Senate majority floor
leader Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president innocent we go about
the counter last night fifty six
and fifty seven Senator Brandt
those are going to be yours so
we'll go back and do those two
and then we will start on the
legislation for house joint
resolution I know you'll to
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
show that all action for placing
Thank you center right.
Would you like me to explain the
resolution.
Seeing no objection please
explain Senator.
have right now on a disabled
veterans property taxes to be
set out there rating.
So right now if your hundred
percent disabled veteran you get
allow that rating to be so that
are the you would be paying the
percentage or discount would be
the percentage of your
disability Terry I got it right
now so if you had ten percent
to widows and widowers after the
veteran passes.
Thank you senator rand Centers
we're debating how straight
resolution I.
Senator pope.
This is important for veterans
as was stated at a hundred
percent they don't pay property
taxes but as we all know we have
many in the state that could be
also unable to work even though
they're not a hundred percent.
I also believe this would help
some of our veterans.
Maybe be able to own property or
Mr president thank you Center
pope any further debate
senators.
Senator Burt thank you Mr
president I don't need the US
It is critically important for
vets and I would greatly
appreciate the body considering
voting in favor of this
to work and and you do as little
as you can has much you can't
around your home and maybe do
some part time work it's it's
opportunity for us to help them
out and so I greatly support AJ
are I and I appreciate
sponsoring at fourth thank you
Mr president yes all all yield
to us are biased thank you Mr
president as senator rand and I
just of.
it would go into effect July
first.
So I just want to make the point
that you know taxes should be in
statute because there that we
election which will be November
of twenty twenty four was there
any thought
Mr president senator to of doing
it in the regular election which
the I just believe that all tax
policy should be in statute that
no tax policy should be in the
constitution thank you Mr
president.
We are for the debate with
bringing it forward one of our
greatest responsibilities is to
take care of our veterans who
sacrificed so much and their
families to serve our country
Mr president of the Sanchez
would deal for quick question.
Is present I would yield Mister
president and and Senator Brandt
exemption the Mr president
center.
Senate Mr president Center so
the way this works is is when
hundred percent you take that
paper showing your eligibility
for this discount into your
county clerk's office or county
assessors office I'm sorry and
then they put it towards your
discharged for an actual injury
and so that has gone up from
twenty percent to now hundred
percent today so if I had been
living in New Mexico the whole
time and this was there I would
and that makes it very simple to
make sure that the assessors
offices in determining your
eligibility but the veterans
administration who actually has
the direct link with the federal
Senator Mr president I just
wanted to show you again that
people are watching us at home
and it really matters some
bringing this forward thank you
Mr president.
Thank you senator was we do have
further debate with senator
participate now.
Senator Pinto thank you thank
you Mr president and thank you
Senator Brandt for bringing the
sport do tell me which
committees on the house side
this went through.
through the and I don't know all
the acronyms for the house but
the house L. the.
I M. C. better to math and
military aerial Committee.
rolled into the tax them this
bill in my correct Senator some
of the rent.
This presents center no because
it's a constitutional amendment
so has to go to the voters to be
I guess we could now we can add
things now but
Because it goes to the voters it
didn't go through that process
but it did go to the Senate tax
committee.
social aspects and that we could
have done a little bit on the
tax package thank you Mr Senator
thank you Mr president any
further debate centers.
to say New Mexico is very very
good to the Veterans I think we
have one of the best set ups in
New Mexico to support our
veterans whether they be
joint resolution I do now pass
just man's consent of the Senate
the record show that the roll
then called the all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
elected so twenty two votes are
needed in order for this to
pass.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Fuhrman.
By a vote.
Thirty nine the affirmative zero
the negative house joint
resolution I has duly passed the
is present us as to send the
Senate the record show that all
action for placing House joint
resolution number six on final
passage into is now subject
debate amendment or substitution
with actually veterans who are
not.
disabled.
and right now we have a four
thousand dollar exemption from
that's all it does every veteran
would get that everywhere or get
that everywhere that we can.
Thank you senator rand centers
were debating house joint
Brandt yields a couple questions
on this Senator Brandt yield
Mister president I always gladly
yield to senator Ortiz Pino.
Thank you senator Mr president
Senator Representative Mr
president Senator actually most
of our property taxes come to
the state
and and then do the locals to
have their portion when they
something I've learned more
recently about is the property
taxes a set amount and it gets
distributed amongst property
owners to pay the tax so what
happens is when you give a
slightly for everyone else so
the same amount is being paid
but it's re distributed amongst
everyone else I hope that
explains.
assessments and.
And but isn't that affected that
this is not going to really do
much to state revenues but it it
Mr president center a possibly
very slight one
because you have to keep that
yield to whatever you bonded for
and so yes you would see a
slight adjustment sometimes
that's not correct so I don't
know who wrote this FIR but
again the the revenue wouldn't
change but it would allow the
voters to decide whether or not
a pretty significant increase
from four thousand to ten
thousand more than doubles what
they what they get what and you
know it's very difficult to
stand up and say you're not in
to be clear about that and Mr
president I I will I will yield
now I I think Senator Neville
who knows a whole lot more about
this than I do wants to speak on
Are you I was talking with my
associate about this issue and
and and I'm I'm just going to.
Let go of this Mike and and
president senator Neville I
would just love to get your
views on how this might affect
other property taxpayers in a in
thank you Mr I understand I
think your question or concern.
Of for example San Juan County
on commercial property has an
eight mill rate I think
somewhere the ball park of that
you have a bigger exemption of a
bunch of veterans in that county
it may take eight point one
males to cover the fifty million
dollar budget for the county so
against their property but they
do get a ten thousand dollar
exemption on the valuation not
on their taxes but on the
valuation so it's it but it does
twelve billion dollars and you
spread that call out in terms of
mill rate it's very very small I
don't it depends on many
veterans you got but it's a very
very small number but it would
We do have further debate center
my SS.
Thank you Mr president of with
the Senator yield senator rand
deal is present more if I should
yield to my expert witness
couple points and all of the the
our short.
But I really think this stuff
belongs in state statute and and
if and when it is passed by us
and when it is passed by the
voters I suggest we put in state
to to take out when our our
constitution was written in the
CIS and and the fifty years or
hundred years prior to that and
that couple decades after that
private land in New Mexico
practically nine percent of
Texas is private so the the
property tax in Texas they
collect a lot of revenue for
this is the government's gonna
get it one way or the other.
So if we give us a break to
these wonderful veterans and
their families the rest of us
are going to be taxed that much
more which will be the choice on
circumstances if we do that
every once taxes will be lower.
Everyone's taxes will be lower
we'll have a more fully
functional government and a
governments and local local mill
levies and things like that so
we you know we're doing the
right thing but we're not
affecting state government or
making the tough calls on our
You know folks who live in how
does all our houses will be
subsidizing folks who live in
four thousand dollar houses
which which which you know in
Mr president we we need to flip
the switch Mr president we need
to flip the switch what I love
about New Mexico's we always try
to help each other we always try
help them I know this give me a
tax break how do we help this
business succeed get my G. R. T.
break how.
so depleted and why we were
almost a failed state just five
or six years ago because we had
no revenues but we have to flip
the switch is a body Mr
president now we can write
couple but we can do targeted
checks we did targeted tax
credits for the earned income
family tax credit we could do
targeted tax credits for
veterans we could do targeted
depleting our tax base with
wonderful bills like this and
and resolutions we we should
just to treat everybody the same
and then give wonderful target
tax credits with the money that
Thank you Senator and if I could
I'd I would like to response
little bit I I'm really
appreciative and I'm sure center
shares a person of of you liking
is two percent
change this one is to go back to
the voters order remove it from
the constitution promising the
voters that will deal with it
legislation I really don't think
they trust us to do that.
Si no further debate Senator
grant to close.
of the Senate the rules records
show the rules been called all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative slide show pants
Mr president Senator by them
thank you Mr president units
consent to excuse Senators
objection seven is tier seats.
Again because it is a joint
resolution twenty two votes are
needed for this.
To pass the Senate.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Are you able to Senate majority
floor leader Peter Wirth to take
is that next order of business
thank you Mr presidents in New
Mexico we gonna resound Spence
miscellaneous we are in that
Lopez on house transportation
public works and capital
improvement amendments to Senate
Judiciary Committee subsea for
Senate bill sixty nine Mr
president Ms that we go to that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
nine as amended Senator Sedillo
Lopez to explain what those
amendments are.
urge the body to vote no on the
amendment.
Senator is we have a discussion
on and then house amendment to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
nine as amended.
for taking this position this
was a bill that was in Senate
judiciary and basically an
agreement was reached that
allowed the bill to leave and
then the the agreement was on
statement further debate Senator
but the I thank you Mr president
you consent to skew Senator
Steinborn into a return to the
chamber hearing no objection.
topic is worth the body knowing
a little bit about in center
were three some very legitimate
concerns about what we're
talking about here we're talking
about electric bicycles which
bicycles mopeds the technology
in the in the apparatus are all
kind of changes so if the if the
sponsor wouldn't mind yielding
the center which is we can
explain what this amendment was
then go pull it out in a
different place down the road
it's an old tactic we're used to
seeing it but we out of out it
when it happens of those of the
center from Santa Fe would money
discussing just a bit but with
levels of E. bikes this involved
level two and the issue was
local government control whether
a local government had to opt in
Miles an hour without pedaling I
would require a local government
opt out or they would be on all
bike trails we changed it to an
opt in which means that again a
local government we need to pass
perfect sense to have level two
bikes on pass and others were
it's more challenging the area I
live in in is more challenging
when you have electric bikes for
people are peddling and they're
in Bernalillo county and
Albuquerque it'll simply just
require a local government
ordinance to allow the level two
bikes on their paths.
Thank you senator Wirth.
I move that this that the Senate
not wait.
I move that the Senate
concurring the house amendment
Thank you Senator Lopez.
So Senator is we have a motion
to concur with house amendments
to Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
nine as amended.
the vote of no is to refuse to
concur with the house
amendments.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
amendment some messages now sent
to the house asking them to
recede from its amendments if
the house fails to recede from
its amendments the president pro
tem and the speaker of the house
back and or business
announcements and miscellaneous
we're in that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president so we're gonna go back
seventeen House Bill five twelve
we're in that order business
Senator panics thank you Mr
president Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
I see no objections Senator
panics thank you Mr president
this piece of legislation seeks
property purchases and sale or
disposal this change removes the
requirement for counties to make
it an equitable with
wish to debate.
Founded no debate centers a
fancy clothes thank you Mr
president I move that house
government elections in Indian
affirmative acceptance voting in
the negative by show of hands.
Thank you senators we're voting
if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
House government elections and.
Committee for House Bill five
twelve has duly passed the
Senate Senator semantics thank
you Mr president members of the
one seventy nine is three times
amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution hearing no
fans for filing the lien claim
in a county the bill adds a new
section requiring actual notice
to property owners not only
mailed or hand delivered and
included a copy of the claim
that is the basis for the lean
and it also was amended to
house bill one seven nine is
three times amended.
I
the Senate.
That the record show the rules
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senator is very voting to your
seats please Mr president
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Diamond voting no.
the Senate Senator Mannix thank
you Mr president members of the
Senate.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much was present
was present ask unanimous
Was Brianna Gallegos because of
that that the record show that
all actions for placing House
Bill seventy nine on final
passage has been taken is now
required to hold hearings every
two years on the rates to be
charged by
by the
expensive process for our for
the superintendent of insurance
to engage in as well as a lot of
paperwork for the title
companies to engage in as well
Anyone wishing to debate.
Say no debate Senator Ivey Soto
to close on the bill thank you
very much is present as
president I move that house bill
voting in the negative pressure
of hands Senators we're voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Soto tell looking boring thank
you very much thank you so much
Senator Ivey Soto we're going on
to the end next item that's
going to be.
I don't ever twenties house bill
three sixty six.
action for a house bill three
sixty six
on final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
on the vehicle they're
authorized to license plates for
two other vehicles to where the
plate is free and the and
there's not a fee to have this
on the registration for that
and pay the registration for
that plate on additional vehicle
so this is not a cost as far as
to the state for that additional
with that Mr president I'm ready
for debate or any questions
thank you senator pope Senator
debating house bill three sixty
six.
affirmative except those voting
the native by show of hands.
Senator is more voting tier
seats.
By a vote of thirty one the firm
is in the negative house bill
three sixty six has duly passed
improvement committee substitute
for house bill one forty one all
you have to Senator Burt thank
you Mr president president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing.
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Hearing no objection Senator
Burt to explain the bill thank
you Mr president this is a
special legislation plate
recognizing the family and
friends of law enforcement
officers killed in the line of
duty and I stand for questions
but I really which was suffering
a license plate bills thank you.
Senator is we're debating.
Senator Burt to close on the
bill.
The agency resigned move now
that house transportation public
course in capital improvement
committee substitute for house
a show of hands centers where
voting to your seats please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
passed the Senate Senator Burt
thank you Mr president members
of the body.
Or non next to item number
twenty two that's house bill
actions for placing House Bill
three sixty be on final passage
and has been taken and that is
now subject to debate amendment
to support the organization of
FFA.
And that particular organization
does a couple of three things
I'd like to talk about it
your your pics of different
things and it also develops
responsibility sue raising
animals all in all they develop
good citizenship.
thank you Senator Woods senator
Morris for US presidents are my
wife was president of the Hobbs
FF I'm sorry Hobbs FFA in high
school so I just the reviews for
license plate bills.
Senator Pirtle the agency
present full disclosure to the
body I'm a lifetime member of
the.
FFA so I'll have to ask
the attention of the body that
the house did not move on to
license plate bills that we sent
over to the other side what was
on make a wish foundation and
Woods to because of the bill Mr
president I move that house bill
three sixty.
Do not pass the national
unanimous consent of the Senate
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
Senator Morris voting no.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president thank you
buddy going on to item number
twenty three on the calendar
that's house bill two forty as
passage has been taken that is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution hearing no
objection.
Senator had a minute to explain
commute community ditch fund.
We're debating house bill two
forty as amended.
New Mexico Santo Domingo Mr
president there are hundreds of
us I get that I can't give you
the exact number Senator Pirtle
and thank you Mr president and
are young who still help with
our I think is aren't registered
so there's more than the numbers
on the books Senator Pirtle
thank you Mr president I was
just curious to wondering how
cool please pass the FFA plate
so that might cut into to those
places already being use that
are are pretty common this one
might do the same thing I I wish
registration and then the place
is going to set forever in a
warehouse so I I have to mimic
coming up for the Smokey bear
play hopefully it'll get down in
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr president no mas
black just the last and CS no
Senator Lopez Mr speaker Mr
president respectfully again I
stand to state that we sent to
built over one for Special
Olympics license plates and make
a wish they table those bills
Senator how to mail to close on
the bill Mr president I move
that house bill two forty is one
suspended do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
Please raise your hand.
Senator Lopez voting no.
Senator anticipate a voting no.
the Senate sent out a mail Mr
president members of the Senate
and we have for the just seconds
might be applied on a thank you
so much.
What was the item number twenty
unanimous consent of the Senate
the right the the record show
that all action for placing
House Bill two eighty seven on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
driver safety in mind when it
comes to motorcycles money from
this plate will be going into
the motorcycle training fund
thank you thank you center how
to mail.
more do you yield Mister
president I yield senator Morris
Mr president and army you said
this was a motorcycle license
plate if I heard you correctly
Senator had a male Mr president
what what what will what will be
the verbiage on this license
plate Mr president Santo Domingo
Senator Hemphill Mister
president I'll be a local design
which is pursuant to the section
Miss Mister president and army
well for the license plate look
like here what will be here on
its.
Senator Hemphill Mr president to
rectangular not square we could
see asked center souls for a
difference between those two but
what we will go down that bunny
trail right now my point being
size of the license license
plate.
Senator Moores very small in
other words.
Do it does anyone else find it
ironic there were having a
double a driver safety awareness
and that is how we're gonna pass
along the message that we need
to be safe Mr our presidents and
our meal and add a mail Mister
license people please I'm dying
over here.
We do have a floor amendment.
eighty seven amendment sponsored
by senator George K. Munoz
sentiment has to move and
explain the amendment Mr
president I move us informed one
With house bill two eighty seven
pretty good guess in today it's
a subsidy bill for house bill
two eighty seven senator bill
explain what your amendment as a
which make the plate bigger and
you can maybe get a double play
the same time so this just adds
miners license plate that we did
Mr president that it is if you
spoke to Representative Chandler
that it is a friendly amendment.
Senator can you please clarify
We do have debate on the
amendments with Senator
Stefanics then Senator Moores
and Senator Pirtle on the
amendment centers appendix thank
you Mr president my comment is
groups but I think we have
really gotten out of hand with
our license plates if people are
expecting the revenue from a
that we go back to some of the
brilliant ideas that have come
up about creating decals and I
stand I will always vote for
a license plate because I'm not
etcetera more so by Senator
Pirtle we are on the amendment
just mostly procedural issues
president that we should since
we're gonna systems are make a
big substitution on this for a
Thank thanks anymore that was
presented as a form of a of a
floor amendment not a floor
substitute so we'll take action
on the floor amendment I really
wish we would do a substitute Mr
president.
yield Senator Pirtle thank you
Mr president and just curious
can you explain a little bit
about the the miners plate in
some of the history with the
miners played I know we we had a
important Senator yes you know
Mr president that New Mexico has
a deep history of mining from
the silver mines and Silvercity
to the copper mines to the gold
miners have worked long hard
hours in the rain in the coal
mines when Gallup was first
started the tell you my grades
National Forest others railroads
throughout New Mexico's about
coal from certain areas to small
communities like at Torquay
Kamal reserve tons of coal mines
ship it over to Japan that in
no in San Mateo I think that is
the last coal mine operating in
New Mexico and so the ship their
and so that coal New Mexico's
value product across the US and
as we had more more it gets wind
and solar miners miners again
few but they need to be
and the poll Miner plate never
seems to to get out there but I
picture the image of this a
little wagon with old picking a
little guy pull on the donkey.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president thank you Senator for
bit on what Senator Stefanics
said you know I I to support
these organizations but I have
no problem voting no on the
plate because as nothing to do
with the organization we're just
and over again that so I I I
wish as a as a body I I've had a
constituent come to me and it
was like childhood cancer real
serious issue and asked me to
run a license plate and and I
can't do that and so I that is
if if we're gonna move forward
to move away from this we need
to take a serious move move to
to a lot of these special funds
so really if if people want to
give money it's not that hard to
donate in today's world Mister
president and with Venlo and pay
at hand maybe there's go fund me
there's so many ways to raise
money just get your chili plate
your yellow plate or your trip
turquoise played like the rest
of us and send your money and
support the cause that you want
Si no further debate on the
amendment center among us to
close them in thank you Mr
president this just moves a
miner's plate that we change to
sticker last week in and I I
really need to call centers
uranium miners and galloping and
so we need to with that Mr
president I move sent form and
then that number one to house
transportation public works
We are voting on the amendment
if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Lopez voting no.
On the amendment Senator Ortiz
Pino voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
The math quicker.
By a vote.
Thirty seven the fermentative
bill.
We have center Moores once
explained as well before go back
on the bill on this on this
explanation Center Pirtle said
he was for childhood cancer one
make sure the record shows that
Thing is present with the
sponsor please yield center had
a more detailed Mr president I
yield Senator Schmedes thank you
are there Mister Mister
president etcetera are there any
other.
Things when we're driving other
look twice for Senator committee
thank you so Mister president
senator Senator children school
buses.
turning my head while I'm in a
moving vehicle.
Moving sixty miles an hour.
And I have a checklist in my
head and I'm turning my head
taking my eyes off where I'm
that I already forgot.
And.
Minors.
Because it could be a minor on
the side of the road and and
For those four five things.
Now I'm gonna turn my head.
A second time.
practice that's recommended by
driver safety programs or the
department transportation
etcetera etcetera have a meal
Mister president senator this is
an initiative that the
lanes look twice before you move
forward to ensure that
motorcycles aren't there.
Senator meetings thank you Mr
president so and.
yeah I think I think we're
practices while we're driving
I haven't reviewed the latest
driver safety.
techniques necessarily and and I
wasn't aware that you're
the reasons that have already
been stated however I I guess
I'm still a little confused as
to
the you know the numerous things
know could be in harm's way or
or pre put you you know the
driver.
Whoever's in the vehicle in
harm's way so I'll have to think
about that certainly take your
But I I would echo some of my my
colleagues concerns
played I enjoyed that discussion
the other day but I'm I'm hoping
that
You know we can continue to have
a discussion on what we're doing
sponsor thank you Mr president
thank you so this means any
further debate centers.
Senator Gallegos followed by
Senator Lopez Senator Gallegos
about motorcycle plate but it
would also be able to put on the
last play for a car is that
correct Mr presents under
just wondering why you would put
the insignia on a car with that
not cause confusion misprision
Center.
Center how to mail Mister
president senator so it raises
Senator Gallegos.
This presents center I I too
used to tow my bike but.
The play would still be on the
bike on the trailer behind the
Mr president center I I
appreciate that but I still
can't see the value of having
that I think you just takes wave
Mr president center from the
president center on the
amendment that you have
all the money or the miners
played agency presentation only
for underground mines or would
introduced this amendment.
Senator Gallegos Mr president
center I appreciate that he's
out of celebrating his win on
employees teach one I just
wondered if they would be
qualified for.
Miners played so this present
with that are you thank you
senator because we do have
we sent over actually three and
again they sent us this measures
these measures I think as you
can understand Special Olympics
Senator Lopez said I I think
they're as important at the bare
minimum those those two causes
and I don't think this is a
debate of if they're worthy or
believe it or not I drive a
scooter.
And Mister president senator is
is it over fifty cece's and
requiring registration with the
play.
credentials on my driver's
license.
Incentive for all thank you Mr
president senator how fast of
that thing go.
Mister president senator it
maxes out at ninety five miles
per hour.
Senator Hemphill Mr president I
can't remember the brand that
was twelve years ago but I still
have the scooter.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
Center how do you Mr president
Senator I don't have that
information.
Senator thank you Mr president
Thank you Mr president and
senator I I again I I I think
we're passing a lot of these
without really knowing how many
is there any way to just donate
to this fund if you believe in
this cause but don't want to buy
a specialty plate.
Mr president Senator yes there's
Senator Pirtle Mr president
Senator are there any I know
whenever you file your taxes
there's a few boxes you can
check for for different special
causes and I believe that the
the motor vehicle department
be new so it's currently not an
option.
So Mister president said there's
not already a fund for
motorcycle safety or motorcycle
And Mister president center how
much money is in the fund
currently.
Unfortunately Mister president
senator I don't have that
information.
And so I'm I'm just curious with
that fund what kind of
motorcycle training is provided
from that fund.
to be recused I I own a
motorcycle thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Senator shared with the debate.
questions etcetera etcetera the
more the Mr president I yield
thank you thank you Mr president
thank you senator who owns the
actually owns the license plate
and I reason I ask is because if
you sell the vehicle I think you
have to surrender the vehicle
the the license plate to
for the license plate if your
vehicle
that somebody looks at.
Mister president senator you're
correct so you would be
responsible it would be under
prohibit people from looking up
the owners of the plates.
Mister president senator I'm not
aware of that.
And Mister president and senator
know the specialty plates but if
we're doing all the license
plates and we haven't taken the
precautions to.
Protect the security of the
the vehicle so you need to look
at the license plate to or find
the owner.
But.
You know is is that the two
means that seems like a security
talk about awareness to those
that commit crimes against some
of our
People.
Mister president senator I'm not
aware of the number of specialty
plates are are that are out
there or who they're tied to.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Mr president.
brown it was down and it was low
to the ground so was that you
Senator.
Of Mr president I was cruising
it was definitely me.
Senator is more voting tier
the record show that the role
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senators if you wish to vote no
Senator Ivey Soto voting no
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Lopez voting no Senator
could a Hemphill voting no.
Subs to bill for house bill two
eighty seven as amended has duly
passed the Senate Senator had a
meal thank you Mr president and
members of the body.
jackets is better question Adams
can center movie jackets.
See no objections so ordered.
A little concern going on to the
five House Bill three set three
sixty three as amended and all
yield to senator share you Mr
president has unanimous consent
that the sergeant of arms escort
So it's one point course when I
was drugs is derived Center
Morse unanimous consent that
Senator sure cannot leave his
seat and bend down in front of
us ever done for the rest of the
And then move.
For substitute for house bill
three sixty three be put on
final passage and is now so
purposes creating a special
registration decals for Smokey
bear fire prevention awareness
requiring the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
Senator to explain the floor
substitute thank you Mr
president first if I may I want
bear is so Smokey bear with a
bear cub that was found clinging
to a burns treat with burned
paws in the in the for in
nineteen fifty in the cap ten
The bear with a loan from there
to Santa Fe where there was a
veterinarian the only
veterinarian the could really
help this bears so nasty the
burns were the spare was in
Named ray bill and his wife Ruth
in children donning Judy adopted
the bear took it home nurse to
the bare back to health.
game and fish ranger and his
family.
As they started to nurse this
pair back together to to health.
To the United States for service
and in that.
He was then relocated or he
relocated himself I guess to the
national zoo in Washington DC.
Lived in in Washington for
twenty six years doing his duty
every day to prevent forest
fires.
he was so popular that the US
postal service had to give him
his own zip code.
Any received millions of
visitors a year including me
when I was a wee lad.
He retired in nineteen seventy
five from his duties.
He died in nineteen seventy six
and was returned to captain
where he is buried now.
observed while the vehicle is
stopped in a parking lot.
So with that Mr president I
sixty three Senator Stewart.
So Mister president.
worked had been just a total
amendment to the bill.
No a few days ago Senator Brandt
at this but it was on the Senate
Because it's a substitute from
us on their bill.
So really the better thing to
have done you could have just
taken this as an amendment and
don't think once if if this were
to pass it called over to the
house that they're not going to
go back to committees just for
this so.
go through the committee so that
they're I'm just saying that
there would be a better way to
do this and that is to do this
think did house bill ninety nine
which was a license plate bill
they took that bill and totally
amended it put a completely new
that's the way to do it because
this really won't work for the
house and I'm sure you want to
protect Smokey bear put him or
her we see him on the license
sure so Mister president.
Will the good senator pro
tempore whoever we have that.
Is our parliamentarian.
substitute and in my own
handwriting right to work
amendment.
And then move the amendment but
that makes the body happy
Senator share so you would have
Mr president with we don't
really like that scratching out
kind of thing you know if you
recall we're trying to get clean
things so
sponsor of the for substance
trying to do although this is
not form and in the form of an
amendment either so I don't know
that we would this document
would work Mr president we do
share at all you'll to you first
and I'll offer suggestions Mr
president there are two things
that were I think we can do I
can withdrawal the Senate floor
Or we can come back to it after
the amendment is drawn.
But.
That's why I think center sure
we do have other bills that
is going to be a cohesive to
House Bill three six at three in
the parts that you want and then
we can do it that way we do have
some time we can come back for
you Senator so Mister president
Three sixty three.
President center for them thank
you Mr president with there
being about twenty hours and
any day to have that luck is
needed today's the day.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator we're going to the next
item that's going to be item
number twenty six House
that the record show that all
acts of placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty nine as amended
on final passage has been taken
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
from our Supreme Court it
eliminates all state mandated
post conviction fees for
criminal and traffic cases.
are administrative of costs
assessed to fund various
government programs.
Point collected eight point nine
million in FY seventeen that's
HSD brain injury fund at UNM
judicial education center.
This bill has been is going to
Senators we're debating House
Judiciary Committee substance
prosper one thirty nine as
amended.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr president
I mistranslated the way we've
been funding these programs.
based upon those who get
convicted of certain crimes.
And what we then end of doing.
As as Senator just explained is
And and so this actually.
Leave the fines in place.
This doesn't affect the fines at
all.
But to make sure that programs
I don't want to call does put a
lot of work into this.
The Supreme Court has come
around the court system to
recognizing that there is an
for the work that they've done
thank you thank you Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I to rise
things we found out is it took
more money to collect this then
it then we we were able to or
some of these fines then they
were able to collect
as part of the the mix I mean it
is such a complicated mix of
the sponsor for bringing it and
you know especially given the
discussions we had over the
interim this is a really good
idea.
that house Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty nine as amended do now
pass I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate record job roles been
called all those present voting
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Mr president Concentrix you
center when you're still returns
the chamber thank you and
that'll be the last time we'll
do that during the process and
that's not going to be allowed
area had counted involved
Senator committee had voted no.
thirty nine as amended has duly
passed the Senate center Stuart
thank you so much Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
were going to the next item this
item number twenty seven house
action for placing House
commerce Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred sixty four on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
See no objections Center messes
explained about thank you Mr
president you recall we passed
the house bill two fifty five
monumental the collections
provides parity for classy
counties and some of the larger
stores thank and fixes a
contradiction in law between
those stores that are in non
classe counties with that'll
see no debate.
Center mass just because.
Thank you Mr president I move
that House Kommersant and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill three
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Centers where voting tier seats.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
House commerce and economic
development committee for the
substitute for house bill three
sixty four has duly passed
Senate center Maestas thank you
Mr president honorable members.
until the moment comes down.
Mr president I know the Senator
portal was the one that asked
for the minute before is still
not here.
share center for the is present
on the will of the next item on
the agenda is item twenty eight
that'll be Senator Stewart going
on to item number twenty eight
that's going to be house floor
placing House floor substitute
for house bill sixty two as
amended on final passage has
been taken it's now subject to
house floor substitute in
amending that house bill this is
from my good friend bill ring
served with him for twenty years
in the house always trying to
get me to help them he finally
without the title being in the
seller's name.
Bill ring has informed me that I
have the most independent auto
dealers and the most current
stoning that's what this is
the vehicle with the title of
ghost vehicle sellers sell open
title vehicles to bypass the
state excise tax in the process
unsuspected individual this bill
make a misdemeanor to sell a car
with the jump title that make it
illegal to sell a vehicle at a
Is there anyone wishing to make.
I
see no debate Senator Wirth to
close on the bill.
voted in the affirmative except
for those in the negative by
show of hands Senators we're
voting tier seats for these.
If you wish to vote now.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
I out of thirty three in the
Representative bring very happy
the state the members thank you
senator I yell to Senate
majority whip my company and
take is that next order of
business thank you very much Mr
president you just consent to go
has passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirteen.
Senate floor substitute for
Senate bill for seventeen.
Senate bill three thirty two as
Senate with the emergency
clause.
Senate bill three eighty two as
amended by the Senate.
Senator three seventy eight as
amended by the Senate.
from the house has been received
the reader to read.
Mr president I am directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate conservation
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal so the message from the
house has been received.
Senate majority whip Mike by the
I thank very much Mr president
you consent to take us to the
Mr president Judiciary Committee
to whom has been referred Senate
bill two twenty three as amended
has had it under consideration
reports that same has been duly
rules and and grossed
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report we have a
motion to adopt three report all
those in favor.
signed an open session Senate
Senate bill two twenty three as
amended.
Senator Michael by the thank you
very much Mr president I'll take
I just one with the for the
information of the body we will
be breaking efforts stopping
here in a little bit and we'll
come back this evening at six
thirty PM if there are other
thank you Mr president and thank
you major guy over there Hey it
is you know it is Saint
Patrick's day and several of us
Irish and so I thought I'd.
Kick this off by just.
Relaying the you know it's kind
of like this all these
is very Kaylee Gaelic Celtic
could cetera the band see a
woman and a fairy at the same
time is an attendant period that
follows the old families and
clapping our hands the keen the
funeral cry of the president of
the peasantry is said to be an
imitation of our cry when more
is a as a whatever an immense
black coach mounted by a cough
and drawn by a headless horses
driven by a dual on it was it
would go rumbling to your door
eighteen oh seven to the century
stationed outside St James park
died of fright the headless
woman the upper part of her body
naked used to pass at midnight
existence the dude on perhaps in
less indeed they are descended
from that Irish giant has swim
across the channel with his head
in his teeth anyway colorful
further announcements as
etcetera etcetera Pirtle that
you wish to make an
announcement.
Senator.
the Charlie's angels we are the
fighting Rossell coyotes and our
coyote is Charlie coyote and so
therefore they are the Charlie's
angels of the body would please
help me recognize them for their
Thank you Mr president so you
know in in in the eighteen
forties that was just terrible
potato famine it was all over
Europe but it particularly hit
their last pennies to get to
America.
So a lot of people say you know
they were yearning for freedom
and liberty nose the Irish were
yearning for dinner.
And that's true.
Protestant country there were
two million Irish who were
considered.
Drunken brawling woman
corrupting liars.
And all of a sudden it was it
So then they tried to do every
things with them and most of
them had menial jobs or
dangerous jobs because well they
would do and other people that
want to do on.
influence and power it was
amazing.
The United States clearly was
affected by the Irish.
Now.
Everybody Irish.
We're all Irish today.
And that.
you're Irish at least until this
evening when you fall down.
So the Irish have done some
great things for America.
reporter how could the south of
possibly lost you have you have
men that are that have that knew
how to shoot in the north didn't
you have men that knew how to
ride in the north didn't and
The Irish have had a great thing
to do in here but.
Drunken brawling woman
corrupting liars how can that
possibly be Mister president.
I mean.
Brawling will it'll Notre Dame
is the fighting Irish will got
we leprechaun out there ready to
fight anybody and in case you
hadn't noticed Mister president
I am more than willing to fight
for no good reason at all.
so all maybe we check the box
to.
And then liars of course not
course not this is the Irish
have just a wee bit of Blarney.
happy and then we can make it
through the day without any
absurdities thank you Mr
president thank you senator we
do have further announcements.
privilege if I may the state
senator like to share with you
and the body where this Senator
McKenna came from
of economic hardship and he was
welcomed Ellis Island and served
in World War one in the navy.
married one of his students
which is my grandmother her
maiden name was curtain and she
came from County Cork.
He was lovingly refer to as the
Prof so he was the professor of
Irish step dancing he later
retired went to Miami beach but
they have their their relatives.
That took classes with my
grandfather and so that's a
little bit why you have a
Senator months in the chamber.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president I'm gonna let Center
pretty out wind it up but I do
have news there was an agreement
reached by the conference
conference committee report to
both chambers on the tax package
just in terms of the process
director Burciaga indicated they
down to the floor tonight to get
that done we're gonna that's the
thing we need to do tonight and
and make sure we get that done
an update on the result that's
been reached and very much thank
Senator Shendo and Senator
Brandt
Thank you for that update
senator Wirth.
Si no further announcements.
Center Mike over there I thank
you very much Mr president just
a couple of things before we
wrap up we are going to be
coming back on the floor at six
and I'll start at six we do have
a cake brought to us by
attendant Cheryl Garcia who
wanted to thank all of the
senators and so there's a huge
cake that'll be for after like
Thank.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator the.
Thank you senator Senator
Gonzales.
a hard recognition the you know
for the hard work that has been
going on for the sixty days but
on more important this is
something that was so started as
a tradition by the late
Sanchez to find this so again
no.
Mr president and senator Paul
the you know how it is for the
very kind words about a kind and
loving former state senator of
ours who was a friend to many of
us so with that Mr president
again the dinner will be at six
served in the Senate lounge for
seeing no objection the Senate
