Um, Ricardo Gonzalez, uh, has
asked to be rolled, so we will
not be doing his confirmation
this morning. Uh, we also are
rolling SB 254. We have a, a
substitute that came in last
night on that, but we have a 24
hour rule on, on subs. So we
will hear that, uh, either, I'm
not sure what we're doing on
Friday, if we're doing any
bills, but if we are, that will
be rolled over to Friday.
Um, but otherwise, Senator
Brantley, you are up first. And,
oh, and I also wanted to
mention, uh, breakfast was
provided for us this morning by
the Council of University
presidents, Mark Savera over
there if anyone wants some. We
also have a new analyst here on
the committee, Hugh Danglar.
Who was back there who has a
long and storied eye, uh,
history and state government, we
are very lucky to have him. Uh,
I also have a, uh, shadow here
with me today, Jason McLeod.
Back here. He's a freshman at
UNS, and he's gonna be with us
for a couple of days. So
otherwise, uh, senator, go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning committee is a
proud Aggie. I am proud to bring
another one here, like to
introduce you to Marisol
Olivius, uh, after studying
abroad, both in Ireland and
Israel, Marisol received her
bachelor's of Science in Agomics
and ag business there at the
College of Ag at New Mexico
State campus in Las Cruces, she
went on to get her master's
degree.
And agribusiness graduating with
an impressive 3.94 GPA is
extensive work experience,
mostly in cooperative extension
ag business and economics, which
we know that New Mexico State is
our flagship agricultural
school. So I'm proud to have her
here. Interesting while she was
in New Mexico State, she was
also very active in uh NMSU
NAMA, the National Agrimarking
Association, as was I. So our,
our resume is actually have uh
mirror each other quite.
Similarly, so I'm excited to
bring her forward. I think she
is all Aggie, um, an excellent
pick for this choice, and I will
turn it over so that she can
answer questions directly and
and begin by telling her just a
little bit more about herself.
Oh
Thank you, Senator Brantley,
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Marty so
leave us and I'm a proud New
Mexican born and raised in
Belen, New Mexico. I am a, I am
currently a graduate student
pursuing a master of agriculture
with an emphasis in
agribusiness. I haven't
graduated yet and I'll be there
a few more, few years.
I graduated in May 2024 with a
bachelor of Science in
agriculture, Business and
economics, and I'm proud to say
I'm an Aggie through and
through.
I am a truly a testament to some
of the programs and
organizations that have come
through the roundhouse during
this former and legislate this
and former legislative sessions.
I graduated high school from
Cottonwood Classical Preparatory
School with an international
baccalaureate degree.
Cottonwood is a charter school
in Albuquerque that has given me
a unique perspective and
learning experience. This one
thing that I continued to hold
near to my heart is the 10 IB
learner profile traits, which
include being an inquirer.
Knowledgeable, a thinker, a
communicator, principled,
open-minded, caring, a risk
taker, balanced and reflective.
From my graduating class of 83
students, 2 of us went to New
Mexico State University, myself
being one of those students,
looking back, I can see the
impact that NMSU has had on my
life since I was about 13 years
old. My siblings and I joined
the 4H youth program in Valencia
County, and this is where I
found my passion for the world
of agriculture. This program
taught me how to raise
livestock, grow a garden, how to
record keep budgeting,
leadership, public.
speaking and gave me a
competitive spirit and a strong
work ethic.
I've been at New Mexico State
University since the fall of
2020, and I have truly found my
home away from home. I've not
taken this time for granted, as
I've been able to participate in
some of the coolest experiences
while being here. I've
participated in independent
research as a freshman, mentored
11 incoming ACE students for a
semester and was it an Ace's
ambassador where I was able to
go back to my home community and
inspire future Aggies.
I've participated in two study
abroad experiences where I went
to Ireland and Israel and was
able to see how other countries
operate and conduct agriculture.
I was a summer intern for the
cooperative Extension Services
back in my hometown and I was
able to see the inner workings
of extension and the impact that
extension has on on each of the
counties of New Mexico.
I've been involved in several
club organizations including the
agriculture, Economics Club, the
National Agrimarketing
Association and the NMSU Manners
organization and beyond proud to
have been the president of the
National Agrimarketing
Association and to have led a
team of 15 students to 3rd place
at the national competition with
our agriculture product 100%
pure pecan barbecue pellets. I
started my master's degree as an
undergraduate student in the
master's accelerated program.
And I had every intention to
come back to NMSU to finish what
I started as a graduate student,
I'm researching the current US
farm succession and transition
programs that are available to
farmers, ranchers, and rural
business owners in the hopes of
developing a workbook for New
Mexico's agriculture community.
I'm deeply honored to have been
nominated to this position. I
know that I have big shoes to
fill, but I'm here to work hard
and to serve all the students of
New Mexico State University. I
would like to express my sincere
gratitude to Senator Crystal
Brantley for being my sponsor,
thankfulness to the governor for
your nomination. Appreciation
for those who are speaking on my
behalf and to the faculty and
staff watching back in Las
Cruces. It could not have done
this without you and most
importantly to my family from
your unwavering support.
in love. Thank you, and I'm here
to serve you at New Mexico State
University with all that I got.
Go Aggie.
Thank you, Ms. Olives. You
actually even encouraged me to
wanna go to New Mexico State by
hearing the time.
That was cool. Mr. Levi, you do
have a couple of people who
signed up in support of your
nomination, and I'm gonna ask
that they come forward to speak,
I have Doctor J Lily White, the
director of Agriculture
experiment Station for the
College of Agriculture, Consumer
and Environmental Sciences, and
also Jeff Whitty, the New
Mexico, uh, New Mexico secretary
of agriculture, if you can come
up and all I stated your name,
if you can restate your name for
the record. Thank you so much
and good morning, gentlemen.
Chair and committee members,
thank you for allowing me to be
here as previously indicated, my
name is Jay Lillywhite. I'm the
Associate Dean for research in
the College of Agricultural
Consumer and Environmental
Sciences, and the director of
the agricultural
experimentation.
I have been a faculty member at
New Mexico State University
since 2002.
Um, my first interaction with uh
Mr. Olivas uh was in her
freshman class.
She took her freshman
orientation class with me, and
then, uh, just recently, she
took a a business finance course
with me.
Um, I also am a co-advisor of
the National Agribusiness or the
National Agrimarketting
Association, a student club, so
I've interacted with Marriol
there.
Over the 23 years I've been in
New Mexico State University,
I've had a lot of opportunities
to serve as a reference and to
write reference letters for
students. It's an honor to do
that. We have fantastic students
at the university.
Um, and, and it's a pleasure to
do that for them.
I have never been more pleased
and honored to serve as a
reference then for Marri So and
this uh this position.
He is truly a fantastic
individual, and we'll do a
fantastic job.
If you've looked at her resume.
Uh, it's very impressive. I wish
all of our students had a resume
that looked like that coming out
of their, their undergraduate
program.
Her GPA shows her academic
abilities and as an invite as a
A teacher, I can tell you that
those grades are well earned and
well deserved.
Um, she has balanced her
academic activities with
extramural activities, um, and I
have witnessed her leadership in
those roles as well, and the NAA
marketing club.
What is less evident in her
resume, or less obvious, is her
personal characteristic.
Uh, Marisol is fantastic
individual. She's fun to be
around, she's engaging.
Um
She's a person of integrity.
He's honest, she's hardworking,
um, she's the kind of person
that I want to be around.
Being around her makes me a
better person, uh, better
teacher, a better mentor.
Um, she's a role model, I
believe for many of the
students, all of the students at
New Mexico State University.
Um, Marisol has the maturity,
wisdom, and character needed to
be an excellent student region
for New Mexico State University.
It's my honor to be here today
in support of her nomination.
And I look forward to having her
as my boss going forward. Thank
you. Thank you for your
comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. You
know, as the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture sits
on the campus of New Mexico
State University. It it has our
headquarters. I have the
opportunity to interact with a
lot of students and, and it's
really an honor to, to do that.
As in fact, as our department,
we employ 15 to 19 students year
round all the time.
But it's part of that, I get to
go to the different colleges
and, and speak to classes. I get
to interact with the clubs and
organizations and, and be with
the students and really, when
people ask me why I do this,
that's the students are one of
the reasons I do what I do. They
are, they are what's going to
follow us and and keep us going.
I've had the opportunity to to
watch Marisol grow into the
person she is over the last
several years.
I've watched her participate and
prepare for her competitions
with the National Agri Marketing
Association. I watched her.
struggle. I watched her succeed.
I watched her, as she said, lead
her team to 3rd place in the
national competition, but she
didn't say. She also was a part
of the national championship
team, I think the year before,
is that right?
So, it, it's, it's a success
that breeds success that
continues to be success, and
it's because of great students
like Maraol that takes, that
continues that in, in uh
perpetuity.
Her leadership on the border of
Regents, she's a very mature
individual. She will be a great
addition to the border regions
replacing another great
individual who's standing behind
me.
Um, I look forward to having her
as my direct boss, and I fully
support her nomination. Thank
you for your comments, Marisola
gonna allow the outgoing student
region a good friend of mine to
say a few words as well on your
behalf.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it's an honor to
stand here before you today to
speak in strong support of
Marisol Olivias for confirmation
of student regent. I've had the
opportunity to connect with her
and I have felt nothing but
reassurance and a lot of
excitement for her to come into
this position, talking to her, I
can tell.
The main thing that drives her
is service, and for this
position, that's what it's
about. And just based off of our
conversations and the questions
she's asked me, and her
background, you all heard her
accomplishments. I think she'll
be an absolutely perfect person
to fill uh the student regent
position and we'll do an
absolutely excellent job
representing the many facets of
our university, the Marisol, I
wish you the best of luck. I'll
be here to support you.
You, Madam Chair, member,
members of the committee, thank
you very much and I hope you
have a smooth rest of your day.
Thank you so much. Now, we do
have the president of New Mexico
State University via Zoom, who
would also like to speak on your
behalf. And you have about 4
minutes left, so Mr. President,
welcome via Zoom.
Thank you very much. Uh, I hope
you can hear me. Uh, I, I just
want to add to what has been
said and everything that has
been said has been uh very, uh,
very much encompassing my
interactions with uh Marisol. I
obviously interviewed her for
this role. We had a great
conversation. I think as a
representative for what the land
grant institution provides the
state with regards to the
education of its citizens and
The research aspects that will
enhance uh the both the
agricultural and the other
technological advances that the
state needs. Uh, she is a Miss
Olivas is a perfect embodiment
of uh who we want to represent
the students on the board. So,
uh, I would like to just, again,
uh emphasize that uh she was,
she's a tremendous candidate.
Uh, I think what Senator
Brantley also added was really
important. She represents the
part, the
of this state that sometimes are
away from the uh urban centers
and so I, I would like to really
say uh thank you to her for
standing, and I hope that uh she
uh gets appointed and uh we uh
we hear her contributions on the
regent, uh, on the board of
Regents. Thank you. Thank you
for your comments. Now there was
no one who signed up in
opposition of your appointment,
but I'm gonna ask by a show of
hands in the committee, is there
anybody else in the committee
room in favor of this
appointment of the
region.
Sing 345.
6. Any online?
And two others online, and in
opposition of the appointment of
the student regent to the
committee room.
See none any online.
Seeing none, and with that, I'm
gonna go to the committee.
Senator Gaos.
I turn to
Mr. Chair, Miss Olivas, I just
wanted to compliment you. I, it
was brought up on your resume.
Oh, I've got a granddaughter,
not much younger than you, but,
um, just looking at the amount
of detail that you've done, uh,
you've done a great job and
being from Berlin, I appreciate
that because that's sort of the
center of the state.
And for you being Hispanic, I
think you're gonna represent us
well at state, just think it's
credible that you're having this
opportunity. I just want to
congratulate you openly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. Mr. Levas. Um,
You mentioned that you were an
Aces ambassador. What does that
mean?
Thank
you, Madam Chason
Senator, um, aces ambassador,
this is agriculture, consumer
and environmental sciences and
as an ambassador we're a team,
this can range from 15 to.
16 students there in the Aces
College, you go through the
interview process, um, it's a
class, but it's a leadership
position and the whole point of
this is to really get out there
into our community, that whether
it be in Las Cruces, whether it
be back home and we're
recruiting on behalf of this,
um, on the Aces college, um, so
I had the opportunity to go back
to my hometown, um, and go speak
to the FFA.
class there in at soda, which
is, um, the school of dreams and
just and, you know, just speak
on the opportunities that the
Aces college has to offer that
NMSU has to offer, you know,
there's there's scholarship
opportunities, um, and behalf of
like just be able to speak on my
personal experience of applying
to school, um, getting
scholarships to attend school,
all the club organizations I was
able to speak on on those
experiences.
s and kind of be able to.
Um, exposed the students of the
career opportunities after
college because that's the whole
point of going to school so we
can go and the the um
contributing citizens of to
society and and be hopefully
stay in New Mexico and
contribute to to the economy
here, so that that's kind of a
taste of what we do as ACE's
ambassadors and and we're a team
we're there to rely on each
other and, um, I also had the
opportunity to come up to.
The state fair here and
represent the Aces College and
and um the table there and I
miss you so um just being an
advocate for for aims you that
that's what I would define being
an Aces ambassador.
Thank you. And
It sounds like part.
Part of the answer to, to my
next question might be that some
of that work that you're doing,
but
Otherwise, what, what do you
think the regions should be
doing to prioritize uh student
career readiness.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I think that the, the
regions.
We, we gotta just make sure our
our students are involved within
the.
Um, getting our stakeholders
involved, we have an awesome
community there in Las Cruces.
We got, we got lavatories in the
state of New Mexico and just
getting our students involved in
the potential careers that they
want to go into, so I would
encourage, um, and internships,
our students to participate in
those, um.
Regs us as regions, we need to
facilitate, um.
Getting our stakeholders
involved with our with our
students and vice versa getting
our students involved with with
our stakeholders.
And, and you're a graduate
student, right? Yes, ma'am.
So, in your role as a student
region as a graduate student.
What are you gonna do to make
sure that you're also keeping in
touch with the needs of, of the
undergrads at NMSU that you can
represent them as well.
Yes. Yes, Madam Chair. Thank you
for the question.
Um
I, I had so much fun being an
undergraduate student and I've,
I almost prefer being an
undergraduate student over
graduate student, but so, um,
uh, so I, I don't mind getting
out there going, going and
seeing all of the undergraduate
students and what what they have
going on, um, our Aces are, I'm
sorry, our ASN MSU is is awesome
and they're there to support all
of our undergraduate.
students as well as graduate
students, whether it be research
or getting them out there, um,
to compete in competitions
beyond grateful to to what
they're doing and representing
the students and we got to
continue to support ASMSU so
that we can get our, our
students representation across
um New Mexico across the United
States, um, as we go and compete
in competitions, do our
research, present on our
posters, um, and so I just.
Just continued, I'm, I'm around
and and that's part of being in
this position is service and I
like to to get out there, meet
people, um, we all got stories
and so I've I've really like to
to understand where people are
coming from. Um, and so I'm
beyond beyond excited to to get
out there with the undergraduate
community, our our athletes um
as well as graduate students.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Madam
Chair, um, Senator Brantley,
thank you for, uh,
Sponsoring, um, Miss Olivis, um.
Interesting, you got a great
lobo supporter there next to
you.
It's OK, just go with it.
All right.
Bipartisan.
Um
I, I really like the fact that
you had a, uh, international
baccalaureate education. Um, my
daughter did, uh, when I was
living in Holland in the Air
Force and.
That's a, it's a great program,
by the way.
Uh, when you were at New Mexico
State University.
Uh, did you live on campus?
Yes, sir, I did. All 4 years I
lived.
Yes, sir.
Are you sure? I did Freshman
year, Garcia, um.
Then I lived in Vista del Monte.
I was had the opportunity to
live in one of the tiny houses,
which is a cool experience and
then these to the Monte my
senior year. So yes, sir, I was.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you, um,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair.
So you were pretty involved, ah
on.
On campus for 4 years. I, I can
assume that, were you a student
officer in the student senate or
anything like that?
No, sir, I was not. OK. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair. During your time at New
Mexico State, um,
And I appreciate Madam Chair's
questions, um, a lot actually. I
had a couple of those, so I
don't need you to go there.
But on your time at New Mexico
State, uh.
You said you studied overseas,
is that correct? Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair.
Um, you studied in Israel?
Which part?
Yes, sir, it was.
It was, um.
Just an hour about a ventura
Bensheba. What year?
It was right before the summer
before the war broke out, so,
um, 2023.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, so you
were there right before October
7th of 2023, if I understand
that correctly.
Um
So if you graduate in 2024, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, uh, did you
see any
Uh, demonstrations of any type
on campus, uh, during this time,
uh, not just
Pro-Israel or pro-Palestinian or
any other type of demonstrations
that um
In your opinion, threatened one
group over another.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Duhagen.
Senator flock.
Um
I did, I did not, I was not
directly there when I, I saw.
So, um, protesting and, um,
students entering our beloved
Hadley um office and you know,
protesting, um, but I did get
the notification. It was right
before, um, graduation 2024 and
um, I remember sitting on the
bed, um, crying because I was
like, oh, no, they're gonna
cancel graduation, they're gonna
cancel it. I, I felt that, um,
and just being from going
through being a COVID graduate,
but
Had to walk the line, um.
It was very not a traditional
graduation, so I was like it,
oh, no, it's gonna happen again.
I'm gonna not have a traditional
graduation, but thankfully, um,
You know, administration.
The regions uh deal with the
situation and so, um, but yes,
sir, I, I did, um, see that and
you know, they, they were, were
protesting what.
Their their beliefs and are
advocating for one group or the
other.
Thank you, Mr. Levis. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, uh,
it's, it's my opinion. I think
it's the country's opinion that
we have seen, um,
Some really disgusting behavior
from various groups on college
campuses around.
The country
And, and for me, with, uh, deep
Jewish blood.
Um, and serving, uh, over in the
Middle East.
Um, it was very disturbing.
And let me just ask you real
quick. I only got a couple more
quick things here, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, Mr. Levis.
But how did that make you feel,
you and your friends, take apart
like they're gonna cancel
graduation, I get that, but did,
how did, how did that make some
of the students feel what's
He's a demonstrations.
And again, Senator Block.
Um
Well our our our first um.
Initial response was this this
pretty sad, this is, um.
there should
Um, this disrespect to our our
facility, our.
Our um
You know, but the violence that
was caused the destruction and
um where
I said I believe us as people
are there to
To respect all individuals, no
matter where you're coming from.
Um
And
I, I feel like, um.
That, that was the people that I
was around was.
Was this was a very, very sad
time.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, I would
agree that every student, no
matter
What your religion, race, color,
creed, sexual orientation.
Political opinions are, you
should be feeling safe on
campus.
And I, I would ask you, um, Mr.
Levis, if, uh, confirmed here as
a regent.
Uh, do you commit today to the
committee and to the Senate, uh,
if you're confirmed that you
will speak out against violence,
against anybody.
Race, color, creed, religion,
sexual orientation, disability,
political opinion, will you make
that commitment today?
Thank you, Madam Charity again,
Senator Block, yes, sir, I do
make that commitment. I, I take
our, our safety very seriously
and we're we're.
We're called to.
Respect us as Aggie's we're
called to be respectful to one
another and I, I do take that
very seriously, so yes, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Levis, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, and I, I wanna say
you bring an interesting
perspective to this position,
because like you said,
You were a COVID kid.
You know, you, you graduated in
2020, the same year my daughter
graduated, lost her senior year,
you lost your senior year, and
then you really kind of lost
some time as a college student
as well, and, you know, um,
I hope that doesn't happen to
other other college students,
but I think that gives you a
unique perspective.
Um, as a regent to all the
things that you and and your um.
Peer group.
I had to go through.
So I, I'm very excited, uh, for
you here. I, I think you are
well qualified, uh, well
positioned.
Um
These confirmation hearings are
probably my favorite part of the
rules committee. I will support
you even though um.
Uh, you have a sponsor there
sitting next to you who's an
interesting character.
Um
Um
I appreciate what you're doing,
and I look forward to you
finishing your, uh, master's
degree and going on to do great
things. I want to thank your
predecessor as well, where,
where did he go?
Um, your predecessor for kind of
paving the way for you and um
You have my complete support,
and I want to thank Senator
Brantly for uh sticking by your
side and as a fellow Aggie to
support you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair.
Comments. I was a young school
teacher in Berlin, and the
community welcomed me with open
arms. I'm from Espanola and the
community felt just like home to
me. And you're a reflection of
the students that I taught who
are hard workers who participate
in 4H to understand that working
the land is part of a life. You
learn that respect is part of
who we are as New Mexicans. And
so your spirit and when you
introduced yourself and your
everything that you've done was
amazing to me and reminded me of
the students of.
The land that I once taught who
were proud of where they came
from, excited to learn, and they
learned that so much through 4H
and their work on and off the
land in Berlin, and so I want to
thank you for that hearing that
you were a mentor is really
encouraging for a student
regent, which means you're
interested in giving of your
time and energy to develop
students around you. And so my
last comment to you is I'd like
to invite you to northern New
Mexico when the NMSU president
comes to two of our extension
offices. He's gonna come and
visit.
At Rio Riba County and Santa Fe
County and show her extension
offices are making major changes
in northern New Mexico. And what
we're doing is we're working
with those extension offices to
look at climate change and the
effects it's having on our crops
here in the north. And so when
the president comes, it's an
open invitation for you to get
on that bus with him. And I'd
like you to see what we're doing
for New Mexico State University
in northern New Mexico. And with
that, I go to Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
move that we approve.
The appointment to the Mexico
State University Port of regions
of Marisol, Elizabeth Oliva to
Further go to the Senate floor
for full confirmation.
Thank you. There's been a motion
to have you move forward to a
full Senate confirmation if I
can have a roll call Senator
Bergman, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stefanis is excused.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doha.
With a vote of 7 yes and 2
excuses, you'll move on to the
Senate floor later this morning
for a full Senate confirmation.
Thank you for joining us, Ms.
Olivas.
I
And a correction to my vote
count that was 8 in favor, and
we're gonna move on to the next
item on the agenda, which is the
appointment of Rosemary Jane
Gallegos to the New Mexico
School for the Deaf Board of
Regents, and while we wait for
Senator Stewart to take her
seat. I also have a shadow
behind me, Brianna Rourke is the
Associated Justice with ASUNM
who's following me today and so
feel free senators to introduce
yourselves for later.
Good morning, Senator.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Um, I, I would like us to
introduce our sign language
interpreters this morning. I
don't know who they are though.
Uh, so, um, Interpreters, if you
don't mind if you can come up to
the microphone and introduce
yourselves.
Thank you, Senator.
Julie Nagle, sign language
interpreter.
Thank you.
And this is Gabriel Heckler, but
she's working right now. Thank
you for your introductions.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I am
so honored today, uh, to be
sponsoring Rosemary.
Geos, she was born and raised in
Taos after completing college,
she and her husband moved to
Santa Fe in 1984, where she
began to work as a preschool
teacher at New Mexico School for
the Deaf.
She and her husband are 40
years, have 2 children, one's an
attorney, one's a physical
therapist, or deep roots in New
Mexico have defined her passion
for serving children and
families, has extensive
experience in the field of deaf
education and served as
superintendent of the New Mexico
School for the Deaf from 2015 to
2021. She's previously held
various roles, including
assistant superintendent.
and over outreach and early
childhood programs, her career
and education of the deaf and
hard of hearing spans 3 decades,
including roles as teacher,
director, consultant, a strong
focus on early childhood, early
intervention out she holds a
bachelor's degree from New
Mexico State and elementary and
special education, a master's
degree from University of
Arizona and Deaf education and a
doctor.
tore and educational leadership
from UNM.
During her tenure as an
educator, she has contributed
significantly to professional
organizations, and publication
in her field, so she's both an
Aggie and a lobo and uh help me
to welcome Rosemary Caos, and
now you can speak yourself.
Good morning, Mr. Oliva. Good
morning. Uh, thank you so much,
Senator Stewart, for sponsoring
me. Um, it's an honor to be
here, Madam Chair, um, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
um, um, as you know, my name is,
um, Rosemary, uh Gallegos, um.
When I started out, uh, I have
to say first how impressed I am
with the young, um, Aggie that
just spoke. Um, this is gonna be
hard to follow, uh, so when I
started out, uh, working at the
New Mexico School for the Deaf
in 1984, right after I had
received my master's degree in
deaf education.
Um, I became a preschool
teacher, which was my dream job,
um, because of our early
childhood is my passion, and um
at that time I had said I will
never ever become an
administrator. Never. I will
always be a teacher. And someone
said to me, if you become an
administrator, you can make a
bigger impact because you have
more people that you can speak
to. And um with that advice, um
10 years later I became an
administrator, just really found
I had a knack for it, uh, detail
oriented, um, policy-oriented.
I, um, I was able to do some
work in our early.
prevention program, which was at
the time only serving us, uh,
about 36 children in the state.
Um, we increased that, uh, and
now, um, that program uh finds
children as early as 3 days old.
And that is critical to
children, uh, who are deaf or
hard of hearing because as you
all know, who have children who
are in education that language
starts immediately. And that's
what's critical. And then it has
to continue at a very high level
after that and the school for
the deaf has uh provided that
and continues to provide that
and as a a region I hope to uh
be able to give back to the
community. I'm ready to do that
after 4 years of retirement in
this capacity. I never thought I
would be the superintendent of
the school for the deaf. I never
aspired to it. It, it came
because I believed in our
mission, believe that the, the
state of New Mexico.
Mexico must have this quality
program for our children and
families, and I still continue
to believe that coming from Taos
and having deaf friends, uh, my
first deaf person I ever met was
the daughter of my godmother in
Taos, and um I just believe that
this school is critical to the
state of New Mexico. So I'm
very, very honored to be here
today in front of you to be
considered for this appointment.
And I will stand for any
questions. Thanks.
goes before we go to any
questions, there are 3 people
who are in organized support of
your appointment, and I'm gonna
call them up to are in the room,
and I believe 1 may be on Zoom,
Mary Lynn Bransford and Joanne
Corwin, if you can come up and
all I stated your name, if you
can restate your name for the
record, and I'm gonna ask the
Zoom operator to see if there's
Rick Garcia joining us via Zoom.
Good morning.
Madam Chair and Mister Chair.
Members of the committee.
Good morning. My name is Mary
Lynn Bransford.
And I am honored to speak here
today.
A little bit about myself. I'm a
proud
Former student of NMSD, I
graduated in '95.
I also currently serve as the
president of the New Mexico
School for the Deaf Alumni
Association.
My connection to Doctor
Gallegos.
is that I have known her.
Since I was a student and then
and at NMSD.
And not only has she contributed
significantly to myself, but
also all young children at NMSD
with her education. She has
fantastic passion.
For uplifting students.
And has also helped
My self-esteem, as well as other
students, to dream big for their
futures.
Later on, I became an employee
at NMSD and we became
colleagues.
And through the program of
student life educator, which was
my job.
I witnessed her absolute
commitment to encouraging
students in school and at an
earlier age as well.
She's been a very strong
advocate fighting against
language deprivation.
And as superintendent, she was
an outstanding leader.
With the highest quality of care
for the students and educators,
as well as deaf culture and
language.
She continues to be involved
with families.
In a variety of activities.
And supports through being on
campus with the family program.
She's been a strong, she's had a
strong relationship with the
legislature and the students at
NMSD.
She's compassionate.
Empathetic
And really listens when she's in
conversation.
Doctor Gallegos?
Sports athletics as well, going
to games and cheering for
students.
And the reason I support Doctor
Gallegos to be a regent on the
board.
is for her passion for NMSD.
The students and the staff
members equally. She is
incredibly dedicated and loyal
to NMSD and the community there.
Or professionalism.
For her professional, uh,
You know, contributions to NMSD
have been incredible. She has a
lot of experience, a lot of
knowledge, and a lot of time in
at MSD. So Doctor Agos will be
An invaluable.
Member of the Board of Regents
at NMSD.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and and members of the
committee.
For the opportunity to speak
here today.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Joanne
Corwin, and I'm from
Albuquerque.
I am also the director of early
intervention services with the
New Mexico School for the Deaf.
I have worked at the school for
about 29 years.
During most of my tenure at NMSD
Doctor Gallegos was my uh
supervisor and so I am well
aware and well acquainted with
all of her many, many attributes
that she will bring as a board
of regent.
Um, it is an honor to recommend
her to for this appointment to
the Board of Regents, Doctor
Gallegos.
And I have worked closely for
many years and I know of her
knowledge, her professionalism,
and her passion, that she will
bring to this appointment.
In countless ways, she has been
tireless in her desire to ensure
that children have the
opportunity for quality learning
and the compliance measures are
met and maintained.
She did reference a little bit
about the expansion of early
intervention services during her
tenure, but I don't think she
gave herself enough credit, and
so I'm going to elaborate a
little bit on that.
Um, as she said at the beginning
of our early intervention
services, we were serving a tiny
handful of children and families
around this state. We now serve
around 260 families each year
through direct services, but we
serve thousands and thousands of
young children through other
ways, through hearing screening.
Through diagnosis and through
consultation. All of that, or
most of that, uh, expansion
happened under the careful
planning and um guidance of
Doctor Rosemary Gallegos.
Um, she has an amazing ability
to bring together key players.
To work collaboratively and to
build systems.
In doing all of that, she is
also greatly supportive of
staff, of students, of families.
I have the utmost regard for
Doctor Gallegos.
She will be an asset too.
And a positive reflection on
both the New Mexico School for
the Deaf and the state at large.
For these reasons and many more.
I would like to wholeheartedly
stand behind and support her
appointment to this position.
I stand in, um, I stand for any
questions that you may have.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee for your time. Thank
you. And do we have Rick Garcia
online so let it be noted that
Rick Garcia had also signed up
to speak in support of your
confirmation. And there's nobody
who signed up and organized
opposition of your appointment.
I'm gonna go to the committee
room by a show of hands. Are
there any in the committee in
support of this?
information.
12345678.
Any online?
not any of the committee room in
opposition of this appointment.
on any online.
And with that I go to the
committee, Senator Stewart. Mr.
Chairman, I just want to uh
introduce current superintendent
of school for the deaf who is
here with us, Doctor Jennifer
Herba.
If you'd like Madam
Superintendent, if you'd like to
say a few words, I believe we
have a couple of minutes left if
you'd like to stand up and
support.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, I
didn't come with anything
prepared. I was just here in
support, but I'm very happy to
say a few words. So what I can
say, in addition to what has
already been said,
is that we don't just, I feel as
the current superintendent, it's
not just that we want Dr.
Gallegos on the board of
Regents. We need her.
She was not kidding when she
said she is very detail oriented
and very policy oriented.
She is very driven in those
ways.
And I can attest to that. She
became my supervisor and was for
a while, uh, and I served as the
director of instruction in my
prior position before Doctor
Gallos's retirement.
And so currently on the board,
we have excellent regions. We
have a parent that's very
involved. We have an alum.
Who's been involved with the
community as well as NMSD. We
have someone who is who works at
the commission for the deaf and
hard of hearing, and she's been
very involved with transition
for students in terms of high
school age students. We have
somebody from a rural New Mexico
represented, but we do not have
at this point, somebody who is
an educator.
Like Doctor Gay was somebody who
really understands school policy
and legislation.
The person who is leaving and
retiring from the board, has
that, those qualifications, and
so I believe that Doctor Gaos is
truly the perfect person to fill
those shoes. Thank you.
Thank you. And with that, I go
to members of the committee,
Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Thank you, Senator, and thank
you, doctor.
Um, I think the school of the
Deaf is, is very lucky to have
you. Uh,
We, uh
The, the region confirmation
that we did last year. We, we
started with the school for the
deaf and it was, uh,
I think one of the most fun, uh,
confirmations that we did. Uh, I
can't remember the, the name of
that region, but he was a lot of
fun. Um.
I
I, every time uh a region's
Forest School for the Deaf come
up, I.
I get
questions posed to me about, uh,
But folks with dual diagnosis.
Uh, students, so if a student
has Down syndrome and is also
death.
Are those students that that you
all are, are they part of that
community at School for the
Deaf?
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, it, uh, I've been out of the
school for 4 years, so I would
revisit, um, those policies that
we have, but we do follow the
individuals with disabilities
Education Act IDEA, and so all
students come to us through, um,
uh, a process to determine
whether the school for the deaf
on campus is the uh correct um
placement for that student and
that.
The school serve the really
placement is about services so
that those services that can be
provided there are appropriate
for that child and um it's, it's
a long process, um, many
children we find through our
outreach programs, which are all
over the state and uh go to the
schools, um, identify children
who are deaf or hard of hearing
and start working with the
children there. And if, if
they're not in our program in
Santa Fe, um, and
And if the child is found
through the IDEA process, not to
be appropriately placed at the
school for the deaf Santa Fe
campus or Albuquerque campus. We
also have a preschool in
Albuquerque. Um, then our, our
outreach, um, folks will
continue to support that student
in their, in their placement in
their local school district. So
we really, you know, deaf
students aren't, um, they use,
I've always heard that you know
they're not tube socks, one size
doesn't fit all, and of course
we have to look at children in
an individualized level, um, to
see, uh, what, what services are
appropriate for them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, doctor,
so, so what is it when you're
providing those services, uh,
outside of, of your, your
campus. What, what does that
look like? Um, again, I've been
out of the of the school for 4
years, so I'd have to go back
and and refamiliarize myself,
but I do read the progress notes
that go on and the, the kinds of
programs that we have provided
again get tailored to the
children, um, that are out in in
the school district sometimes,
um, we will work with the
interpreters that are are
working with.
a student we will often work
with the teachers, um, who are
working with the student to help
them with um
With information and techniques
that are, are uh are helpful
within the setting that they
that they are in, uh, we often
do lots of family, uh,
gatherings to bring community to
those to those families so that
they have other families who
are, who are, um, have their own
um uh children who are maybe
similar similarly situated, um,
the students have come to campus
for.
summer events, um, we really
tried, uh, again, I'm, you know,
speaking from when 4 years ago,
and I'm, I'm certain that some
of these are are still
continuing because the um the
deaf community is a very
community oriented, um.
Uh, community. And, and so, uh.
Having immersion and um
togetherness is really part of
Of the um of the development of
children, you know, if you look
at children, they they have um
their their progress is not just
determined by what they
educationally can and can't do,
but their families, um,
influence them. And so we really
try to bring the families in to
the community of the of the
rich uh diversity of the New
Mexico School for the Deaf with
so many deaf individuals there,
um, and, and so it
It really is a a.
Bring the outreach services also
bring community to those
children that may be very feel
very isolated and alone in their
schools and maybe be the only
deaf child there. So that's part
of the process.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Block, followed by Senator
Galos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, uh, Doctor Gay goes, I, I
can't really think of anyone
better than the fullest
position, then you're looking at
your resume.
Um, but I just like to know a
little bit about, um, you know,
looking online here at the New
Mexico School for the Deaf and
the one thing.
That
caught my eye that I think is
great cause I, again, just my
opinion, uh, I think sometimes
um.
Students with disabilities,
whether it's vision or.
He, uh, hearing loss or some
other disability, um, have a
hard time in participating in
extracurricular activities.
And I see your volleyball team.
is just phenomenal. Can you tell
me about
Um
The importance of
extracurricular activities,
specifically sports that uh your
school.
Uh, has, please.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Senator Block, thank you for
that question. It's very
insightful. Um, the school for
the deaf, I, I was never a real
sports person, you, you know, I,
I do music.
And, and, um, but when I um
started school for the deaf and
I became the superintendent,
the, the value of our students
being able to be involved and
not just be involved, but be the
stars because they're in a
place, uh, where they can
achieve with and have
unfettered.
Language and communication
access is just really something
to see. Um, I would encourage
anybody to come to one of our
basketball or or volleyball or
football games because it is
just.
Um, something special, um, to,
to see, um, our students in, in
sports activities, academic,
they're also involved in and
these are not just, um, locally
that they play, they also go to
other states, they were just in
Arkansas, and I think, um, the
girls basketball team.
I think that the girls
basketball team won, um, uh,
championship, uh, in Arkansas.
Yeah. So, um, so they also
travel to other states, they go
to Gallaudet University in
Washington to compete in
robotics, um, it, it's just,
again, a sense of community
that's not just within our state
but that the school for the deaf
provides for, for our students
and children who are involved
with us in our outreach
programs, um, to other deaf
children in, in the country is,
is phenomenal.
And it's so good for them. It's,
it's really something to see.
Thank you for that, uh, Doctor
Gallegos, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, because.
Um
Yeah, you also have track and
field, you have cheerleading,
you have elementary sports, you
have battle of the books, you
have an academic bowl as well.
Um, that just blows me away
about what, what, um, the school
is doing for uh these incredible
young young kids all the way to,
uh, I think it's 21 years old.
Because what I saw on your
website. Yes, if, if through
their, um, again through their
IEP, um, they, they qualify for
services up to 21.
Uh, thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, uh, Doctor
Gaos, tell me about
Um, a couple things here.
Two questions if you can answer
this. Employment placing.
Uh, if your school does that,
And tell me about some of the,
um,
Challenges that.
Uh, your students face when they
leave the school, cause I'm sure
the alumni, cuz you have an
alumni board here.
Um, I'm sure the alumni will
come back and say, hey, uh, this
is what we're facing, um, out in
the world.
But, um, what do you, what do
you do for
Um, employment, placing, any,
any, you working with any
companies or anything like that,
and what are some of the
challenges you're finding of
getting these people employed.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Senator Block, um, again, I'm,
I'm not as current with the with
the school for the deaf stream
for transition at this, at this
time. Um, but the school has,
um, has a, um, what I do know is
that the school follows the
policy of starting transition
services at age 14. Um, and
looking really very deeply into
that through the um, the
students individualized
educational plan. Um, we have in
the past.
had um a partnerships with
businesses, um, in Santa Fe to
place students in work
experience, um, you know, our,
our students like other, any
other student, some go on to
college, some go on to career
and, um, and we, um,
At the time, and I'm, I'm sure
now that that that's still the
goal is to prepare students for,
um, the eventuality that, that
best fits, fits them and their
families. Perfect. Thank you,
Doctor Yeos, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, lastly, um, I just want
to ask you, you said something,
uh, interesting, um, before I
was talking about sports, you
said that you love music.
Uh, tell me how music plays.
Uh, a role
Uh, at, at this particular
institution, because to me,
music can be enjoyed by anybody,
no matter, you know, who you
are. I, I would imagine there's
some type of way for them to
hear music, if they have some
hearing loss, uh, were they, do
they, do you have a band where
they can play musical
instruments or listen to music.
Um, Madam Chair, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
Music for me was just a, a, a
thing that I did when I was in
school and actually continued to
do it now in, in my, in my
retirement, um, uh, students who
are deaf and hard of hearing,
even though have different um
love or not love of music in
different ways and can access
music.
Um, at, at their, at their
hearing level or at their level.
So, um, there are some visual
music opportunities that that
happened. We don't um have a
music program at the school that
I know of right now.
Thank you, Doctor Gaos, um,
Mister, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
um, you get my full support, um,
it looks like an incredible
institution. I don't know much
about it, but um, I want to
thank you and all the staff and
faculty and and volunteers for
uh.
Everything that you do there
too.
Really enhanced their learning.
Um
Capabilities and ability to to
go out in life and and do do
some great things and the sports
piece is real big for me. Uh,
that right there just blows me
away. Uh, how, how many sports
that you have to get these uh
young students together to have
that camaraderie and sports
because that that helped me
growing up as, as one of the
dumb jocks in high school, uh,
so I, I appreciate that. Thank
you so much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Gallegos.
And humanitarians.
Herman pro tem.
Miss Gallegos, thank you for
Being here today, uh, I'm always
looking for my rich, famous
family members. I think I found
them, uh, we visited earlier and
it's quite impressed with both
of y'all.
Uh, you make our name look good.
I, on the other side, uh try to
irritate. So I appreciate what
you do. I did want to start
with, uh, to me,
And and it's got to be
incredible for you. I'm, I've
been on school board for 23
years in Eunice, and it was
really impressive when a teacher
sees
student succeed.
The young lady that came to
speak that was her student now
colleague.
Now possibly uh working under
you as regent, uh, just watching
her.
relay information to and from
years ago, my granddaughter got
involved, I think it was
switched to birth.
Uh, a movie about someone that
was deaf, and she took classes
on uh sign. I can't do that, but
she has a real passion for that,
and I see the value in that, uh,
but I just wanted to
congratulate you and tell you
how proud I am to see that
that's
Uh, gone on to the next
generation and, and we'll go
forward as you continue in your
trajectory and as a region. Uh,
I did want to, and actually uh
center Block had brought it up,
uh, the value of the sports, but
in here, uh, you had ski high.
And it shows that you're a
co-author.
uh, for early intervention
curriculum.
Can you explain to me what that
is. I foresee them going up to
the mountain and skiing, but I
didn't know if that was reality.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, and members of the
committee, um, uh, Senator
Gallegos, actually, um, the term
sky high, yeah, it, it was what
started
This is really gonna age me. But
it's, it's what started early
intervention in the country. It
was the, um, it came out of
Utah. And, and, um, the, the
school for the deaf, I believe
in 1981, um, uh, applied for a
grant to be a, a sky high, um,
Participant and, and the school
received um the funding and they
started the early intervention
program. So there was a
curriculum that came out of that
called Sky High, um.
And, and it, and later in in my
career, um, I was, um, helped to
revamp the curriculum and um, I,
I was a co-author along actually
with, um, Joanne Cor with Joanne
Corwin, who is one of our
speakers. So we updated the
curriculum for that. And it's an
early intervention home-based
curriculum because babies learn
from their environment and 24
hours a day, right? And so we
Work with families and, um, and,
and, um, support and coach
families into facilitating
language for infants and babies
and toddlers, um, and that's
what this curriculum helps
families to do.
Mourman.
Um, Madam Protem and Mallegos or
Doctor Gallos, uh, I wanna give
you credit for that, uh.
But and I appreciate that, um,
and, and now I've got 30. I.
start with
Santa Fe, it'd be something like
that, but I appreciate that. I,
I did want to go back uh to the
uh
The sports.
In, in your facilities, uh.
And I understand they even go
out of state and other places.
Uh, do you see a lot of your
students that participate in
that and how important it is for
their overall educational
process.
Mr Chairman.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Senator, um, Gallegos,
absolutely, um, I, I, you know,
in a, in at the school for the
deaf, students who who typically
would not have that opportunity
with the competition the way it
is in bigger schools, um, have
the opportunity at the school
for the deaf and, and most of,
uh, many, if not most of the
students participate in some
kind of extracurricular
activity, um, sports or
academic, academically, and it
is, it's
again, it's just mind blowing to
me to see these students, um,
stand up on a stage and express
themselves and have so much
confidence because of the
extracurricular activities that
they've been given and the
amount that of um support that
are coaches, um, can give these
students because again, they can
communicate them with them
directly through American Sign
Language and um and they're
deaf, um, most of them are.
themselves. It's, it's just,
it's just, it's fascinating and
amazing, and it's so good for
our students.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair
and pro tem Doctor Gels, uh, I,
I do want to go back just a
little bit. I saw and I just
want to compliment you on this,
uh, being part of the unit
school district. I see you were
in Gadsden, uh, as special ed.
Um, it, it's one of those things
to be able to see you go from
there to where you're at now,
and to reflect back on public
school, you see the correlation
of of starting out that
Uh trajectory from back then
where you are now and where you
perceive it'll go as your
regent.
Yeah, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, Senator Gallos, absolutely
my first experience was at
Anthony Elementary, actually
teaching deaf children, um, I
didn't, uh, receive as much, um,
Education is I, I needed to
teach deaf children, but I had a
special education endorsement,
and so I was hired for the
position, um, after a year and a
half, I really realized I was
not qualified to teach deaf
children, so I left to the
University of Arizona to get a
degree in deaf education so that
I could come back and then I
came back to New Mexico and,
and, um, but took the job at the
New Mexico school for the deaf.
So, and was there ever since.
But absolutely, just that, that
first experience in Anthony, New
Mexico, um, will always be very
vibrant for me.
In understanding what was going
on, what goes on with children
in, in public school setting.
Well thank you for that, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, Madam
Protem, Doctor Gallegos, uh, I
think you're uniquely qualified
for this. Uh, it's, it's
incredible just to hear your
story and see where you've been,
where you started and where
you're going forward, so I'll
stand stand proud support for
you today. I think everything
that I've seen today with with
your student is so impressive
that I look forward to hearing
better things from.
In the future. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you.
Congratulations. Um, I was just
wondering, um,
A protein. I didn't mean to not
acknowledge you, I apologize.
The
During the IEP process and
evaluation.
Is the
Ability or the um
It is the uh
I
Are, are these people evaluated
for cochlear implants.
Do we help them financially with
that. And if
And are there other technologies
out there that are developing
that we should be aware of and
maybe possibly support as a
legislature.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee and uh Senator
Townsend, um, thank you for that
question. Um, I've seen the
school for the deaf, um, just
grow and evolve related to
technology, technology is
amazing, um, for everyone and um
for individuals who are deaf or
hard of hearing, um, absolutely,
we serve many, many students who
have cochlear implants and um uh
it's a, the cochlear
implant is a, is a medical, um,
decision by a, a family, and um
their financially the school.
The School for the Deaf does not
support a, a medical that
The implant surgery and the
follow-up, um, related to the
medical tech technology part of
that. Although our
Um, audiologists on campus are,
are very uh comfortable helping
and supporting students who have
cochlear implants and can refer
back if there's some needed, you
know, adjustments to them. So we
have evolved in serving those
students with with with cochlear
implants. Um,
Uh, hearing aids, um, have
gotten so much better, um, since
in 1981, you know, children were
still wearing big boxes. Now
they're over, over the year, um,
uh, what we call FM systems
where the, where the teacher
speaks into, um, a microphone,
um, uh, the school for the Deaf
uses American Sign Language, um,
to teach, um, but some students,
uh, will, will use their, um,
auditory part of their learning
also.
And so there's that technology,
um, that the, the, the, um,
audiologists will help with as,
as well as the speech language
pathologist, um, all of the
visual information now, um.
With Zoom and um
It
it's, you know, um, computer,
um, everything that we have now,
uh, that's more visual where
students can touch base with
people in a different state and
can, you know, we can see the
signing on FaceTime, um, all of
that has just, I think I, I, I
hesitate to to speak for the
deaf because I'm not deaf, um,
and you, you know, it's best to
ask a deaf person around those
kinds of things, but I just see
that that
It has really helped, um, people
to connect with each other.
I appreciate that, Madam Chair.
Um.
Missa was, I was wondering.
And you may or may not know the
answer to this, but I wonder how
many children.
Um
would be
would benefit from a
From a cochlear implant.
That we have in our systems.
But because they don't have that
financial capacity on that, is
there, is there a need there
that we're not meeting a a of
children that if they had a
cochlear implant.
I mean, their learning might be
enhanced their, their job
opportunities might be enhanced.
Are we missing, are we missing
the boat and, and really helping
those kids, um,
On a faster track in this into
society than than ignoring that
possibility.
Yes madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Senator Townsend, um, it's a
good question, um, are early
intervention program.
Um, is all over the state. We
have our, our what we call
regional supervisors who
actually live in the areas of,
of the state that they serve and
then they have early
interventionists who go out and
serve the families. Those
individuals help families
navigate all of those questions
around is what is a cochlear
implant? Would it be beneficial
for me? What is deaf culture?
How is that beneficial for our
family? How do they interact
with each other. And there's
many conversations and those,
those individuals that could be
prouder of them, um.
Help the families investigate
all their options.
Um, including, um, uh,
technologies that are, are
supportive of cochlear implants
and hearing aids.
But it just seems like we're,
we're
Trying to address the need, and
it just dawned on me, are we
missing the boat by not doing a
little bit of extra that would
You know, maybe take them out of
the program, put them back in
their own homes, much sooner,
put them in a workforce, you
know, learning capacity to go
skyrocketing differently, so
that was, I appreciate it very
much you're, I know the school
will be tickled to death to get
you.
Thank you.
Like you said before I had
Senator Bergman's just a
comment, I really think that
your voice is important for
early childhood as a regent with
the school for the deaf and just
two senators block and Gallegos,
their cheer team has placed
nationally led by a coach from
Espanola and do quite well at
the state competition in New
Mexico. Now I cheered at the
University of New Mexico and to
watch them and have them feel
the vibration of music and how
in sync they are is amazing to
watch on how they can lead a
crowd.
and how they can move to music
by feeling vibration. I'm just
amazed because even as a hearing
cheerleader, I had a hard time
sometimes keeping beat. They
never miss miss their beat. And
so with that, I had two Senator
Bergman, Mr. Chair, I'm sorry.
If I could have a minute,
please, sir?
On that point, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I would like to
say it seems like everything
goes to Espinola in New Mexico,
um, including chili, that's its
space.
I have never met anyone that
loved.
uh, their district really as
much as you, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate you with uh your,
your insight into uh espanol in
your area. One thing that I'd
like to say, Mr. Chair, uh, that
Senator Townsend brought up,
which was quite an astute point
on the technology piece.
Um, there are now real-time
caption glasses out there that
might be very helpful to um.
Uh, the, uh, your, your students
at your institution, as well as
there's some real-time synthetic
AI sign language translators out
there as well, uh, that are,
it's just some exciting
technologies to help these
students out. I'm not sure if
you're aware of those or not,
but that might be something to
look at and for something to,
for, uh,
Even maybe the state to invest
in to to help you out. So, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Bergman. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I move to
approve Rosemary Jean Ghost
confirmation of the full Senate.
There's been a motion to move
you forward to the full Senate,
uh, to the Senate for a full
confirmation. If I can have a
roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefani.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Duig, Senator Duha is
excused. With a vote of 8 yes
and 2 excused, you'll move to
the full Senate for confirmation
later this morning.
Thank you so much and thank you,
Senator Stewart.
We're gonna move to the next
item on the agenda, which is
Cody Dean Johnston appointment
to the New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology Board of
Regents with 2 Senate sponsors,
Senators Ramos and Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez, if you'd like
to come up, you're more than
welcome to come up as a.
Good morning, Senator Ramos.
Mr. Chair, thank you so much,
and it, it's a great honor and
privilege to be here with Mr.
Cody Dean Johnston.
Cody Johnson is a dedicated and
accomplished student at New
Mexico Institute of Mining
Mining Technology.
Where he is pursuing a bachelor
of Science in Computer Science
and engineering with a minor and
secondary education is expected
to graduate in spring of 2027.
In addition to his academic
pursuits, Mr. Johnson currently
serves as a Socorro high school
boys swim coach and the middle
school track coach, showcasing a
strong commitment to youth
development and sportsmanship.
His professional experience
includes leadership roles at the
New Mexico tech office of
Advancement and the Office of
STEM Outreach.
Where he has successfully
managed events and taught
computer science, fundamentals
to elementary and middle school
students.
As a pool manager and head coach
at the city of Socorro Swim
Center, he not only improved the
swimming skills of New Mexico
youth, but also manage a team of
coaches and organized
competitive events.
Cody is also actively involved
in community service
coordinating, coordinating youth
programs in in soccer.
And contributing to the state
science Olympiad is technical
skills span multiple uh
programming languages, and the
whole certification as an NFHS
accredited coach and Red Cross
lifeguard instructor Cody's
strong work ethic, leadership
abilities, and commitment to
education and community service
have made him an outstanding
candidate for New Mexico Tech.
Um
Mr. uh Johnson has also worked
at ICASA with the cybersecurity,
which I think is a great trait,
and he's an accomplished young
man and I'm I'm here to uh to
recommend approval.
Thank you, Senator Ramos,
Senator Sanchez, would you like
to add anything?
Um, he said it all, uh,
Senator, I don't want to repeat
anything. I'm here in strong
support of this young gentleman
we got to meet outside. He is a
member of my community, uh, was
raised there and from Valencia
County and now is at uh New
Mexico Tech and we're honored to
have him today in front of you
guys.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chairman, I
just have one thing to add, um,
his favorite dessert is
raspberry pi, but not the kind
of raspberry pi that we think
of, maybe that's something we
need to bring up here. But thank
you so much, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senators, Mr. Johnston.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair. um, first off, I would
like to um thank.
All the people that have helped
me get here.
Um
Getting emotional. Oh my gosh.
Passion is good and emotion is
OK in this community
of educators and public
servants.
You.
Oh.
Yeah, look over there.
Um, so, um,
Um, my grandfather was a
politician. He served as a city
councilor for over 30 years.
He's in the room with me.
Um, my entire family is full of
educators and have been giving
back to the community, and I'm
excited for this chance to get
back.
Um, I'm from Socorro. I grew up
in Socorro, went to Socorro
High, and now I'm at the Mexico
Tech.
Oh
Um
So, I originally did not want to
apply for student region. I
didn't think it was for me and
my boss, Sandy Lucero, who's our
assistant director of alumni
relations actually convinced me
to apply. Um, and then I
realized that this was an
opportunity for me to get back
to my community and my school,
which I love so dearly.
Um
Oh
So, I started it in Mexico Tech,
um, kind of familiar with the
community, but I didn't realize
how
Wide the reach of tech was. Um,
I was looking recently and we
meet the uh the monetary
requirement to be in our one
school, which is small enough
that we don't put out enough
PhDs, which I thought was
absolutely amazing for a school
of smallest tech.
Um, I started an outreach
program shortly after starting
uh Met New Mexico Tech under
Doctor Sessions, and I was able
to get back to the community,
um, volunteering my time
initially and then getting paid
through the department of
outreach.
Um
Um
I'm sorry, I'm familiar with
myself today.
brain fog.
So I am the head coach for the
boys swim team for the high
school. Um, I started that this
year. I'm helping out, um,
Uh, coach Dao, who's an amazing
mentor to me, as well as my
brother, um, I'm also our pool
manager and our head coach at
the city, and that has been
amazing to get back to the
community and to see all these,
um,
Amazing swimmers and kids
represent Socorro.
I don't have a whole lot else to
say. I'm really sorry. Um, but I
thank you for this opportunity.
No need to apologize, and we do
have a few people who signed up
and organized support for you.
If I can ask for Sandy Lucero
and Doctor David Greene to come
up. And although I've stated
your names, if you can restate
your name for the record. Good
morning to the two of you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and members of the
community. My name is Sandy
Lucero and I'm the assistant
director for alumni relations at
New Mexico Tech. It is my
pleasure to speak in support of
Cody Johnson as New Mexico
Tech's next student region.
I first met Cody when he was
still in high school,
volunteering at Tech's annual
President's golf tournament.
Even back then, Cody's
commitment to New Mexico Tech
was clear. He was dedicated,
hardworking, and always willing
to lend a hand. Since then, I've
had the privilege of working
with Cody and watching him grow
into the incredible student
leader he is today.
Cody's passion for New Mexico
Tech, the students and the
Socorro community is unmatched.
He has played countless roles on
campus and in the community from
coaching local high school and
middle school sports to
participating in student
organizations and assisting with
outreach and events.
Despite juggling so many
responsibilities, he remains
reliable and focused on making a
positive impact in every area he
touches. His dedication is
unwavering, and he has shown
time and time again, he is not
only capable, but truly
passionate about making a
difference for everyone in New
Mexico Tech and in Socorro.
His ability to balance multiple
roles while maintaining his high
standards of excellence speaks
to the level of commitment Cody
will bring to the position of
student regent. I have full
confidence that Cody will
continue to work tirelessly for
the benefits of students,
campus, and Socorro. Thank you
for considering Cody Johnson as
the next regent for New Mexico
Tech. I wholeheartedly support
this nomination. Thank you for
your comments.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the the committee. My
name is Doctor David Greene. I'm
the vice president of Student
Affairs at New Mexico Tech. I
have been at New Mexico New
Mexico Tech for 3 years now. In
that time, I've had the
privilege of meeting a lot of
amazing students and we had a
number of students apply for
this opportunity and Cody's name
clearly rose to the top of that
list. Um, being intoorro and
living in Tooro, it's an amazing
community to be a part
of, but because it's such a
small community, you get to see
people where they live and where
they are all the time, and Cody
is active truly within our
community. We see them out with
his family, uh, doing things,
shopping, doing the things that
normal people do. But we also
see him on campus really
engaging his fellow students and
the community, you know, one of
the big things about Socorro and
about being a regent is being uh
a big part of a community.
of learners and a community that
wants to really engage outside
of uh not just the, the, the
campus, but the whole entire
environment of what Socorro is
and Cody embodies that in all
the things that he does, and I
strongly, uh, endorsed Cody, uh,
Johnston as our next student
region. I know that he'll be a
great representative for the
institution for our students and
uh for the state for the people
that he will continue to
support with the passion that
you heard in his voice as he was
uh introducing himself, so thank
you. Thank you for your comments
and Mr. Johnson, you also had a,
a letter that was sent to the
committee on behalf of your
nomination, and that was from
Beth Cottle, the head cross
country and girls track coach at
Sourto High School. There's no
one who signed up in up
supported, I mean, an opposition
of your appointment, but I'm
gonna go to the committee room
by a show of hands. How many of
you are here in support of this
appointment.
10
Any online?
not anyone in the committee room
in opposition of the
appointment.
not any online.
Seeing none, seeing no questions
from the committee. I just have
a quick comment, um, miss, uh,
you do, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Senators. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
senators for bringing this
forward. Cody, you're well
qualified to be here. I love
that you paid tribute to your
family who is in the audience. I
do have a quick question. Um,
between the three of us and we
have a couple other House
representatives that represent
the Socorro area in New Mexico
Tech.
I am a proud Aggie through and
through, but I must admit that I
think that New Mexico Tech is
the jewel of New Mexico and, and
one of my frustrations as a
legislator that represents that
area is that we continue to hear
that it's one of our best kept
secrets is New Mexico Tech, and
we have not done a good job of
letting that secret out. One of
the challenges that we have in
getting some students to, to, to
be there. It's not a failure on,
on the part of New Mexico Tech.
But maybe we're not coming
together as a community to
provide the resources that would
entice or encourage students to
move to the area. So my question
for you is.
As a, as an ambassador of New
Mexico Tech, what can we do as
legislators and what do you need
from the community.
That would help fill that void
and encourage.
Students to move to Socorro,
because the reality is the
school's amazing.
But there are some things we
need to do to entice people to
to frankly move to the middle of
nowhere.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee.
Senator, thank you for this
question.
Um, Sakoro's always been a close
tight-knit community. Um, and I
find that sometimes we are
resistant to change.
Which has kept us, um, going for
so long. But sometimes I also
think it hurts us just a little
bit. So I'm hoping as a
representative of the community.
And the colleagues that I can
hopefully bridge that gap. Um, I
think the legislature has been
doing a good job of supporting
Socorro, um, as we grow, I hope
we can entice more students.
Um
I know it hurts me to know some
of my favorite professors choose
to live out of Socorro, whether
it be because of the, um, they
don't think the school district
is.
The greatest or uh lack of
housing. Um, so there's many
other things the community to do
that I think.
Um, we could be doing better,
but I know that we're trying,
and I uh know the core I can get
it done.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and I would encourage you then,
Cody, is to stay in contact with
us to let us know how we can
help as legislators kind of
invest in the community that
would be a benefit, especially
to student life that to
recognize those voids. I know
we've invested in in some
extracurricular, you know,
events or locations or what it
may be to the city of the rodeo
grounds has had a massive
investment, but we need to know
what it is that would encourage
students to want to come to New
Mexico Tech and and help you
kind of with.
recruitment and retention, so
thank you and, and welcome to
tech and we look forward to
working with you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Johnston, for
being here and your family for
being here. It's uh it's a big
day for you, big day for your
family, real quick. Um,
kind of
Looking at you there with those
two gentlemen there kind of
reminded of the old song, uh.
stuck in the middle with you,
clowns to the left of me, jokers
to the right.
Um
You know,
I think Senator Brantly was spot
on in her question. And one of
the things about New Mexico Tech
is I think it is one of the
premier uh engineering schools
in the country, especially on
petroleum engineering.
The other thing that New Mexico
Tech is a challenge for students
is, I read somewhere, they have
a high washout rate, uh,
freshman year, more so than UNM.
In New Mexico stayed on the um.
Engineering and science side.
What, what can you do, uh, if
you're confirmed in this
position.
Um, help reduce that washout
rate, or do you have other
recommendations for students
that are in high school.
That, um, better prepared for
the rigorous.
Um journey of New Mexico Tech.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Block,
thank you for that question.
Um,
so tech, I've always said let's
everyone have a chance, and it's
very rigorous and I love that
about tech. um, and this
statistic may no longer be true,
but it's been kind of spread
through word of mouth that our
most failed classes to, our
second most failed class is also
Calc 2, taking it again. Um, I
know that we have started a
pilot program to split that into
two semesters. Um, I have some
friends that have taken it and
it just made their lives so much
easier. Um, I think that we need
to continue to support the uh
students.
support services, student access
services, um, things like that.
I know that OSL has had a big
push towards tutoring. I've
attended some of those amazing
people, um, brilliant people. I
think we're heading in the right
direction. We just need that
push.
I appreciate that, sir. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
You know, one of the things that
I, I think New Mexico Tech needs
to.
Um
Advertise more.
Um, because again, I talk about
this being a very elite premier
school. There's a lot of work
that New Mexico Tech does with
um Department of Defense, um, a
lot of
Um, things with
Weapons, cybersecurity.
Um, AI.
Modeling and data data
analytics, analytics, and I, I
really hope that you can somehow
get that word out like Senator
Brantley was talking about.
Because if you go there, in my
opinion, from what I've seen on,
I've hired so many New Mexico
tech grads cuz when I see New
Mexico tech grad in my firm.
We snap them up.
We snap them up because they
have the ability to go work on
some of these uh incredible
contracts that New Mexico Tech
has, um, with the Department of
Defense Department of Energy,
and others in the federal
government to really prepare
students for the workforce.
One of the things I would say,
Mr. Johnston is, I don't think
we're doing a good job of
keeping New Mexico tech grads in
New Mexico.
And if there's anything that you
have an idea or anything we
could do better, I'm, I'm all
ears.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Block, um,
thank you for these really hard
questions.
Um, but they're good questions,
right?
Um you don't know.
Um.
So a lot of our, from what I've
seen a lot of our graduate
students are international
students, students from other
places, um, that call back home
is really strong, um.
As I know, I
Still in Socorro, right?
So look in other places, I got
pulled back to Socorro cause
it's close to home, close to
family. Um, I really think
That, uh, supporting the
national labs, I, I do believe
they are one of our largest
hires out of tech after grad,
after graduation.
Don't have the numbers, but I, I
believe that is to be correct.
Um, supporting the national
labs, supporting science and
research within New Mexico. Um,
I know I've been working with
the Department of STM Outreach
to kind of get students to think
about tech through science and
be at and science fair, um,
where the state association for
both of those.
Um, but I think supporting our
local businesses, um, we have
Kirkland, Holleman out in
Clovis, um, both the labs.
I, I really think continuing to
support those and continuing to
give students opportunities can
help stay, keep students in New
Mexico.
Thank you, uh, sorry for that.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Lastly, um,
I, I'll ask you, maybe you don't
know the answer to this, but do
students have the ability to get
security clearances and do
undergraduates have security
clearances right now at New
Mexico Tech. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Block, um, I believe
that to be the case. That's
that's fantastic. Awesome. Cody,
congrats to you, uh, in your, in
your family here, they're
Quite emotional.
Um, and your mom raised her hand
in support, so that kind of
shocked me. But, um,
Congratulations, you have my
full support, and I appreciate
the two senators on each side of
you being here as well, you got
two good guys there. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Brantley, for a 2nd time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, to Senator
Block's point, we've talked
about the need as legislators to
um really put some recruitment
into women and to the science
fields to recruit women to go
into the science and technology
fields, I would also imagine
that that would assist with the
retention of our male students
as well
Thank you, Senator Bradley.
Before I go to the out will of
the committee, Mr. Johnston,
there's two other letters that
came in, one from your former
high school teacher, Mabel
Aguila.
wrote a nice letter on your
behalf, and I'm happy to see you
as a former journalist that you
took part of the school
newspaper. The other letter came
from the professor and chair of
physics, Sharon Sessions also
sent in a letter on your behalf.
And so I just wanted to tell you
that servitude leadership you
can tell runs through your
family, and so you'd never have
to apologize for showing
emotion. Leaders can show
emotion anytime and that doesn't
make anyone weaker, it actually
strengthens us as leaders, when
we can lead.
heart and dedication, that's
powerful, because that means you
have a connection to people and
connecting to people means
you're their voice when you walk
into a room, so never apologize
for showing emotion. I
appreciate that. We do have a
strong pipeline. I'm the chief
of staff at Los Alamos National
Laboratory with New Mexico Tech
undergraduates do get security
clearances, and you might want
to consider coming and joining
us in Los Alamos as one of our
student employees, and so with
that, what is the will of the
committee?
Senator Stephanic. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, I move
that Cody Dean Johnston be
appointed to the Mexico
Institute of Mining and
Technology Board of Regents.
Seeing a motion to move you
forward to the full Senate for
confirmation, I will ask for a
roll call vote.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Yes, ma'am.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Doig, Senator Doig is
excused and 2 excuses, you'll be
moving forward for a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
Thank you for joining us.
It's at this point, which I
typically hand over the gavel
back to the madam chair. She had
to step out, so I'm gonna
continue leading in the next,
uh, item on our agenda is Senate
Bill 254, the cybersecurity Act,
which has been rolled over, OK,
and so we're gonna move over to.
Am I seeing Senator Puya in the
room?
first.
And Senator Patilla is not in
the room, I'm gonna move forward
to Senate Bill 417.
Confirmatory adoptions by
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart, I just got a
note from the chairwoman, but
she I I promise, said her
Padilla that he could, he could
go.
For those watching online, we're
waiting for Senator Pavia to
enter into the committee room
where we'll be listening to
Senate Bill 167, the early
childhood Trust Fund.
OK. Thank you, Senator. Go ahead
on 167,
I.
Apologize, I'm running back and
forth between finance and here,
but essentially, uh Senate Bill
167 is essentially a companion
piece of legislation to a Senate
joint resolution that was passed
through this committee on
Monday, uh, to protect and uh
place the uh early childhood
education and care, uh fund into
a trust fund. This would be uh
the enabling legislation should
that pass through uh positively
with the voters, um, essentially
what we do here is it just
mandates the transfer of the
existing balance into the early
childhood and Care Trust fund,
the bill broadens the scope of
programming as we discussed on
Monday. And then there is a
contingent language on the
effective date based on the
passage of that constitutional
amendment. Uh, the reasons that
we want to do this are enhanced
resource allocation,
comprehensive child development
support, financial stability and
sustainability so that this uh
department and the good works
that they do can plan into the
future and get uh uh long range
planning done and then a legal
instruction.
clarity that is required in this
in this instance. So that's
essentially what, what we are
proposing here. I do have, um,
Madam secretary Elizabeth
Gurginsky of the early childhood
education and care department,
and I also have the chief
counsel.
I believe that's the title.
Chief counsel, Shelly Strong
with the department as well, who
both were with me on Monday,
thank you.
Great, thank you. I, our
committee secretary has stepped
out, so I don't know if we have
folks signed up on this or not.
Um, do you guys have any
organized support?
OK. Um the wonderful support we
had on Monday. I know there's
several members of this
committee that fully support
this measure.
All right,
Uh, was anyone here in
opposition?
No? OK. Uh, we'll go to the
members of the committee.
Anyone?
I feel like the teacher and and
Ferris Bueller's day off, um.
All right. Well, so I have a
question.
Um
We have a great new analyst in
our committee, uh, who was, was
looking at the language, uh, the
difference in language between
uh your SJR and this bill.
Um
And
So he noted that uh
So, the FIR for 167 verifies the
language of the proposed SJR and
that certain administrative
costs might have to be covered
by an additional appropriation
from the general fund.
But the language in in the SJR
says that money distributed from
the fund shall only be used for
those programs and services,
expenses of administration in
those programs and services as
provided in subsection D.
Of that section. And so the
language in the in
Uh, 167 subsection D does not
include administrative expenses.
Uh, which may create a conflict
between the language of the
statute and the constitutional
amendment.
And so
So how is that, was that?
I think there you have an
inconsistency there. Um, that,
that should be addressed.
All right, thank you. I'm gonna
ask our counsel to address that.
Um, we didn't mean to do that.
That was uh oversight.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
Um.
My understanding was that was uh
in the SDR, uh, I do believe
that may be an oversight, so,
um, we are going to take a look
at that and we may need to, uh,
address that inconsistently.
This goes next to judiciary. So,
uh,
So Senator, I would ask that you
The education.
Uh
OK.
Yeah, OK, that must just be a
typo. Um, well, cause I was
gonna say I'm on judiciary, so
we, I would be happy to, to just
address it there.
But um
I am just wondering.
Um
I'd be happy to address that,
look into that further and
address it in judiciary, um,
since it will go through that,
um, with you, madam. Oh, it
doesn't go through. OK, um, we
can definitely address it prior
to the next MII if it is an
issue. I'm looking here, here's
what I'm gonna ask, ask you to
do because it looks like we
don't have much discussion on
this bill anyhow. I'm gonna ask
you to step out with our
analyst, get an amendment worked
out now. We will go to our next
bill, and then after we're done
with the next bill, come back
in. We'll pick back up here.
And, and do the amendment.
Great, thanks.
All right, so Senator Stewart.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
before you today Senate Bill
417.
This is a confirmatory adoption
bill.
Uh, I have an expert witness.
This is Attorney Lynn Pearls.
I'm going to turn it over to her
and let her explain this cause
she'll do it much better than I
will.
OK. Thank you very much. Uh,
brief is, is, uh, always a
challenge for me. Um.
So the purpose of the
confirmatory adoption bill is to
provide equality and legal
security for children born
through assisted reproduction in
their families.
Um, what this bill does is it
creates a new section of the New
Mexico Adoption Act, and it
allows people who have used
assisted reproduction to
conceive, who are already
parents were presumed to be
parents under New Mexico law to
petition for a streamlined
confirmatory adoption judgment,
uh, that is when all
Possible people with claims to
parentage consent to such an
adoption. Um, this is to provide
some additional security to our
New Mexico families in this
world where we migrate and go to
other states, um, either to
visit or to live, um, we are
facing a world where not all
states are recognizing uh
parental status based solely
upon a birth certificate, um,
and so we are looking to make
sure that we have something, uh,
uh, that is.
given what's called full faith
and credit, um, throughout all
of the states to make sure that
when our children travel, they
have um the security of knowing
that their family will be
recognized.
So I'm sure that's very uh
brief, but that's exactly what
the bill does, so I don't, you
know, this, I don't know what we
have for organized, but I bet
you do. I do, Matte,
so I have um
For organizations, uh, listed
for organized support. I will
leave it to you all to manage
your, you still, you're at like
2 minutes. So you still have
about 13 minutes left. Uh,
Equality New Mexico, bold
Futures, ACLU, New Mexico, and
Planned Parenthood, New Mexico.
Madam Chair, is it working? OK,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Marshall
Martinez, I'm the executive
director of equality in New
Mexico. In New Mexico, we have
long held the values of
acceptance, affirmation, and
love, and that is especially
true when it comes to the way we
create our families. Our
policies have a history of
protecting families in the
myriad of ways that they are
created in such a culturally
rich state.
Our families deserve to know as
they travel to visit
grandparents, take vacation road
trips, or even drop an older
child off at college, that their
family is held, respected and
protected, no matter what they
may look like. We urge your
support for Senate Bill 417 to
ensure that all children in New
Mexico are protected and
respected equally across the
country.
My name is Kat Sanchez. I'm with
Bold Futures. We are a statewide
organization by and for black
indigenous women and people of
color.
As part of our work in New
Mexico, we engage with and
listen to community leaders from
across the state, and in those
conversations, we hear how
individuals wanting to start or
broaden their families often
rely on either fertility
assistance or surrogacy, and in
these cases, confirmatory
adoption allows for a smoother
process to affirm parents and
strengthen families. In
addition, confirmatory adoptions
uh offer security for family,
because in the beautiful
spectrum of what a family looks
Like something as solid as
adoption paperwork offers needed
confirmation of familial ties,
not just in New Mexico, but if
or as the family travels as
examples, those living close to
state lines and the fluidity of
travel to Texas, Colorado, or
Arizona for health care or other
needs. We urge you to pass on SB
417.
Good morning, Madam Chair. OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Pepin, registered
lobbyist with the state of New
Mexico representing Planned
Parenthood votes New Mexico. We
at Planned Parenthood stand in
full support of this bill, we
enthusiastically support the
accessibility and rights of
parenthood for all New Mexican
families. Thank you.
I have ACLU on your list as
well. I think they're on Zoom.
Go ahead. Whoever is here. Yeah,
go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto here with the
ACLU of New Mexico, and we are
in strong support of SB 417. In
New Mexico, we know that
families take many forms, and
our policies reflect that. New
Mexico recognizes parents of
children in a variety of ways,
including, for example, placing
non-biological and
non-gestational parents' names
on a child's birth certificate
in certain circumstances.
However, even when a married
non-biological or
non-gestational parents.
is included on a birth
certificate, there was a risk
that a hostile jurisdiction may
choose not to recognize marital
presumption for someone not
biologically related to a child.
Confirmatory adoption is a
simple process through which the
parents can obtain a court
judgment declaring their
parental status. The US Supreme
Court in 2016 held that adoption
decrees must be given full faith
and credit under the US
Constitution, meaning they must
be legally recognized in all 50
states, but providing this
confirmatory adoption process.
we can ensure that parents who
have a child in New Mexico
through assisted reproduction
can protect the integrity of
their family, even across state
lines, and we urge to do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we did not have
anyone sign up in opposition. So
we will go to members of the
committee, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Can you give me an
I know this is, you understand
this inside and out, but I
don't.
Tell me about
confirmatoryops. Give me an
example.
Why is it needed? What is it, is
it aligned with federal law.
What are we doing?
Uh, thank you, Mad, Madam Chair.
Senators, Senator Townsend, um,
yes, so adoption is a purely
statutory thing.
And adoption is governed by each
state.
Um, so there isn't a federal
adoption law. Each state has
their own adoption laws. And
then there's something that I'm
sure you hear all the time
called full faith and credit.
Where each of the states by
federal law, each of the states
are required to recognize the
judgments of other states. So if
you adopt a child in New Mexico
and you moved to Colorado,
Colorado acknowledges and
recognizes the adoption of your
child. That's full faith and
credit.
Um
So that's how it fits with
federal.
laws.
Um, confirmatory adoption is a
It's a, it's a shortened
process, right?
Um, and
It exists
Uh, in order to.
Provide security for all
children.
Those of us in New Mexico who
work with families and with
children worked very hard to
make sure that all children,
whether your parents are married
or unmarried, whether your
parents are two men, 2 women, or
a traditional, uh, male female
couple. We want to make sure
that children have all of the
rights and benefits and security
of their family. And so a
confirmatory adoption in this
world of assisted reproduction
makes sure that a child who was
raised with their parents, um,
doesn't move.
New Mexico to another state that
says we're not going to
recognize this person who has
raised you for the past 10 years
as your parent because they
don't have a genetic
relationship. So this gives us
New Mexico a way to, in a fairly
short process, simply affirm
through a confirmatory judgment
that the person who is intended
you to be your parent, the
person who participated, uh, uh,
for example, along with his wife
in assisted reproduction, but
it's not necessarily.
is gamites, right? It's not his
sperm.
Um, but he's still the dad.
We want to make sure that if
they move to another state.
Get, get, get crossways with
each other and go through a
divorce. We wanna make sure that
the mom can't say.
You're not the dad.
Right? You're not the biological
father and tries to undo, um,
uh, a presumption of parentage
that exists through marriage. I
don't want to get into the legal
weeds, but most of us are
parents because we're presumed
to be parents. We had a kid in
our marriage and that kid was
deemed to be the child of
The married parents, but it's
just something called a
presumption. And so we have some
examples of states. There is a
case pending on appeal in
Oklahoma, where two women
married, they planned, they
conceived a child together. They
had the child during the
marriage and in their divorce.
The mother who gave birth
claimed that the non-genetic
mother suddenly was not a
parent.
If there had been a confirmatory
adoption process, there isn't
one in Oklahoma. If there had
been a confirmatory adoption
process that would have uh saved
the tumult, this family is now
experiencing. So our issue is if
we have our New Mexico couple,
right, who's married in New
Mexico and has a child and
travels to Oklahoma, we want to
make sure that that child uh
retains the security of all of
their parents, um, without
having to uh be challenged about
who is or who isn't.
parent. Did that help, Senator?
It, it does help and I
appreciate it very much, um.
But legal.
I, I, I know you said you didn't
want to get into the.
Legal ease of this.
But we're making a law. I'd kind
of like to understand the
legalese of it, um.
But
Specifically in
Does this fix? I mean, I, I
understand what you told me. I
mean, I, I get that, but in the
legal sense.
Are we
Are we preventing, I just wanna
make sure that the child
I
Not
Manipulated that they are
absolutely protected.
And, and so,
Is that the only
Thi this prevents is if you have
a same-sex couple, male or
female, they have
Adopt or or bring the child into
the relationship.
Is there anything else that this
fixes in law, I mean, what
exactly?
Does this prevent and how is the
child protected? The goal is to
prevent families from being torn
apart.
This bill is not specifically,
um, it, it doesn't apply only to
same-sex couples.
Um, opposite sex couples, as we
know, often use assisted
reproduction, but we're not
playing games here. It is
same-sex couples who are more
often challenged with regard to
their parentage.
Right, there's a case in Florida
where one of the two moms ended
up in the emergency room, and I
believe it was the biological
mom and they wouldn't allow.
The non-biological mom who was
on the birth certificate.
To make decisions about the
child while the biological mom
was incapacitated in the
hospital. We're trying to make
sure that our children, this was
not a New Mexico child, but we
want to make sure that all of
our children, when they, no
matter what state they are in,
when they are with their family
that they are recognized as
family, so that they um uh are
granted all the rights and
benefits that flow from, um, a
parental relationship. We know
that children are better served
when
they have secure parentage.
We know that they are harmed
when that parentage is insecure.
And so this is meant to
alleviate one of those major
concerns, uh.
In the current political
environment, there may well be
challenges to same-sex marriage.
And so if we have.
A married couple, a married
lesbian couple here in New
Mexico who've had children since
Griego versus Oliver, which was
our New Mexico marriage case,
and so they're on the birth
certificate.
If one of those cases, if
something happens in the Supreme
Court that the Supreme national
the the National Supreme Court
does something to upend
Obergefell and uh national
nationwide recognition of
marriage is somehow challenged
and then there are some fears
that there could be some changes
coming.
We want to make sure that the
family relationship isn't
upended. We want to make sure
that we don't end up with
children suddenly having family
insecurity, and so this bill is
aimed at making sure there's a
process that without regard to
federal recognition or other
states recognition of the
marriage that children of those
marriages, um, or children who
were born via assisted
reproduction into relationships.
People who are already parents
in
Mexico, but there's a method to
provide that extra security,
that some insecurity about
national laws might cause.
Madam Chair and thank you for
that. I, I appreciate that. Are
there cases pending in New
Mexico courts now.
Um, that this would help.
So
Not that I am aware of right
now, the law in New Mexico is
really quite solid. Many people
in this room have worked for
decades to provide
Law that is cited around the
country.
For how positive and pro-child
and pro-family are New Mexico
laws are. So right now within
our own state, um, our laws
generally support families,
although I do have to say that a
confirmatory adoption will save
some families some money, uh,
because
For people who have
Created their family through
assisted reproduction, going
through a very long process of a
traditional adoption is
convoluted and uh we have been
doing it for 20 years in New
Mexico for same-sex couples, but
it, but this would reduce a lot
of the paperwork, um, for some
of those. Um.
Madam chair, you're the
attorney. I'm not.
But I think there's a provision
in the Constitution that says
that the legislature should not.
As a, a all that affects pending
cases, isn't that correct?
Uh, so Senator, yes, there is,
but I think what we heard is
that that's not an issue here
because there are not, there's
not a pending
in New Mexico or not, I just,
my point was,
If there is
Then you'll have a problem, I
think, in the end with the
governor signing off on this.
Because it would be
Oh, unconstitutional, if there's
a pending case, if there isn't,
then there, there's no problem
whatsoever, but I do appreciate
you helping clarify and, and
Helping me understand. Thank
you.
Senator Bradley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you guys for being here.
Oh, I wanna begin by this. I.
I'm not opposed to same-sex
couples raising kids, especially
in the adoption process, I think
when we talk about love is love,
because a lot of these kids in
in New Mexico I've never known
love, but who cares where it's
coming from, but I'm very
confused on this bill.
So legally.
If an opposite sex couple.
has a baby.
And the mother lists a father.
The biological father is no
longer in the picture, then she
just lists the the father a
current.
The current boyfriend, whoever's
in and does that become some
legal document cause they're not
biologically.
A father either. So how did,
how, what, I guess I'm saying is
how will this
You said that this is going to
help those who don't have a
genetic relationship, and we
talked about how we're gonna
change birth certificates, but
then we also went back to
adoption records, so why, what
are we changing on a birth
certificate?
And, and, and.
Why?
I, I guess
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senators, uh, Senator Brantley,
I'll, I'll try and answer that.
Uh, we're not changing anything
on birth certificates.
Um, when a woman
As sexual intercourse with a man
or her husband.
Whoever that person is, then
they're not using assisted
reproduction, so this bill
doesn't apply. OK. How does this
bill, Madam Chair, create a
streamlined process.
For the confirmatory adoption
that they cannot otherwise do
now, so I guess we just need
more explanation as to as to the
adoption process.
So Madam Chair and senator, this
simplifies and shortens the
adoption process. This allows
this couple.
Whoever they are.
To file court documents about
the baby they've just had.
To allow for the adoption in a
much more simplified shorter
process because it's
confirmatory.
Like, just had a baby together,
however, that worked with the
assisted technology and they
want to ensure that that is
recognized in other places, so
first certificates are not
always recognized, but adoption
is cause it's that full faith
and credit that's uh goes across
the state. So this takes the
adoption process just for these
folks, short and streamline it,
they still have to go to court.
They still have to provide the
documents that court still has
to look at what the documents
are, what know what the data is
in front of them, but it, it
takes it out of the 3456 year
process for adoptions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That is,
that clarifies this very quickly
as to what we're doing. Are
there other states, Madam Chair
and senator, that, that have
implemented the streamline.
Process
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senators, um, yes, there are,
um, and I had a handy dandy list
that I'm looking for. That's
going up, it's in my notes.
Um, there are 8 that have that
have already passed the laws,
uh, uh, Maine, Rhode Island,
Maryland, New Jersey, New
Hampshire, Colorado, California,
Virginia, and then the bill is
pending in New York, it's
pending in Vermont and here. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think you clarified it in your
opening remarks, but then if
there was a legal custody battle
that, that
Followed a divorce, this would
give standing to both parents
that are listed on the
documents, correct? Correct. OK,
thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Other members of the committee,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, um.
Senator Stewart and
I, I didn't get your name.
Lynn Pearls
Pearls. Miss Pearls. So I, I
have a, uh,
My wife and I have a uh a couple
friend.
Uh, they have 3 children.
And I'm just curious how this
would uh work here, so walk walk
me through it a little bit like
you watched Senator Brantley and
Senator 1000 through it.
So they recently gave birth.
Uh, the wife gave birth. They've
been married for about 17 years.
And they had um
Assisted, uh, help.
The, the husband is the father.
Uh, the mother is not the
genetic.
Mother.
So they were, the little girl
was born Rust Hospital.
And uh here in New Mexico, so on
the birth certificate is the,
the husband and the wife.
I want to make sure I understand
this. Would, would this?
Would this bill
Uh, inhibit any type of standing
as Senator Brantly was talking
about of the
Genetic donor or does this bill,
is it going to require the
mother.
Who gave birth
There are non-genetic child.
To
File for adoption or what type
of protections.
Uh, would this bill provide?
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator
This bill doesn't require anyone
to do anything.
First of all, it is certainly
voluntary for anybody who would
wish to do it.
Uh, secondly, I want to make
clear that I cannot give legal
advice or comment on the details
of your friend's individual
situation, um.
Uh
What I can say is that this bill
makes very clear.
That a donor is not a parent.
Which is useful to have in law.
Um
Again, I'm very good at going
down rabbit trails and I'm going
to try hard not to. There is an
amendment to the uniform Parent
Act pending somewhere in.
Legislature this session, um,
And it
is working on clarifying
assisted reproduction and donors
and all of those things, but
we're not going into that whole
big world, we're just talking
about this one little area to
provide some protection and it
makes clear that a donor is not
a parent. So a donor would not
be involved in this process.
Thank, thank you, um Mr. Pearl.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So on,
on page 5, walk me through some
of this legally so I can
understand this.
Um
Right, we're on line 12, it, it
says here.
A person who alleges or is
alleged to be a genetic parent
or possible genetic parent of a
child.
But whose percentage has not
been adjudicated.
Alleged father does not include
and then at number 3 it says the
donor.
So
Is the
I'm trying to understand because
the donors.
Isn't, isn't the donor an
alleged father, if that's
Donors providing the the sample
to
Fertilized, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator
So one of the most difficult
pieces in the family law.
Has always been.
Acknowledged, Father, presumed
father.
An alleged father, all three
definitions, and I can also
share with you that child
welfare defines.
Couple of those differently.
From adoption and family law.
So I'm gonna try real hard not
to go there in detail, but the
bottom line is, if you are a
presumed father, it's a
presumption.
So you're married to a man and a
woman are married. The children
they have are presumed to be
their children.
Right? We all know that they're
not always both the biological.
Donors or biological, not
donors, the wrong word,
biological parents of those
children, but they are presumed
to be the parents. A presumption
can be set aside.
And acknowledge, Father is
someone who has been recognized
as a father in a variety of
different ways.
This section G that you're
talking about is an alleged
father, a father who either
himself or alleges that they're
a father, or someone else
alleges and says, you are the
parent and we are saying in this
law, if you're a donor,
And donors are defined, I
believe.
Yes, donor is an end page 7 line
5 donor is a person who
contributes a gamut or gameites
or an embryo or embryos to
another person for assisted
reproduction or gestation.
OK. A donor does not include
people who intend to be parents,
right? So donor is specifically
defined as somebody who
specifically donating.
Not for the purpose of being a
parent. So over here when we
talk about are you an alleged
father. Donors don't, you know,
alleged fathers don't include
donors. Does that help?
I don't know.
Quite frankly, um, thank you
though, uh, Ms. Pearls, thank
you, Madam Chair, because when,
and, and I had that section
highlighted here in my notes
because it goes back to what I'm
saying on line 8 page 7.
The the donor, everything, I, I
agree with section in there,
everything you read, I
understand, and then it says.
It sounds like it's more like
the intent just because.
The
The man
Donates his genetic code will
say to keep it clean.
The donor does not include a
person who provides.
Gamuts for use in assisted
reproduction with that person's
spouse.
But it also says the donor means
a person who contributes a gamut
or games or an embryo.
So it, it's contradictory to me
there, and that's the part I'm
trying to understand to get my
head wrapped around.
Because what you said earlier
is, well,
A donor doesn't mean the donors
trying to have, have a kid.
It could mean something else.
This, this seems
Again, I'm not a lawyer.
Um, this seems very
contradictory to me, and I, I, I
don't understand that. And then
lastly, I'll ask you, um,
instead of
Alleged
Father, how come we don't have
biological mother biological
father in here, is that, is that
in here mis not read that in
here.
Madam Chair, Senator, this bill
is specifically about assisted
reproduction.
And so we talk about the person
who gives birth.
And we talk about
The peoples who, who's whose
gamites and eggs are used.
Um
We don't really want to confuse
this with.
Other forms of conception.
Uh, we want this is specifically
about assisted reproduction. So,
There are times when.
Not just with same-sex couples,
but with opposite sex couples
where they cannot conceive
through traditional sex.
Which means that husband.
May make his donation, right?
And then assisted reproduction
is used in order to fertilize
the egg.
And so that's why we need to
make sure that we did when we
define donor as not a parent.
On page 7, section N, which
starts with number 5.
We have to make sure that we put
that that while we've defined
all donors as not parents, there
is an exception.
And the exception is when a
husband, a spouse, is when a
spouse is using his own sperm,
right, for the assisted
reproduction. We wanna make sure
that we don't define him out of.
Being a parent. And so donors
clearly are not parents except.
In this situation,
In these exceptions, one of
those exceptions is if you're
the married spouse, and the
whole reason of the donation is
to conceive with your spouse.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
but I, I guess my argument is
whether or not the man or the
woman.
Um, wants to be a, a father or
mother just wants to donate
sperm or or or an egg.
That's still a biological
genetic.
Donation with that person's DNA.
They're still biological.
That's a biological sample, is
it not?
Um, I'm sure I don't think we
understand your question.
Senator Stewart, Madam Chair,
Senator Stewart, what I'm saying
is the donor.
It's a biological donor.
That's what it is. It's not
just, hey, I'm donating
something that just because the
donor does not want to be the
father or the mother.
They, they are still, it doesn't
show in this bill, it, it, to
me, it needs to be
Very descriptive, it is still
the biological donor, whether
it's the man or the woman.
Um
In here, right? Is that, is that
correct? Because you, you said
something about, well, it's not
biological.
But it is biological because
this is a biological sample of
that person's DNA.
In this process.
Uh, so mature, I think we just
go back to the definition on
page 7, so we're trying to
distinguish between when a
donor's not a donor and uh if
you see number one, the donor's
not a donor when it's the, it's
the parent, uh, working with the
spouse.
Uh, so,
This is not for everyone. This
is just and yeah, same sex
couples have to use assisted
technologies, but sometimes that
this doesn't mean they have to
use this process at all.
Thank you for that. I, I guess
I'm really stuck on the, the
Madam Chair, um, the scientific
term here because
When we say alleged.
Father
The person who alleges or is
alleged to be a genetic parent.
Or possible gene genetic parent
of a child.
I, I, I guess I'm just confused
here on the wording.
Because
This is coming from, again, if
we go back to
My example.
Walk me through this real quick.
It's not the mother's egg.
That was fertilized by her
husband's sperm.
It's a biological sample that
the that the couple.
Had an agreement with either
some type of healthcare facility
or person to donate.
Her biological
Material to be inseminated.
In the life.
So why aren't we just saying
biological here to
Keep things kind of straight.
Instead of donor.
I will try. I missing something
here with the word biological? I
mean, are we talking past past
each other maybe.
I, I think there might be some
of that, so.
Some of the language used.
is based upon something called
the uniform parentage Act. There
are uniform acts, um, that are
written by committees nationally
and then distributed to state
legislatures, and I'm sure that
in your time with the
legislatures you're aware of a
variety of uniform acts. And so
we're using language and
definitions that are coincide
with uses, the usage of these
words nationally. This is a
state law. We are not
We're not changing anything
federally. This is state law,
but we're using language choices
that are used throughout the
country, um, particularly with
regard to the uniform parentage
Act, both as it exists in New
Mexico's law currently as well
as the recommended uniform
parentage Act from the Uniform
Acts.
Um, committee. So I think that's
as as close as I can come. I, I,
I appreciate that answer. Um, I,
I think what I would ask is um I
can stop my questions here.
I
I, I want to understand this
bill better. I mean, if it
passes through committee, fine.
I'd like to talk to you after
committee to kind of walk me
through it because, you know,
you see the word adjudicated
there. I, I don't know what
adjudicated means. I, I want to
hear Senator, um,
I want to hear the other bill
that we have in the amendment
before I go to the floor, but
This, this is confusing because
I'm
I'm really stuck on these
definitions, so I, I appreciate
you trying to walk me through
it, but, um, if you can come see
me, uh, after I'd greatly
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Fox.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh I
move a due pass on Sanibel 417.
All right, we have a motion for
due pass. Let's do a rollcavo on
that.
Asked earlier
to speak.
Oh, Senators did not go to you?
I apologize. Um,
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you.
Prote and
Um, Miss Pearl, do you have a
couple just clarifying
questions, um.
The block was confused on some
of the language, and I want to
go to page 5.
Uh, line.
9
And in the discussion about the
biological father, he struck
that from current law.
And I'm, I, I'm, I'm also trying
to understand if you're talking
about a donor.
Why that is not in there, uh, as
a backup.
I'm just wondering why we're
striking that language.
Uh, in this bill, I'm sure.
Man, I, I think what's happened
here is that the language that
was struck is in and rewritten
in the next 123.
So it's to uh ensure that the
language is up to date and this
is not, this language doesn't
include everything we need to
have it. Madam Chair, Ma'am
prote and Miss Pearl, then I
guess my next question is, uh,
we're trying to go to
National standard
And if I understood right, madam
chair, Miss Pearl, you talked
about 8 states are currently
doing this.
Is that correct?
So Madame Chan, Madame Prote and
Miss Pearl, why is 8 states
matter when you have 42 others
that do not update this. If
you're talking about a national
standard, is what I understood.
You're only doing this in 8
states. I don't see how that's a
national standard if we're 48th
out of the 50 states, and I
would see that we are not.
Uh, or an underlier of the
states that are currently have
this law.
Uh, but if I understand my term
and prote and Miss Pearl, if
there's only 8 that happens.
I don't know how that is the
national standard.
So man uh
I don't think Miss Pearl said
that, uh, she, she, she talked
about the national uniform
Heritage Act.
Uh, so this amends both that and
our adoption.
In New Mexico.
So this uh move is just
happening organically in other
states, this is not a national
standard issue.
Senator, can I, I, I think I
might know,
I think I might have a sense of
what you're asking.
So doing this here would give
full faith and credit in all the
states, not just other states
who have passed this law.
Is that right? Yes. OK.
So, so this wouldn't just apply
in the states that that passed
this law, it would be that if
we, we pass this here, then this
adoption would have full faith
and credit in all throughout the
nation.
Thanks for that man.
Sharon and protein.
Uh, then it goes back to the
same question that Senator
Townsend have if we don't have
A case in Mexico.
Why are we worried about this,
Madam Chair?
And Madam Chair, we're worried
about it because what the
Supreme Court has been doing,
which is undermining uh uh
precedence over the last 50
years, so, um, they could undo
the loss that uh they've decided
already uh for LGBTQ community.
Um, so this is a protection of
kids that are born here in New
Mexico to make sure that they've
got a uh full faith and credit
adoption that they can rely on.
And chairing center for them, so
you're saying is if we pass
this, and the US Supreme Court
has no jurisdiction on us, even
if they make a
Federal mandate or change, is
that what I'm understanding?
Ma'am, I didn't say anything
like that. Um, all I said was
that we are trying to protect
our our kids in New Mexico
through this process. Other
states are also doing it, uh, if
we pass this, we'll be number 9.
so it, it depends on the state.
Chair and Senator I'll have to
look at the um
Replay cause I, I thought you
definitely use the word Supreme
Court, and so I'm just trying to
understand the intent of the
legislation. I do have, I'll go
on to another question, Madam
Chan, Senator and, and Miss
Pearl, uh, you talked earlier
about the regular adoption.
And the cost and the timeline,
uh, can you tell me what the
difference would be?
Uh, with this adoption process
versus what is currently
standard.
And Madam Chair, a standard
adoption process takes years.
But this uh will take.
Perhaps a few months.
Now, it still is a court process
that a couple, whoever they are,
still has to produce documents,
etc.
Uh, but it's uh easier uh
quicker way to adoption because
the child re.
Belongs is part of that couple's
thing.
Well thanks for that, madam
chair and Senator, I guess in
Lee County we do it differently.
First little baby that was born
in Safe Haven, not born,
depositing saving back box is a
little over a year old and has
already trajectory is to be
completed this year for adopted
so he would be adopted within 2
years of being placed, so I
don't know for the years.
Come in, because I think if
you're looking at this one and
being within a year.
I don't think it currently does
that, so.
Um
I'll close with this, uh.
Because
New Mexico recognize or
Um
Adoptions of other states it
currently do we um recognize
Colorado or Texas, we currently
recognize that humanitarian
center
chair, yes, that's part of the
full faith and credit that
adoption ah is recognized in
every center then again, why do
we need this bill if we are
recognized them, why are they
not recognizing ours and.
So, Madam Chair.
We're trying to shorten the
adoption process for children
born with these assisted
technology.
That's all this is doing.
And so at the present time, that
we don't have this, uh.
Uh
It wouldn't be recognized in
other states. Birth certificates
are presumptions, but adoptions
are part of the.
Full faith and credit with uh
across the states. That's what
we're trying to move to.
Well thank them and sharing I'll
yield with this. I'm grateful
for Lee County providing the own
gas revenues, but also shortened
period of adoption. I wish that
more of the state would
recognize what we do in my
county.
Put that on you.
Sarah Townsend for a second
time. Thank you, ma'am. Um.
A protem.
Um
When all else spells, I go talk
to a lawyer to help me. And so
I'm getting some questions and I
wanna make sure these are what I
was unable to.
To
As
intelligently while ago.
What about
The
In the, in the case of.
A male
Donating sperm.
For the conception of a child.
And
This birth certificate would
have the two, in this case, in
this example.
They would have the 2 same-sex.
Person
People
Listed on the birth certificate.
What about the inheritance.
Prospects of the child. What if,
what if the male
doesn't want to be
Um
Removed. I mean,
is that donor?
Is, is he alleviated from the
process? What if he says no?
What, what if, what if that guy
has a jillion dollars.
Has no other children and wants
to leave it to that child, is it
prevent the legal tie to that
inheritance. I just want to make
sure that the child is
protected.
Yeah. It's not really what the
bill is about, man.
Yeah
I'll I'll, I'll turn it over to
Miss Pearls.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'll, I'll
give it a shot.
Donors
Involve intent.
And so when somebody.
Is involved with another person
and they decide together to have
a child.
That's a parent.
When somebody goes to a sperm
bank.
Or just to a physician, and they
do assisted reproduction.
And the donor signs a piece of
paper, usually, not always, but
usually.
And in New Mexico's law, it
talks about.
What makes someone a donor,
we're not addressing that law
here today. There's a whole
separate section of the
uniformed Parentage Act about
assisted reproduction and talks
about.
Oh you're a donor and figuring
out if you're a donor or if
you're a parent.
This law is about.
Parents
And not donors. This law says a
donor is not a parent.
So if you're not a parent, then
there's no inheritance.
And, and I appreciate that. I
think that, that.
If that donor has signed off on
a piece of paper and says I'm a
donor. I have no.
No time, I just, I'm just being
the donor. I get it.
But if he didn't.
Are we leaving he or her out,
whether it's sperm or an egg, I
mean.
I'm just trying to make sure
that child in it.
And its ties to its heritage and
its family in the past, I mean,
some child someday is gonna say,
I wonder.
I mean, I've been through
Sex education. I know.
These two guys can't be my mom.
I know these two ladies can't be
my dad.
I want to know who my dad is, or
I want to know who my mom is.
How do, how does that child then
have a pathway.
Find that out under this
circumstance.
So sure that that doesn't have
anything to do with this bill.
That, that's part of the thing
that happens when you're
adopted, you know, you look for
your biological parent, you can
still do that, it has nothing to
do with any of those processes.
OK. I, uh, I have more
questions, but I understand
where we're at. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator, we're not going on the
floor until 11:30, so if you
want to ask your questions, go
ahead.
Madam Chair, my concern is, I, I
don't.
Um
I completely agree that.
To people, regardless of their
can be
Great parents. I'd be the first
to say that.
My my my concern.
In, in this case is
Are we protecting the child.
Lineage. Does that child have
the right to know?
Is there a process for them to
know under this circumstance. I,
I'm, I'm not ar.
I'm not arguing with
With the parental issue. I'm
just thinking about the child.
That's all I'm trying to do is,
are we giving the child a fair
shot.
Or are we taking away
Like putting on the birth
certificate.
Two people that that child will
realize at some point in time is
not
May not be their biological
parents. Do they still have a
pathway to go find out who my
parents are.
my great grandparents are.
That's my concern. Yeah, and I
understand uh me proteins point.
I'm just thinking through.
the impacts of the bill, not
necessarily.
What we're doing today.
So manager, let me answer, but
then I also want pearls to
answer, so.
You know, you're concerned of
the child is exactly the
motivation for this bill.
So, I appreciate your concern.
We have the same concern, but
let me turn it over to Pearls to
answer your exact question.
Madam Madam Chair, senators,
Senator Townsend, I want to go
back to Senator Block's example
of his friends, actually, um,
which is
This bill here.
is about
People who
Plan their family with the use
of assisted reproduction.
And what you're asking is
something that
I would
Love to sit and have a drink
with anybody who wants to
discuss for hours, um, the
The faith and philosophy
underlying assisted
reproduction.
And when it's important to have
a known donor, and when it's
important to have, um, unknown
donors. Those are important
issues, so I don't want to
minimize that and and and make
anybody think that those aren't
issues that that legal people
involved in um assisted
reproduction tech technology
law.
that we don't think about them.
We think about them all the
time.
Um
But in that example, where your
friend down the street used a
donor egg to conceive.
There are all kinds of decisions
they will have to make as a
family.
And
It's my position, and I believe
it's, in general, the law's
position that we want to keep as
many of those decisions within
the family as we can.
And so whether your neighbor
friend.
Whether that family chooses to
tell their child that they were
conceived with a donor egg.
When they choose to say that
what they choose to share about
that donor egg is generally
something we want to have be a
family decision.
What we want to make sure in um
in this bill when we talk about
confirmatory adoptions is we
want to make sure that the
people petitioning the court for
the assistance of the court for
a shortened judgment process,
um,
To confirm their parental
status, they have to say to the
court in this pleading in the
legal document, the petition
they file.
They have to explain and if if
you look at the new language,
the, the new material starting
on page 20
the petition has to include a
declaration signed by all
petitioners. That's the top of
page 21, explaining the
circumstances of the child's
birth through assisted
reproduction, attesting that the
petitioners are parents, and
that there are no other persons
with a claim to parentage of the
child.
And so that's kind of the key.
To the assertion in the petition
and why these petitions deserve
a shortened process. Um, it, it
becomes very, um, unwieldy uh
expensive and unreasonable to
have a couple that uses a donor
egg, have to go through a
traditional adoption, a
thousands of dollars for a home
study, I know somebody asked
about costs. Um, the home study
is really the most expensive
part of it. Um, advertising in a
publication.
For any known parents of baby X
when we know that it was a donor
egg, there's just steps in a
traditional adoption that are
very time-consuming and very
expensive that this process will
eliminate for those families,
these families are very
specific, they are already
parents under New Mexico law,
and they must state in the
petition the circumstances of
the assisted reproduction. Thank
you.
Thank you. So I believe we are
on a Du pass motion from Senator
Stefaniks. Let's go ahead and do
a roll call vote on that.
Senator Bergman's. Yes.
Senator Block. No, and I'd like
to explain my vote.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator Duha. Yes, with 5 in
favor you have.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
uh, Miss Pearls, you're an
attorney, right?
Counselor, I, I'd really like
you to
Get with me sometime to.
Really walk through this bill
because I have a lot of
questions.
And I've been, I've been dying
to get to Senator Padilla's bill
here, but I want you to um get
with my um assistant and get on
my schedule on a Tuesday or
Thursday, and I, I got a ton of
questions. This is just very
confusing.
And uh because of your legalese
doesn't help me.
Uh, in a good way or in a bad
way, whatever you want to say,
but uh, I appreciate your time.
I appreciate you trying to
explain this. It's a very, very
complicated issue and I want to
understand it more before I have
a final floor vote if this makes
it to the floor. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. And I
had my, my microphone off so for
the folks online.
Ah, so you have to do pass with
5 in favor for
Senator Padilla, come on up.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
I'm back here, uh, after we had
a great consultation with your
analyst who gave us some very
good direction and advice on
your uh concern with the
legislation and I'm gonna ask um
our counsel at the table here to
just walk us through exactly
what that amendment would be and
its exact placement.
That.
Thank you
um on line 17 of page 7.
At the end of that line, we
would strike the period to add a
coma.
And add the hold on, let, let
everyone get there. Got you.
You.
Yes, page 7.
Line 17.
All right, go ahead.
At the end of that line, we
would strike the period.
Add a comma.
And add the words.
And the expenses of
administering those programs and
services.
Period. Yes, page 7.
Line 17.
After the word kindergarten
strike the period and then add
the language you just.
Yes.
So page 7, line 17 at the end of
that line.
After the word kindergarten?
It strike the period at a comma.
And
Add the words and the expenses
of administering those programs
and services.
Period.
And thank you for the feedback,
Madam Chair, and we see that as
a friendly amendment. OK.
Is there any debate on that
amendment?
Is there any objection to
adopting that amendment.
See none. That amendment is
adopted. We're back on the bill
as amended. What is the will of
the committee?
I move too pass,
right? We have a motion for to
pass.
All right. Is there any
objection to that motion.
Seeing none, you have a to pass
as cementum. Thank you, Madam.
All right, guys, we're gonna see
if we can very quickly.
Do 319.
We'll be listening to Senate
Bill 319, minimum car insurance
amounts. Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So my,
well my expert is running over,
um.
So
I think a lot of us when we
think about car insurance, we
often think about liability
insurance. We think about what
is if if we hit something
someone.
What is going to pay for their,
their damage.
Um
Uh, probably the most important
coverage you can have.
is uninsured motorist coverage.
Because that
is why if you get hurt.
That is what pays for your
damages. That is what allows you
to take care of your family.
And yourself and, and, and make
you whole.
UM coverage is um is very cheap.
Uh, oftentimes,
People will reject it, not
knowing how, what, how important
this coverage is, uh, because
they'll get a slight discount on
their insurance premium for
doing so. Um.
But we also have a huge number
of uninsured drivers here.
So the chance if you get hit,
the chances of you getting hit
by someone who, who is uninsured
is very, very high. And in that
case, if you don't have UM
coverage.
You're out of luck. Uh, there
is, there's no recovery
available to you often because
usually that person who hit you
is, is judgment, what's called
judgment proof.
You're not gonna get any money
out of them.
Um, or it's a hit and run.
And so what this bill would
require would require that, uh,
so right now we have a mandate
for liability insurance and
minimum limits for that. That
would, this bill would extend
that mandate to uninsured
motorists insurance. So
You would have the same minimum
requirement to have a minimum
level of uninsured motorist
coverage. And I have here with
me, uh, Brandon Cummings, who
some of you guys might recognize
from the judiciary Committee,
uh, and he can.
Very, very briefly, because we
have to be on the floor very
soon. Tell us a little bit more
about it.
Or just be here for questions.
We don't have anyone, uh, to
speak and support, and I don't
believe anyone signed up in
opposition. Senator Black. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Uh-huh
Madam Chair, I just have two
quick questions. So this, this
happened to me, I hit a wasn't
my fault. I want to make that
clear. Um, I hit a person, iboed
them, they crossed into the road
in front of me, they were
uninsured. I have USAA and I'm
not sure if every policy has
that blanket coverage if it's
required in New Mexico or not,
but the uninsured motorist
coverage covered me only up to a
certain amount.
Um, does that affect
Um, is that affect this bill at
all?
So
So what you're describing right
now, that is a volunteer, so, so
you, you purchased that
uninsured motorist coverage and
you purchased it for a certain
amounts. And so what this would,
this would make it blanket
coverage, but you would still
pick the amount. You could pick
the minimum coverage, just like
you can pick minimum coverage of
liability now. If you wanted,
you could, is let's say you had
higher liability, uh, limits,
you can always match your UM to
your liability, which I highly
recommend everyone do. Also,
don't sign something that says
you can't stack your pal.
Um,
Get a little off topic here,
but.
But,
so, sorry, go ahead thank you
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Duhague, it is it?
Is it required in New Mexico.
Or
Uh, New Mexican drivers who have
insurance to have the uninsured
liability.
Not presently, uh, Mr. Tay, this
is this would make that that the
case. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Duhague. uh, thank you,
um.
Mr. Chair, so would this
increase
So that being said, that's
additional coverage that would
increase insurance costs for um
New Mexicans, correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator, there would
probably be a slight increase,
but UM coverage is really cheap.
It is the cheapest, most
important coverage you could
possibly get, uh.
Mr. Cummings, go ahead, go
ahead.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, by way
of to the Geico quote this
morning, uh, using myself, my
information in one car and just
comparing which is what you're
required to have right now,
$25,000 per person, $50,000 per
accident.
With what it would cost to add
uninsured motorists would be
required, and the monthly
premium went from.
Uh, $40.06 to $53.46.
So over the course of 6 months,
the difference is.
Uh, $240.45.
would be increased by $80.
over 6 months.
OK. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And then, uh, Senator
Doha, the only other question I
had here is on page 3, section
D, line 16.
Uh, for, for Delta and echo
here, an owner of a motor
vehicle should not permit the
operation of the owner's motor
vehicle upon the streets.
Or highways of New Mexico if the
vehicle does not carry uninsured
motors covers pursuant to the
provisions of the section, a
person shall not drive a motor
vehicle upon the streets or
highways of New Mexico to
vehicle does not carry.
Uninsured motorist coverage
pursuant to the provisions of
the section.
So the, the, the two questions I
have for you is, uh, in, in my
district there, um, we have a
lot of off-road drivers.
Uh,
And then she off road on here,
is that, is that not included?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, under
our insurance code as it stands,
we require insurance when you're
operating on anything other than
so when they say, um, streets
and highways, that term means
any public road.
If you're on private property,
you would not be required to
have insurance. Sure, but
unreancho estates.
They they're not roads.
It's not a public road. It might
be public property.
But it's not a public road, and
that's a that that's why I say
um term of art cuz it's so
anything that's public, so if
you even have a public uh
municipal parking lot, that
would be a street and highway in
New Mexico.
We enforce traffic laws on all
public property, um.
So, if you're operating, so the
I guess the difference would be
if you have a large farm.
You can operate at your, your
farm truck on your own property
without the requirement, sir. I
thank you, Mr. Chair. I I just
respectfully disagree because it
doesn't say that here, it says
upon the streets or highways of
New Mexico. So those are not
streets or highways of New
Mexico. Mr. Chair, Senator, I
know where you're talking about.
That part used to be my
district. Um, those would be
considered, I mean, they're not
paved.
Uh, there's
I was, I was really, I, I was, I
was kind of fascinated by right,
they don't have water, um, but
that is still a, it is an
unpaved roadway that uh is
covered by the municipality, I
believe. It's or or the county,
at least is a county, so I think
those would be covered despite
the fact that they are.
Uh, uh, a roadway not being a a
great roadway, which
unfortunately they are not out
there. It doesn't make it not a
roadway. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess
Senator Duhague, I would ask you
what what's the name of those,
what's the name of the road out
there, what's the name of the
highway out there?
Mr. Chair, Senator, I can't
remember, but I do remember
driving down them, um, doing a
canvassing, uh, when I was
running in that district. And
so,
But as if it's it's county
property, it's not, that is not
necessarily private property of
the people who live there, but
What you use to get to to those
those homes. So that would still
be be a roadway of the state.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chairs.
I think that needs to be
captured in here because if you
talk to the county.
Which that's out in the
unincorporated areas.
There's no an Arroyo is not a
road, and a roo is not a
highway, there's no name for it,
you can't, there's no addresses
out out there at all, um.
Uh, I'll, I'll move on to that
cause, um, the other question I
have is, if it says an owner of
a motor vehicle if the
particular owner
I first say Senator Gallegos,
he's got a nice big truck, and
uh we're out there and he's
like, hey Jay.
Um, here you drive, he's trying
to teach me how to drive.
Um
It it shouldn't be the driver of
a motor vehicle instead of an
owner. So Mr. Chair, Senator,
it's both, because you entrust,
like you were just in you're the
example you just gave, you would
be entrusting that vehicle to
another driver. We people do
that all the time, um, and this
is the same language that we
have for liability insurance.
Ah, it has to be an owner or a
driver, that the the obligation
is on both of them to follow our
laws. Thank you for that,
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm not against this, it's just
I'm trying to get my head around
the words, uh, and I appreciate
that and um.
I'll yield. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you,
Madam Chan, gentlemen, uh, just,
uh, want to go back in history.
I'm trying to understand the
difference between our bill in
2021, a Senate bill, uh, 147,
which is mandatory financial
responsibility and that um
Didn't get hurt.
what it did for the poor.
Um
I was more worried about.
Um, uninsured mortars hitting me
and me having to resolve the
responsibility, but can you
explain to me the differences in
your current bill and what you
and I had in 2021. Mr. Chair,
Senator, yes, and we should
probably bring that bill again.
Um, and I'm, I'm trying, so I,
from my memory, and I haven't
looked at that bill since then,
but that was primarily about
raising the minimum limits.
Uh, that folks would have to
have, um, for, for liability,
uh, and so.
So this is more, this is about.
Making the UM coverage, making
sure that everyone has UM
coverage just like everyone has
to have the, the liability
coverage, but it's not changing
those minimum amounts that are
now set in law, um, whereas I
think our bill did change those
minimum amounts.
and
Miss Chan, Madam Chair, and
gentlemen, uh, so that, that.
Uh, coverage had been enacted in
1983 and has never been
Increased. We're looking at
doubling them back then, but one
of the, the fears that I have
and it was the discussion we had
then and I don't know if
If you're having these, um,
Discussion now is the uninsured
motor.
Motor coverage is typically more
costly.
Uh, than Representative even in
your bill and you're seem to be
at the lower end of that. If you
had any conversations with
people that are afraid of what
it's going to do uh to us on our
insurances.
So you and Mr. Chair, Senator,
UN coverage is usually pretty
cheap. It is some of the
cheapest coverage you can get.
Um, there was a big concern
about the cost impact of what we
were talking about in 21 because
doubling those liability
liability limits would also
And
increase people's premiums. Um,
I think that has more potential
to increase premiums, frankly,
than adding UM coverage because
UM coverage is so cheap that
the, uh, the quotes that that
Mr. Cummings was getting today
showed an addition only of about
$13 per month for the premium
for the UM coverage.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
and then, um, my next question
is, uh, part of it is, is if I
understand the bill right,
there's removal of the offset.
And would that not allow us to
have a double recovery.
For an incident
Mr. Chair, Senator, the language
in in the bill about removal of
offset tracks the state's called
Crutcher that said that the
offset was illusory. Oh,
absolutely. So the language in
the bill that that refers to uh
ending the offset tracks are
Supreme Court's decision in a
case called Crutcher that ended
that offset. So it's the bill
language will track what the
Supreme Court has said.
If that makes sense.
It does, Mr. Chair and
gentlemen, uh, it just still
doesn't give me.
The warm fuzzy I have, uh, when
we'd had our bill in 2021, the
trial lawyer seemed to really,
uh, have opposition to it. This
one here.
will actually be a benefit to
them, cause then they would be
able to increase our recoveries.
Uh, I'm just wondering how, you
know, that would work and what
the public would look at if we
were to passes of that opens up
more litigation versus
protections, this term.
So, Mister Chair, Senator, I
don't, I think, I think who this
really benefits is is the
public.
Um, because this is your own
coverage.
So, so this is your uncoverage
that would cover you.
And so to the extent that you
have an insurance company that
is, um, wrongfully denying your
claim for your own benefits,
then you might have, I mean,
those cases exist already, um.
But I don't, this would not
increase litigation against
other outside parties because
this coverage is about covering
you.
Uh, and so you might get in a
fight with your own insurance
company over it.
But, but that would be the only
potential increased litigation,
I would see, and, and frankly,
that happens all the time now
because of insurance companies
who.
like, uh, paying out when people
have paid their premiums every
month.
last session.
I was in Albuquerque.
Most of the Rio Rancho, not sure
where the boundary is, and
someone had swerved in and hit
my bumper.
By the time we pulled over and
the city of I actually it's
President's Day, the city of
Albuquerque did not have.
Officers can respond, so it must
be in Albuquerque.
Uh, when I turned it into my
insurance doing all the
paperwork myself as the PD
didn't show up.
And submitted it.
It would have cost me more.
For me, an increase on my
insurance and what the repair
was to my bumper. My bumper is
exactly the way it is because it
ultimately does cost me.
Even with this, I think those
premiums are gonna go up if I
use.
And that's what concerns me. I
think if you're talking about
poor in Mexico has a lot of
poor, will it not affect their
premiums?
Experimenter.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
I'll say something and then I'll
just kick it to Mr. Cummings cuz
he'll be able to say what he
just whispered in my ear better
than I.
And now I just forgot what I was
gonna say, so I'll.
Immediately, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, so this bill will address
the uninsured motorist Act under
the uninsured Motorist Act, um,
insurance companies aren't
allowed to increase your
premiums for a law suit didn't
cost.
So we do not permit your premium
individually to be increased
because you made an uninsured or
underinsured claim and we cap
the maximum deductible for
uninsured or that's in this
bill.
That
That's already, that's already
in the existing law.
Madam chair
And
Mr. Maner and uh gentleman, I
will call State Farm on that
because in our discussions.
A year ago
If I would filed,
There can be some reviewing of
my
My insurance. So what you're
saying, uh, we had someone in
here the other day stay at State
Farm is probably one of the
worst actors in the state.
This may have just proved that,
but my fear is that what we do
here.
Matters to them and uh.
But that all.
Thank you Under Townsend. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, um,
I find myself in a difficult
spot.
I'm kind of POed insurance
companies.
Way down deep.
with the way they're treating
many in New Mexico.
But
But when I read this bill,
What it does is it
The real problem is there's
people out there driving that
don't have insurance.
And I get it, and I, if you
Come up with a bill to make them
buy insurance. I'm all on. I, I,
I'll be, I've, I've, I've gone,
but, but I think this bill is
doing is it's penalizing.
Those people that are following
the law and buying insurance.
We're making them spend more
money for insurance to protect
themselves because we know
there's many people out there
that don't buy insurances.
And I, I understand your point
is it's protecting them, but the
problem is there's a whole bunch
of them out there that aren't
buying insurance.
So I don't think it's.
As much as I want to support the
effort and as much as I'm POed
at the insurance companies.
I think this
law-abiding.
people
Because other people don't
follow the dang law, and that's,
that's what I have problems
with, but um,
Man, I'm all in for trying to
get more people to buy
insurance, and I think the MBD
does a lousy job.
A policing.
But they are the responsibility
is to make sure that people have
insurance.
They don't, they do a lousy job
of doing it and because of that.
You have a problem that you're
trying to address and, but I
just, I have a hard time with
the process because the ones
that are following the law
we're, we're gonna increase
their cost, and the other ones
that aren't following the law.
We're just gonna say, go ahead,
we're gonna try to cover
ourselves because you won't, and
I just, I have a hard time with
that. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Stoppanics.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I wasn't
gonna ask any questions, but now
Senator Townsend has confused
me.
Is this bill, like his comments
about increasing
The insurance amount was lost on
me. Could you, Mister Chair,
Senator, or your expert respond
to that? And Mr. Chair, Senator,
this does not change the minimum
limits that are currently in
law.
This would just say that just
like you have to have liability
insurance, you have to have
this. But it would not change
the, the, the minimum. OK, so
Mr. Chair, when I was a
youngster, I uh grew up and
lived in Ohio.
And we were required to do this.
Um
And
My parents were probably not
happy about paying the amount
because we were um
A low income working family.
But
Because they had
Teenagers coming up through the
ranks.
They had to do it and um
I'm sure it was a burden for
them, but the very first day I
was out driving with my driver's
license.
I was talking to my friends in
the car and I drove straight
into another car.
And my parents were very glad
this that
They had whatever insurance they
had.
Now I have another bad story to
tell here and uh New Mexico.
I used to run a nonprofit.
And we had a band that used to
go out and pick up seniors.
And um as
The seniors were in the van
going through a red light, or
they were stopped at a red
light. Somebody.
Came through red light as it
turned green and T-bone the
band.
One of the seniors died. They
all ended up in the ER and the
family
Although they wanted to be kind
to the nonprofit.
Um, they needed some
compensation.
And the person who had T-boned
our van fled.
And they were apprehended, but
about it was about 5 years
later.
And so they did decide the
family did decide to pursue it
at that time, so I understand
why.
We would want to have this, but
I also wanted to address.
The higher rate and make sure
that we were not
Imposing a higher rate on
people. I understood the
comparison that you did, Mr.
Chair, on the monthly, and so it
was about in your comparison, it
was about $80 extra per 6
months.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, 80 and
6 months.
OK. So, Mr. Chair,
That can be an increase for
people who have no funds.
But I also understand that the
consequences of not having it
can be more serious as well.
That that's not my only comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. What's the will of
the committee?
I'm overdue pass motion for a do
pass. I can have a roll call.
Senator Briman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stephannis,
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is excused.
Senator Townsend, Senator
Jaramil. Yes.
Senator Doigg, yes.
a vote of 4 yes, 3 no, you will
move on to your next committee.
Madam Chair, do you want me to
hand the gavel back to you? Are
