It rise and report progress
second motion.
Okay that's so what am I
supposed to say now.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered the Senate is back in
session.
Thank you madam president
unanimous is that we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous seeing no
no third reading of legislation
so we'll get that done and get
up to committees so with that
madam president Jim since that
we go to that order business
Senator Padilla thank you madam
excuse senator project correct
himself Senator Wirth I thank
you madam president Ms that we
go about our business messages
from the house.
We're on that order of Business
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
Message from the house will be
entered in the General.
order of business committee
reports for you to read.
Then present your tax business
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
agree to be allowed to re all
the committee reports that we
events be referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill fifty four do pass
and then referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill sixty eight do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill sixty nine do pass
and thence referred to Judiciary
Committee.
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one fifty seven do
not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill two oh four do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
bill two ninety two do passed
and then referred to the finance
committee.
Respectfully submitted Benny
Those pose nee the eyes have a
committee report is adopted and
journal will reflect their acted
upon individually.
The reader to read madam
president your conservation
committee to whom has been
And that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
The I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the review be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on that was one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually seeing
bill one sixty nine do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
you know that Senator Elizabeth
Liz Stefanics chairwoman.
Senator Stefanics madam
report is adopted in the Turner
will reflect their acted upon
individually.
Madam president your Education
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two thirty
souls chairman Senator souls ask
Miss consent of the Senate that
the reader be allowed to read
all the committee reports that
we vote on them with one motion
and that the journal reflect
they were acted upon
committee.
Senate bill three oh seven do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator William P. souls
All those pose nee committee
report is adopted in the journal
will reflect their acted upon
individually.
Madam president your Indian
rural and cultural affairs
the finance committee
respectfully submitted to
Senator Shannon D. Pinto co
chair Senator Pinto thank you
madam president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
Move adoption of the committee
report thank you are on adoption
of favorable committee report
all this paper signify by saying
aye.
five has had it under
consideration and reports that
same has been duly enrolled in
it grossed preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Senate senator Pete Campos
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed nay committee
report is adopted.
I would like to announce that
the officers of the Senate have
go that our business
introduction of legislation.
Seeing no objection were on that
order business introduction of
legislation the reader to read
Senate bill four oh two
equity fund revising investment
guidelines eliminating bond
requirements for New Mexico
finance authority employees
providing an exception to the
inspection of public records act
transportation committee thanks
to finance Senate bill four oh
to Senate bill for three
introduced by senator Correa
have bill an act relating to
taxation creating the hotel
title Sir printed referred to
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee tents
to finance Senate bill four oh
three.
four oh four Senate bill for all
four have been read twice by
tires or printed referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee
thanks to finance Senate bill
four oh four.
from licensure regulation and
inspection requirements allowing
the acquisition of meat pursuant
to ownership of an animal share
directing the established
state preemption for political
subdivisions prohibiting the
adoption of by laws laws
policies or rules that prohibit
the keeping of six or fewer
emergency Senate bill four oh
five Senate bill four oh five
hundred twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax business and
act relating to jurisdiction
provided for concurrent
jurisdiction on violation of
laws but childhood on military
installations Senate bill four
oh six Senate bill four oh six
introduced by Senator Stefanics
and others an act relating to
natural organic reduction
providing for the natural
organic production of a dead
practical Rick practice
requirements for natural organic
production operators and natural
organic production facilities
providing disciplinary
proceedings and criminal
referred to Senate tax business
and transportation cents to
Judiciary Senate bill four oh
seven.
Senate memorial thirty nine
in the Senate Senate memorial
thirty nine.
So the moral thirty nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed not referred
to committee placed on the
water conservation district day
in the Senate Senate memorial
forty so a moral forty have a
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not referred to
And act relating to crime
creating the crimes of
negligently making a fire on
firearm accessible to a minor
exceptions House Bill nine.
House Bill line had been read
twice by title.
Is referred.
To the Senate Judiciary
bill here that we're going to
get in.
I said the Lopez.
And act relating to health
prohibiting healthcare providers
grounds for discipline Senate
bill four oh eight Senate bill
four oh eight have I read twice
by title Sir printed and
referred to the Senate health
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you madam
president so that's it for today
for committee chairs will be an
eleven o'clock on Monday and
Madam president of the Senate
conservation committee is not
meeting until Tuesday at nine AM
that half of the morning at
which is my bill and we will
carry that over to Thursday so
we that agenda that's being
posted we will hear everything
to Steve thank you very much
house bill fifty or forty three
to be the first house bill heard
on the Senate side so that that
we can stand up that we are
keeping up with things and not
three twenty one will be hearing
bills from Senators o'neill
Padilla Wirth and Moores and the
Senate rules committee will meet
Thank you senator Ortiz the
panel thank you madam president
of the Senate health and public
affairs committee meeting will
start at two fifteen I know it's
a little rush but we want to get
have to catch a bus at two
thirty so we're going to meet at
two fifteen in room two eleven
we also have built by senators
who should committee.
thank you thank you any other
announcements from any chairs
are any thing or anyone.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
who helped make this happen so
I've got my list today so we can
be specific the Legislative
Council Service for all the work
drafting.
security our chief clerk and her
office including those working
in the front office everyone up
on the rostrum calendar copy
room ENE I. T. journal
Our sergeant at arms all of our
committee secretaries and zoom
operators everyone is working in
committee's members secretaries
chiefs of staff that do a great
job of the rain Montilivi hail
Sanders more invents Torres
thank you all this come on other
big hands.
birthday events so with that
madam president unanimous
consent the Senate Senate recess
until eleven o'clock Monday
morning seeing no objection the
