Of.
Funding available ninety four
point seven million.
So it is unclear what time
period that estimate covers.
So can you speak to that Senator
chairman Senator.
Mr chair Senator.
Sorry I don't I don't have a
copy of the FIR
and I only have my phone's.
Thank you I'm I'm a little
limited right now in
So I can't really speak to that
I apologize.
Yes.
That that's fine.
Insure chair Senator Steinborn
Senator at the.
What they talk about the loss of
federal funding I think that
only kicks in because one of the
issues with actually getting
emergency funding is the state
of emergency has to be declared
but the amount of damage has to
exceed a million dollars so
anything if there's damage less
than a million dollars that's
where we run into being able to
absurdum immediate emergency
funding
but once it exceeds that
million.
My understanding is that's when
the federal funding kicks in and
you can actually if there is an
bill vote.
On the federal side if there's
already an emergency somewhere
else in the nation
for example there was the fires
in California and we had a
catastrophe here they would just
attach our emergency here to
that and have it funded but it
has to exceed a million dollars
in damages is my understanding
Mr chair of thank you is that a
female Policy.
Mr yes that that was my
understanding yes and I don't
know if there's anybody that can
clarify but that's what they
told me when I tried to
with the flooding that occurred
in our area.
Are those tears anybody here
from our state.
Think of this.
No okay senator Sanchez.
It.
Of the other.
This is an emergency funds so
it'll just be set of course what
I'm reading it.
And the.
I kind of read it the same way
that I think Senator of human
social read terms of helping to
rural areas because even though.
My share my go down.
My chair again it was never even
to this day responding any
projects in my rural
communities.
And if you think about Ivey Soto
and the several blocks he has in
Albuquerque to loss few the few
blocks and a few blocks to.
Compared to representing seven
pueblos.
All of that to you.
Twenty Navajo chapters.
City of Rio Rancho ton of Cuba
and all of these counties.
My four million dollars if those
equitable able to get ten
thousand each.
You know.
So with this fun.
I think if disaster happens in
rural area.
Even though I may get a little
share.
The rural areas and a little bit
more I know we're you know
chipping away at the the bonding
capacity now we got the water
trust fund we have to send their
we have the.
Colonias in there is in the
fourth one.
That we just did that because
one shows colonias to yeah
caption sure Rodriguez sure that
price right house and I believe
that this will be the fifth
right yeah and really it's
irresponsible to you before
million dollars for this.
Okay so but anyway but but I I
think you know and I know that
in reference to hear of that
settlement of Mr chair at all
any projects or any kind of
disaster and tribal lands the
board will be the tribal
infrastructure board.
And so I don't know if FY are in
response to Indian Affairs as to
what it would take to manage
those because they're already
taxed with all the projects and
so something that I just flat no
okay two to four so thank you
that's all I have Mister anyone
else.
Yes reporter Senator is a you
know I I appreciate the comments
from from the ocean or
additional direction Shendo I
don't know that there's time
with.
The Christchurch there we've had
you know difficulties obtaining
funds to help you with with the
Christchurch this will be a a
continuing to build Fund every
time on the money going into the
shop and maybe you choose baby.
Show that would be the the the
order still or more shot show
thank you thank you madam chair
do you have any comments on this
bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm I think it's one
of the things because I think we
have to ask ourselves to if
there is damage that is not
You know the the funding isn't
there to replace it
what are the mechanism do we
have.
Besides that coming after
capital outlay if it doesn't get
Thanks during the the session R.
during the interim then when the
session comes around are they
gonna come back and say you know
this is what happened this is
the damage from
such catastrophe or whatever and
then they ask us for money for
capital outlay money to replace
I hope that's not what we're
doing but I don't know how many
times if that's happened in the
past.
That's all thank you Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you senator was one of the
committee if I can you know that
I really appreciate this bill
Senator you started discussion
but obviously has some issues
that I would like to continue
the discussion so about a do
pass if I I'm gonna make a
motion to do pass of with no
rack so it can continue on to go
to to go to finance next.
Mr chair that's correct.
So that would be my emotions on
making a motion to.
Do pass with no recommendation.
On.
When I get opposition to that
provide motion to.
Yes Sir okay sorry job position
also are okay good good okay
some some not Senator Griggs in
opposition you have a do pass
recommendation.
So next thank you Mr chairman
members of the commission built
eighty six.
Okay I am Mr chairman for Senate
they're all eight six The New
Mexico State University rolling
tribal development institute I
do have an expert witness Dr J.
lily white.
We start today lily white here.
I'm sorry yes.
Two thousand.
Mr chairman so what this bill
does is it would create.
Institute at New Mexico State
University and and not institute
would collect data and
So that we when we're making
decisions that affect rural
economic development
we have some data so we're
making evidence based decisions
and prioritizing legislation
that's rooted in evidence based
policies and so with that I'd
like money expert witness Dr J.
lily white to say a few words.
Actor lonely right.
Mr chair and committee members
thank you for having me here
today and accommodating the
three distance technologies.
justice and introduction I'm
just economic and rural
development in the college of
agricultural consumer and
environmental sciences at New
Mexico State University I've
been at the university for just
over twenty years and the
position I hope today is is
relatively new and it's in
direct support of the college's
mission to serve as an engine
for economic and community
development in New Mexico.
you know that New Mexico is one
of the most rural states in the
country according to USDA's
economic research service twenty
six of the thirty three counties
in New Mexico are classified as
non metro six of these are
classified as completely rural
with less than twenty five
hundred people in urban
population.
Additionally the census of at U.
S. Census indicates that there
are nearly two hundred fifty
thousand native Americans living
in the state many of these
individuals living on rural
tribal lands.
Research has shown that there
are significant differences in
the challenges faced by urban
and rural populations.
For example New Mexico State
University researchers
identified that many of New
Mexicos world counties and rural
areas lag behind in areas such
as employment earnings poverty
education and housing.
There's a a relatively dated is
a couple years old.
Research shaped by the P. peer
research foundation it sounds
similar types of issues they
indicated that rural areas had
issues stronger issues with job
availability of public
transportation access to medical
services access to high speed
internet access to grocery
stores.
And the pandemic that we
recently went through and are
still going through this at some
level has even illustrated in
and highlighted those
differences even more so we've
seen differences in labor
participation rates between
urban and rural and the press
like behind.
A real instituted esco State
University could help shed light
on important issues are face my
next doctor we're we're pressed
for time why is this is still
important and what we do and
like I sentences sure yes so it
would provide information to the
legislature into rural and urban
communities.
I think there's opportunities
for students to be trained and
and sent back to rural areas to
the cyst rural areas and and the
needs that they have I think
that could be one of the largest
as aspects of the of the program
also trading faculty members of
the university about New Mexico
and and the challenges that
faced in Mexico I think those
are three really large.
Benefits of the this ticket at
thank you doctor.
Sounds to me so so we can go to
the audience is there anyone
here in support Senate bill
eighty six share this with.
claim that you want to.
Is
just a more.
All right so
Anyone opposed to eighty six
that's a common rate.
Mr three years ago the reserve
this proposed act on and house
and a lot of respect to those
sponsoring the post still a
number of reasons
One is that this is to be
located on New Mexico state as
you know almost all of funds for
the
Mexico and secondly the bills
call for any kind of
collaboration with tribal
governments.
And it also calls when the state
seated up ideas solutions
recommendations bring this back
to Mexico
Lastly drugs are pretty familiar
with the kind of challenges that
face they face.
And they are access to capital
one as well as building
improving infrastructure like
roads had Toadies access to
fresh water and up last the real
need for building the creating
of skilled literate workers
communities that come with
providing our students with.
An adequate education for those
reasons streamers Committee
receptors thank you thank
One line I just sit here we did
have one individual and support.
Go ahead.
Are you there.
Hello
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Pickett I'm speaking on behalf
of the alliance for local
economic prosperity we have our
organization has engaged in
community conversations some of
our rural communities we hear
the pride of New Mexicans we
also hear great need our
children are needing to leave
our state for jobs there's
housing and food and security
access to capital educational
transportation issues we we
would ask for your do pass on
this bill we would like to
insure that we are listening
deeply to the means engaging
with our rural and tribal
brothers and sisters gathering
the data and together solving
the problems that we are to do
pass on eighty six thank you
thank.
The committee.
St showed up.
Okay.
I need some.
Yes just a couple things one is
on the definition of tribal
communities page three I I know
there's a little different from
the normal definition that we
use no definition that we use so
the state doesn't doesn't get
some recognition that the Feds.
And then and then the or
political subdivisions of
federal recognized I don't know
what that means.
And so really it ought
What would let me let me suggest
that we.
Strike the word support state
online's page three lines seven
and eight.
Finalized a strike or a
political.
Struggled one nine.
On line ten strike Pueblo or
tribe and insert in lieu
located wholly.
Or in parts.
So that would be means of
federally recognized in a nation
tribe or pueblo located wholly
or in part with the New Mexico.
Okay.
Do.
Then the.
This is the need to repeat that
hi I think this
of smart.
So what Senator is that a
friendly amendment.
So Mr chairman and senator
that's fine here I I knew that
this committee would be
excellent at making this bill
even better this is again just
the beginning of an idea my
intent is to provide creative
solutions to some of the
inequities that we see and rural
New Mexico we have such a large
state with many many rural
communities and for all of those
reasons that were discussed
earlier about the inequities
with capital outlay and a lot of
the unmet needs in rural
communities however we can help
to have these conversations to
highlight some of the issues
across New Mexico it's I is it
just going to benefit rural New
Mexico so I appreciate Senator
Ivey Soto is comments and I
think that is a friendly
amendment and would make the
legislation better.
So Mr chair yes and Senator Ivy
Soto let me make sure I have
this correct report this to the
state.
Okay on page three between line
seven intent on line seven
strike the word for after the
word federally.
On a on line struck the roof
did.
Recognized nations COVID levels
or try strong words for a
critical step to the.
All of line nine subdivision of
federal leader state recognized
Indian nation in certain there
located wholly for his part
within Mexico.
That is correct all right let's
just switch the order of pueblo
and try because no state in the
nation tribe or pueblo.
Senator tried for five long.
Yeah.
Then do that.
I think we all gotta we gotta.
The.
To the amendment is there anyone
in opposition to this matter.
So Senator you have an amended
bill and then this gentleman I
also know on the definition of
rural community it's a
municipality will population
thirty thousand or less.
And
and it does seem to me that that
thirty thousand will hide for
New Mexico actually for talk
about rural communities.
Of
service help public is all part
of the city thirty thirty five
right around thirty five
thousand is Alamogordo so that's
right on the cusp there of what
would be considered a rural
community but they're the
biggest committee that.
And that county it's it seems to
be we may want to drop that
number down to.
Ten or fifteen ten twelve ten.
Slide ten twelve.
Will come in.
It is.
I'm fine but thirty thousand
slip Silvercity.
Let us show you are.
We share of center and there
will probably know but sure
cities around ten thousand
fifteen thousand side Senator
yes Mr chairman and senator it's
just under ten thousand so we
have right around.
Ten thousand.
So there you go.
Yeah it would give a little room
for the one so fifteen thousand.
So so fifteen thousand changing
from thirty to fifty correct
page three line item fifteen
thousand that is correct it and
I would I would be the thirty
thousand online I
but but make it make it the
fifteen thousand online one.
Spent on any opposition to that.
C. nine.
Okay perfect on your amended.
Members of the committee.
Senator.
Okay thank thank you chairman I
think senator
I I'm I'm not totally opposed to
this bill but I do have the same
concerns and I think one of the
that that was brought up
the representative of the
couple.
Of.
I can of understand from a
previous experience you know
back in nineteen seventy eight
this Legislature of created the
Indian resource development of
program in New Mexico state as
part of the Navajo agricultural
products industry project.
To educate folks of around a
quarter of that program the
slowly expended expects banded.
Of to help support students and
not only agriculture but
business engineering and science
it just recently I or do you
move the.
Program to Albuquerque for the
very reason that all the trucks
are in you know even though the
fiscal agent is New Mexico state
the staff is not located in
Albuquerque so that they can
have better access you know to
to the tribes and and and and
and so forth so.
You know if this goes forward I
would probably prefer to have
something like that in this bill
so that it's not so three
hundred four hundred miles away
from where the tribes are
located and I easily gays and
and whatever of I know as a land
grant university in on the
university does a law already
the so called optics tension and
other programs that it has.
And I know that would get you on
them so that so called one
Research University and they
have a very different purpose
and so sometimes institutions do
things in a different way so I
kind of like the alignment with
them issues but my only concern
Mr chairman is the fact that if
this program get those get
developed maybe the tribal
institute pieces that quarter in
Albuquerque or somewhere in
northern New Mexico you know and
not just in the state.
Senator shares and for some of
those books from southern New
Mexico the more I disagree with
that just a little.
I understand I understand that
the.
There's only.
I'm on the same one you.
Because I'm.
And it's in Los crucis.
The with the school of state
that I have a dog.
For that very reason.
Madam chair religious and what
are your thoughts on this bill.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee did we address the
tribal collaboration concern
Senate conversation about that
up to the.
Black yes right and I don't know
if it actually has to be
entailed in the bill I think
it's something that is
automatically occurs but I think
my question to you is why don't
we just have it put in with
higher ed instead of having it
just directly
towards economic university.
I don't know if anybody can
that.
Thanks.
Anyone else.
What was community and.
Mr I would I would just of this
Senator Shendo.
Come about Ripley is that as the
states land grant university of
it was you actually operates in
all thirty three counties.
And they're they're probably
capable of of had putting astute
where they deem most
appropriate.
And
You know which might be with the
department of agriculture.
Or not but like I said that's an
administrative decision on their
part
I think the real question is
whether not whether we attach it
to a specific university.
Or with if we if we
Just simply put it under under
the department of higher at for
them to figure it out.
We tend to put these things
under a specific university by
statute and then the other
universities try to compete we
end up with I effective programs
instead of one really I have one
but you know that's just
tradition in New Mexico.
Well I can say I'm concerned
about the lack of collaboration
with levels.
That's a role in it for me
What's the what's the will of
the committee.
The food do patch to
We can discussion boards as.
Senator Hemphill cover questions
you know what that would help us
Mr chair record to.
Thank you for.
After four one without without a
recommendation and they can have
that conversation.
So just moved we do best which
move with the rack.
At that age I just.
okay Mr chair yes he's streams
that section.
The act.
the institute has
the.
So I mean there's not a mandate
for their involvement.
In terms of mandatory the ages.
No appreciate the gentleman I
think but that's a report of the
two parties and I'm reading the
issue is what are those
activities that is student
engaging in collaborative tribal
governments that's not so much.
It Mr but if I if I could just
as a general statement on you
know one thing that that does
frustrate me.
In terms of a lot of these
initiatives that we do.
Involving tribal communities as
we have a department of Indian
affairs and state government and
for some reason they're never
included in the cells.
And I realize that department is
is short on resources but if.
But if they were included in
some of these things that that
might assist in their in their
reach and their ability to to to
properly function between the.
The tribal communities on the
and the state.
Between sovereigns.
Alright so so we have a due pass
motion with no recommendation on
this one I think we should call
the roll madam chair did you
want to weigh in before we
they're both.
No that's fine okay thanks so we
will do a roll call vote on the
motion discussed with no
recommendation.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Sir.
Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator no.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
So you have you have in the past
with no record once again.
This bill.
Obviously you thank you Mr
chairman yes thank you so much
for that discussion Mr chairman
and members of the committee I
think I can create some
additional language to make this
even better and includes
collaboration obviously we want
to have as much collaboration as
possible to make sure we're
really getting to the root of
some of the rural and tribal
issues and frontier community
issues thank you
for.
Thank you
Senator o'neill.
What's that Mr chairman I go
ahead and present the dealers
the the lord's work today Senate
bill for sixty eight percent of
Lopez Senator.
Instead of instead of Senate
bill thirty three is yes.
This is just real quick okay
so that that that.
So so that's.
Thank you.
Okay.
Lopez is here to the Olympics
okay so I
opted for going thirty three
years ago Center for sixty eight
dollars for today.
Thank you Mr chairman chair this
is a bill that declares April
tenth of each year has a lower
is where the day
many of you know I'm not going
to deliver the fact of all of
the activities that are course
where I was from New Mexico has
done not only here but
throughout the country and it's
designated for the people of New
Mexico if you look at the
language to organize the
community and undertake efforts
and and expressions in harmony
with the general character today
so
I stand for questions great okay
sure did you want to add to
that.
so well good.
All right so the audience is
anyone in support of our weather
today.
Anyone opposed.
Members of the committee.
Senator Ivey Soto Mr on page one
line twenty after the work what
I provide.
I would like to suggest that we
insert comma.
Who was born in Dawson New
Mexico comma.
Is that that is a friendly
amendment.
He got that.
Slide twenty of the work what
the insert comma who was born in
Dawson New Mexico Kassem's.
That also means people might
figure out what dos New Mexico
is.
So you have amended bill
so I members of the committee at
let's go to the is there any
opposition to this this.
Senate Bill or sixty eight as
amended as.
Saying that you have these two
passed as amended thank thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you.
Senate bill thirty three no we
heard extensive.
I I here for this but we have a
committees to.
Just go straight to the point of
that remember vividly
everybody's comments Mr chair
speak for everyone else on the
committee so Senator Shendo.
Thank you of.
Chairman of and members of the
committee we heard extensive
testimony as you mentioned the
chair of the last year we had
here is a to my left is the
governor of us and you Pueblo
and then to my right is Michael
Sanchez.
So we also have folks in the
audience if there's any of the
questions of so what this
substantive basically has done
is.
Of the some of the comments that
were made the last committee
hearing so this is going to
reserve table a point so that it
was going through what happened
here so instantly so may I
remember this was an automatic
this one is a may cross
Commission tribal law
enforcement and former green is
that we departments of MSA.
Subsection one nine dash one
dash eleven.
to obtain commission tribal
office was successfully complete
four hundred hours basically
stating that is approved but in
Mexico Law Enforcement calving
the judge must provide proof of
public liability problem
definition specialized
insurances standard of the
authority conferred by the
commission is co extensive with
the externalities of the police
officers reservation.
nothing to the committee
substitute for thirty three
changes these fundamental
requirements of none the less
coordination between law
enforcement agencies and
commission of tribal law
enforcement faces of various of
difficulties many specific to
the history of individual
communities which the committee
substitute addresses.
Of the seven requires a chief of
the Mexico of the state police
entered Commission in agreement
within sixty days of request I
listed chief provides specific
reasons why the tribe does not
meet the special requirements
for entry into.
and then the next as the SB
thirty for this report in New
Mexico state police chief
information within thirty days
of the officer meeting the
requirements for commission any
day now suspension or revocation
Commission most all of the
underlying condition agreement
between the state of New Mexico
state law enforcement officers
and then Senate bill thirty two
recognizes service citations but
I officers for students state
law shall be committed if the
court and then also tribal civil
citations issued to non Indians
and tribal citations issued to
them Representative thing to try
to force.
Finally SB thirty three by a
commission I offices make sense
for the only story about who's
persons who have been arrested
for violation of state law to
appropriate authorization thanks
facility for the custody of the
state or local law enforcement
agency.
Collectively these to of the
change contained the Senate bill
in committee substitution three
offers additional consistency in
invitational law enforcement
services and help to alleviate
concerns but two six zero every
few only and the sponsor.
And so so we need a motion then.
I do a do not pass on Senate
bill thirty three.
Hello sorry and do pass on.
Specializations for discussion
purposes on the.
Thank you.
So.
Yes.
Good morning I'm mental mental
vice chairman of the only
members of the committee my name
is Stewart price on governor the
public sent via version of
Senate bill for to see before
you today is a refined version
of the bill that we saw last
week and the various points
Senator Shendo outlined on here
a few minutes ago the public
Sandia continues to support
passage of Senate bill thirty
three thank you Mr vice chairman
and members of the committee
members of the committee Mr but
I do know that the of the the
chief of the state police.
Just sitting in the audience
I'm assuming that that he's had
a chance to review the the
committee itself if we could ask
him what's wrong what it is to.
Where are you.
Yes Representative I have not
seen your not the chief of the
state police.
Investors.
If it changes of a rush out to
child may so it changes a.
Maybe what shall in terms of
trade commissions.
And it changes the child may in
terms of suspending an agreement
there's a material breach.
That's the program.
This is my break is not work as
fast as sources.
If we are okay.
So members of the committee.
Senator Griggs thank you Mr
chairman your last on the
rostrum sure discussion in the
audience of more you know in the
Representative tribes and
pueblos it they were they were
not happy with what happy with
the bill as.
do we have the.
Senator can you talk about the
work that went into the
committee staff and you believe
that you have everybody
Drescher concerns that were
percent of the the governor by
Senator reached out to the
tribes and I'm not sure we have
a hundred percent because
there's still some issues that
are being address of I believe
there's a.
Get into.
And so that all public housing
builders meeting today
Albuquerque and so I think this
is going to be talked about but
I think we have a major of the
tribes that currently have
commissions and those are
interested in supporting and I
would prefer to go over a voice
on the maybe a lot of the.
question on the Senator rigs
I yes I did speak to the
majority of the the public
governors to include the Apache
the agency love education last
Friday
and it seems like the vast
majority are in support however
I do know a few of the problems
that that are still not
satisfied with the language so
we're not a hundred percent
there and I have not spoken to
anyone at the Navajo Nation as
of yet
try to reach out a little bit
but that's the or at and we are
Of I am the briefings the the
awful governor's council which
is comprised of twenty posed
here later today with regards of
Senate bill three three.
And we're sure sure but
Sure you'll discussions at the
at the meeting but that's that's
just the the pueblo yes correct
yes that's not involving the the
Mescalero Apache usual hi Karia
more Navajo that is correct and
for sure.
Sure sure in that
You would use your Max addition
to this year.
Thank thank you Mr.
Mr chair any of this is
something that the tribe's opt
in to do.
Of isn't the we change that.
Tribes of the.
Representative agreement
the state police but but the
other Salas is on page five for
use of the ship of state please
shout and
I believe once the trident
decides that they want to of.
My correct.
Other interim committee Mr
chairman Richard this will send
it that is correct the tribe has
the option to ask for the
commission created with the
state police if they choose not
to opt into that there is no
requirement on behalf of the
state for the tribe's.
They choose the stateLee shall.
Mr Chairman said right so that
is correct and less there is an
underlying reason the state
these you have to say what
they're.
Of the seven of the.
Of the the state police is that
all of what happens to look at
the case of we check in with
them I guess.
Which is our members of the
committee.
Obviously I never liked the word
shall
I understand what they're trying
to do here
through this over I think
there's some things that are
everyone wants to focus the
understand if.
Two thousand singles G. Fisher
on the so we have if you want
scenario at times we have to
give it a person of.
That is getting higher on by
tribe or pueblo and so they
would meet the criteria for this
for commissioning I would never
sign that knowing that I didn't
want to work for me what I
wanted to work for chief our
meals so shelves difficult we're
without first annual nuances
that I don't disagree with this
bill or or wanted to that we do
everything we can all help other
law enforcement agencies shows
difficult.
Thank you Mr chairman given
given that the public has of
them covers is going to be this
afternoon.
Of I mean I really feel like the
consultation the trouble
consultation issues are the
result in this committee.
if and and given that there's
there's maybe some nuances that
the state police now they're
saying that.
Could could enter into I'm I'm
just you know but I'm also
concerned that that all the
Apache tribes of the Navajo
Nation Representative way in.
Of I'm just wonder if we could
roll this over.
to allow the consultation take
place and then.
And then present those issues
being resolved we can we can
discuss some of the.
Okay I'm Mr madam chair your
thoughts on that suggestion.
Yes I agree with them Senator
Ivey Soto Mr chair okay all
right so chairman yes and I also
love the state
she also not on page two.
Subsection.
You'll also see.
Formal R. the
chief of police has the
opportunity and I'll send
okay is your concern and now
non.
Some of the officers that
mission.
Okay Senator another so just a
comment of of Mr chairman all
the tribes have.
The given this substitute in all
but.
Some of not responding so we
can't force them to respond and
this so but but its not
affecting this not up in no it's
it's not automatic so the tribe
just to so that people need to
understand that I are making a
choice to do this and they don't
and that doesn't sector and
broader than that the
measurement that session with
the opportunity.
You know absolute right like
like we so what we just did
receive correct but given that
the public has a governor's be
this afternoon given that the I
get that could not state police.
Just auditing committee it's a
little you know that there may
be some some of these issues of
of whether or not somebody's
been.
Because well well well our
analyst is absolutely correct
that he has the opportunity to
suspend but that's suspend after
after having to grant the
commission on somebody then just
try to.
Right and so that so that's the
you know like like some of these
the one says.
And then there's the other thing
about about because I I there's
an inference but there's not.
As I stated here.
That win enforcing state law the
tribal police officer needs to
comply with all the requirements
of state law.
And right because because of
what we end up with the
situation I can think of two
things off and for example the
requirements of state law on
please.
That may not be practiced within
certain drugs right one of those
it's like Ms.
The government forces state law
state law requires all police
officers the budget.
The other thing is
interrogations.
Technicians are required to be
us reporter.
And and that's part of state
law.
So that if you have trouble
please across commission.
Enforcing state law that I would
I would just like to have a lan
you're saying saying and comply
with all the requirements on law
enforcement.
In state law that if we just
that simple right but but the
thing is there's something
there's patients on that and
then and then like I said I
would like to just make sure in
addition the the meeting this
afternoon available from so
governors that and the and the
input for the for the state
police I would just like to make
sure that the that the offensive
drives and the Navajo Nation
affect the opportunity at least
to to weigh in at which point
then I don't think of the
problem.
So let's carry it over it's not
first.
Know the rules that
next meeting okay thank you we
have just enough time for one is
Senate bill forty three is
football Monday is a legal
holiday so I think we have time
to get a sense of what this bill
is.
So
Because.
Or.
I think we can get started on
this bill.
You shouldn't take long okay.
This.
This is.
All.
I.
Renewable.
Today.
All right Senators tell.
Hello all right.
Mr chair committee members would
bring.
Senate bill forty three a day of
football Monday as a legal
holiday to New Mexico.
And if you look at some of the
stats here and
Sixteen.
Yeah one hundred thousand people
called in the day off for both
so.
Senator county or.
What went to county called.
Two thousand sixteen for one
really cold.
So
We're running this as a you know
football Monday after Superbowl
holiday for New Mexico.
And that being said I'll turn
over a lot sooner part on.
Of thank you Mr chair members
agrees great to be back in the
one of the committees I ideally
mess being on Indian Affairs was
eight years that I'll never
forget but football Monday it's
it's something that I've people
joke about a lot but in all
seriousness the amount of
productivity lost among football
Monday as huge as as was stated
sixty million people work will
how how is government or how our
schools are how are things
supposed to run efficiently if
if fifteen percent of your
people don't show up so just put
an unnecessary burden on on
those that do show up to work in
I think it's something that
people are are going to enjoy
the Superbowl and then the next
day realize I'm not going to go
in and so this would just find
some clarity and some
consistency so that people can
really enjoy themselves on Super
Sunday and not have to worry
about going into work the next
day.
Thank you of Mr chair and the
committee one other thing is and
businesses across one thing
Tennessee is running the there's
a bill that's out there in
Tennessee that's running as well
as in our state so we could be
the first state to do it or the
second over the first six point
five billion dollars are lost
businesses on that one.
Across the United States so like
Senator Pirtle said Mr chair is
you know the productivity goes
way down so knowing this I mean
we're running this is a football
Monday in Sioux would have done
thank you so jobs etcetera this
is been done in Tennessee
they're running a bill yes
it's been proposed there's.
There is proposed right now the
other states known as funds just
Tennessee.
It's been going on in support
yes.
Of the forty Niners are playing.
Once but you know the percent
of.
We still show up to seven fifty
percent of tribal police or
state job.
Senator Shendo I think this is a
funding bill something that New
Mexican for for years and years
to come are you.
Anyone else in support of
members of the committee this
gentleman I think this is a we
can enjoy the state for the next
two minutes
You know I'm I'm really
concerned about forcing sixteen
million people with a hangover
have to deal with that is that.
The school.
and
The public safety is a public
safety issue of involved and and
really the problem is that the
Superbowl is on something.
And we would resolve this
problem get the NFL word with
the Super Bowl.
To a Senate.
Because then people could.
Put simply Mr trump Sunday
morning and be back at work a
month.
Okay and and so and so I I I I I
think they've identified.
It's gonna problem I just don't
think they're solution is the
best and the thing is if we give
everyone the day off the
ultimate and then they're not
losing a billion dollars and
that day they're losing at six
sixteen going up to a hundred of
I don't know math because that's
why I went to law school.
Get out they would be losing
about fifty billion dollars
instead of a billion dollars if
we give a hundred percent people
today.
So
it is a yes it also would be yet
one more holiday that no
legislator in New Mexico or
legislative staff would be able
to enjoy.
Mr chair Senator run amendment
of that and.
Send us provided we get to enjoy
the day yeah right it's not
because of the in the sixty days
a legislators.
This goes the LFC right.
Next.
Better known.
Verse but I certainly love this
bill.
I just think responsible knowing
that LFC.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee remember you know I
was laughed at to whenever I
brought for the delay saving
time there's also additional lab
you guys can get on board with
this way before anybody else
finds out of school.
That's.
Mr chair
I'm sure this bill July March we
made up there I can go back to
my office and.
But of the.
I think we're just the where
every Monday is St.
Before we were we were going
madam chair chair what we gonna
do about March madness
championship Tuesday.
Hi Lynde.
Steps.
Right I think the amendment.
She needs to be amended to
include in the NCAA to.
Chairman Mr chair for any
imminent as a friendly.
Things will serve others I.
All right so members of the
committee do we have a motion.
I'm moving to pass.
Check if Griggs.
Do Raul college at the role.
Are
know this is passing.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto pass.
Senator Sanchez pass yes.
Like these guys.
We got so we will.
If you will to.
Yes.
Senator yes.
Serving the.
I I'm sorry somebody not me
kicked us out of the meeting and
and it.
Evertec standard.
What I'm what I'm going to
second
Senator Ivey Soto the rule does
not preclude cellphones.
About.
Simultaneous electronic means
Santo
Okay I will join the chair
voting no.
In the past all right so explain
madam chair can you explain
about.
Because I think the people
should that I think the
allegations before the camp.
There is.
Yeah the tax the.
