In your district. And then we're
going to do, uh, staff
introductions, and we are lucky
to be joined here by, I think
the entire Senate security team
today, so we'll
also get to know them, but, uh,
go ahead, Senators.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
pleasure to be here and we got a
bounce back, OK. I'm list of
panics from Senate District 39,
it's parts of four counties. I
used to represent 6, but now
redistricting is for San Miguel,
Santa Fe, Torrance and Valencia,
and it's a pleasure to be back.
We'll bounce back and forth.
Senator Block.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Jay Block, um, brand new rookie
freshman, um, looking to learn a
lot here. I want to thank, um,
your staff for the rules
committee been very nice. I
showed up an hour early, um, I
thought everyone was late, but
uh I just wanna thank uh, your
staff for just being so helpful
and um I look forward to
learning and um working with
with you and and the rest of the
members. So thank you.
I'm sorry, Senate District 12,
Rio Rancho, Northwest
Albuquerque, um, the best Senate
district in the state, beautiful
people, so thank you.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Heather Bergmans and I
represent Burnley or I represent
Midtown Albuquerque, which is
Senate District 15, and I am
really excited to be here and I
look forward to the work this
committee will get done.
And I'm sure, thank you, uh,
state Senator David Gallegos
from Headingley County. We bring
y'all money. Uh, I just wanted
to say this is my first time on
this committee. I was in the
house for 8 years, been in the
Senate for 4, starting on second
term with y'all, uh, eager to
learn, uh, I don't follow rules,
so it'd be really nice to be a
part of.
And uh just wanted to talk about
Center Block, uh, is used to
military time. He doesn't
understand the legislative time
of military you're there early
we're here when we want to be,
so thank you.
Uh, good morning, everyone. I'm
state Senator Mimi Stewart from
District 17 in Albuquerque, it
includes the international
district. Uh, before we
districting, I had part of it,
um, after redistricting, now I
have the whole international
district, um, and the East
Gateway area of Albuquerque.
Uh, so very happy to be here.
This is a fun committee. You
will learn a lot about
government because we do hear
about from government agencies
and then, of course, we get to
look at all the confirmations,
so, uh, we get to help.
Uh, populate our state agencies,
so, um, very happy to be here
today, by the way, is January
22nd is the day that women got
the votes, so you'll see a
number of us in white and others
who forgot are on different
colors, so.
Glad to be here, madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Sharon. It's a
pleasure to serve with all of
you guys. I pride myself on
being punctual and so I'm sorry
for the confusion and in my
tardiness here today, I
represent Senate District 35
geographically, I think Steve
Compos and I have half of New
Mexico between two districts,
um, there, it's, it's just, I
think we have more cows than
people in this area in the
southwest region. Um, I've
followed your committee and I'm,
um, I, I said time management is
important to me and I'm happy to
serve with the chair.
actually respects people's time
in this time and time again, um,
and so I'm just excited to be
here and I think the
confirmation process speaks to
the value of the Senate really
and the importance of what we
bring and I think that that's uh
very importantly, that we won't,
that when a governor moves a
name forward, we take that
serious and make sure that
through that process, the Senate
has a voice in making sure that
that person who's serving does
the best job and so I'm proud to
be here and and happy to help.
Thank you.
I
singing tou. Good morning. I'm
state Senator Leo Jaramillo, a
proud native son of the
Espanilla Valley, and I
represent Senate District 5,
which includes Los Alamos at
Sandoval, Santa Fe, and Rio Riba
counties, and I'm excited to be
back and it's your number 5.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Jim
Townsend. I represent.
Senate district 34.
Which I know it'll be a
contention, but it's probably
the best district, but uh it's a
great one to be. I've uh served
in the house for a few years.
I've.
The opportunity to come to the
Senate. I look forward to
serving with each and every one
of you. And um,
Maybe I can learn a little bit
in the process, so I look
forward to it. Thank you very
much.
And I'm Katie Doheg. Uh, I
represent Senate District 10,
which is in Albuquerque from
Balloon Fiesta Park all the way
down through the North Valley,
Old Town, downtown to Tingley
Beach and part of the West side.
And I am thrilled to have you
all here with us today. We also
have, uh, Senator Lopez, um, who
is, is out of commission today,
uh, but she had previously
chaired rules for about 20
years.
Something like that, um, and
she, she is a a wonderful uh
wealth of knowledge, um, and
experience for us to have here
on this committee.
Um, so thank you all. I, we'll
talk a little bit more about the
committee, but first I would
like to have uh, everyone who
we're gonna be.
Working with here, uh, and
staffing our committee, go ahead
and introduce themselves. We'll
start with our committee
secretary.
Hi, my name is Tulkarra Webb,
and I'll be your committee
secretary. I'm happy to be here
with you.
And this is Talkara's first year
as a committee secretary. She's
also been on the job for at
least the last month, uh,
getting us all ready for
confirmations. So thank you so
much for all that work, um,
Jessie, go ahead.
Great. Well, thank you all so
much. Uh thank you all for, for
all of the work that you've done
in the past and that I know
you're gonna be doing over, over
the next 60 days.
So in front of you, you should
have a copy of the Senate rules
procedures.
As, uh, the pretend mentioned,
we, you know, we do
confirmations in here. So we
are, we are kind of a workforce
committee because we not only
hear bills like the other
committees do, but we have all
these confirmations are lists so
far this year is 170 people. Um,
we are not going to do 170
confirmations we're, but we are
gonna get through as many as we
can, uh, rules is one of the
only standing committees that
Uh, by our Constitution can meet
to do confirmation hearings
during the interim. So whoever
we don't get to, uh, this
session, we'll be having a
couple of interim, uh,
confirmation hearings as well.
Um, but because we are kind of a
workforce committee and we're a
morning committee before floor,
we control time. We, I'm glad
you uh run on military time. You
will, you will appreciate how
how we do things, um, so.
Generally, the first half of the
session, we start at 9, and we
start as a subcommittee, uh,
with whoever is here.
Um, we don't take any official
action until we have a quorum,
so we don't take any votes until
we have a quorum, but we, it's
important for us to get started
on time because we have a lot of
work to do and we have a hard
stop with the floor. And so I
would encourage everyone to, to,
to be here when we start, uh,
if, if you want to hear the
presentations, uh, please make
it a point to be here. Um,
whenever, if for, and this is
more for
who would be coming before the,
the committee, uh, if they have
bills, if they're gonna have
lengthy amendments or committee
substitutes, get those to us 24
hours ahead of time so that all
of our analysts have a chance to
consider those in their
analysis.
We, for public comment, um, for
buildings and all, we have a
little bit of a different,
different approach on
confirmations versus bills. So
I'll talk about bills and then
I'll, I'll hand it over to our
vice chair, talk about
confirmations because he, uh,
our vice chair Harmio has the
gavel during confirmations. So
he tears those, um, and I
oftentimes are our sponsors of
folks aren't able to be here.
Uh, so I fill in for any
sponsors who, who aren't
available.
But for bills, we, the sponsor
of a bill has 20 minutes overall
to use as they like for their
presentation of the bill and for
their organized support. So
anyone they want to have speak
in support of their bill. They
can use those 20 minutes however
they want. I, a recommendation
is use 10 minutes for your
presentation, 10 minutes for
public comment and support, but
you can use it however you
choose. Um, then for opposition,
We encourage organized
opposition on bills, so folks
who want to oppose a bill, we
would encourage you guys to work
together. You can pick a
spokesperson, you can decide on
who you want your speakers to
be, um, and so an organized
opposition will have uh 15
minutes to present their
opposition as, as a public
comment. If it is unorganized
opposition, um, then they'll
have 1010 minutes with each
speaker, uh.
can speak up to, up to 10 people
can speak for a minute each.
With that unorganized opposition
will always stay within that 10
minutes now if there are only 2
people with unorganized
opposition, they can speak for 5
minutes each, as long as we're
staying within that 10 minutes,
we can be we'll be flexible
about that.
But overall, uh, we do.
We do control our time for
public comment because
Of the, the time crunch that we
are under and in kind of a
unique position with this
committee and for confirmations,
go ahead, Vice chair. Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman. So we
basically follow the same rules
when it comes to organized and
unorganized, um, comments that
are taking place. The confere
can give us a list of those who
are going to speak on their
behalf, and we ensure that we're
respectful of everyone's time in
here that we give them that time
limit of 20 minutes. There are
some conferees that don't bring
any organization with them who's
to support them. In those cases,
we give up to 2 minutes for
those who raise their hand to
speak on their behalf. The same
for those who are opposing the
country. So we follow the same
rules, but we veer off just a
little when there's not an
organized group of people
speaking on speaking on behalf
of the country.
So, um,
Now, we also
If we are doing fine on time,
uh, and I'm, and I'm gonna be
working with our, our ranking
member, uh, when we're setting
agendas to to try to ensure that
we are giving everyone the time
they need on, on particular
matters, especially if we have
controversial matters coming
before the committee.
If we start getting short on
time, uh, I'll start recognizing
people for 5 minutes, uh, at a
time. And so,
If the time is going fine, I
won't do that. I don't want to
limit debate, uh, but if we need
to make our debate maybe a
little more efficient, uh, so
that we make sure that we're,
we're getting out for floor. Uh,
all recognized members for 5
minutes. And then after everyone
who wants to have spoken if
there's still time left, you can
be recognized for a second time
for another 5 minutes.
Before I go on from the
procedures, does anyone have any
questions about them?
Senator Bachair, uh, first of
all, thank you for going through
this, uh, very much appreciate
it. Um, as the chair when you
said there was 170 confirmations
that man that's a lot of people.
And um I'd just like to know
what your priority is. Is your
priority to get these people
confirmed as as quickly as
possible, I mean, how are you
racking and stacking the
priorities of the committee.
Thank you.
That is a great question. Thank
you, Senator. So we try to
divide our time between
legislation and and
confirmations. Uh, one is not
prioritized over the other. Um,
We're going to I because
basically half of our, our
committee is new to rules, uh,
and has not done confirmations
before. I really want us all to
get trained up on confirmations.
And so, I'm not exactly sure
what that's gonna look like yet.
I'm gonna be working with, with
Natalie on that. Um, but because
of that,
I'm going to commit for cabinet
secretaries, we're going to be
doing them the second half of
the session. We're not going to
be doing them upfront because I
want everyone to feel like they
have their sea legs under them
with confirmations before we're
getting those very important
positions.
Regents are also very important,
but they can't serve without
being confirmed. So we are going
to prioritize upfront regions,
because we need to, for them to
do their job. Otherwise, we're
going to be doing.
Confirmations of smaller boards
and commissions for the first
half. Uh, again, just for
everyone to, to kind of get a
feel for confirmations and for
what that process looks like and
the kinds of questions we should
be asking, um, but
But I, to the extent that your
question is, does legislation or
confirmations, which ones get
prioritized.
We really try to split the baby
on that. Um, they're both,
they're all important.
Any confirmations where the
person can't serve without being
confirmed.
That generally gets top
priority, but that's the only
time that a confirmation,
confirmations are overall
prioritized above.
Legislation.
Yeah, that, that was kind of
where I was going because I'm
sure there's certain, uh,
individuals that I, I would
imagine need to be confirmed so
the government can do something
where a statute or rule only
that person who's confirmed can
kind of move the ball forward,
so, um, I appreciate you, um.
Uh, working in that from, from
the top and I, I, I guess it's
OK. I mean, I assume the
governor.
is aware that we're pushing
these off to the 2nd half of the
session.
And Senator, I, I have
definitely been letting
everyone, everyone know that.
Um, so I would, I would assume
it's, I haven't had that
conversation directly with her,
but I've been letting her staff
know that and letting the
conferees know that. And so, so
everyone is aware, um.
And then when we do start
getting people scheduled, we'll,
we'll be getting them scheduled
in a way that they have time to,
to get there, you know, they
like to have their families here
like to have certain people
here, so we'll, we'll make sure
that we're doing that in a way
for the people have time to do
so.
Um, so which actually covered,
that was the next thing on my
list. So thank you. Uh, you will
also, when we're doing
confirmation, so you'll, you'll
see you have copies of the
Constitution in front of you.
Those will probably be here for
every meeting. Um, when we deal
with, uh, election bills. We'll
have a copy of the election code
out for everyone and for
confirmations, there's a big
book of all the boards and
commissions, uh, that will have
because
Oftentimes people come before us
and frankly, we, we have no idea
what the sport is or what they
do.
And so that, that book is
helpful, but that's also what
kind of this training that, that
we're coming up with is
I, I wanna make sure that, that
we all really understand what
these positions are, how they
impact our state, um, and what
their significance is when
we're, when we're having these
hearings.
We're also gonna be working, I'm
gonna be working with uh Senator
Townsend on an overall rewrite
of our Senate rules, you know,
we passed, uh, some, some
changes yesterday on opening
day, but our Senate rules,
are haven't been, haven't had an
overhaul, and I don't know how
long, um, there's a bunch of
stuff in there that we don't do.
There's stuff we do that's not
reflected in there. There's,
there's just overall cleanups
that need to happen. So,
everything that, that, that the
majority and the minority can
agree upon, we will have
together as, as a, a joint, uh,
as a, as a resolution, not a
joint resolution, but a
resolution that we are jointly
sponsoring, um, and then to the
extent that other people have
other rules.
changes that they want to
propose, we will hear those uh
as they come.
But that's really it. Um, our
first substantive meeting is
going to be on Monday. Uh, I do,
we don't know the, the overall
agenda completely yet, but what,
uh, but we are, I do know our
fir the first thing we're gonna
hear, which is going to be the
bill reforming the gaming
commission. So.
To the extent that folks want to
look into that. Go ahead. I'm
sorry, did you say the game
commission? Yes, there was a
little feedback. Thank you. Yes,
yeah.
And as soon as I also, as soon
as I know what we're doing, I
put the agendas out. So you, you
should, as long as I know you
will know too, uh, what's gonna
be coming up for us.
Right.
Uh, so, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
along with the game commission,
will we start uh confirmation so
you don't know that yet and it
might be later.
I'm still figuring that out, you
know, last year we had
confirmation days and we had
bill days. And I kind of liked
that. So I, I think on Monday
we'll just be bills for sure.
Uh, we might do some start with
some confirmations on Wednesday.
Um,
If we do.
I'm
Oh
Go ahead, Senator, since I'm,
I'm not sure what I'm gonna be
saying. OK. Well, I, I'm, I
should probably finish thinking
it through myself before I start
saying things out loud. So go,
go ahead. So Madam Chair, let me
throw something else in. Uh, we
will have some conformee who
have already been confirmed in
the past. Maybe a repeat regent,
etc. Uh, do you intend to throw
them in the last half or kind of
speed them up.
So for regions, they'll
definitely all be upfront
whether we've confirmed them
before or not because, cause
they have to be in order to do
their job. Um, but
That it's a good question.
Hadn't, I hadn't thought about
that. Um, I think we also
I'd like to, to work with
Senator Townsend to, to the
extent that we can come up with
kind of a consent calendar, uh,
either on bills or conferees,
um, uh, if there are folks who
just, who are not at all, uh,
controversial, uh,
And, and, and members, and any
member can can object to the
consent calendar too. Uh, so if
there's, you see someone on a
consent calendar and you say, I
really want them to have a full
hearing. I have questions to ask
them, then, then we will
certainly do that. But, but
you're right, we will try to be
efficient and in our
presentations so that we're not
Doing full-blown hearings, if
that's not necessary.
OK, thank you.
Any other questions?
Yeah. OK. Well, I'm really
looking forward to to working
with all of you, um, and we're
gonna have a lot of fun in here,
