Have an intern for the entire
week. He is a Lobo. It's Cameron
Taylor here in the back. Could
we please give him a welcome to
the seven?
Okay, so Cameron will be seeing
a very busy week. I explained to
him that if it had been last
week, it would have been a
little more social, but that all
of the committees that really
digging down into bills now
And it's a fast pace and many
bills would be heard this week.
So I'm here for the healthcare
authority.
The Healthcare Authority
Department Act was passed in
2023, initiating the creation of
the department by changing the
name of the human Services
Department and transferring
various divisions and functions
from the Department of Health
and General Services Department
of the Healthcare Authority.
SB 14 is a statutory cleanup
that now changes the name
throughout various statutes from
Human services Department of
Health Care Authority. So the
200 pages that you see isn't all
substantive. Um, but we will
talk about that There are three
areas of substantive changes.
The first one is that the
director of the health care
authorities state benefits
division.
Well now join the retiree health
care care Authorities board.
And in addition to joint
procurement I back
Well, not just go out for RFP.
They now must jointly contract
that is a big
Change because all the four
entities of I back used to go
their separate ways after they
did our fees.
It also also authorizes the
Department of Health to share
health information data it
collects with the health care
authority.
And the Health Care
Affordability Fund Program
Administration is transferred
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
the Health Care Authority.
The temporary provisions at the
end of the bill. Listing
sections re compiled refers to
sections that did not meet that
did not require any amendments,
etcetera.
There is an F I r that I've
seen. I have not seen the
committee and analysis and I'd
like to get that, uh, to read
what we're presenting.
Um
First I'm gonna have acting
secretary or secretary designate
to, uh, do a brief introduction
and then I'm going to Miss W.
Armstrong to go through the
bill. Uh, especially the chart.
That we've presented to all of
you. So, Debbie, okay?
Good morning, Madam Chair
Members of the committee. Thank
you for having me. Um, thank you
to send sponsor Senator Stefanek
Worth Stewart Empathy A for
sponsoring this important bill.
Senate Bill 14 finishes
establishing the framework for
standing up the New Mexico
Health Care Authority, which was
created during the 2023
legislative session essentially
transitioning the New Mexico
Human Services Department into
the New Mexico Healthcare
Authority to be the single state
agency charged with healthcare
policy purchasing and
regulation, Human Services
Department submitted a
transition plan to the
Legislature in November, which
laid out two key changes that
are contained in Senate Bill 14.
Um and I want to just highlight
those briefly because the bill
is, um lengthy, and there is a
lot of cleanup that Miss
Armstrong is going to go
through. Um, but first, the bill
redefines the term consolidated
purchasing for healthcare
benefits among the agencies that
constitute the interagency
Benefits Advisory Committee or
the eye back.
To me in a single process for
both procurement and
contracting. We believe that
this change will compel the
necessary collaboration of the
eye back agencies to work
together to advance improvements
in contracting for health
benefits for public employees
and retirees. And second, the
bill would move the health care
affordability fund and its staff
in appropriations from the
office of the Superintendent of
insurance to the Healthcare
authority.
This change will enable the
healthcare authority to better
coordinate health insurance
coverage for new Mexicans and to
maximize the state's health care
purchasing power. Um, before I
close, I'm gonna be brief here
so we can get into questions,
but I do want to reiterate the
importance of this foundational
bill. The agency is currently
performing a complete actuarial
analysis of the existing state
of New Mexico Health benefits
plan.
And is on boarding expert
consultants to current to review
are completely our current
procurement and contracting
strategies so we can make
concrete recommendations for
health benefits to the
legislature that can be executed
by July of 2025 14 will be the
enabling statute to advance this
important work to improve the
health care system for new
Mexicans. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
audience. Um, I wanted to, um,
walk you through the You should
have a
Um, chart.
Or a spreadsheet.
Um And what? What? This is, um
to help orient you, uh, to what
is in here?
Page number. The bill section,
the current statutory citation.
Title.
And then whether it's a new
section of law recompiling. I'll
talk about the recompiling or an
amendment, um to rename or do
any other technical changes due
to all outdated language.
And then, uh, other amendments
are are, um noted in the side if
there are some, and the Bolding
is where the substantive changes
were.
Um much of the authority,
particularly for licensing and
certification of facilities is,
um, and a number of other things
are contained in Chapter 24,
which is health and safety.
And it, um to now insert
healthcare authority in there
for parts of it, But not all of
that chapter, uh, seemed
confusing and so at the
recommendation of Legislative
Council, we're creating a new
chapter a chapter 24, a called
the Health Care Act.
And so everything related to,
um, authority of the healthcare
or what would be the, um, for
the healthcare authority is
being moved to chapter 24, a
So that's the recompiling.
And, um
Uh, I will. Um And then I've
highlighted on here. You can see
what acts were, um, talking
about, Um, as you go through,
um, go through there, and as you
can see, it's mostly
Almost entirely amending to
rename. Um uh, the section at
the at the back that's on
Recompiling are sections that
are being re compiled into 24. A
that didn't need any amendment.
And, um
The things that were repealed
All those sections. The language
of what was repealed is
incorporated into 24, a
Um, And with that, I think, um,
we can
We can stand for questions.
Hopefully, that makes it a
little bit easier. Um, just one
additional, uh, saying in that,
um
Income doing this and taking
legislation, particularly the
regulation and licensing
functions out of Department of
health and moving it to the
healthcare authority.
We inadvertently, um, might have
messed with the authority of the
Children, Youth and Family
Department and the early
childhood department who has
some of their authority for the
Children and youth programs or
facilities or childcare centers
were incorporated in there, and
we didn't quite do that, right.
Is being. Um um and hopefully
it's OK for the next committee.
Um, Madam chair where that's
being drafted now to to fix any
problems that we inadvertently
created for those two
departments, But
Um, it's it's a technical fix to
make sure everybody's got their
authority where it's supposed to
be not changing anyway.
So, Madam chair, we would stand
for support. Opposition
questions, Comments from
committee.
Great. Thank you so much. We
only had we had one person sign
up to speak in support. That's a
Marco Gonzalez.
Ah!
From Molina.
Let's see. Are you here for
instead of Marco?
Uh, are you here for Molina?
Come on up and and, uh, speak
into the microphone.
And I think the microphone might
not be on
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Marco Gonzalez. And I am
the registered lobbyists for
Molina Healthcare. We're very
pleased to be back, providing
care for the most needy and this
next iteration of the turquoise
care. This is a critical piece
of foundational piece for the
care of our the most needy and
we're very highly supportive it
we look forward to joining the
department.
Um, in achieving many of its
goals that are outlined in this
and other initiatives that
they're doing, and so we
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it forward. We stand
wholeheartedly behind and look
forward to working with the
administration and the committee
and Legislature to providing
better care for our citizens.
Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you. We didn't have anyone
sign it.
Thanks, madam Chair members of
the committee. Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health had the opportunity to
run an agency very similar to
this in another state before
coming to New Mexico. The state
of New Mexico is far and away
the largest purchaser of health
care in the state. And we tend
not to act like it. I think this
uh, this proposal to consolidate
purchasing regulatory of health
care in a single agency helps us
how our best chance to deliver
the triple aim of
Better health. Better. Thank
you.
We didn't have anyone sign up in
opposition. If anyone would like
to raise their hand to indicate
support, please do so.
Anyone would like to raise their
hand to indicate opposition.
Please do so.
All right, and so we will go to
questions from the committee.
Senator Stewart
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning. Thank you for the
presentation. I guess I'm I'm
I'm I'm here and so, um, you're
right. I mean, renaming, re
compiling. Um, So on the first
page, you do have a new section
of starting on page 41. Can you
just talk about that?
New section.
It looks like it's mostly just
definition. So why are we
calling it new? Um Madam Chair
and Senator. It's new. It's kind
of the intro if you will, in
general, um, components of 24, a
And it's It's duplicative of a
lot of the things that are in
24.
But right, um, putting it in now
24 A. And so it's the
definitions, powers and duties
and keeping records
confidential. It's the same as
what's in the Public Health Act.
and, um, just putting it in 24,
a for purposes of the healthcare
authority.
So, Madam chair so, but nothing
else is everything else is
recompiling or amending.
Correct, Madam chair and and
Senator. Everything else is
moving it out of 24 A to 20. I
mean, that's the recompiling. So
it's removing it from this
section from that great and
Madam chair. And where in here,
is it that you have to be
careful of the C E. C D and I
forget where else with their
authority. Where? Yes, Yeah,
Here is, are those issues
It's in, um licensure of of,
Yeah, it's in, um
Um, powers and powers and duties
of the healthcare authority. I
think I think, uh, manage Chair,
Senator Stewart. I'm just sort
of following or tracking the I
think there are some issues in
the powers and duties section
that we're just referenced there
on page 45 that I believe are
being addressed. Um, and then
I'm page 199 around childcare
facilities.
Um, I believe those also
addressed the powers and duties
of early childhood education and
care department.
Page on page 30.
Mm. Chair. So what? What is your
plan to ensure you're not
Okay, encroaching on these other
two apartments in this this this
this
Is that from? I don't think we
should touch these microphones.
Anybody touch their microphones,
They get very excited.
Madam chair and, um and Senator,
um, the relevant pieces of of
authority for them are component
into 24, a
Um, two. We inadvertently
thought that they had ocean in
licensing.
That was in the Public Health
Act, so we're going to do the
healthcare Authority piece at so
my last question, Madam Chair is
So we don't have I back
And if we do, madam chair,
Senator Stewart, Um I believe
sort of under the Health Care
purchasing act. It's really on
page 29, where it changes the
definition for the consolidated
purchasing to refer to you
contracting in addition to the
procurement process, that
section I believe refers to the
I back entities where that
requirement today.
Refers to just the procurement.
So that sort of encompasses
those I back entities and then
also on page 26 where we are
adding, Um, the director of this
Healthcare Authority state
benefits division to the retiree
Health Care Authority board.
So, Manager. What does this do
to my back, moving forward?
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart,
This really compels joint
contracting, in addition to what
is happening today around
procurement, which sort of what
happened today is back agencies
all go kind of engaged in the
same procurement. However, they
kind of go off and negotiate
contracts separately. We really
want to compel a joint
contracting negotiation between
those I back agencies so that we
can get a better deal for the
state of New Mexico.
Madam Care and senator buyback
is maintained.
It does not go away.
Okay, Well, I'm getting Madam
chair. Conflicting reports
You're going to compel them.
What do you mean? You're going
to require them to jointly, Uh,
contract out there. I've been
living with this for a very long
time. And there's really ish big
issues about combining a PS with
Nomsa.
Nim. CIA's costs will go up
because of the health conditions
in a PS, so I've I've suffered
through three studies of this. I
still have them all at home in
my office. So if you can be a
little bit more details about
exactly what this does to my
back.
Okay. I will try. Madam Chair,
Senator Stewart. Um, what we are
trying to do with the I back is
Compelled but not required. It's
a requirement in the bill that
we engage in joint contracting,
but but we have sort of removed.
We had initially proposed that
the healthcare authorities sort
of approved the contracts.
That is sort of removed from the
bill. That is no longer in
there. What we are trying to do
is sort of joined forces to
negotiate contracts. Um and I
think that's really what we're
trying to do is sort of more
benign approach to compel that
joint purchasing strategy. Um
today everyone's kind of doing
their own thing. We think that
there is power in numbers with
healthcare where we can try to
get a better deal. So that's
really what we're trying to
advance while leaving the area.
Back intact.
Alright. So, Madam Chair if you
once again show me in the bill,
where the compelling language
On page 20 contracting. Hey,
yes. Page 29 line 10. It
includes and contract
As new language.
Not just going out to an RFP.
I have actually, Madam Chair. I
had the opportunity to chair I
back at one time in my life and
Uh, I was a little dismayed that
everybody wants their different
ways. We went out to RFP, for
example on prescriptions. Two of
the four entities chose one
entity. One chose another
another chose another and
It was concerning about
Consolidating purchasing in
pricing.
I'm sure I I'm very familiar
with that issue. Been working on
it forever, But it's not as easy
as Oh, just all picked the same
one.
That's not really work like
So you're you're sharing me that
this page does not require them
to do that yet?
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart. We
really feel like joint
contracting is essential in
order to achieve sort of a
better health care system. Right
now, the players are kind of
going off in their own
direction. Everyone's kind of
doing their own thing.
We don't feel like it's working.
There is a lot of feedback
around the health care system
sort of the players in the
health care system, where all of
the dollars are really not
working together towards a
coordinated plan. This is really
trying to get a coordinated plan
in effect for the state of New
Mexico.
Try just feeling that my answer.
My question is not really
answered. What I get is what
people want to do with some
criticism of AIPAC right now
without telling me that yes,
we're not quite there yet. They
will continue. That's what I
want to hear. Okay, madam Chair,
Senator Stewart.
That is correct. I mean, we're
really not. You know, the plan
is to try and get or compel the
system to work together. It's
going to take a while to get
there. We are just at the
beginning of getting the
actuarial analysis and that's
what I think you're asking me a
sort of like what's the plan?
What's the concrete plan?
I would be no lacking in
transparency. Parents say if I
told you that we had a fully
fledged plan today, we are
engaging in onboarding. Those
expertise, making sure we do a
full actuarial analysis. I'm
very, very acutely aware that
the decisions we make will
affect new Mexicans, including
myself. I'm a covered employee,
my family. I will be a retiree.
Um and I don't. We are really
need to have a set of concrete
recommendations, and we'd really
like to work with other agencies
to come up with a set of
recommendations across the
system. Alright. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you other members.
Senator neighbor.
Mm. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Madam Chair and center. This
this, uh
Areas way out of my league and
trying to swallow all this, uh,
was a difficult task yesterday
afternoon.
But I do have a number of
questions and kind of about to
go through the bill, but it
The department.
I guess. Now the proposed
authority.
It's a pretty significant
Piece of the
State budget. Madam Chair,
Senator, I'm going to defer to
the secretary designate.
Madam Chair, senator neighbor
That's correct. Today we are the
largest purchaser of health care
in the state of New Mexico
through the Medicaid program at
our budget is
For that is, um you know, it's
about a $10 billion program, so
we do have the largest set of
funds for health care in the
state of New Mexico. We're in a
really unique position in New
Mexico. We could because we have
the largest percentage of our
population covered on Medicaid
to really use that purchasing
power to advance advance
improvements in the health care
system overall.
So, um, you know, that's I
believe that's uh, What you're
asking is sort of what portion
of the budget in that madam
chair, Madam Secretary of the
The impact or the budget really
is, uh what in excess, Madam
Chair, Senator neighbor. I'm not
actually a certain what
percentage of the total budget,
but it is a large share the
Human Services department today.
Has a very substantial amount of
the General fund today, Madam
Chair. My My point is that, uh,
this is a big deal, and it
affects, uh, a good portion of
state government and at least
with respect to the amount of
money that we are
Putting toward health care.
And
Yet the, uh F I R and the
analysis is pretty pretty short.
so I was expecting it to be a
lot lot more in depth than maybe
that helped me out. But it is
what it is. Um, I'd like to go
through the bill a little bit
because I do have some
questions. This is Bill appears
to rewrite.
Or maybe consolidate a lot of
things, and I'm wondering like
on page three lines to
Three and four.
How is child support and force
mint related to healthcare? And
what if we're reorganizing this?
Why doesn't that those functions
get put
Somewhere else. Why is that
health care?
Madam Chair, Senator neighbor.
That's a great question. Um and
I think it's something that
we've discussed internally and
with the governor as well, Um
right now we're trying to
establish the foundation of the
health care authority. Um, we
need more time to really think
about what happens to the other
side of the human Services
Department. Um, where? What's
the right home for those kinds
of services?
They are very connected to
healthcare because providing
stability, income, stability and
food and, um, sort of all of
those foundational supports are
really essential for people to
live healthy lives. We also have
typically one customer so most
of our child support customers
are also customers about other
benefits. So we're really being
thoughtful before we recommend
where we would transition those
services whether those would
eventually sort of transition
out of the agency.
Um, that might be a multiyear
plan. It's not contemplated as
the first part or the first step
of setting up the health care
authority because we have to be
really kind of careful about how
we do that. We're optimizing a
lot of federal funds by having
those in the agency today, so we
just want to be thoughtful. But
that is part of our continued
play on us to make some
recommendations around those
services.
Madam chairman, Madam secretary.
One of my concerns with with C Y
F D has been that it's so broad
that he can't focus sufficiently
on on any if we're doing
If we're doing this massive
effort, uh
It's just seemed to me that that
would have been something that
we would have given some
thought. Maybe put that
Yeah, and some other department
that is more closely aligned
with those issues and maybe has
the ability to provide the
actual enforcement of that.
Um
On
Page 15 line, 13.
It Strikes and New Mexico Health
Policy Commission. And my
question is, is that moved
elsewhere is that commission
totally terminated that Madam
Chair senator that will remain.
Department of Health will share
data with the health care
authority and just one other
comment, Madam Chair we did pass
the bill last year that created
the Health Madam Journey,
Center home Page 19.
Um
Line five.
And I believe also on page 29
were striking risk management
and
I suspect list management is
going to survive this bill, but
you're removing certain
functions from risk management
to this authority. Is that an
accurate reading of this?
Madam Chair, Senator neighbor
correct in accordance with the
Healthcare Authority Act that
was enacted last year that moves
the state employee benefits
section of risk management over
to the healthcare authority, So
it's just pulls that piece out
of risk management, obviously
the risk management division at
General Services does a lot of
other things besides purchasing
health insurance, so it's just
pulling that side out and
placing it in the healthcare
authority in accordance with the
law that passed last year.
So, Madam Chairman, Madam
Secretary. The impact of local
governments. Uh
There will not be any adverse
impact to local government.
Madam Chair Senator and I wrote,
that's correct, and I hope we
can actually offer improved
health care purchasing to the
local governments as well. And
like I said, we do see that
several other places as well.
On page 35.
Again. This is, uh
Lines two through five.
I guess the question is, Are we
doing this?
Mhm.
To C Y F D has two Children or
believe this section deals with
C Y F D.
Maintain and enforce rules for
control of conditions of public
health importance and maintain
enforce rules for immunization
against conditions of public
health and wardens. Um
I guess I didn't know.
How that
Related to see why D if I read
this thing, Madam chair and um
and senator that is section
that's still part of the Public
Health Act under Department of
Health.
So this is making corrections. I
know it's confusing and a lot of
it gets replicated. But, um,
unpaid 33 line Um, seven, you'll
see it's amending section 20 for
the Public Health Act. Well, I
guess that's my confusion is
over on page 30.
The department means Department
of Health and Children, Youth
and Families and
So we're using department.
As he sings, but
I was wanting to know Elsie y f
D fit into that because it's
part of the defined term.
Um
Madam chair and Senator, Um what
I was talking about earlier
where? Children, youth and
family, um, were in there for
the childcare facilities and one
so they were in there, and
that's when we have
Not move that over was an error.
So we're getting that amended.
so that, um, all the authority
for healthcare in Chapter 24 A
so that all the licensing
Okay?
It just seems odd to me that you
define department is being
Two separate departments with
different missions, but
That, uh, I didn't quite
Connect the dots, sir.
Uh, page.
43
Um, this this issue really is a
common thread. I think, uh,
Throughout state government and
its standard language, but lines
13 through 15. We're authorizing
this authority to create
regulations and put the standard
language in and
I know many states have become
more sensitive because this is a
delegation of
The legislative branch is power
to the executive branch, and and
there's no provision to review
or or to have some mechanism and
I know represent. Dixon has has
expressed some concern with
that. And I would just echo
that, Uh, In my opinion, we need
to
Pay more attention as a
legislative body to the rules
and regulations and have some
mechanism maybe have some say in
those as many but that's that
issues replete through this, uh
Bill, and, frankly, every bill
that we see that comes before us
dealing with agencies, so it's
not a specific
Specific thing to this bill, But
just a general comment I'd like
to see us as a legislature.
Maybe have some oversight page
52.
At the bottom of the page. We're
deleting an entire section that
deals with the protection of
Children, and I kind of wanted
to know why.
That's been deleted or is that
covered elsewhere?
Um
Madam chair and and senator.
It's put back
And the same question with
respect to page 122 lines, 10
through 16 is that provision,
Uh,
Yeah. Um, Madam share and and
Senator. Um, that is, um
Well, if this is the language
that authorizes C y f d to
engage in that we're now
striking but deficiency and C Y
F D authorizing legislation
think it's taken care of, But I
will flag this one to double
check when we're doing the the
other fixes for C Y f D to make
sure that it is somewhere
Okay, I'm page 158. And then
there's a number of places
pages 1, 61, 63, 1, 64, 1, 72,
1, 76 and 190, possibly others
where
We're using the words authority
or department and that's on page
158 lines six and like I said,
there's a lot of references, but
it says
Authority or department means
the healthcare authority and I'm
wondering why.
We didn't strike the word
department here because we've
been pretty consistent
throughout the bill up to this
point of using the word
authority.
And then all of a sudden
authority.
Two words mean the same thing?
Yeah, And I'm I just wonder why
we need the word department.
Why? We didn't strike it here.
Where? Prior to this time you
struck department. Except when
you were referring to
A defined department.
I just point that out, but it
appears in a number of places
there and Senator we needed
improving this. We will double
digits. Um
And it it may It may be that we
just ledge higher act. Um, but
just change, you know?
I'll check
Well.
It's it's easier to read, if if
a word means something, not two
words mean the same thing. So
anyway, Page 177.
At the bottom lines, 23 and
following on to the next page.
Um, the yo the low income
utility assistance friend is
created.
And my question is
Similar to the one of the first
questions I asked, How is this
remotely related to health care?
Manicure? Senator I'm going to
go back.
Madam Chair, Senator neighbor. I
believe this is just a
reflection of where things
currently exists today, so we do
administer at the Human Services
Department, also at the
Healthcare Authority once that's
launched, um and minister
services, um including low
income utility assistance
through the agency again, these
are closely related to health,
and they support the health and
well being of new Mexicans who
are low income, so that's part
of our mission.
Well again, Madam Chair and
Madam Secretary. I would
I reiterate my objection that we
want to be
Focused on the subject and
There's probably some other
entities within state government
that, uh,
Page 186.
This is, uh
Talking about Medicaid funds.
And
This is not a question. It's
more of a statement. Uh,
We've heard loud and clear, at
least in in, uh
My part of the state.
That are rural hospitals are
real medical providers are
having tremendous difficulty
with Medicaid reimbursement
rates.
Yeah. And
To the point that some of them
some of the C. E. O s have
claimed that if things don't
change quickly, they're going to
be out of business and not able
to serve.
Rural New Mexico.
Yeah, And so I just make the
comments that we have to do
something.
To make sure that we're
attending to those needs and
that were fairly reimbursing The
people who are providing those
medical services through the
Medicaid or the medical Medicaid
program and
Hope that your department will
look into those things and look
at what can be done to save our
clinics and rural hospice
difficulty there so just to
comment on this section, Madam
Chair Senator, we do have two
initiatives would be, um, match
with Medic provide higher
salaries for all healthcare. You
can talk about.
Madam Chair, Senator. Yes. So
there's there's two. Well,
there's multiple things actually
and hospital to last year, we
raised rates up for hospitals,
including extra funding for
rural hospitals up to 100% of
Medicare. Those redid increases
have advanced and been and been
implemented fully, but we know
it's not enough for our rural
facilities that experience low
volume in particular, and so
there are a couple of
initiatives. One is hospital
provider assessment that will
generate
Read about 1.1 billion in
revenue for New Mexico hospitals
That is the governor's bill. Um
so really excited about being
able to advance that and then
there are some interim measures
as well to make sure that our
rural hospitals get some subsidy
funding in the interim while we
stand up that program
One page madam Gerald Page 190.
H 192 lines 14 through 16.
We're deleting, Um
The term and I guess we may not
be using the term anymore, but I
just
Is that the reason for deletion
of the comprehensive We're not
doing it or we're not using
those terms or
We don't use the term. I
understand why we delete the
definition, but I hope we are
doing some reviewing Madam
Chair Senator. We are doing a
comprehensive review and
analysis and sort of go back and
take a look at this language.
But we we definitely, um, are
working on that right now. Um,
and so I'm not sure why the
language was struck to defer to
Yeah.
Well, yeah, the terms not used,
I guess What I more important
question is Madam chair and and
Madam secretary is
We are doing the review and
analysis whether that's defined
or not.
Absolutely. Madam Chair and
Senator Norbert.
Those analyses are currently
underway.
On page 217.
Wines tune
313. We're deleting the
superintendent of insurance.
Yeah, And you mentioned that in
your preliminary comments, and I
just wanted to know whether or
not the superintendent of
insurance supported this change
of duties or
Your opening comments.
Indicated that it may make
sense, but I just wanted to know
if the superintendent agreed.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator?
Yes. We've been working with the
super on this and and, uh,
Um, my my final comment. Madam
chair is
As we as we look at the C Y F D
issues, uh I really, really hope
that, uh
At some point we can do a
comprehensive
Review of that agency and
possibly, uh, make sure that we
have the appropriate focus on
its various silos of interest
and
And attend to
What I would consider the need
for it to be, uh
Focused on specific areas and
not try to bring everything
under the roof that it's under.
I know it's beyond this bill,
but, uh, you are going to deal
somewhat with C Y D, but, uh, we
need to make sure that we're
doing what we can and that arena
as well. And my suggestion is
the maybe
Break that agency apart, not
bring bring more things into it,
but have maybe two or three
different secretaries heading
different focuses on what that
agency is involved. Having the
juvenile justice, peace and then
the foster family peace doesn't
seem like, uh
Lack of focus.
Is, I think a real concerned,
Yeah.
I am concerned with some of the
other things that may be the
agency's taken in too much under
one silo, and as few areas you
might want to have those
appropriately handled by
somebody.
Thank you Do on the list. I have
Senator Morris than Senator.
Thank you, madam. Sure. Um, I
wasn't here for the
presentation.
I do share some of the concerns
that were shared by
Some of the other colleagues
about
The scope of this. I wanted to
go through this. I just want to
make sure
That when we created this, um
This. This new agency Madam
Chair, Senator Morris, that's
correct. Um, but we're not
getting rid of any Madam chair,
Senator Morris. That's correct.
Nothing eliminated through this
really just kind of
transitioning functions that are
currently in other agencies over
to the Human Services Department
would which will then become the
healthcare authority?
Um,
Senator, um, Manager, Senator
Morris. Are you talking
specifically just to clarify
about divisions within the
agency or department. Many
Department level secretaries are
we up to after 20 years?
Madam, um, chair, senator or
guests.
Away.
Um
My my big concern is the Senator
Warren's about that, and I know
you have another bill concerns
me about that. It's for the
hospitals. Um, it's not gonna
private practice in this in the
hospitals have their team
lobbyists. The hospitals are
doing what they do. They
Independent practices and
Areas around your very
concerning, um Auntie O
Let's all get back to that
Segway into a senator Stewart
was talking about when I came in
Currently chair, Senator
Medicaid is year two years,
usually between 42 at Mount
Accurate Right now, Madam Chair
Senator Moore's That's correct
about about Yeah, roughly 45% of
new Mexicans covered on
Medicaid.
And, um
We're now and I want to dive
into back in the old days when I
was with GST.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Morris's the public schools
insurance account, right? Um
Madam Chair, Senator Moore. Is
it? It's the public schools
insurance Authority. Actually,
the I believe that the counties,
municipalities kind of are yes,
they are sort of able to
purchase on their own to, I
believe and if they can achieve
a better deal that way
I'm sure and so.
In the macro level. What
percentage of new Mexicans?
Well, how big of a pool is that?
Madam Chair, Senator Moors. It's
about 180,000 new Mexicans, um,
kind of covered through that I
back pool today.
Percentage wise, so I can just
do the quick math on his 4545.
You said percent on Medicaid.
Madam Chair, Senator Morris we
have about 865,000 on Medicaid.
Um, and that would add another
180,000 not to Medicaid. They
would still be covered through
the commercial market, but we
would be sort of trying to
negotiate better pricing using
our purchasing power as the
biggest purchaser here in New
Mexico.
Um, so roughly 10%, Madam chair
so there, uh, there's 2.1%.
So we're talking about going
into that, Um, Madam Chair
Senator Moore's. We are
proposing to move the health
care affordability fund, also to
the agency, their purchasing,
They're actually not a purchaser
per se. They're really kind of
helping with subsidies and
premium assistance.
Primarily through the well. New
Mexico to to make coverage more
affordable for new Mexicans to
sort of smooth out the edges of
cost,
Madam chair. I think there are
roughly about 40,000 new
Mexicans receiving care through
the well New Mexico
I'm
Care and Senator. I think it's
more like 55,000 now have
enrolled the fund also 1000.
So we're we're getting up to
Madame share senator about 60%
of the commercial.
Is that roughly, um you're
obviously on the record, but
roughly 60%.
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
that's probably close to
correct. I mean, we are really
trying to sort of leverage that
purchasing power that we have in
Medicaid to improvement for
everybody, Uh, and sort of the
other large pears are really
going to be Medicare. So, yeah,
I think we are really trying to
influence purchasing for that
private market. I'm sure so 6%
Medicare guru of all. Um um
Um so my concern
Its ties into what we're talking
about earlier the rates you say
it's gonna negotiating for up to
6070 what they do with Medicaid
and these other performs. It's
going to be
And that is my point and that
we're fighting for them.
Those rates are going to Mexico.
How could you put uh
Madam Chair, Senator Moore's,
um, just a couple of things, so
we we have been investing
heavily in the Medicaid rates as
you know, And I think, um,
thanks to the legislative
support, but the agency
Continuing to advance those
provider investments. We've said
a number of policy initiatives
to make sure that the managed
care organizations negotiating
no further. Nope. They cannot go
below with the Medicaid fee
schedule dictates. We're at 100
and 20% of Medicare Now for
most, you know, child maternal
health, behavioral, health and
primary care services.
Proposing in our budget, our
executive budget for fiscal year
25 to get up to 150% of
Medicare. We really think that's
going to alleviate some of the
strain. We agree with you. We
want providers in New Mexico
able to make a really good
living attracted to the doing
business here. Um,
unfortunately, I think there's a
lack of transparency on how
pricing works on the on the
other side of the market. So
with the state of New Mexico
benefits, I can say
No one's really able to tell me
where the price uh, references
and so I'd really like to see
that in order to really
understand and be able to answer
your question more fully, but
that's part of that actuarial
analysis that we're working on
today. Our goal is to really
only improve the lives for
providers and our healthcare
network here in New Mexico not
to eradicate that in any way or
weaken the provider network.
That's my big concern. Eyeballs
right now. But, um, But that is
the true Mexico and even at
100%.
That doesn't meet us and you can
negotiate those rates with
Presbyterian. You are a price
taker.
From
Medicaid.
You provided it's exact same
service through the exact same
care. But if your Medicaid with
Presbyterian or all the other
hand, they realize that they
have to work real parts of
states and they will go about
when I share your concerns about
prices. My concern is that when
you guys are moving forward,
you're negotiating Medicaid
rates. They're also going to
start negotiating all the health
insurance rates for the state
employees.
Everyone else.
Madam Chair, Senator Morris. I
appreciated those concerns. And,
you know, I think there are ways
to negotiate healthcare without
reducing prices and rates to
providers on the Medicaid side.
We do that all the time. And I
know Medicaid is one of the
lower pairs. But there are other
strategies that are not
currently being used in this
system.
Uh, to also negotiate better
pricing and our hope is to you
and our intention is to really
leverage those other strategies
for purchasing.
And and I really appreciate our
conversations about this topic,
But I don't know what future
So I I appreciate you hearing my
concerns on that.
So we're moving back to Senator
Night? Oh, Stuart's question is
a PS. The teachers that
That I represent Will their
health insurance of this madam
chair, Senator. It is part of
the eye back today, So it's
currently part of that. Um And
so, yes, there are contracts
would be part of the same
negotiation as they are today.
They're part of that same
procurement concern, but
Concern I have is an eyebrows,
Employees remember crackers, so
they bring a lot
Now that they're going to be
within and I'm hearing from the
teachers, Senator, Madam Chair,
Senator do Hig. Sorry to hear
that I really feel like we We
are pretty sure that the system
isn't working as best for anyone
right now, and we're really
trying to advance a system that
will work better with the pure
intention of trying to advance
improvements and gnomic.
Certainly not make anything
worse for any employee. Um and I
say that
Uh, personally out of my own
self interest as a covered
employee here and in New Mexico,
and family and Children who are
covered. Um I think our
incentive is to really drive
improvements. Um, for everybody
when we created that about
better business to drive put all
the different big deal when we
created that, and we're
Taking it and just
And I think it
So I'm worried about that. Also.
What? Um
Lastly, the last topic I have
is what are we leaving? If we're
moving everything out? Just the,
um
You know, we originally had I t
so we created the C I A GST back
in the old days. Um, the chair
manager Senator had the chair of
buyback rotates among the four
members. Yeah. So when what back
in the old days, when I was at
GST, we was housing. That's
still the case. What is left at
you took away I t were taken
away this
Uh, transport, Madam Chair. Um,
Senator, we have transportation.
We have, um, General Services,
which is like the printing our
bills and everything else
through state government. We
have risk management, which had
several ploy benefits We had,
um, building services building
services contracts.
Purchasing purchasing. There's
quite a bit left left in. Um,
what about Department of Health
when he got secretary here,
Secretary Alan Do you want to
come in on that? Thanks, Madam
Chair Senator Patrick Allen,
secretary of the torment of
health. Easiest way to think of
it is that we remain the
population health people. We do
the prevention, other kinds of
work that helped people get the
health care that the best
healthcare, which is not needing
to get health care at all.
We also continue to operate the
stage seven.
Public health and then, um human
services were moving out.
Income support and all salt
support enforcement. No, madam
Madam Chair, Senator Morris.
Those divisions are currently
staying within the healthcare
Authority. I think Senator
neighbors question was sort of
where they belong. Do they
belong in the health care
authority? We believe that they
do as a bright now, moving them
out would be a pretty big, um
How a lot of implications that
really need to be fully thought
out. So as of right now, child
Support income support division
will stay within the health care
authority. So when Senator di
Burro was asking what that had
to do
Um
Madam Chair and Senator, I
believe, um, that senator
neighbor was questioning whether
those should be still in health
in the human services in the
health care authority, and, um
Uh, where we're doing this
In phases. So last year we
passed a bill moving in what
we're moving in.
Licensing and certification.
Uh, purchasing, and, um, the
developmental disabilities, um,
division from Department of
Health.
The income support and child
enforcement are still there
because they're really
integrated. Not only, um, maybe
by purpose, but the I two system
has them. It was single
applications and so forth is all
really integrated. And so, um,
we
Were thinking about the next
step would be to look at
When we get
Over the things that should be
there. How do we pull those
apart? Should they be pulled
apart? Is there a reason to keep
them Because of a lot of the, um
A lot of work has been done
together technically, and so
pulling that apart is a much
bigger effort. And, um
And deciding there's probably
options of where they would go.
Um, we didn't want to, um, send
something more to see Why F d at
this point. So where else do you
go? So
That was just put on hold to
stay where it is for now, and
should that
Is that more appropriate after
you right now so we could have
shoes. Open it up and move over
childhood. You want to make that
your main We could, uh, we could
have a lot of fun with that
bill. Look at C Y F T. And I
think you know we've had this
throughout the years We've been
around long enough for our old
C, where you have to eat during
the King administrator role
That's going to really
Continued growth after US
Senator TC Pinot isn't even
gonna be here. Believe it or
not something,
With that. I appreciate the
conversation this morning. I'm
sure Senator representative
sector, doesn't he?
Thank you as Senator Hermia.
Thank you, Madam Chair now, One
of my questions was already
answered that the superintendent
of Insurance does support these
changes. But I do have a couple
of other questions. Now The
healthcare authority is fairly
new. Are they prepared to take
on these new roles and functions
which have been housed in
another department for years.
Madam Chair Senator had a meo.
Um yes, I believe. Actually,
This is one of the one of the
really things the things I'm
really excited about.
The agency has a lot of
healthcare expertise. We are
running the largest healthcare
plan in New Mexico through the
Medicaid program. Um and I
believe that we are really
positioned to ask the right
questions and really do the
right negotiating before these
products on behalf of the rest
of New Mexico, So I believe we
are ready to do that, or our
executive budget does support
some additional staff that we
believe we need, So we are going
to be negotiating hard on those
pieces Just
To make sure that we're standing
up the healthcare authority with
the right foundation.
Um, And in addition, I'm
bringing on expertise through
consultants. So we've got we've
hired an actuary to really dig
in and look at the data hiring,
um, expertise consultants in the
self insured market to really
make sure that they're reviewing
reviewing the current contracts
and procurement and giving us
some advice and recommendations
about negotiating favorable
terms to the state, and then
we're going to be doing a claims
Integrity audit of the to assess
the performance on the current
system, so I believe we are
Standing up the foundation to be
prepared to do the work.
Madam chair. Thank you for that
answer, and you touched on my
next one, So there's no
appropriation with this bill.
Are you anticipating that
employees who are currently
working in these programs will
transfer over and then you'll
have to hire additional staff to
help
Um So, Madam Chair Senator ahead
Um So, Madam Chair, Senator
heading Meo or FY 25 budget sort
of makes the full
recommendation. So it includes,
um you know, so there were
reductions to the Department of
Health and General Services
Department, as those were
inheriting or getting about 404
staff through the original
transition. Um, and then our
budget includes additional
programs support budget, not a
huge amount, but enough to make
sure that we can do the
functions of the agency and be
accountable to all of you for
the budget.
And the deliverables that were
assigned to do
Madam chair. Thank you for that.
No further questions.
Thank you, senator or TCP now.
Thank you very much, Madam
chairman and and Senator
Stepanek's and
Representatives here helping us
out with this and I apologize.
If you've covered some of this,
I had a building. Another
committee cited.
Fashion, But during the interim,
you made several presentations
to our committee. The health and
I'm struggling to see where in
here.
Are you still planning to
transfer the developmental
disabilities program over
Um, where? Where is that in the
bill, but
On your on your
Crib sheet here. Where is it?
Where can I find that Madam
Chair, Senator or TCP? No, I
believe it was in the Healthcare
Authority Act last year, so it's
existing statute that
transitions the developmental
disabilities did it. We don't
need to do it. That's right.
Madam Chair Senator. Second
thing, Madam Chairman, The O s.
I
Personnel transferring over as
well as the program. And I guess
we don't need to do that in the
in the statute, but is that
what's also going to happen?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator or TCP?
No, that is in this bill that
transition of the Health care
affordability fund and the staff
and appropriations to the health
care authority. That was not
done. But that was part of the
transition plan and part of my
presentations over the interim
Western include that transition
over to the healthcare authority
and Madam chairman then
On, Um on page 30. You talk
about the department and it can
be different things for
different kinds of programs.
And we have C Y F d actually
licensing.
Facilities, which I don't think
they do now.
Is that? Is this going to be a
new responsibility for C Y f D.
Um, Madam Chair and senator. No,
it's not going to be a new
responsibility they were doing
the, um the young, uh,
facilities that were
You did miss earlier.
And that, um, we inadvertently
the way this is done. It's still
is it authorities that they had
might go away, So we're going to
clarify that in an amendment for
your committee for the early
childhood for the early
childhood, and and, uh, C y f D
for the jurisdiction that they
have
Facilities for just so just to
be clear, then for me, the the
current
Regulations call for C Y F D to
license these facilities already
the ones under 21 Madam Chair
residential Treatment Center.
Okay, Um
Very good. Let me see if I heard
everything. Um
Oh, and do we still have a
health madam Chairman's
representative, former
representative, I'm sure do we
still have a health policy?
Well, I could ask senators to
Mannix, who wants to chair was
the director of the Health
Policy Commission. Do we still
have such an animal? And why do
we continue?
To talk about it, Madam Chair,
Senator, The Health Policy
Commission is in statute in the
Department of Health and, uh,
enables or provides authority to
collect data from across the
state in a variety of different
manners in this bill, it allows
the Department of Health to
share the data with the
healthcare authority.
We didn't want to move that over
to the healthcare.
I mean, it just seems like it
might be.
Um, well, Madam Chair senator
Right now. The Department of
Health has staff and data
collection methods in a
particular division. In fact, I
had an employee worked there for
several years, so they are very
adept at collecting data, not
just for health. How's he
commission? Um
Recommendations, but also for
other data in the Department of
Health. And so it really is a
tiny piece of the entire package
of data that the Department of
Health collect.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Senator. Yeah, the the I guess.
The LFC recommendation for the
L. Peter Claims database.
Is grossly inadequate.
We've been trying to get that
particular function up and
servicing the needs of the state
And for some reason, the lfc and
there
Inevitable wisdom has decided
that that's a waste of money or
we we've got better things to
spend it on. Even though we have
the incredible surplus that we
have now we need to make sure
that that's changed. I just want
to bring that to the members of
the old Here Claims database.
It is essential if we're going
to ever get a handle.
On our health needs so
Whether it's a health department
or the health care authority. We
need to get that up and working
and the LSC budget simply
And once it gets in madam
chairman Once he gets into the
healthcare authority, we all can
get
Right that the idea we need it
reality or where it's
appropriate to hope that the
data that they collect
Great. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. That's all my
questions.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Um And I think, um
What I want to just for some
clarification.
It's just with regards to the
disabled PTSD.
Um and I know we did transfer it
and I know it's it's
There should I say.
What? I'm what? I have a concern
of, um
Now that this is and I know we
transferred it last year. But
now that it's within this new
healthcare authority
Is making sure that the program
doesn't get subsumed into
because that's a big concern.
Madam Chair when you have
families, um those who are
managed care. I know we say it
is just a concern.
Because that does some very, um
And results.
For families, and I just wanted
to hear Madam Chair. Um
What your commitment is.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
Thank you for raising that
point, no plans at all to move
that into managed care, Uh, in
fact and in fact, under the
organizational structure of the
agency to make sure that d d s d
doesn't get subsumed by the
elephant that is Medicaid and
keeping those under separate,
um, separate leadership so that
we really have like a deputy
secretary That's really
dedicated to D d SD one that's
dedicated to Medicaid. The teams
will work together and there's
going to be some really
Good synergies, I think today.
There's some failures because
there were into agencies and we
don't get things done fast
enough. Frankly, um, and we tend
to point the finger at each
other, so I think that's going
to really improve, but I am very
conscious of the importance of
maintaining that separateness.
Um and
Sort of that advocacy role that
D D SD plays as well. So we will
keep those separate no movement
towards managed care.
And I pretty. I appreciate that
a statement. Um, Madam chair.
Senator the and and no
denigration to the secretary of
Department of Health, but we've
had issues with this. You know,
there's um
But I'm hoping is that
With the transference. And now,
um
The continuation that we do have
some
Real oversight and what is
happening? What has happened
because sometimes the history
also gives us direction.
Um, you know, for the facilities
of where some of our persons
live.
Um, I think those need to have
some oversight because of some
of the concerns that I've heard
from families who have a loved
one.
In some of these facilities, you
know, homes. Should I say
Um
What? I'm hoping, um
Madam Chair and Secretary
designate Armijo is that, um
There will be
Oversight in the true sense of
the strong oversight very
strong, especially with some of
the cases that have happened
recently with some of the
residents and some of these
homes have been receiving
funding from the state.
And you know the ensuing um
Yes, And you know abuse that has
happened And those are some
concerns, especially for Bas. Um
You know for those parents who
have a child who, um, may need
some oversight. Once we pass on.
It's a big concern as to where
our Children are going to land B
and the oversight of a state
entity who's supposed to watch
over them.
So I'm just making a statement.
Madam Chair.
Senator secretary that this is
something that
Hasn't been done correctly, and
I hope that your department
issue
Um, Madam Chair.
Senator. I know that just
reading through the legislation.
Um, you did mention that you're
going to have some amendments
when it goes on to the next
committee and I thought were
listed in our blue F I r that we
have.
Especially as we talk about
issues with, um you know, the
Children need to be very careful
what we do.
Um
And I'm glad to hear that.
The
The other question. I have two
is, um
When you look at the oversight
of the health facilities.
And I know again. This was you,
Um
Madam Chair Senator secretary
designate.
There's been some issues, um,
namely in my community and
actually part of different areas
of polio county, Torrance
County, Valencia.
With one of our fq hcs.
And when this particular entity
um
Was that the point of closing
It was. Where is the oversight?
What are we doing to really look
at the manager Fq HC and I
realized the feds have a certain
I mean, that's a big long
discussion to have Madam chair
that takes much more time than
here.
But I'm hoping, um and I know
it's spoken this as several of
us with Secretary Alan
On the oversight, especially
financial when it was first
choice in my area, and the other
is like La Familia here in Santa
Fe.
When those entities
Get to that point where they
have to close because of finance
or other oversights that maybe
we haven't been done through
audits and such
I would hope that there'll be
some more.
Oversights to such a bland word,
but some really strong financial
Insight into what these and
speaking madam chair with the
state auditor, the only they
don't do it an audit every year.
It's only kind of like
A 10% that they look at through
the state auditor, and you're
not going to catch a lot of
these entities unless it's
flight by the feds or whomever
else so I would hope
That this would be one of the
areas that you would look
strongly into.
Its financial oversight for some
important health.
Facilities.
Especially when we talk about
rural New Mexico If
Madam chair that those are the
highlights of you.
Thank you, Senator Baca.
I think you madam chair. Get
this mic, right? Um, I wanted to
ask 11 question, Madam chair and
and senators. Stefan IX does
this in any way Expand C Y f D s
authority or transfer authority
under CF.
Madam Chair, Senator. Thank you
for that question. And since, um
Mr Armstrong was very
instrumental and developing the
chart that talks about transfer
of authority. I'll let her Madam
chair and Senator No, it doesn't
change C Y F D S, uh, current
authority. There is some
clarifying that we need to do to
make sure that they maintain
their authority over childcare
facilities. Um, and and so we
may have inadvertently
Um
Ah!
Remove their authority as we
move things around trying to
clarify, so we're fixing that
for the next committee to make
sure that they maintain the same
authority they have over
licensing of facilities for, um,
various facilities for under 21.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So you
specifically and we've covered a
couple of times here, but still
not very clear on it. Um, uh,
early childhood education, had
some issues with this are
specifically they they list some
amendments that they would like
to see in there. Um, looking at
the F I r. Can you tell this
Tell us
Which of these amendments will
be adopted?
Um
Madam chair and Senator, Um,
we're going to address all the
issues identified in there, but
it may not be amended quite the
way that that they suggested, um
they were suggesting leaves some
stuff alone, which left?
Authority at D. O H. For
Um for licensing, so we
Legislative Council, or drafter,
is working on addressing all of
the issues, but it may not look
exactly like the amendment, they
suggested, and we will get it
cleared with C Y F D in early
childhood. I get those
amendments. Thank you for that
madam chair and representative
Additionally, sensor has been so
many so many questions regarding
C Y F D in early childhood.
And the changes that are being
made pursuant to this bill. It
seems that it might be helpful
to have a representative from
each of those agencies at the
hearings going forward so we can
directly ask them what their
concerns are. Obviously, these
are all, uh, Cabinet and
executive, uh, positions so
But but the fact that so it's a
little alarming to me that you
have that interplay there
through their fi are of these
issues that are occurring
between these agencies, So I
think that would be very
helpful, especially on a bill of
this magnitude. And and I mean,
we have 200 some odd pages here
and sometimes that's just
impossible to
To filter through that, but we
do have direct questions. I
think some of the committee
members here have expressed that
and if we had a representative,
we can get straight answers from
them here on the record, Um the
other item that I wanted to and
I'm just kind of jumping around
here because many of the members
already Adams, Um there is a
section in here for records
Come, uh, confidential records.
And and it says their new
material. Um did we have
Prior to this, no confidential
record protection of some kind
and statute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. I know this is, um, uh,
confusing. Um there is currently
exists in chapter 24, which is
public health and safety.
And it is being replicated. So
all of the components of that
chapter are being re compiled
into a new chapter. 24, a
So what you see as new material
is really replication of what's
in the O. H s and put it in
healthcare authority as well. I
appreciate that. And, uh, yeah,
I see that now. Thanks for, uh,
pointing that out to me, the
other the other item that data
collection. This is going to
call agencies. Do you have a
platformers?
Some system that is already in
place that can, um uh, really
just make that accessible to
your staff and the interplay
between the agencies. How is
that going to work or do you
need a new platform, and so is
that going to require a budget
Madam Chair, Senator Baca. Yes,
we do. And we've actually been
working on this for many years
across the state agencies.
Actually, I just this past year
have a data sharing agreement
across all of the agencies now,
um, the agencies are all working
together to build a sort of data
sharing platform. Um, and
actually, we will have data
across the agency starting in
April. So for that launch is
going to be kicked off in April.
so really looking forward to
being able to do a better job
with data analytics and sharing
across the
Health and human services
agents.
Um and I'm going to skip over.
Thank you for that answer. I
appreciate that. One more follow
up on that. How many years has
this been? Um, madam Chair,
Senator Baka. That is part of
our HHS 2020 project that's been
in process for a number of
years, but the data services
piece of it was just procured
this past year. So in that first
iteration of of data in
production will be in April, So
we just procured that contract
recently, um, in the last 2023.
Okay. Thank you for that madam
Secretary of the next thing I
want to look at. Is this board,
Um, it expands this current
board from it Looks like 12 to
13. And there were a couple of
changes in there and I'm just
wondering if you could speak to
that. Um, one of the changes
that I looked at, essentially
you changed one of the
memberships from a retired
educator to an educational
retiree. And to me, that would
mean that
We're replacing a teacher with a
teacher or an administrator.
What was the thing?
And that's going to be on page
27 line seven.
I see.
So, so it's just a change in an
agency then and then we added in
there, the director of State
benefits division of Health care
authority? Well, um, I guess
I'll ask you why. Why did we add
that in Madam Chair, Senator
Baca? Um, this was a solution
that we identified in order to
ensure that the agency's kind of
know what's going on with
healthcare purchasing and are
working together with the
purchasing for state employees
and retirees.
Um, we'd like to have a seat at
the table partially so we can
just leverage and learn from
them so they can leverage and
learn from us. We think it's
going to advance greater
collaboration between retiree
health and the health care
agency for purchasing. I guess
my concern with that is just,
you know, diluting these boards
so that there's so many voices
in the room. It seems like it.
It loses efficiency a lot of
times.
Um, I think at least if you
would have kept it the same, and
but that was just a thought I
had, but we see that in a lot of
bills where we add and add and
add, Um, but anyway, just wanted
to point that out, But that's
really all I have. Other
committee members asked. Mostly
thank you, and I know that
Senator Morris wants to be
recognized for a second time.
Ah, we'll do that after I make
my comments, however, because we
have a hard stop it 1030. We
have a lot of other bills on the
agenda. I will recognize you for
no more than five minutes for
speaking for a second time,
Senator Morris when we get to
that as long as they want, but I
appreciate that Senator.
So, Senator, Secretary. Um
I'm looking at this new
language on
Pages. 40 starting on page 43 or
41 really?
And a lot of this is taken from
the Public Health Act. Um, so
its existing language.
It's bad existing language. This
is the kind of half of this
would be struck if this bill
went to judiciary, mostly
because it's saying stuff that
doesn't need to be
It. That is true whether you say
it or not, Um, so it doesn't
need to be in our statutes. I'm
not gonna offer any amendments
here. But as you all are doing
amendments for the next
committee, um
I think that a lot of that
language can can be cleaned up.
Uh,
I also
I'm also interested in here and
and this is existing language
that they can only sue and beast
only be sued with the consent of
of the legislature.
Yeah.
Doesn't make much sense to me.
Um, Now that is existing
language That is Page 43 sub
six.
Page 43 sub sects.
And that's language that's
already in our law. Um
I think that's very problematic.
And in fact, I might offer one
amendment to take out the
To take out sub sects. Actually,
I won't because I want to give
you all an opportunity to to
make sure that
That changes that we're making
to this language.
All right.
I want you to be able to see the
impact that it would have
overall, but I went very much
encourage you to take that out
in your amendment, when when you
do them when this is going to be
back next
Um
I also on confidentiality.
And this is very similar to the
confidentiality provisions
that's in the Health Public
Health Act, But it's
So one thing that again is
existing law.
So it says that it suffers
confidential except where
permitted by rule of the
authority.
What about HIPAA? Like what? How
can how can an agency's rule?
Preempt.
The federal protections given by
by
Um
And and and and I don't know if
this is you refer to your page
because my answer might be
different than what you're
asking Sure, Page 45.
Line one
Well right now, Madam Chair and
I can stand to be corrected. But
right now, the information that
is the data sharing is an
aggregate and in fact, um, when
you are looking at health
trends you don't identify. But
what is your your
You're concerned about
individual confidentiality,
because Senator if you look at
page 44, starting at line, 21
It says the files and records of
the authority giving identifying
information about persons who
have received or receiving from
the authority, treatment
diagnostic services or
preventative care. So this is
identifying information, right?
I'm gonna refer to the secretary
designate.
Adam. Terror is a great catch,
But I do think there are so we
are HIPAA until you and we have
to follow all of the rules of
HIPAA. There are rules within
HIPAA about that leave it up to
the agency to sort of decide
when I'm sharing information is
really for the for the purpose
of improving healthcare policy
or necessary to do our jobs. And
so I think
Yeah, I read that in that way. I
mean, we weren't We're not
really sort of able to overturn
hip hop. Of course we follow all
the rules of HIPAA, but we do
share data for the purposes. Um,
usually it's always an
aggregate. But there are times
when we share it across agencies
for purposes of making sure
we're kind of
Tracking an issue or problem
solving regarding some
constituent problems sometimes
so there are ways in which I
think we are able to do that We
always do it with the data
agreement. We never overturn any
existing federal rules, so we
always all of our data
agreements are you know we have
business that follow the hippo
statute.
And this is existing language. I
mean that that language is is in
the public Health Act already,
um
One.
Hmm. We're not doing on that
point center. Um
There's also there are in in the
confidentiality provisions of
the Public Health Act. There are
kind of carve outs for research
that they aren't in this
In this confidentiality
provisions. I'm wondering why
not?
Madam Chair. The Department of
Health has, um does, um
Regarding individuals and
they've got their, um
Um, um, the committee that can
search you know, and and so
they've got all of those
components at Department of
Health that okay, Great. Yeah.
If you guys aren't gonna be
doing research, then then you
don't need those that that makes
a lot of sense.
Um, looking at the very last
page of your bill to 25.
Section 147 for repeat. So this
first repeal was looking it up.
It looks like it was a dupe
section. We we put the same
section of law and twice, so
that's just taking out
duplication.
The second one.
Is it's for the New Mexico
hotel, health and Health
Information Technology
Committee. It's just it's taking
out the title and the purpose
sections.
Section of that.
Of that act.
Which I first when I saw that, I
thought, Oh, great. Finally,
everyone else is jumping on the
Judiciary bandwagon of getting
rid of purpose sections. But
you're not doing that in the
rest of the bill. It's only for
this section. Um and it's not re
compiled elsewhere.
Um, like where it would have its
own and
Like what? So why? Why are you
taking out the title in the
purpose section just just for
that.
Madam chair and, um
Uh, I have to check with Ledge
Council.
Drafting, so
I can check with with that one.
It's just be well. So I have the
same concern with see with see
That's the Primary Care Council
act, and it's taking out the
title. It's also taking out
definitions and it's not
recompiling it elsewhere. So now
we're using terms that are
undefined.
In the rest of that act.
Uh,
And so I
I would want to make sure
That there's a good reason for
doing that.
I assume that you're you're
you're gonna check with Let's
right Senator Morris for five
minutes, man. I'm sure again for
hours. If I want, I'm not able
to try to limit debate or
conversation and Senator Senator
Senator this is the same thing
we do in judiciary. This is and
we are a We are a committee with
a and you had every opportunity
to to speak as long as you
chose. Previously, we have now
been on this bill.
For almost two hours, and we
have a number of other important
matters to get to. So please go
ahead. Madam Chair, I told the
Senate Judiciary chair the exact
same thing. The editor, I'm
allowed to talk and ask
questions, and that is how the
Senate operates.
Madam Senator Madam share
regarding HIPAA. There are
exemptions for federal law, for
instance, we have to report in
our laboratory to the purple
disease, including during covid
as TDs.
By the way, I need to talk to
you, Secretary about but
anyways, there is there are
exemptions so to the senator.
Since now you're going to be
controlling such a big part of
the market and you are exempt
from hip. I do think
We might be able to dive into
I would have some concerns
because of your exemption from
hip hop.
In certain services
circumstances.
Madam Chair senator more than I
do not believe we are exempt
from Hippo. We we do follow it.
I think we ought there are
provisions around sharing data
that are pretty carefully
codified, which is why we have
data sharing agreements when
we're going to be sharing data
outside of the agency. So we are
a hippo covered entity and
everyone that we share data is
also HIPAA covered, so there are
a lot of pretty strict rules and
provisions around those data
sharing agreements. Um
That which is why our legal
counsel review those pretty
thoroughly so I don't think
we're exempt. There are just
conditions as you mentioned that
let the agency share data, but
we have to do so with other
HIPPA covered entities. So I
think, Do you think that's the
point? And I'm not an expert on
how state agencies do need to be
aware of that forward certain
exemptions for research?
Public health reasons, etcetera,
etcetera, Um
Speaking of a PS earlier I got a
text, have they
Endorsed this or looked at this
because I got some concerns from
about the police, the
firefighters, the city workers
and their voice, the city of
Albuquerque and or the
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm not
sure where where they land in
terms of endorsing, um or
opposing. Um, However, we are
going to be engaged in formal
stakeholder ring. We have been
spending that we have spent the
last years of working on the
transition plan that proposals
that are laid out, but we will
be engaging in the formal
stakeholder process sort of as
we speak for sort of setting up
the foundation for that.
To make sure that we're
listening to all parties. I
don't think we can proceed
without sort of doing adequate
stakeholder ring. Um, but so
that part will occur. We've had
some conversations with them. I
don't think that we're where we
need to be yet. Um, so we are
going to be engaging with them
directly doing all of that work
with them, and I do share
Senator Lopez is
But again 2030 40 years from
now, Um, prevention, future
secretaries who might intend to
do just Madam Chair, Senator
Morris. I don't believe there's
anything in statute that
prevents the D D program from
being in the managed care
program, But I would have to
check I would have to do a more
detailed analysis. Yes, I have
legal. Cancel back there. Uh,
information me that no, it's not
in statute. Encourage you to
work with Senator Lopez on that
bipartisan effort.
Because I
I think she raised something
that we talked about, Um
I'm sure. Senator. You We know
we have amendments and I'll do
respect Usually don't let bills
out knowing why weren't those
amendments probably like to try
to because this was going to
Judiciary committees? Um, Madam
Chair, Senator. The F I. R with
the detailed analysis and
recommendations for, um um so
we're at the same
Disadvantages. You are
About this.
Um, yes. Um, um, Madam Chair,
Senator Miss Armstrong had
Um, yes. Um, um, Madam Chair
Senator, Miss Armstrong head
indicated that we have several
amendments and we've been taking
notes about throughout the
morning, but the amendments were
around early childhood in some
about, uh, C y f D. So we know
we're going to have those two
that are recommended center or T
subpoena. Because usually are we
have a hesitancy in this
commission's I've been here
leading committees.
Bill or that just kind of the
feeling of this, and it's still
early in the session. It's not
slowly
Madam chairman and Senator
Morris, I think you know this is
really the prerogative of the
chair whether they want to older
bill until it's been done up in
his totality and makes it out.
We've done both inspect. We've
held some bills up.
Until they're fixed. Totally
Now, I would mention that we
have
I think
As many lawyers inspectors there
are in this committee Senator
Nibert, Senator of City Lopez
and Senator Estes around specs
of their legal issues, pick over
it as well as any other group of
lawyers. Judiciary. Um I'll do
that. Thank you, Madam chair.
Thank you, Senator. Appreciate
it, Senator Hermia.
Madam chair motion for a do
pass.
Alright, We have emotion. Let's
have a roll call vote.
Senator Baca. Senator Bubka
votes No.
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Lopez votes. Yes, Senator
McKenna.
Yes, Senator McKenna votes. Yes,
Senator Moore's Senator Morris
votes No Senator Nibert.
Senator. Neighbor votes. No
senator or G P No. Yes, Senator.
RTZ Pinot votes Yes, Senator
Pirtle.
No senator. Puerto votes. No,
Senator Stefan IX. Senator
Stepanek's votes. Yes, Senator
Stewart Senator Stewart? Yes,
Senator.
Her meal. Yes, Senator Harmony
about Yes, Senator Doig? Yes,
Senator. Do Hig votes Yes. Vote
of 7 to 4.
Do you have a new paths? Thank
you. Thank you, Madam chair and
members of the committee and we
will now move on to Senate Bill
108.
Yeah. And if if folks can can
keep it down as you're leaving
so that we can get on with our
business?
Good morning, madam. Check. Good
morning. Go ahead. Senator will
wake you up, right?
This chair is pretty warm. Let
me tell you
Ready, Madam Chair. We're here
in Senate Bill one that weight
and what this does is create an
election fund in a distribution
to the election funded every
got to figure out where the
right spot is Good right there.
So Senate Bill 10 wait relating
to Election fund created
distribution to the election
fund is sure the balance is at
20 million every year.
I want to go through election
cycles that can go up and down
and we don't know the exact
dollar amount elections costs
for school boards, county
election city elections and we
watched that funding in general
elections.
And so as it comes up and down,
and we need stability in our
elections and money in prior
years, we've always had to come
back and backfield costs and we
have the money now, so let's
just creased ability that
secretary everything, Dad just
briefly. Thank you, Madam chair
and to the sponsors.
One of the challenges we've had,
and is that, um, we put the cost
of elections in our base budget
every you know insane increase,
depending on the year. So again,
the purpose of this is just to
create that stability, create a
predictability and and, um, that
funding will be there will
always come to the Legislature
for authorization for how we
spend that money and we have
other accountable, Madam chair
and just thank you.
We have three people signed up
in support, because we still
have quite a bit on our agenda.
I'm going to ask you to keep
your comments to one minute or
less. Uh, we'll start with Mason
Graham.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair
Members Committee. My name is
Mason Grandma, the policy
director for a common cause. New
Mexico.
In order for our elections to
remain accessible and secure. We
have to ensure that our
secretary of state and county
clerks have adequate resources
and when our elections are
properly funded with voters and
poll workers experiences a
smooth and easy process that
builds and maintains trust in
our elections, and for that
reason we asked for it to pass
on. SB one await. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for your
brevity.
Santa Fe clerk, Clark
Thank you, Um Santa Fe County
Clerk Katherine Clark. Um,
funding is absolutely essential
to make sure that we can
continue to run elections and
when we don't know where the
funding source comes from, we
tend to be conservative and not
make improvements, right? We're
worried about the future when we
can plan five or 10 years ahead.
We can make sure we upgrade
equipment. We can make sure you
plan in advance. I would. I
would like to note that
For the first time in 20 years,
the House suggested getting rid
of harbor money, which is the
federal source of funding. So if
we want to continue to have well
run elections in New Mexico, we
should pass this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, Dona Ana County Clerk
Doctor Lopez Askin.
Good morning, madam Chair.
My apologies. Uh, committee? Can
you help you? Amanda Lopez,
asking Dona Ana County clerk. I
Alright, there we go Better.
Um, I'm here. Also in support of
this, I would like to reiterate
that
With elections becoming
increasingly high profile and
heading into 2024. I think this
really doubles down the support
of free and fair elections and
ensures the secretary of state
can focus on the many duties and
supporting our county staff so
we would appreciate your support
and thank the sponsors for their
support on this, bill. Thank
you.
Oh, thank you. Just anyone in
the audience want to raise their
hand to indicate support?
Just all right. Got a couple
back there. Does anyone want to
raise their hand to indicate
opposition?
Seen? None. Assume, Miss
Bachmann. You weren't actually
raising your hand in opposition.
Oh,
Mm hmm. Questions from the
committee Senator RTZ Pinot.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Just
two quick questions, senator and
and Madam Secretary. Um
Firstly the what do we pay out
of that fund? Do we pay for
these runoff elections at some
local governments have now that
we have
We've incorporated all of that
work school boards, right? Even
school boards into the repaying
for the For all of those costs
out of this fund as well, Madam
Chair and Senator, it is for all
elections.
City Council mayor, school
boards, tax districts, etcetera,
so everything but and and men
chairman. So when a we just had
a run off and burn Leer County
in Albuquerque, the city of
Albuquerque for
A
City Council seat and it cost I
don't know, like $300,000
400,000 dollars to do that, and
they got all of
They got half about half of what
they got in the in the original
election for this runoff.
But you don't have any control
over there. You couldn't for
example, say, if you're going to
spend this money, you really
have to go to this. What do they
call it? The
The one that last cruises used
the
Yes, Madam. Chair Senator ranked
choice. Voting? No, we can't
choice. Yeah, mandate that, But
we're certainly, you know,
encourage to do that.
Okay. So last year, Madam
Chairman, you got 20 almost $22
million.
Inter appropriation was that
You would have. You wouldn't
just wouldn't have helped you.
Um
So been short, I guess is what
I'm saying. Madam chair, Senator
it. You know, we're okay. We're
we've gotten a lot better and to
budget for them. Um, but you
know, when you're past Madam
Transgender, I mean, we've had
to go before Board of finance to
to cover those gaps, and that's
the kind of thing we're trying
to avoid in the future. So,
Madam chairman, then this is
this a hard figure that will
just stay. 20 million
From here on out, because I mean
That's the goal. Madam Chairman,
Senator, I'm sorry.
Hear from my looks.
Oh, no, We're here in trouble.
Honest.
Ah, um So I think that the so we
can come to you and say this is
how much and then with the
trigger in effect, if if we if
we do end up short, Madam chair
And Senator due to
unpredictability. We we need to
pull additional funds from from
that. That was my point. So you
still have that fall back if you
need, Okay. Thank you, madam
Chairman.
Thank you other members.
That's under Stewart, then
Senator Moore's
Then Pirtle, then I've
Sure I was going to make the
motions. You can come back.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. So you spent $22
million out of this fund last
year.
Um, but you also got money in
from the local governments.
Correct mountain that because
you are allowed to take state
money and the local government
money, So help me walk through
that. Basically where I'm going,
is how we got 22 to $20 million
figure you spend $22 million,
but I know you have other
sources of revenue y $20 million
Um So, Madam Chair Senator. It's
a little bit complicated because
again it goes to Yes, we have
this election fund established,
but we haven't been using it.
For that purpose. We don't
actually take in funds anymore.
Sessions ago, All of these
elections became paid for, um,
so originally that funding in
and to combine it now, now what
we're trying to do is say, Okay,
this is the fun that I'll
elections are paid for out of,
and it's not part of our
operating budget, So we're
trying to separate that out. So
what you've seen in the past is
That election money going into
our operating budget and and
seeing it kind of do this,
depending on whether we have two
elections here.
Statewide.
So, um, that we've gotten to a
point where we can say roughly
an election cost. Um, and that's
where the 20 million comes from,
because in any given fiscal
year, we can have up to two
statewide elections. Ma'am
chairs secretary. So to when you
say to you talking about the
general and and a primary, one
of those in election, and so,
for example, in the fiscal year
we're currently in regular local
election in primary. Got it, And
so we're just taking our
surplus, senator.
Er and just putting it into this
fund.
And it's not giving you any new
powers suspect. So if it's safe
analogy fund that
We can actually then go back and
raid during rainy Day fund.
Correct. I mean, that's what we
do in the Red Raiders shirt.
This is a Lobo jacket. Red
Raiders. You look behind you
Wrong state. You'll see that all
the dashing men in the room are
wearing. This must have been a
sailor must have been a sale at
Walmart or something.
You know how hard I had to look
online to fight us done? Yeah,
anyway, so this is no different
than creating all those other
funds. We have off road vehicle
fund and yada yada yada, But we
do Can we do a number of living
in our power to go back and
collect that money? If we do
like we had to last time during
the rainy days? No, we're not
limiting. We're not changing
anything in statute.
I mean, if you look at the cycle
and and you see what happens in
2022, they were negative, so
they didn't have a balance, so
to operate funds. That's why he
said he had to go to the border
finance and say We need
emergency money when they don't
have the authority to go into
this funding appropriated for
any other superfluous but for
elections, And so she's not be
able to access, I suppose,
basically taking them off the
board of Finance. Um
For this, okay? Some other
agencies and they just over a
different story. Madam Chair,
Senator. Appreciate Thank you,
Secretary and you do run good
elections.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
wanted to point out we spent 15
minutes on a four page bill.
So that's four minutes.
Per page.
And then we just passed a bill
225 pages in two hours, and
there was a complaint. That's 32
seconds per page.
So I just wanted to point out to
the body. You know, it's our
duty. We're flushing. Um, all
the issues out. I think this is
a good piece of legislation.
Um and we've spent an ample
amount of time on it.
But
To try to stifle debate is, um,
well violates the rules. One
Hey, we don't address this in
our rules and masons section 10
to
the okay, Go ahead floor. Um
We don't stifle debate in the
Senate. Um it's our duty to the
public.
To discuss issues at full length
if we need to don't know of any
other past chair of this
committee in the 12 years that
I've been here
That have done such a thing.
And I think it's just a bad
precedent. I know everybody's in
a hurry to get their bills
passed and done. We have a duty
to the public.
To ask questions when we get the
secretary of state in front of
us or when we have secretaries
of departments in front of us. I
know we have their their
cellphones and and whatnot. We
can ask questions, but
Um, the public demands that of
us to do these things, and it's
just sets a bad precedence.
And, um Mason's does say that
debate is more open.
Because we do have a job and a
duty.
To do what we need to, um and so
hopefully moving forward. We're
not going to take 225 bills and
pass them to see what's in them.
Because that's that's a policy
that I don't think is is proper
or best interests of the public.
Thank you.
And Senator, Uh, Mason section
102 member has a right to speak
only once on a proposal. Uh and
if if folks are going to
Use.
Uh, speaking for a long time on
matters as a way for us to avoid
us doing the work of the people
and the state and I will stop
recognizing folks to speak for a
second time.
Senator Baca. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I, um I you know, I you
know, that's never been a
practice here, and there are
some other rules that maybe we
should hear, such as the, um
starting starting and conduct in
this committee without a quorum.
That committee handbook, But
with that I do have questions on
the bill.
And so, uh,
One question I have is, is this
Is this a recurring amount or is
it just this year? Is this a
recurring amount or is it just
this year? It'll be recurring to
the cost of the election.
Election only cost 5 million.
There's 20,000,005 million will
get replenished cycle maybe 13
million.
The only be seven. It'll fill
back up. It's just a rotating. I
see. So so the fund so Miss
Madam Chair and Senator, so the
fund is created and the fund is
replenished. So essentially,
it's going to be recurring at
some, uh, amount that cannot be
determined. On this day. I guess
we'll just year over year. Um,
um you you chose 20 million for
some reason.
Um, well, why was 20 million
shows Why wasn't 50 Million or 5
million or
Whatever.
We're testing the waters. The
average right is turning the
cyber security issue to be
So, so the plan then is just to
kind of let's see what this 20
million dozen there. There
possibly could be a reduction in
the funding.
You know, Senator, she said she
runs two
Answers and I apologize, Senator
Buck I didn't even have you on
the list and just assumed the
senator, Senator Nibert was was
next on the left. Uh,
Did you? Thank you, Madam Chair
just a couple of questions.
There's a general fund budget go
down because we're creating this
fund.
Madam chair in
Madam secretary, Senator,
neighbor. Um, it is probably
after election cycle this year.
We're probably after the primary
well general in November if
there's a drawdown or budget her
for this year, but in the
following year into
automatically fill up and so
that election
Madam Sharon and
Senator.
Tax and Rev had several comments
regarding this, and I just
wanted to know. Uh they were
concerned about the
Notification issue that maybe
there's agencies not notified of
what it would be. And then their
second, uh, comment was to
I have a date certain when
Just, uh, event is to occur when
the deadline is to occur, and
they were concerned with
With maybe not having enough
clarity. And so I just wanted to
know.
Have you addressed those with
the tax and Rev Department or
Is there something we need to do
in the bill to address those
concerns? Center, right? I think
you're correct. But we don't
know the date of disable. Here's
our full building costs, right?
You don't know that timeline in
that secretary. And so it's hard
to say, you know, 30 days
afterwards, we'll have those
dates try to time.
Well, Madam Chair and senator
then
Would you be sending several
draws on that, Uh, fund?
Based on maybe the first. Uh
Amount of money that they
they're wanting, reimbursed for
and then later on, they send
another request that it costs
more than we thought it was
going to, or
Um, Madam Turin Center. I think
just manatees. We don't
anticipate this being in terms
of constantly refilling the fund
once we've taken anything out,
and we'd come to you at the
beginning, you know, before the
fiscal year during the, um if
there's if there's over edges
from the previous quickly and
then we'll ask for that. The fun
to be refilled back costs that
were realized so
Hopefully, you know, this won't
be a constant back and forth
with tax and revenue, Madam
chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Removed.
Okay. We have a motion for a do
passes to Rojo vote.
Senator Baca. Senator Baca
votes. Yes, Senator Lopez. Yes,
Senator Lugar.
Senator Lopez votes. Yes,
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Morris. Senator Morris votes?
Yes, Senator Nyberg, Senator
Nyberg votes? Yes, Senator or
TCP? No. Yes, Senator. RTZ Pinot
votes. Yes, Senator. Pirtle,
Senator. Portal votes. Yes,
Senator Stefan IX.
Senator Stefanik votes. Yes,
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart Boats. Yes,
Senator. Her or me? Oh, yes,
Senator. Harmony about Yes.
Senator do Hig? Yes, Senator. Do
it votes? Yes, A unanimous do
pass Senator Lopez to explain
their vote.
Madam chair, Just a notice A
note for our secretary of state
to wish you a happy birthday.
Yeah.
We wouldn't see her so happy
birthday.
Alright. The committees
committee has been pushed back
to 1045. So we are going to do
Senate Bill 137. And that will
be the last bill we get to
today.
Senator Go ahead.
Thank you, madam. Chair of this
bill is a coming out of the
Legislative Education Study
Committee working with the
school board Associations.
Elliot C e. D and the governor.
This bill will improve our
school boards right now. We
don't have any training
requirement instead shoot.
Let's put Santa training
requirement of 10 hours.
First year each school board
members elected and five hours
for each year after that, it
lays out best practices of what
that training should entail.
It requires that our new Mexico
vistas that's her p e D, uh,
website include who's had the
training and who has not.
We don't have any punishment for
not getting the training, but we
certainly are going to
advertise who has it and who has
not so voters and members in
each district can decide what
they do with that right now for
us for campaign reports for
school board
Uh, it's set at $500. If you
spend more than that, and you're
in one of the larger districts,
you have to file report. We've
changed it so that it's $1000.
If you spend less than $1000,
you don't have to report if you
spend 1000
More you do, and that's for all
school board members and and
share that is essentially, Bill.
I'm happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator. We did not
have anyone sign up and support
or opposition. Some folks did
email email in, uh, support and
we're having copies of those,
uh, handed out to made for the
members right now.
Uh um, questions from the
committee.
Oh, sorry, Senator Sparks you
already on the list? I apologize
and thank you for bringing this
forward. I had talked with my
school board members, and many
of them had in fact been
participating in training. But
my questions are really about
The Webcast, and then I have a
second one. After that, I think
that we have
Connectivity issues in some of
our rural areas, So could you
comment on that?
Madam. Sure, Bill. Also a
requires thank you for reminding
me that there is some video and
audio webcasting required from
school board members, but
You know if you doesn't work,
and the technology doesn't work,
it doesn't work. You know, we
hope people will work on that so
that they can be online. But you
know you you have to do some
type of all over the state
determining policy for all of
our school district. So, uh, we
want them to be recorded and
kept
On their website the same way we
do. It's on the last page those
webcasting
Requirements.
Thank you, Madam Chair in
Senator, I totally get that We
want to do this transparency.
Um, the second one.
Was about
Prohibiting or prohibiting
school boards from terminating a
superintendent with out cause
within 60 days, So I haven't had
this situation. Madam Chair,
Senator
Where, um
Individual, uh, superintendents
might have had a
Colored past.
And all of the substantive
background didn't come in in
those 1st 60 days, but it was
I'm talking about sexually
harassing Children.
Um, but it had been, uh, well
known within a community, but
they didn't have the paperwork.
Substantiated that
Now that would be
Without cause because it would
be hearsay.
Wouldn't we want to
Provides safety for our
Children if we heard something
like that.
Man chair. Um, you can hire and
fire superintendents anytime.
This provision for the 60 days
is to give. Uh the idea behind
you can't just elect school
board members and have them
immediately Discharges
Superintendent, which is what
Um, has happened.
Not much. Not much, though.
That information was out that
person could be fired. Okay.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Senator
Nibert.
Thank you, Madam Sharon and
Senator
I, too was concerned about that
provision because I thought it
was odd that we are restricting.
What is really the major job of
the school board? That's the
higher fire. The superintendent.
Uh,
I'm very
I mean, most of the other things
that the school board does is
somewhat
Or 53, because
The E D is heavy down. Uh, all
the other things, So I just
thought it was odd that we were
were trying to title their hands
in that regard, but I guess
If I can imagine what the
purposes is. Allow the
superintendent to prove
themselves to the new score.
school board members before they
take action, and not, uh,
Understanding on my part, Madam
Chair, Senator, partially, um,
when you get an elected school
board that's brand new members
have had no training, who
perhaps are just going with what
some constituents want. This is
just a palms.
It's just a 60 day pause for
them to start getting their
training. Start getting
acclimated, working with others
not just coming in and saying
No, you're done.
So it's just a 60 Day Pops
Madam chair in Senator, the, um
I've seen some elections where
the platform of the candidate is
to taste the very action that we
would be prohibiting here, so
just a pause, just a 60 day
pause. Give them just enough
time.
Firing someone on day 62 is up,
obviously allowed.
And then, uh,
Gives the school board member
new School board member Madam
Chair and Madam president.
Does not go through this
training.
What happens to that school
board member? Are they subject
to a fine Are they subject to
removal from office or are they
are completed it? What is the C
any recourse there if they
Either refused or madam chair.
There is not any recourse that
you just mentioned. It's that
their name is published on New
Mexico vistas and on their own
decide it's not having had the
train.
Um, I guess, uh, boards are
their own little elected bodies
and they can certainly put
pressure on people to get
training. They can decide not to
elect someone as chair who
hasn't had training so we're we
don't want to be, you know, big
arm of Santa Fe. We did not put
punishment in here except for
the closure.
And transparency.
Although madam share, Madam
president, we do say it's
mandatory.
We do. It is mandatory. It's
mandatory, but
Only if they want to lunch.
Thank you, Madam Senator Pirtle.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um
I do have a few questions and I
do have the same issue that
senator neighbor
Just brought up where it's
mandatory.
Without punishment is just a
suggestion.
Um and I find that quite
interesting. I understand the
desire to make something
mandatory, but I really I really
feel like this, um, doing the
training. But anyway, that's
For another day, I guess because
we're in a hurry to get through
this bill. Um
My issue is on page 14. It's the
Section seven.
And I'm just wondering
How some of our smaller charter
schools, um, are going to be
able to comply with the video
Webcast really just the
maintenance of their Web page to
do this. Is there going to be
funding provided? Um, Is there
something to to some of these
schools because some of them are
quite small and may not be able
to comply with this Is it going
to then interfere with their
charter? I mean,
What? What issues would come if
they weren't able to comply with
this section.
Madam Chair, Senator.
You know, since the pandemic
we're all online you have to be.
Teachers are online districts
are online.
People have this technology.
So you know if you're very, very
small, and you need help, ped
will give you help.
E D has all kinds of
departments I teach. The idea is
to have this body that's in
control of the school district
to be accessible and to have it
the clearly functional and have
people be able to see that and
if they have issues, they'll get
help from P. E. D.
And I'm reading as well, madam.
Sure. What's the punishment if
they don't comply with this
section
Again, Madam Chair. This is an
accountability and transparency
issue. We're not putting
punishment in here. Schools
don't do well with punishment.
They do much better with we'd
like you to do this and you have
money to do it. And there you
all are online. So please follow
the requirements from P. E. D.
Thank you, Madam. Chair,
Senator.
Um
I do have
Just some
Question two. How, um, the
training will be administered.
Is it going to be allowable to
then catch up? Kind of like some
of our training?
Madam Chair and senator where,
if for
Circumstance outside of your
control to be able to come into
compliance. Even if you miss the
the time window of taking the
train, Manchester Senator this
training happens all the time.
It's not like you have to go in
this certain time. It's run
mostly by the school boards with
the contract from P. E. D.
So these trainings are flexible
and they're offered multiple
times. So there is not a Oh, you
missed it. Two hours here.
You're in default. That's not
the way it works.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I'm I'm gonna
vote. No.
And not because I think if it's
going to be merely a suggestion
that it should be something
that's provided. I really have
an issue as an elected body,
really getting too much into
other elected bodies business.
Um you know these individuals,
whether we like them or not, or
what they stand for were elected
by their constituents.
And, um, you know if if they
feel like they need to take
training to be an effective
member of the school board, I
think it should be 100%. It may
just be a philosophical
difference between yourself and
I, but I feel you know, we can
at least think that respectfully
and and we're, um you know,
flushing it out here, and I do
appreciate that that we're able
to make those points for our
public back home and
Um, you know, they don't miss
out on these discussions. I just
want to appreciate you for
bringing this bill and moving
Committees Committee back so
that we could have a full open
discussion about this
legislation. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Senator Baca. Thank you, Madam
chair and, uh, to have some
reservations about word. My
question, Madam. Who? Who's
request Was this to bring
forward Who? Madam chair? This
is a bill that we've been
working on for several years. In
Senator Baca. Thank you, Madam
Chair and, uh, to have some
reservations about word. My
question, Madam. Who? Who's
request Was this to bring
forward Who? Madam chair. This
is a bill that we've been
working on for several years and
the interim legislative that can
find a
Legislative education study
Committee. Um, we worked at the
school boards on this we worked
with, uh, staff at the Elliot C.
We worked with P E. D. So this
is a compilation bill from all
of those folks jokey in would be
here today, but he's in D. C. He
called me yesterday chatted with
me.
He's in support of this, Uh
although there's no organized
support. There's plenty online,
including Albuquerque Chamber. I
believe so, um, we I I believe
and the reason I agreed to carry
it is that I believe we need
better training. Um and we need
to have training for everybody.
So that's really the main key
point. The reason that I brought
this forward
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator. I, um I meet
annually with my school board in
my district and, uh, you know,
every year I'll just say that,
um
They they
Push back, I'll see.
Against Santa Fe, Um, regulating
them in any way and they, they
they cringe at the how we're
pushing on local control, and so
We spoke about a few things this
year like we do every year. Um,
but
This was the main topic and
point of not being told by Santa
Fe.
What to do in their district.
Um, and it was echoed as well by
our superintendent down there,
Even he agreed. And I think that
I I know I myself based on that.
I believe in. I believe in the
fact that they are elected in
small districts all over by by
people.
That think they can do the job
And if they're not doing their
job, then they get booted out of
office. So because of that, um
that this type of thing would
actually stifle certain people
from. Additionally I would say
that people that attend school
boards and run for this office
many times, and there's at least
three or four citizens in
Uh, retired from military,
different things. And and so I'm
not exactly sure that
instituting, uh
Standard across these types of
30 years and now becomes they
will always know much more than
a layperson. And so so those are
just some of my hesitations. I
do appreciate the the thought,
and I did see this happen to
disagree with them as well.
Thank you. I had Senator
Hermione next on the list.
Madam Chair of motion for do
Pass.
I think we still have two more
to speak. So Senator Morris than
Senator mechanic, So my
understanding and I get a head
nod that this does include a
charter schools.
Manchuria and I have different
experience with our school
boards. This includes all the
little small It does. Thank you
for clarifying that, Um and I
pray I like the concept because
for us and a P s, um so I assume
they would still get their per
diem have to do the training.
A man chair. We're not changing
anything else. Um, And so I I
from an A P s perspective. I I
agree with you. I just have a
little bit different than we
are.
So I'll leave that alone. I
think you understand. That's the
question I had was about the
campaign reporting. Um why are
we since I've been here that we
actually created that campaign
reporting for school boards? Why
are we going from 500 to 1000?
Uh, madam Chair.
We? We wanted to make sure
everyone had this provision and
for that reason we raised to a
to 1000 so wouldn't capture
Any of those smaller districts
that barely spend any money.
Maybe a maybe a radio spot,
Maybe an ad in the paper. Um so
we thought the $1000 would allow
a lot more freedom and flicks
because when we created this was
intended to just be for cost,
But it wasn't um, so I just
wanted to make sure that's well.
So it's just
We obviously are.
The people overhead to get them
to be on the logical
Madame Charles. Just say one
more thing And that is in 2023.
There were 61 school board
candidates filed a report.
But there are 447 school board,
Raising the amount will mean
that those smaller school boards
Senator McCain asked to be taken
off the list. So, Senator Harm
me. Oh, I think we are on a
motion We're not doing speaking
for a second time, Senator
Pirtle, Um madam chair.
Senator, you have not been
recognized. We're on emotion, So
we're going to pass a bill
without
Question that just came up.
Senator.
You have not been recognized and
we're on emotion, and you had
plenty of time to to ask your
questions and and speak prior to
this. The committees committee
which you are, and I believe our
is meeting. That's how we're
gonna do it moving forward.
Hmm. I'm not saying we're going
to do that every time but right
now, when we've already pushed
back committees committee 15
minutes. We're doing it now, so
we're not having anyone table,
All right. We have a motion to
table. Go ahead and do a roll
call vote or let's we can just
raise hands. Uh, who would like
to raise Okay? Do a roll call
vote on motion to table, Senator
Baca.
Yes, Senator Baca votes. Yes,
Senator Lopez. No. Senator Lopez
votes. No Senator McKenna. No,
Senator McKenna votes No,
Senator Moore's Senator Morris
Boats? Yes, Senator. Nibert,
Senator Nyberg votes Yes,
Senator or cheesy Pinot.
Senator or TCP. No votes. No
Senator. Purtell. Yeah, Senator.
Puerto votes. Yes, Sinners to
phonics. Senators to phonics
votes. No, Senator Stewart. No.
Senator Stewart votes No Senator
Harry Romeo. No. Harm me about
snow Senator. Do I know Senator
Do Higman boats know that motion
fails? We are back on the motion
for do pass.
Security. Have a motion on the
table, right? We already have a
motion on the table. Uh,
So we will go ahead and take the
motion for do pass call vote.
Senator Baca.
No Senator Baca votes No,
Senator Lopez.
And this is an emotion for a do
pass. Correct. Senator Lopez
votes Yes.
Senator McKenna. Yes, Senator
McKenna votes. Yes, Senator
Moore's Senator Morris votes
Yes, Senator Nibert Senator
neighbor was Snow Senator or
Jeezy Pinot. Senator Jeezy Pinot
votes? Yes, Senator Pirtle.
Explain my vote.
Senator Perrault votes. No,
Senator Stefan IX, Senator
Stefanik. So it's yes, Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart votes. Yes,
Senator Hermione? Yes. You heard
me about Yes, Senator. Do hig.
Yes, Senator. Do Higueras. Yes,
You have a do pass Senator
Pirtle to briefly explain his
vote. We're going to recess in
two minutes. And thank you,
Madam Chair. Um I did have a
simple question as to what a new
school board was, but
Unfortunately, because of your
choice of
Um, having an iron hand in this
committee, we will not know how
that will work. Um, the people
of New Mexico. Thank you.
