to present this morning, uh,
Emily Cartenbach or confirmation
as secretary of this important
department aging and long term
services. Uh, she has been
serving in this capacity since
the beginning of November, and
just a little bit about.
Uh, Ms. Carlton Bach, uh, and
we'll kind of, I'll work back
normally kind of start and work
back, but in this case, I'm
gonna start uh with her
graduation from Santa Fe High
School in 1993. She's someone
who uh is grew up here in Santa
Fe and has really made her
career here in New Mexico. Uh,
she began her work, uh,
Presbyterian medical services
in establishing rural health
clinics.
And expanding, uh, social
services and was there at
Presbyterian, um,
From 2002 to 2006.
And then she worked for aging
and long term services division
director, consumer and elder
rights march 2008, 2009.
was the acting director of New
Mexico's Office of Healthcare
reform, uh, in the summer and
fall of 2010, uh, and then
worked as the director of policy
and planning uh for the office
of secretary of Aging and Long
Term Services from October 2008
to 2011, uh, and so after that
worked both at the New Mexico
level and the national level for
the drug Policy Alliance and
really focused on health
centered approaches.
to addressing substance abuse
and uh over the years, that's
really the capacity which I have
worked with Emily during her uh
different advocacy roles there.
She's always been someone who is
accessible, I think, works in a
way that's collaborative, and I
think this is kind of a full
circle appointment for her and
we're very lucky to have her
willing to step up again in this
role. So I would yield to
Secretary designee for the
moment designee, uh, just for a
few comments upfront.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
thank you, Senator Wirth for
being my sponsor this morning.
Um, I'm really honored to be
here and to be considered to be
the cabinet secretary for aging
and long-term Services
Department. I want to thank the
governor for her confidence in
me and to the incredible staff
at aging and long term Services.
They've been, um, you know, they
serve our community with
compassion and care every day. I
know some of them are here
today, I just wanna thank this
amazing team, they've been
really.
welcoming and helped taught me
so much even in the short 3
months I've been here. Um, I
grew up in a family of educators
and advocates, designers and
builders in a rural community
just south of Santa Fe, uh,
where my brothers and I played
in the arroyos and the pinon
trees for hours. We had to ride
a a bus, school bus, uh, an hour
each way, um, it was an
incredible, uh, childhood, maybe
not the school bus part, but it
was, it was, uh, I.
I loved it, um, but it was also
a community where I saw
firsthand how uh and this
impacts many of our rural
communities, the lack of access
to services and social supports
and, and the impact it had, um,
on our families and that really
shaped my interest in public
health and rural health and in
community health.
Um, as mentioned, some of you
know I was with the aging
department, um, in the early
2000s and I helped set up the
aging and uh disability Resource
Center and learned about a lot
of the programs across the
department and so it really
feels great to be back home
there.
as mentioned, um, to this
appointment, I, I really
Spent my time advocating and
listening intently to
communities and I was fortunate
to work with men of you as the
senator mentioned on
legislation, but also spent a
lot of time shaping policy that
was grounded in those that are
most impacted and listening um
to the community, and I, I
really hope to bring that
perspective, uh, back to the
department as I serve in this
capacity. When I was with the
department in 2006, we were just
starting to realize the
significant impact.
impact that the growth on the
population of those over 65 was
gonna have on our state and
those projections continue to
bear out, in fact, in just 5
years in Mexico is gonna be, um,
projected to be the 10th highest
in the nation for our population
over 65, um, and it's gonna
impact our most rural and
frontier, uh, counties, the same
areas of our state that also are
struggling with the lack of
accesses um of services and
support.
And so this is the challenge I
face as I step into this new
role, and I'm committed to
ensuring that the department
helps New Mexicans age in place
safely and with dignity, and
this will require us to expand
support for informal caregivers
who are the backbone of our long
term care system. I'm sure many
of us in this room are
caregivers, whether that's
caring for a parent, a child, a
spouse or a neighbor, and uh I
was astounded to learn that in
New Mexico there are 200.
70,000 informal caregivers.
That's probably an undercount.
If we stop for a moment, that's
about 10% of our population are
serving, um, older adults,
adults living with disabilities,
that translates into about 250
million caregiver hours every
year.
So that's an impressive economic
value, but those millions of
unpaid care, uh, can often
create a lot of strains and
stress on our caregivers,
whether that's financially,
whether that's emotionally or
physically. And so this is an
area I really plan to focus on
as I step into this role, is
making sure that we're lifting
up and supporting our informal
caregivers around the state.
There's so many other areas of
importance in the department
from strengthening the
Resource Center to making sure a
long term care ombudsman, uh,
staff are visiting those
facilities, protecting
residents' rights, making sure
there's quality of care. Um, we
need to be focused on dementia
and Alzheimer's, because we know
that, uh, is going to be growing
with our growing older
population, behavioral health
issues, hunger, uh housing, we
have a lot of older adults
living on the streets,
supporting grandparents, raising
grandchildren, um, and
adding loneliness and isolation,
which uh is a significant
concern coming out of um the
pandemic.
And so all these issues are
critical for us building a
future in which all New Mexicans
can age with dignity and
independence and joy, and I'm
committed to the hard work. Uh,
I look forward to serving this
agency and serving New Mexican
families and uh look forward to.
Being the next Secretary of
aging and long-term Services. So
thank you. Thank you so much. So
we do 15 minutes of your
introduction, which includes
your organized support, and I
have several people that I'm
gonna call up. There's 2 who are
via Zoom. I'm gonna give them 2
minutes each. I'm gonna ask for
Rachel O'Connor, Larry Martinez,
and Karen Wells to come up, and
you can go ahead and speak on
behalf.
Of the appointee, if you're
here. And although I've stated
your name, if you'll restate
your name for the record.
There's the microphone right
behind.
And so you have 2 minutes each
and then I'll go to those who
run Zoom. Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name's
Rachel O'Connor. I'm a
behavioral health consultants,
but prior to that, I was the
director of community services
for Santa Fe County and prior to
that worked um as a policy
advisor in the Richardson
administration.
It's very much my honor to be
here today to support Emily.
In this uh very important
position.
I first met Emily in 2010 when I
became the director of the
community services department,
she was starting what is really
the groundbreaking, um, law
enforcement assisted diversion
in Santa Fe County and in
partnership with the city of
Santa Fe.
And I quickly learned the
incredible skills that Emily has
that I think are important for
this position.
And I also oversaw a senior
services program and New Emily's
experience there. I think she
has all the qualities that make
a good cabinet secretary. She's
smart. She has experience in
working with government is very
sophisticated in terms of her
ability to impact policy and
budget, and she has a
significant experience in
community organizing in
partnership and
and content areas related to
seniors and their needs in New
Mexico.
I urge you to support her. Thank
you. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Larry Martinez.
Um, I served uh for 27 years in
New Mexico state government
serving as deputy secretary for
the Department of Health as well
as the then Human Services
Department, now the Healthcare
Authority.
And uh I retired in 1999 and
went to work for Presbyterian
Medical Services, and that's
when I had the opportunity to
meet this young, ambitious,
smart, skilled, and passionate
individual named Emily
Kaltenbach. She became my
colleague then, before she left
to return to state government,
uh, at the aging long-term
Services department.
And I had the opportunity to
work with her then in that
capacity, and when I retired in
1999, uh, uh, rather in uh 2024
from state government, right? I
lost a quarter of a century
there. So I'm giving away my
age.
And I, I really wish I knew what
Emily's secret is because she's
remains young, uh, some of the
rest of us aren't so successful,
but uh I served.
Uh
On the task force that Mayor
Alan Weber of Santa Fe, City of
Santa Fe appointed to address
the substance abuse problems in
our community.
And uh
Beyond her passion and her
hardworking skills and her
experience, I learned that she
had organizational skills that I
could not believe.
We were a very diversified
committee because we had law
enforcement individuals, legal
people, physical and health care
therapists. We had uh addiction
specialists. We had stakeholders
and advocates serving on this
committee. It was one of the
most diverse committees I ever
served on.
And we came forward with some
very substantive recommendations
for the city to adopt with
respect to substance abuse, and
she did the most wonderful job
in hurting all of us cats. Thank
you, Mr. Martinez. OK, and uh
I'll just end off by saying
there's no one who is more
skilled or experienced or uh in
a better position to serve in
this wonderful state agency than
Emily. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Secretary,
members of the committee. My
name is Karen Wells, and I
actually met Emily when she was
18 years old, and it was her
first job. We were both working
at Presbyterian Medical
Services, and we ended up
sharing an office where we got
to know each other. I will tell
you that at 18 years old with no
time flat, she was completely in
charge of the massive federal
grant program that supported all
the HQHCs around the state of
New Mexico, which was the
hallmark
of uh Presbyterian Medical
Services, I think still is that
they take care of rural
communities and, and so she and
I immediately bonded and have
been friends ever since. We also
crossed paths again when I went
to work at the Aging and
Long-term Services department,
and she and I had offices right
around the corner from each
other and uh constantly
communicated with each other
about the work we were doing and
what we were getting on with,
uh, needless to say, we have
remained friends and have been
in contact.
in a lot of different ways. Now,
as many of you know, I'm an
analyst for the House Health and
Human Services Committee. This
is my 9th year doing that. Prior
to that, I worked about 15 or 20
years I've lost track, kind of
in and out for the legislative
council service.
So she's my go to person on so
many things. I call her up and
say, I have this bill. I don't
know what it means, and the next
thing I know I have paperwork
that I can copy and put in my
analysis and she's so quick, so
smart, so devoted to everything
that she does and has been a
wonderful friend all these
years, and I am very, very
honored to stand here and
support her uh nomination to be
the secretary, cabinet Secretary
of Aging and Long-term Services.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
and we have 2 online who will
also have 2 minutes each, I have
representative Deborah
Armstrong, as well as James
Jimenez, if you can pull them up
from Zoom and they, you each
have 2 minutes. Good morning,
representative.
Good morning. I'm sorry, I'm not
there uh in person. I'm a
full-time caregiver for my
mother. So I, I understand what
uh Emily was talking about in
the, in the number of people
caregiving. Um, it's my great
honor and privilege to be here,
uh, to join you this morning in
support of Emily Caltenbach as
secretary of Aging and Long-term
Services, uh, like, um, Karen
Wells, I met uh Emily when she
was uh
in college, uh, and she interned
at Presbyterian Medical Services
where I was um uh assigned to uh
work with her and um was so
impressed. She was working on uh
health policy. It was her
interest and serving rural
communities and she fit in, um,
so wonderfully and we had such
um uh good working relationship.
She's so bright and
personable. And so when like
years later, when I was
secretary of aging and long-term
services. I stole her from
Presbyterian Medical Services
and brought her to the aging
department. Um, and, uh, was,
uh, so,
privileged to have her join us.
She was, she's just remarkable
in her um relationship building
with people who understanding
her brightness, quick to
understand the uh issues, she's
organized and it was just my
privilege and delight to have
her there. Um, later, uh, as
she, uh, moved on to um the Drug
Policy Alliance. I was still in
touch with her and
Uh, work with her as a
legislator.
Uh, and carrying some of the uh
or supporting some of the
legislation that she was working
on with um the drug Policy
Alliance
and uh
thank you. Mr. Jimenez.
There we go. I had to unmute,
uh, Madam Chair and now Mr.
Chairman, my name is James
Jimenez.
I'm here to testify in support
of Emily's nomination to be
Secretary of Aging and Long-Term
Services Department.
As many of you know, I served as
a DFA secretary as well as chief
of staff to Governor Richardson,
so I feel like I've learned a
bit about of the qualities
necessary for excellence in the
position of cabinet secretaries.
I have no hesitation in saying
that Emily has all of those
qualities. I've known Emily for
many years and worked with her
in a nonprofit sector doing
advocacy to improve the lives of
New Mexico's families. As a
native New Mexican, she has deep
appreciation.
for the strength and beauty of
our culture.
And she knows the values our
elders bring.
In helping to raise stronger
families.
As you can see from a resume,
Emily is very qualified for this
position, and I think she is an
excellent choice. However, what
the resume doesn't tell you is
anything about her personality,
as you've heard, working with
Emily is a delight. I found her
to be very thoughtful and a
terrific listener. She knows how
to evaluate complex issues, how
to ask probing questions in the
ways that are focused on seeking
answers, not necessarily on
winning or losing.
I feel like Emily's calm
confidence is a perfect fit for
the department that addresses
the needs of our senior
citizens, and I strongly urge
you to support Emily's
nomination to be the next
secretary of agent long-term
Services. Thank you. Thank you.
Now we've reached our time for
the introduction, but I want the
record to show that there was
one other person who signed up,
and that's Vincent Vargas of the
New Mexico Health Care
Association. Although we won't
hear from him, we'll, we'll let
the record show that he was also
in support. I'm gonna go to
members of the committee.
room if you can raise your hand
if you're in support of this
nominee.
Oh.
I'm gonna say the whole room.
Anyone online in favor of the
nominee.
Anyone in the committee room in
opposition of the nominee if you
can raise your hand.
Singan any online?
And with that, I'm gonna go to
the committee for questions.
Senator Black.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Wirth for
sponsoring and.
Uh thank you, Emily. It's.
Not quite sure what the split of
the crowd was in your support,
but I'm gonna.
So it was uh pretty much a close
call.
I
Um, I want to thank you also for
coming to my office and and
talking to me, I appreciate
that.
Uh, uh, very much and look
through your resume, um.
Well rounded
Like your drug past, not taking
it, but you're working with,
with, with that stuff, working
those issues.
Um, some of the issues, concerns
facing seniors today, I just
want to get your thoughts real
quick if you don't mind.
Uh, health care costs.
Physical aging.
Physical assistance.
Financial security.
And uh and loneliness.
And you mentioned that New
Mexico will be in the top 10.
Or I assume it's percentage of
people that are seniors, um,
very soon because I think right
now when I looked.
number 12.
So we're, we're an aging state.
Um
Which is, uh, which brings some
challenges to New Mexico.
So if you could just tell me,
because looking at
Some data. It's a little dated.
And I think this is totally
different now, but it's over
$20,000 was the average
healthcare cost for individuals
that are 65 and older.
And that was almost 3 times that
of a working age individual.
Which is roughly about 7, 7000
so.
Uh, what can you do in your
position to help.
Uh, mitigate those costs and
reduce those costs for our
seniors in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator, I appreciated our
conversation as well, um, thank
you for bringing up the, uh, the
concern around costs.
I want to go back actually to
the time I was with the
department in 2006, we worked on
an elder economic security
index, where folks could
actually put in, um, their data
where they lived, um, whether
they owned a home, whether they
had health issues, and it would
show what you needed to have
every year to be able to be
financially secure and support
your health, and, you know, when
you plug those numbers in from
New Mexico, it's quite alarming,
um, because
So many of our older adults are
on fixed incomes. They don't
have the resources and supports
in their community, and, um,
they don't have the financial
means, um, to
Get the 24 hour home care or uh
the facility and so you bring up
a really important part, uh,
point. I'm really proud to help
expand a program at the aging
and long-term Services
department called New Mexicare,
and that program will pays,
provides financial support and
training and other support for
those informal caregivers who
are supporting their loved ones
or their neighbors in their home
and so that's one way, um, we
can.
start improving the lives of our
older adults who live at home,
because we know it's a New
Mexico value, it's part of our
culture that we keep people at
home for as long as possible. We
support them and so that's one
example, but um there are so
many ways we need to improve the
life of our older adults, New
Mexicans are not the healthiest,
uh, especially in their older
years, and, um, and so I'll be
looking to ways to to support
those individuals who, you know,
either are on Medicaid or just
above that.
off limit for Medicaid.
Thank you. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Appreciate that answer.
Um, I think we're all a little
worried about getting older and
our financial security.
I'm in my twenties, so I'm OK
for a little bit.
Um
One of the things I think is a
challenge with our seniors, not
just in New Mexico, but across
the country is.
We see a lot of grandparents
raising kids.
Is, is an issue, and we also see
a lot of family members.
Taking care of seniors at at
home.
What are your thoughts when it
comes to some type of
incentives, tax credits, some
type of incentives, um, Mr.
Chair and uh Emily.
Helping out those families that
are either raising kids as
seniors on fixed incomes with
inflation, that's been just so
high over the past few years.
As well as those families that
can't afford to send them to a
nursing home.
Or they're scared to send them
to a nursing home because some
of the quality can be
questionable.
Uh, what are your thoughts on
Tax credits, um, or other type
of incentives that the state may
be able to provide.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
uh, I will just share that New
Mexico leads the nation in the
in the percent of kinship
caregivers.
So those, many of whom are older
adults who are grandparents
raising grandchildren.
Um, I'm really happy to hear you
bring up the tax credit, in
fact, our governor, there's a
governor's bill, Senate Bill
335, um, sponsored by Senator
Padilla that provides uh tax
credits for foster families and
for legal guardians under the
kinship caregiver Act of New
Mexico, and so that is going to
be, you know, up to $6000 a year
for those families who are
providing full-time support for
those children, many of whom, as
you mentioned,
are on fixed incomes, um, and
need that extra support to care
for our children in New Mexico.
Um, there's also a bill on the
House side, House Bill 252, that
represented Perrera is
sponsoring, among others, um,
that would actually give um some
financial support to the
department to help those
grandparents raising
grandchildren, navigate the
complex um benefit system, um,
do some.
Home visits provide some uh.
Support groups and others and
also provide some legal
assistance and support for
kinship caregiving. So there are
some really great pieces of
legislation this year, um, and I
think it's really important that
we lift up those families and
those older adults who are
taking on.
Uh, the carrot, you know, some
of them are.
80s taking care of children,
some of them are experiencing
early signs of dementia
themselves and so we need to be
making sure we're protecting
those families. Thank you.
Great answer. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Emily. Uh,
just two other quick questions
here.
In, in my district in Rio
Rancho, we're seeing um
A lot of medical
Um
Providers and or a lot of
medical businesses pop up,
especially around Rust Hospital,
what we call the answers
gateway, and we have.
One of the most beautiful
assisted living and memory care
places called Morningstar there
I I took a tour of it, it's like
a cruise ship inside, I mean,
it's just it's beautiful.
Um, now that, you know, you
talked about our population
aging, just very briefly.
Tell me about how that affects
economic development and a
positive or a negative way. So
thank you, Madam Chair and
senator, um, so we don't have
enough facilities to meet the
demand in our state at the same
time, we need to make sure that
we're um.
Letting individuals live at home
with dignity as for as long as
possible and independence, um,
and to your point about economic
development, we need to build a
pipeline of direct care workers
in our state.
Um, and there are not enough
formal direct care workers to
help.
Older adults remain in their
home, and also they're not
enough direct care workers to
help those older adults who then
have to live in facilities and
so, um, that's a an emerging um
area where we can be training
our young people to become
direct care workers, um, that
would be good for our state to
be able to have opportunities,
economic opportunities, um, so
that they don't, young people
aren't leaving the state for
other opportunities, and so
there's definitely
for um our younger adults to get
into the field of aging. We
don't have enough geriatricians
in our state, um, and other
healthcare providers, and so I
see that as um uh opportunity to
improve our economic
development. Thank you.
Thank you, I'm for the answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The one, the one issue, and I
don't disagree with you, but
it's very tough to.
Recruit for this particular
career field because the jobs
don't really pay that much.
Uh, and that's, that's an issue,
and that's why I think a lot of
these are.
Going on, you know, unfilled and
that's a danger to.
The clients or patients or
whatever you wanna call them.
Uh, lastly,
Oversight
We have seen
Uh, Mr. Chair and Emily, we've
seen uh across the nation issues
with, uh, nursing homes and
aging care facilities.
In regards to some really des
despicable things that have
happened.
Uh, how does your agency fit
into the oversight of some of
these um nursing homes or
assisted living places or memory
care. Madam Chair and Senator,
so our department runs the long
term care ombudsman program and
that program, um, protects
residents' rights and ensures
quality of care, but we don't
license those facilities. So the
licensing and the direct
oversight and regulations live
at the um new healthcare
authority.
Um, we work very closely with
healthcare Authority, with
Department of Health, and other
partners to ensure that quality
of care, um, the ombudsman are
both staff and volunteers who
develop relationships with the
facilities. So we have uh over
From the ombudsman perspective,
oversight of just shy of 300
facilities statewide. Those are
licensed long-term care
facilities. Those are licensed
assisted living facilities. An
ombudsmen are there for the
resident.
So if there is a concern about
safety, if there's a concern, it
could be even, you know, I was
served cold food for the last 7
days in this facility. Um, we
are there for that resident and
for that resident's family and
so that we can work with the
facilities, we can identify
serious concerns we can work
with our partners at HCA who
might then um have to engage in
investigation of those
facilities. Um, it is critically
important that these
facilities, um, are of the
highest, held to the highest
standard and provide the best
quality of care for our older
adults and our adults living
with disabilities in our
community. And so that's how our
ombudsman program works, we,
that is an incredi that's one of
my main priorities stepping in
is that during pandemic, we lost
a lot of our volunteers and so
we need to build that program
back up, but we're committed to
ensuring um those residents.
Thank you Emily. Thank you.
I, I would, I would tend to
agree with that because.
I, I think this is one of the
most vulnerable populations, um,
that receive care, quite
frankly, you know, we have
cameras in daycares, like my
youngest daughter and all that
stuff, and you can see what's
going on.
But
You know, these are easy people
to take advantage of on, on many
aspects, and that's uh something
that that worries me cause I, I
saw it with my own grandparents
as they were getting.
Uh, up there in years, um,
towards Senator War sage.
And um
I, I worry about that because
they are
They're very, very vulnerable,
and, you know, they can get
confused and picked easy and
mistreated easily, so.
Really respect, uh, appreciate
that answer, and um,
Again, looking through your
resume, it's, it's a very
impressive and I want to thank
you for your time to come to the
office and chat with me on a few
things. And, uh, I look very
much to supporting you on the
house, on, on the Senate floor.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Chair,
Senator Wirth, and uh it's been
Many years that I've known
Emily, and it's great that you
are uh.
Ascending to this position, and
I'm sorry if I missed it in your
introduction, but could you tell
me and maybe the audience and
the committee, what some of your
plans are for the department and
I'm sorry if you already talked
about this.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator,
thank you, um, it's been great
to work with you for many years,
and I know you have a lot of
background and experience in
aging and long-term services,
so, um, thanks for, for setting
the foundation in, in New Mexico
for um for protecting these
older adults. So I talked a
little bit about, uh, supporting
our informal caregivers and
expanding that those services
and supports for them, um,
because they are.
There's so many of them who
aren't getting the financial
support and the training, uh,
emotional behavioral health,
physical support they need, um,
I, we need to uh address some of
the behavioral health issues
there are not appropriate levels
of care for behavioral health,
especially for those who need
fus facility level of care and
who have severe behavioral
health issues, um, I think
behavioral health goes under
diagnosed in the older
population, cuz it's often just
uh chalked up to.
Oh, they're just aging and they
actually have um some very uh
severe depression and anxiety
often um contributed by
loneliness, um, we need to
address hunger, uh, expand and
support, um, our aging network,
those are the senior centers,
those are the transportation
respite programs, um, and also
really focus and train on
dementia and Alzheimer's. A lot
of our healthcare workers,
whether that's in a long term
care.
facility or in hospital
settings, don't have the
training to deal with, um,
adults experiencing memory loss
issues. And so those are a few
of, um, the priorities, um, but,
um, I, there are many, but I
know that I can only focus on a
handful over the next couple of
years. OK, so, um, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, and senator, and
I'm just calling back, um.
You and I talked about the
resource center and in the past,
the research center was very
helpful to assist seniors in
Navigating healthcare
prescriptions, costs, etc. Uh,
what is the stance of, of that
research center right now.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
senator, so we get about, oh, I
think 6000 calls.
A month, I mean, it is, you
know, the number of calls
because we have, we have this
growing population, um, we
currently provide support for
open enrollment for Medicare.
Um, we do benefit counseling. We
are the central intake for the
Medicaid home and
community-based waiver program,
so we help to enroll and get
those individuals on um.
On the waiver registry. We then
also have to navigate all kinds
of questions that come in and
figure out how to, um, and where
to refer folks, but.
What I have found is that a
phone call is not enough. And so
one of my priorities is really
to make sure that the ADRC is
that central point that one door
into the department, um, and do
some warm handoffs. So in that
conversation with an individual,
we might identify that there's
some self neglect going on and
maybe that's a referral into the
adult protective services
system. Um, we may need to do
some care coordination with
MCOs, um, to get those home.
A services in place. And so, um.
It's my priority to strengthen
the ADRC, um, to make sure that
we have staff who are trained in
these complex issues and help
navigate folks. We have a great
team, um, but there's more work
to do. Thank you. So, um, Mr.
Chair, Ma'am, chair, Senator.
Uh, Emily, we, I have a bill
that um changes uh the
enrollment period for Mediap.
I'd like for you to look at.
It's an open enrollment, uh, a
birthday rule and 16 other
states have it, uh.
And 4 other states have total
open uh enrollment for Mediap.
And uh the last thing, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, is that years
ago,
I'm dating myself, I don't even
remember when we had a task
force that looked at
Um, the issue of the number of
medications that seniors were on
and the confusion or the
interactions and that they
really needed to be some
assistance for seniors.
Um, and teasing out what might
be making them dizzy or falling,
so as we talk about keeping
people safe in their own homes.
I'd like you to put that in the
back of your mind. I know you
have a lot to do.
But thank you very much. I think
you'll be excellent, uh, going
forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. um, Senator
Wirth.
Emily, thank you for coming by
the office as well. I think it
was beneficial.
Um
I read recently that New Mexico
was the only state in the union
that had a declining doctor's
population.
You have this morning.
Advocated for.
Um budsman's program and the
value of it.
But it's not.
It does not replace.
Valued medical care.
With our aging population that
you have happily.
Depicted today.
In your presentation. What are
we gonna do?
It seems like we have a wreck
coming.
And we're going to have to
address it.
And, and I would
If you can
Uh
If you can
From your point of view, look at
the problem.
What has caused it and how we
fix it, I would appreciate it.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and,
and senator, and thanks for that
conversation the other day, so
yeah, it's a complex issue, I
think, um, we definitely don't
have the specialists and the
number of providers to serve our
older adults, but to serve New
Mexicans in general, right, um,
not only do we have a, uh, a
lack of geriatricians, for
example, or behavioral health
specialists that, uh, specialize
in older adult care. We also
know that there aren't enough
child psychiatrists.
You know, um, and when we talk
about grandparents raising
grandchildren, that's really
important that we're serving the
whole family. Um,
There, you know, I'm not
necessarily an expert in, um,
all of the uh, the medical
malpractice issues around and
some of the other um.
Conversations, however, I do
think we need to think about how
we can improve and we already do
an amazing job, the University
of New Mexico, New Mexico State,
and creating um opportunities
for uh individuals to stay and
work in, you know, that they can
be trained in geriatrics, they
can live and work in New Mexico.
Um, we have, we rely
significantly on federally
qualified health centers around
this.
state to um provide care to our
rural communities, um, we need
to make sure that they are fully
funded and I'm able to recruit
and retain providers who can
serve our older adults in those
communities, um.
We
We also need to think creatively
about mobile health there are
opportunities and telehealth,
uh, opportunities so that we can
link older adults who live in
rural communities with
specialists that may be in those
urban centers, um, there are
opportunities to create mobile
health units that can go out to
those communities, um, and serve
populations that have those
specialists. Um, so I think it's
uh many different ways um to
make sure New Mexicans have
access.
to the best um qualities,
specialty care.
Thank you for that. um, Mr.
Chairman and
secretary.
I will tell you that, um,
I think it's
Probably one of the greatest.
Issues that you're gonna face.
is
Is the lack of
Expedious healthcare that aging
population in New Mexico.
Um
Many
And most, I would tell you most.
Of the people in my district go
out of state for healthcare.
Because it's
Oh
Not because it's
Necessarily cheaper, but it's
available.
And the um
and people.
First and foremost, look at
availability when crisis hits
their family.
And um I um I look forward to
working with you to help address
it, but we're gonna have to fix
it. And if we wait until we
We have a severe issue. It's,
it's, um,
Disingenuous on our part because
the data is out there. We have a
problem and we're gonna have to
fix it, and I look forward to
working with you to fix it.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Dohe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you Secretary.
Um, I wanna also thank you uh a
couple months ago. I right
before a session, I had a
situation come up with uh
An older
A friend of mine who was no
longer safe to stay in her own
home, um, and was being moved up
here to Santa Fe to live with,
uh, her grandson and
They would, uh, and, and they
didn't know what to do and we
didn't know what to do, and we
didn't know where we were gonna.
The the grandson is not a long
term option, uh, and I, I
appreciate you sitting down with
me and kind of talking through
the options, um, and it's that
situation uh includes a whole
lot of the, the issues that,
that you brought up today.
Um
This New Mexico program.
That you're working on, uh,
sounds fantastic. It is, it is
exactly what I know that family,
uh, it would make a massive
difference in that family's
lives, uh, and I think the same
is true for for New Mexicans
across our state. So I
appreciate your
You're focused in that area, um,
and just your responsiveness,
um.
I was
I was really surprised to hear
your numbers too, about.
2,270,000.
Informal caregivers across the
state, that's 10% of our
population.
That is, uh
That is shocking, yeah.
Um
I really have.
Thank you so much. Uh, secretary
Sunder.
Thank you, Senator Stephanics,
for a 2nd time.
Sure.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I moved the
appointment of Emily Colton back
to the secretary of Aging and
Long-term Services Department.
Thank you, Senator. There's been
a motion and before I go for a
roll call vote, I just have two
comments if you don't mind
Emily. Um, thank you for
visiting with me and for all
that you do to care for seniors
in the state of New Mexico. And
so we recently moved my mom back
from White Rock to Espanola is
her number one was concern was
she's starting to feel lonely in
White Rock. People in White Rock
weren't just going to senior
centers the way they did.
Before the pandemic, and she
wanted to feel closer to family
by coming back to Espanola.
There's two issues happening in
Ri Riba County, I just want you
to know about that we can chat
about later, but one is Ririba
County looks like we have a
surplus of money when it comes
to our senior centers and senior
programs. But the truth of the
matter is it's forecasted for
employees who work in those
programs. So it's really
forecasted per month that we'd
have enough to pay for their
salaries, but we're not getting
enough money to feed our seniors
and when you think that we're
north of Santa.
and we had all the way to the
Colorado border, we need these
employees to be on the ground
running and literally driving
meals, which is so sad that when
I rode with them, the only
interaction they had with anyone
was the meal being delivered to
them, so we can chat about that.
And then another is I'm thankful
for representative Era and the
legislation that she's proposed
for grandparents raising
grandchildren. And this
committee has heard me say this
before, but in the interim, I
want to work with legislation
that focuses on grandparents
raising.
grandchildren who aren't the
legal guardian. So when we have
users who might have children
who have who have dropped them
off with their grandparents that
haven't given up their rights. I
need to work on some sound
legislation that will ensure
that they can apply for programs
in the state of New Mexico, as
I've heard from grandparents who
are really tired, they need
assistance, they just don't
qualify because they're not the
legal guardian. And with that,
there's been a motion to move
you forward to a full Senate
confirmation later this morning.
I'm gonna call for a roll call
vote.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Block.
I
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos, Senator Lopez,
Senator Lopez is excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart, Senator Stewart
is excused. Senator Townsend.
Senator Jara meal. Yes.
Senator Doigg.
With the vote of 8 in favor,
we'll see you earlier this
morning in the Senate chamber
for a full Senate confirmation.
Thank you.
That concludes the appointment
piece of this, uh, agenda. I'm
gonna hand the gavel over to our
madam chair to continue with
legislation.
And folks, as you're as you're
leaving, if you all can take
your conversations out outside
so we can continue with our work
and Senator Wirth, go ahead on
Senate Bill 274. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair and members, uh,
Senate Bill 274 uh came to me
from the board of finance.
Uh, we have some thresholds in
our statute for disposing both
personal property, tangible
personal property and real
property that have not been
changed in years. Uh, this bill,
and I'm gonna go over the 3
threshold changes in the bill
and then yield to uh my expert,
uh, Miss Ashley Leach, who is
the board of finance director,
uh, for specific questions. So
the threshold for
exposing tangible personal
property has not changed since
1987 and it's $5000 so if.
A state agency, a local public
body or a school district wants
to.
Dispose of obsolete, worn out.
Furniture equipment, if that's
valued at more than $5000
they've got to go through an
approval process, we're going to
raise that threshold from 5000
to $30,000 for tangible personal
property.
Second threshold is with respect
to real property, uh,
Basically, when the same
entities are transferring real
property currently the threshold
requiring approval is $25,000.
We're proposing to raise that to
$150,000 that threshold has not
been changed since 1989.
Uh, the final threshold is with
respect to a state agency.
When a state agency and we've
seen these bills of a state
agency is selling or leasing
state property, the threshold is
$100,000 requiring them to come
back to the legislature for
approval.
Uh, that number has not been
changed since the 1960s.
So this bill proposes to
increase that number to $550,000
to require that level of
approval.
Uh, so that's the gist of what
the bill does. I, I will say
there's some.
Somewhat challenging drafting
changes that were made by the
Legislative council, uh, and
I'll just flag one of them so
you can all see and again that's
why we've got expert here, uh,
Ms. Janelle Mason, who drafted
this bill, for example, on page
1 line 21, we delete and state
educational institution.
There's a drafting reason for
that, which we can explain. It's
not creating a new exemption,
it's just this uh mason wanting
to clean up a statute. And so it
took me a while to navigate
through it and I just want to
flag it as an issue cause you
may all have questions and
certainly Miss Leach can help
with the answer to that. So I'm
not sure anything you want to
add up front and then we're
certainly open for questions.
Madam Chair, Senator, members of
the committee, uh, thank you for
having me this morning. I don't
think there's um, much else to.
Add, um, just to echo the
senator's comments that this was
an attempt by the Court of
Finance to clean up some
thresholds that have not been
updated in decades to alleviate
some of the burden on these
local entities that come to
state agencies and the board of
Finance for, for approval of
tangible personal and real
property dispositions, leases,
sales, and the like, so happy to
answer any questions, but uh
thank you for your time this
morning.
Thank you. We did not have
anyone sign up and support or
opposition. So I will go to
members of the committee,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
And thank you both. Um
I, I think it desperate
desperately needs updating. I, I
understand that. I was
interested in the, in where we
came up with the numbers. Why
$550,000 on real property that
That caught my eye.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
uh, excellent question. So we
adjusted these thresholds based
on CPI with an additional
consideration for property
valuations that we're seeing in
the market today, so we
increased it by CPI from the
period of time that it was last,
uh, implemented in statute. So
again, uh, really.
Targeted that from the 1980s,
even though I know that 100001st
aid agencies is as old as the
1960s, but we increased that
from like the 1980s using a CPI
factor and then, um, added a
little bit additional to that to
consider that we would probably
not be updating these again in
statute for a few years, so, uh,
that was how we, uh, determined
the increases.
Medicare, uh, thank you for
that. I
I, I understand the implications
of trying to
be restricted in managing a
business when you can.
Dispose of
Stuff that you need to get rid
of and, and uh
I hope that it expedites and and
uh brings efficiency to the
process. Thank you.
Any other members of the clinic,
Senator Brantley. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator,
and thanks for being here today.
I think this is especially
helpful for some of our uh
small, you know, uh, divisions
of state government. I think
specifically the soil and Water
Conservation districts. This is
not caught up with inflation,
um, they have challenges just
managing procurement and
disposal of property. I wanted
to ask one quick question. Why
was the state land office and
state transportation commission
exempt from us.
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
that's an excellent question. I
am not entirely sure I can do
some additional research on
that. I believe that provision
has been in the statute since
its inception, uh, but we'll
have to take a look. Um, the
intent of uh bringing this
statute forward this year was to
raise those thresholds, um, and
not affect any of the entities
that were, uh, would require
state oversight, so I can do
some additional research on that
and get back to you.
And ma'am and Brantley, the
other one that caught my eye is
municipalities are exempted.
And that's an interesting, so
our counties have to go through
this process, but years ago
somehow there was an exemption
from municipalities. And so I
think they probably have a
separate.
Track
But again, just to reiterate,
we're just trying to increase
the thresholds without.
Getting into the reasons behind
it, but I'm interested in
knowing why we've got one rule
for counties and one rule for
municipalities, so I'm gonna.
Work on that as this bill moves
and get an answer for that.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you,
Madam Chair and senator. It
seems like if we could include
that into this bill as it
travels through this session,
that'd be beneficial. There was,
there's uniform policy, but
thank you for the bill. I think
it's helpful.
Any other members of the
committee?
So my, my question was gonna be
this taking out that state
educational institution
language. Uh, I'm just curious,
so, so why is that?
Yes, um, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, so it
as the senator mentioned, it was
a drafting preference from the
drafter, it doesn't change any
oversight that exists right now.
So right now the statute um
states state educational
institutions, but then exempts
for your call or for your
universities later in the
statute. So it was sort of
putting it in and then taking it
out, the board of Finance does,
um, uh, provide oversight and
approval for community college
dispositions and so.
What the drafter did is because
that state educational
institutions was in, but then
out they just stripped that and
then included a community
colleges in the definition of
local public bodies, so nothing
changed. It was just a a
drafting cleanup preference.
Great. Thank you. What is the
will of the committee?
I move too fast.
All right. Is there any, uh,
objection to that motion?
Seeing none with 7 in favor, you
have a do pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
Thank you. All right, Senator
Trujillo.
The Senate Bill 458 and uh
members, we have a sub on this.
But
He was being passed out.
And it was said to you
yesterday.
Madam Chair,
Thank you for, um, hearing this
bill today. Um, I do have.
A
Built in Senate Finance that I
may need to rush out for. And I
do have another co-sponsor, so
either if you could just be down
here with us, so that if I have
to run out, I can run out and I
may even just leave all my stuff
and just run. So,
Madam Chair, did you wanna go
ahead and introduce the sub, or
do you want me to explain what's
happening. Sure, I will move a
do not pass on Senate Bill 458,
and they do pass on the Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 458 for the purposes
of discussion.
Is there any debate on that
motion? Any objection to that
motion?
See them. Go ahead. All right,
Madam Chair. So, um, I'm just
gonna give a little bit of
history of what's happened. Um,
I introduced Senate Bill 458,
which was a bill that was
drafted by the legislative
Finance Committee, and approved
by them in the uh last month of
their meetings when they were
endorsing bills, and the bill
had a couple of components to
it, uh, it included a commission
to
nominate a secretary, and then
the governor would have to
approve, uh, you know, pick one
of those. It also had
information about the family
first. It had some carrot
information, which is the um
providing safe care for uh uh
newborns who are born with uh
drugs or alcohol in their system
and then it had the movement of
the substitute care advisory
council, so.
Where are we today?
We have this substitute that
really just focuses on the
family's first piece of that
bill.
And so you're not gonna see any
of the commission information in
there, the uh carro language has
been moved over to Senate Bill
42, and we're working with the
secretary on getting that, um,
so that it's ready to be heard
in judiciary and the substitute
care advisory counsel. Thank
you. Substitute care advisory
council has been pushed to the
side for the time being. Um, it
was in the old bill in
end ed to be in the office of
the the administrative office of
the courts, they're not really
pleased about having that, um,
so we're still trying to figure
out what the location of that
and what their duties might be.
So that takes us to this
substitute, and I do have an
expert witness here with me who
has been really the drafter of
the 458, which was also a bill
that was introduced in the House
and has been going through some
reiteration there.
So let me just kind of go
through the substitute really
quickly and then we'll stand for
questions. The section one
really is just clean up
language.
So
Turn to page 4.
And this is where it really
starts with, it requires the
department, which is CYFD to
develop and implement the
family's first strategic plan.
Which is a federal law that uh
my expert witness is going to
have much more information
about.
Let's go to page section 7.
We'll start on page 6.
And you can see that we've
crossed out the language that
gives the department the
ability, um, that they may
pilot, right? And it puts it
down to now we want to have
reports.
Um, so the pilot, uh, the May is
has been removed. Now we want
reports on what this is gonna
look like.
If you look at page 7, we've
also taken out um the language
about the pilot, and we've said
implement the multi-level
response system statewide by
2027. So this is, this is
language that takes it out of a
May and a pilot and moves it
into a requirement.
Section 3 begins the
requirements for the family's
first program and really
families first is a preventative
act that was adopted at the,
it's a federal act.
That encourages us to find ways
to prevent kids from being moved
into foster care.
We know that families are best
suited when they stay with their
families, but when the families
are, are struggling, they're not
capable of providing there's
mental health issues happening
and there are times when
children have to be removed, but
we know that the best place for
them to be is with their
families. And I, I know many of
you have already heard this, but
I was in foster care from 1617,
and 18 years old. And I wish
that there had been those kinds
of services to help my family.
family and of navigate through
the challenges that we were
having. So this is really
important to me.
Foster care is a fabulous
opportunity and and something
that we have to get right, but
families first is really
something that can help
families. So with that, Madam
Chair, I'd like to turn it over
to my expert witness to talk a
little bit more about what the
state has done with Families
First and the money that has
been provided to get us to
there.
Uh
Morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name's Doctor Rachel Garcia. I'm
the LFC analyst.
Let me see.
It'll pick that, OK, uh, good
morning. I'm the LFC analyst for
CYFD, um, and what I'll just do
following Senator Trujillo is
talk a little bit about the
federal family first prevention
Services Act, the current
status, and then what this bill
does, um, so family first was
passed by the federal government
in 2018. It allows states to
draw down federal title for
money. Title IVE is money that
states receive or uh
reimbursement for the provision
of foster care and in 2018, the
federal
government said we will allow
states to use Title IVE money if
they implement specific
evidence-based programs to
prevent the need for entrances
into foster care. Um, we are now
one of 4 states that does not
have a plan in place, um, the
state has to have a plan, um,
then approved by the federal
government to allow us to draw
down the federal funding, which
comes in at the uh the FAP rate,
uh, the Medicaid FMAP rate, so
essentially.
$3 for every dollar that we
spend, um, our state has
submitted multiple plans but has
not yet been approved. The last
one, as we understand, was
submitted by CYFD uh last
December, so essentially what
this bill does is codify
everything that the federal
government says, um, a state may
do in family first, our state
shall do, um, and the bill
provides for providing updates
to the public and the
legislature about progress
toward implementing that plan.
know that funding for kind of um
startup costs as well as that
upfront match um is already
included in last year's budget
through the grow, um, and would
essentially provide a bridge
until the state could draw down
federal funds. Um, the second
key element of the bill.
Ah, that Senator Trujillo
mentioned is the provision that
the state shall implement the
multi-level response system
statewide, you all as a
legislature passed uh
legislation that put into
statute the multilevel response
back in 2019. That's an
evidence-based approach to child
welfare, that our state has
never implemented. Um, CYFD has
received some technical
assistance from Casey family
programs to begin implementing,
though we don't have a timeline
in place, so essentially.
this bill would do is say by
2027, we will implement
statewide, um, that approach
that you all already established
in statute and then update the
reporting requirements to
include interim committees that
would be relevant in terms of
receiving information about
progress and outcomes. Um, I
would be happy to answer
additional questions. I know,
um, senator here as well, um,
but that's sort of an overview
of what the bill does and why
and the connection to the
budget.
Great. Thank you very much. We
did not have anyone sign up in
opposition or support on this.
But Secretary, I, I see you
here. If you would like to say
the, the department's position.
Uh
Probably helpful information for
us to have. Um, good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I'd like to just,
um, say thank you to, um, the
sponsors of this bill and
Rachel, the department has been
working on its family first
plan, as they said, it's been
submitted several times. Um, we
did get technical assistance on
that last submit in December, we
believe that it will be
approved. We tried really hard
to get it approved before a
change in administration,
knowing that that could then bog
it down with the changes and
looking at it, we are
implementing this right now.
now with funding that came
through through Grow, um, as
Rachel said, we're not going
statewide just yet, we're doing
it on as a pilot project to make
sure that we get it right, but
we did have family services come
and assist us in actually
building out a program as
opposed to just sending people
and saying, you know, go forth
and do this work and so they've
implemented a program, happy to
share um what they've provided
with us, with you, um, as to
next steps and what that looks
like we do have the positions
posted, um.
So we were we are working on
implementation, don't have
issues with the data that
they're putting into this, I
believe the only concern, and
I've said this, you know,
several times, I think there are
21 is um looking at what is
considered evidence based in the
clearinghouse, and knowing that
some of those programs are not
available in some of our rural
areas, and that limits us in the
services that we can provide in
rural areas and in tribal areas,
um, and so we have taken an
approach where it's evidence in
as opposed to evidence-based,
um, and then the second is just
the funding. I just want to
clarify again that although some
of that is eligible. We talked
about the FMAP rate, we will
need more general fund for
families first programs than
what we're currently doing.
Right now we're pulling down
TANF dollars, which is 100%
reimbursement, um, and when we
do the families first, it's a
lower federal reimbursement and
more of a general fund um
appropriation. So just wanted to
make those.
clarifications, but um,
are working towards
implementation and have no
issues with the dates that are
imposed in this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary. Uh, I have
first on my list and brown.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you guys for this bill.
This may arguably be one of the
most important bills for CYFD
reform that we have before us.
It's alarming to me that there's
4 states in the nation that
don't have this plan.
And then we wonder why we're
last, uh, you know, on, on the
list, worse and, and child
well-being here in New Mexico.
I, I don't know the details of
this plan, but I would like to
know.
You mentioned that there's a
lack of federal funding. Maybe
this is for the secretary. Do
you have an estimate of how much
federal dollars New Mexico is
missing out by not having this
plan approved.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Brantley, I don't have an exact
amount, um, at the last time
that we looked, there were very
few states that were yet pulling
down federal funds. Um, it's a
process to get them pulled down
so we don't even anticipate that
once our plan is finalized and
approved, that we will
immediately start drawing down
those funds, um, but I don't
know if Doctor Burster has
Actual dollar amounts, um, uh,
Madam Chair, senator, so if you
have your FIR, um, we did write
each section kind of to be
relevant so you can look just at
the family first piece. If you
look at, oh I'm so sorry, my FIR
has no page, oh, page 4, we
tried to do some estimates about
what that would look like, so we
looked at states, um, that were,
um, kind of implementing at a
broader scale, um, those states
do something like serve between
0.1 and.
0.4% of the entire child
population, so we then did some
kind of estimating around what
would that potentially look
like. And so if you look on page
4, we did some estimates, so
somewhere around $9 million in
total spending and then assume
that 75% of that roughly would
be picked up by federal funds,
um, again, that uses the masters
based on what other states have
seen in terms of their rollout
and how many children might be
served and then what we might
draw down, but somewhere in the
territory.
Um, we estimated around 9 to 10
million.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
That's alarming that we're
missing out on that much money,
but I think what's even more
alarming cause we know we can't
spend our way out of that
problem, although I'd love to
have an additional $9 to $10
million to put towards CYFD.
What's really concerning is what
policies we don't have in place
and why our plan continues to
get rejected. Is there not a
national template or can we not
just, I mean, I, I, I feel like
we don't have to reinvent the
wheel here is they're not just.
There's the majority of the rest
of the nation has plans that
were accepted. Can we not just
adopt the same plans that
successful states that have
increased.
You know their their outcomes.
Can we not just adopt a mirror
plan, um, Madam Chair, Senator
Brantley, I'm gonna let Kathy
Phoenix Doyle take over for me
because she's the one that I'll
let her sit here.
She's the one that's been
working on this and working with
other states, and I think rather
than her giving me information
to give you, I'll let her um
kind of speak to that if you're
OK.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, the,
it's important that our
prevention plans are. It's
important that our prevention
plans are tailored to our state
and when are the plan was
submitted.
Um, right before I got to CYFD,
um, and it didn't.
Meat what the our federal folks
wanted, we redid it to what we
thought they wanted, and they
said, but we know that you're
doing all these other things for
prevention. So now we want you
to go back and put those in
there. And so that's what we've
done as we've changed with
NCYFD,
uh, we have family services,
we're developing all these other
prevention programs that are not
just for children who are
candidates for foster care, by
the way, um,
That's why they wanted to see
that. It was important for the
federal government to see what
we had already been doing and
then how are we going to
continue to do.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
senator, and I appreciate that
that answer to some extent, but
I feel like we're.
We, we continue to be last.
the worst in the class, there's
40 others, 46 other states that
have submitted.
An A plus plan that's been
approved.
Why don't you just copy their
homework? Why don't we just
adopt the same, the same plan
that Utah or any other
successful state that's adopted
uh meaningful programs that have
Outcomes, how do we help you
submit a a plan because this is
so important and it's not just
about the money we're missing
out on. So to me it's the
policies that are in place.
Oh
Uh, you're, you've still lost
me. Why can't we just copy the
homework from another successful
state.
Um, Madam Chair, senator, if,
and I can get you a copy of our
our plan that has been
submitted. We're waiting for the
federal government to review the
one that is submitted right now.
It does look a lot like other
states. We have very similar
programming, but we have to also
make sure we tailor it to New
Mexico and what, um, so our
tribal component may look
different than other states
would look, um, our rule
component can look different. So
we do have to make sure
That it goes with the state that
I think what's also important to
remember is that we are doing
these programs, they're
happening.
We we're utilizing tenF funding
right now to do. I appreciate
that too, but if we were doing
this program successfully, Madam
Chair, and the federal
government, in my opinion, would
recognize it just like they have
for 46 other states and then
we'd be getting about 9 or $10
million for doing the programs
that we have in place so we're
not doing something right. We
know we're not doing something
right because the federal
government's denying only 4
states left in the nation and we
got a lot of dead kids in New
Mexico.
So, so we're not doing something
right, so I, I don't.
I don't know what's wrong, but I
can tell you that mandating that
we get a plan in place and I
don't know if it's CYFD who
doesn't need to be drafting the
this, and we need to have some
tutor come in and created an
outside independent someone
create the plan, but we've got
to get a plan in place. This is,
this is probably, um, I, I keep
saying this with every CYFD bill
that comes before us, like this
is the piece we're missing, this
is important, but then I see
something like this and I'm
like,
So, so we're 1 in 4 states in
the nation that can't get an
approved plan to the federal
government. I don't even care
how that we're missing out on
millions and millions of
dollars. I care that we're
missing out on good policies
that are going to keep kids in
place and so whatever it takes
to get your homework in to get
this thing approved and to start
making our our state safer for
kids. I'm all on board. We got
to get this done this session.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, other members on her
block all of us on our guidance.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Thank you also for uh the
sponsors, and I appreciate the
CYFD secretary being here as
well.
Um
I, I kind of wanna just touch a
little bit upon Senator
Brantley's questions, uh, to you
in regards to
The 46 other states or whatever
that have this plan. Did, can I,
can I assume um that the
department or the sponsors
looked through.
Various different plants and
like kind of took some pieces
out that they thought.
Would fit in New Mexico cause I
mean, you know what may work in
You know, New Hampshire or Utah
may may not work in New Mexico,
so I, I assume you were pulling
piece parts out around the
country that we, we think might
have a New Mexico solution to it
because um.
I, I think this is, I think
she's exactly right, we should
be not reinventing the wheel.
Looking at 46 other states and
Doing some analysis of
What are they doing right in
this part? What are they doing
right in this part? Let's, let's
pull that is, is that a fair
assumption for this, uh, piece
of legislation or policy that
you guys are trying to
implement.
Um, Madam Chair, Secretary
Block, I appreciate that
question. We have submitted a
plan. So there is currently a
plan that is before the federal
government for review and
approval. That plan did take
pieces from other states that
have been successful, we worked
with Casey Family Programs, who
has looked at all of the plans
that have been approved and then
they work directly with us on
tailoring that, so if there was
something specific that had been
approved, but it needed to be
tweaked a little bit to fit New
Mexico.
then they worked with us on
that. We had them on con well,
we didn't have them on contract.
They did that at no charge to
the state, but they provided a
contractor for us to come and do
exactly that. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So, on, on page 7.
Um, starting on line 10 through
line 16, that was lined out.
We're talking about these.
Department pilots, um, these
are, these are different
programs, is that correct?
Earlier programs.
Um
Madam Chair, senator, so, um,
that section of the bill is
referencing the multilevel
response statute, that is the
statute you all passed in 2019
and said that CYT could pilot.
To your point, Senator, yes,
that language essentially
eliminates the language and
statute regarding pilots and
instead says um CFD shall
implement multilevel response,
which is an evidence-based
program by 2027. Perfect. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
if that was in 2019
Can I assume that we had a lot
of data.
From those, those pilots to look
at to craft, uh, to help craft
this.
This new, uh, multi-level
response system. Madam Chair,
Senator Black, um, no, um,
unfortunately, and this predates
the secretary, so this is back
in 2019, the law was passed and
there have been a variety of
secretaries since that time, and
in fact the department really
has not ever highlighted the
multi-level response system that
you all established in statute.
CYFD has obtained some technical
assistance from Casey family
programs within the last year to
help them do that, um.
But unfortunately, no, because
that department never actually
implemented what was our.
Um
That
I appreciate your integrity on
that answer.
Uh, Madam Chair, that blows me
away.
Right there, so.
I, I understand you've not been
there that long, but you, so the
legislature passes something,
right? The governor signs it.
Your department is supposed to
do it.
And, and I, I wanna make sure I
understand it has, it wasn't, it
wasn't done.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, it
was done at the department in a
pilot program through family
outreach. It was called
something different, it was not
called multilevel response, um,
so through family outreach, the
intent of that legislation was
done, um, was it done to
fidelity and was it done, I
think in the way that the
legislature expected no, but I
don't want to leave the
impression that they just didn't
do any of the work necessary.
Some of that was done through
family outreach, which we will
continue to do.
Um, and that was written into
our plan, so that work that's
been established with the
programs and the providers will
continue as family outreach. It
is basically um level one of
multi-level response,
multi-level response in level 2,
which is I think what we're
discussing right now will be
implemented as multilevel
response we.
piloting it in several counties,
um, and then it will be
expanded. I don't have issue
with the date for it to be fully
expanded and not be a pilot
that's listed in this bill.
OK. Thank, thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I.
I
So what, what type of checks and
balances are, are in the
department or the legislature to
make sure that
The department is complying with
the intent of of the law.
That you're supposed to be
executing.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Black,
um, I believe that there are
reports the legislature puts out
their um legis stats we have
online our 13 month report where
it really details the number of
families and family outreach to
date, we um had 987 families
participating in family
outreach, um, so I think there
are a couple of public, at least
from CYFD, we have a public
dashboard that shows where that
work is being done and
In which communities, um, and
then I think Doctor Mercer can
speak to the oversight from LFC.
OK, I'll accept that for now.
That's fine. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Secretary, I
appreciate that.
Um
Let's let's talk about this.
Strategic plan here to comply
with the federal Family First
Prevention Services Act.
Um, when, when was that?
Family first prevention Services
Act passed.
Uh, Madam Chair Senator 2018.
OK. Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the answers, so.
Have we not complied with that
since 2018? Is that what I'm
hearing because we're one of 4
states that hasn't done this.
Yeah. Madam Chair, Senator, so
the law didn't require that
state.
Put in place a plan effectively
with the federal law did was
provide a carrot.
It said that if states put in
place a plan that delivers
certain types of evidence-based
services, then we could get
federal funding.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Are the families involved, um,
in the crafting, Mr. Chair, and
uh panel of the families
involved at all in these
strategic plans, and if not, uh,
who, who is?
Chair committee, um, the.
Families have been involved, as
have community providers and
what works, what doesn't work in
their areas and what will be
helpful. Thank you. So I, I can
assume that this is, this is
kind of a dynamic flexible plan
that you guys always have to be,
um, updating based on
Based on some of the information
that is later in the bill that
may not be working.
Mr. Chair, Senator, correct. We
will, it will be in constant
amendment.
How, how many families are
currently
are affected by these strategic
plans.
That's probably a better chair
for you right there rearrange.
No.
Uh,
yes, ma'am. Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
the question was these, these
are, this is a big level of
effort, the strategic plans
here. How many families?
Uh, have these are gonna have
these plans.
Chair Senator
I don't have the exact number. I
know that you know with our
community providers we're
serving about 1000 and as the
secretary said with family
outreach, it's about.
900, I think currently serving
with our family resource
centers, we've already served
about 600. There's a lot of
different levels with er like
there's a lot of programs and so
I don't have the exact, but it's
significant. All right. Thank
you. uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
It, it is significant, so it's,
do you have a case, case worker,
I mean, uh, the case workers
getting like over overburdened
with all these.
Strategic plans and all this
other stuff that these
caseworkers have to do to try to
push this family forward to help
him out. Senator, um, there can
be planned fatigue, you are
correct, and, and that happens.
What we've tried really hard to
do with our family support
specialists to make sure that
they're trained in the in
specific areas. Every single
family support specialist is
trained in um
One particular uh motivational
interviewing, which is an
evidence-based model, but then
they each will have some of the,
the separate curriculums
depending on the, the.
Families that they're working on
to specialize. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Just a couple quick things here,
um, because I I really want to
understand this, and I
appreciated the secretary and
her time in the office, uh,
chatting with me on.
Maybe not this, but other many
other issues, um.
On page 10 of the bill.
When I read on section 3 of line
6.
It said identify all network
service providers. This, this
kind of reminds me, Mr. Chair.
Um, and panel of our SB.
3, Bill, where we're going
through the administrative
office of the courts through the
various judicial districts to
look at.
Different
Service providers that are going
to be listed in an appendix. Um,
are, are you, are you, do you
plan on coordinating getting
that list or are you gonna be
trying, you know, trying to
I mean, because the work's gonna
be done for you, it's a lot more
efficient to do it that way. I
don't know if you're aware of of
how we're gonna be.
Implementing SB 3 with
identifying these network
service providers, have you guys
thought about um
Working with the AOCs on that?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Block,
yes, absolutely, so there are a
lot of gap analysis that are
being done, healthcare authority
has recently done a gap analysis
on, um, behavioral health
providers, I'm hoping that
they'll share that with the
courts because it was
comprehensive, um, we're working
with UNM on a gap analysis for
services for um children in
state custody and youth that
needs services, um, I
participate in the children's
court improvement counsel, um,
where.
Which is part of the AOC and I'm
assuming that this will be a
coordinated effort through that
committee um to share with us,
but there's no reason to
reinvent the whe when that
information is readily
available, um, I'm hopeful that
together we can, you know,
provide gaps that they're not
seeing for children's services,
um, to really identify what
those are. I think one of the
significant things that's really
gonna help with this is the
creation of the family resource
centers in communities, um, we
have several set up now we're
working.
closely with them so that they
can be a hub where people can
come within a community for
services as well. That's a
perfect answer. I appreciate
that, uh, Madam Chair, because
Talking about plan fatigued as
you were, you know, make this as
easy as possible and efficient
as possible so they can um.
Provide the services as possible
and efficient manner.
To save time, so, um, I, I
really
Appreciate it, uh, Senator
Brantley's comments on this, um,
we're, we're moving forward very
slowly.
The speed of government and CYFD
and across the state, so.
I'll support this bill. I think
it's the right thing to do and
um.
And you guys just have a.
It's the hardest department to
run in the state.
Most challenging one and uh.
There's a lot of things that we
got to do better, and I think
this bill will help a little
bit. So, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Dios.
I'm sure I'm move to pass.
All right. We'll take that
motion up in just a minute cause
I think there's we still have a
couple of folks on the list
centersophonics.
Man you very briefly, and I
support the motion. Um,
I, it says in our analysis that
um
This might have significant
financial implications by
increasing access to federal
funds.
And none of us know what's gonna
happen with federal funds, but
could you
Explain how it might increase.
Federal funds, Madam Chair,
Senator, so, um.
If our state has an approved
family first prevention Services
Act plan approved by the federal
government and and we are
providing eligible services we
can draw down federal funds for
those services at the federal
FMAP rate. So that is
essentially the federal revenue
stream that we could access and
Madam Chair, is there any kind
of estimate, Senator, um, Madam
Chair, Senator, I'm in the FIR
on page 4, we tried to do some
estimates about how many.
we could potentially serve how
much we might potentially draw
down our estimated summer around
9 to 10 million.
And that would align with what
we see in some other states that
are doing this in a robust way,
a, a bigger scale. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. Um, I don't have
anyone else on the list. I just
have one question before we get
to San Diegos' motion.
Uh, so the secretary had talked
about using this evidence
informed language rather than
evidence-based.
Is that likely to be an issue
with the feds.
Um, Madam Chair, senator, the
federal government requires
in-state plans that we use
programs that are identified in
the federal Title 4E clearing
house, um, and so to be eligible
to draw down the federal
funding, we would need to
implement those programs. Now
CAD can still continue to
implement other programs that
don't meet that criteria, but
the programs to be eligible for
federal funding have to be
listed in the clearing house and
have a certain rate.
OK, um,
So I guess, I guess what I'm
really asking is if we
If we edit this to say evidence
informed rather than
evidence-based.
Is that, is that gonna be a
problem?
That's my, that's my question,
right? Yeah, so Madam Chair,
Senator, the feds will only
approve for federal funding the
programs that meet their
criteria, if we are implementing
programs that don't meet that
criteria, we cannot draw draw
down federal funds for those.
And do, does there, is there
criteria evidence based, not
evidence informed, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, that is correct, and
it's, it's even more restrictive
and that's why the language in
the bill directly mirrors the
language in the federal law.
OK. Um, in which case actually
understanding what you're
saying. I don't think we can
make that change if we want this
to work.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we have the program
that we are using is in a
California clearing house. It is
under review by the federal
government for approval. We're
hopeful that that will happen
hopefully simultaneously when
our plan is approved, we will
continue to serve, um, in the
same manner for families that
don't have evidence informed, I
mean evidence-based programs in
their community, we will
continue to use our funding
stream through TAF to continue.
to serve those families, um, and
then hope that our new program
will get approved, um, if not,
we will transition over. I just
want to clarify though that it's
not just families that were
doing an approved plan, they
have to actually be approved
families, and I think that's a
huge difference because it, it
really minimizes the number of
kids, so they have to be 4E
eligible participants in order
to draw down the federal funds
for those, not just at the plant
itself.
is approved and serving
residents in those communities.
So Madam Chair, to clarify, the
federal law says that they have
to be families who are at
imminent risk of foster care
involvement, so the federal law
defines eligibility for the
program, so that eligibility is
not the same as Title 40
eligibility children who are in
foster care, um, but there this
bill aligns with the definition
that's in federal law.
Great. Thank you very much.
I was, uh, and Senators has
already made a motion. Uh, is
there any objection to the
motion for due pass.
See none with 8 in favor.
Finally remember to, to cancel
her Bergman's while she's at the
table. I I I still can't count.
That's why, that's why I went to
law school, not medical school,
uh, with 9 in favor, you have to
do pass. Thank you, uh, do pass,
uh, of the, the committee
substitute. Thank you.
All right, Senator Charlie.
Uh, Senate Memorial 14 and
members, uh.
I know you see.
Uh, Senator Woo sitting here. We
just have these last two
memorials to get to. Uh, I know
this is uh Woods's Memorial is
very important to him, so I, I'd
like to
To get through both of these
memorials before we go down in
the next hour before we go down
to the floor.
I hope everyone can, can help
with that.
All right, Senator Charlie, go
ahead, and Senator Charlie, you
were in here presenting the
other day, you know, the drill
you have 15 minutes for your
introduction and we have a
number of people signed up and
support, but
They have to fit within your 15
minutes as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and good
morning, everyone. I'm honored
to present this morning a
memorial affirming New Mexico's
commitment to protecting and
preserving Mount Taylor, a site
of immense cultural, historical
and environmental significance.
This memorial calls on the state
and federal agencies to
safeguard Mount Taylor, a
traditional cultural property or
a TCP.
And opposed uranium mining
projects that threaten its
sacred and ecological integrity.
This memorial aligns with our
state's long-standing commitment
to cultural preservation?
Environmental protection and
responsible resource management.
Mount Taylor, known to
indigenous nations throughout
the Southwest by several
traditional names.
Katima
is how we say that in my
language.
Is a sacred place and has been
central to the cultural,
spiritual and historical
identity of many tribes for
countless generations.
In 2009, after significant
advocacy from the publics of
Akima.
Pablo Laguna.
A couple of Zuni, as well as the
Hopi.
tribe in Arizona and the Navajo
Nation, Mount Taylor was
designated as a traditional
cultural property and listed on
the New Mexico register of
Cultural Properties.
The New Mexico Supreme Court
upheld this designation in 2014,
reaffirming that the mountains
designation as a TCP.
Affirming the cultural
significance of Mount Taylor as
an eligible property to the
state register.
Mount Taylor continues to serve
as a place of ceremony,
pilgrimage, and prayer for
tribal communities.
And its preservation is
essential to maintaining
indigenous cultural identity.
Mount Taylor faces a renewed
threat from proposed uranium
mining projects that would
devastate the landscape, deplete
vital resources and pose
significant environmental and
health hazards.
One of the biggest concerns is
the impact on aquifers.
Such as the San Andreas Glorieta
aquifer.
Which serves as the primary
water source for the pueblos of
Laguna and Akima and surrounding
communities, including several
land grants.
These aquifers are often the
primary source of springs and
river flows that serve as the
primary drinking water and
irrigation resources for my
district's mining operations
could contaminate and
irreversibly deplete this
already overappropriated water
source further exacerbating
water insecurity issues in our
region.
We've seen the consequences of
past uranium mining in New
Mexico.
Contaminated groundwater.
Negative health outcomes.
An environmental degradation.
We cannot allow history to
repeat itself when we know
better.
This memorial urges state and
federal agencies, including the
New Mexico mining and minerals
division to deny permits for
uranium mining within the Mount
Taylor TCP boundaries.
It also calls upon Congress to
reform the outdating general
Mining Act of 1872, which
prioritizes mineral extraction
over cultural preservation and
environmental stewardship.
It also fails to require
meaningful tribal consultation.
New Mexico has
Long been a leader in protecting
cultural and natural resources.
This memorial is a continuation
of that legacy.
In addition, this memorial
builds upon a position of other
entities urging the mountain's
protection.
Just last year, the state land
commissioner issued a letter
opposing.
A uranium project.
On the western slope of the
mountain.
The all public council of
governors representing 20
sovereign pueblos has
unanimously passed resolutions
calling for the protection of
Mount Taylor.
And opposing uranium mining
projects.
I understand some may ask about
the potential benefits from
uranium mining. However, the
economic and public health costs
of past uranium projects far
outweigh temporary gains.
We know what this looks like.
uranium mining has left a toxic
legacy in New Mexico.
Abandoned mines, poisoned water
sources.
And long-term health impacts on
tribal and rural communities.
Forcing state, federal, and
tribal governments to expend
significant resources on
addressing you might uranium
mining cleanup, we should be
investing in sustainable
industries and not reviving
extractive practices that
degrade our natural resources
and disproportionately harm
communities like those
surrounding Mount Taylor.
In closing, I urge this
community, this committee.
And my, my new community, you
all of you, to safeguard this
sacred site for future
generations to uphold
commitments to tribal
sovereignty and to ensure this
environment is protected,
reflecting the values of
conservation and cultural
respect that our state is known
for.
And Madam Chair, before we, um,
stand for questions they'd like
my expert to
Chair, my name is in Rogers. I
have served as the general legal
counsel for the Pueblo of Achema
for close to 40 years. I have
was the attorney at that.
Uh
took the Mount Taylor, uh,
designation through the state
process to get it on the
traditional uh cultural
properties listed the state of
New Mexico. It is a registered.
traditional cultural property
and also uh
Through the court process
affirming it.
I'm also, uh, because of my work
with ACMA. I am also uh very
aware of the extent of damage.
To the communities there.
As part of our uh defending our
proposed water settlement in the
Rio San Jose Valley, I had to
document.
The full extent of the
environmental degradation and
damage.
To the area.
For that purpose, we had to put
that into the.
To the record to show that the
federal government was actually
getting a bargain from our
settlement, so I have that
information. I can make
available to you.
Um
Other than that, I uh also am
very aware of
The
Uh, lack of
Protection for that area and
If it is not.
Um
If it is not stated that the
area is protected. I think the
clearest example was what energy
fuels, who owns the the proposed
road the Honda mine.
On Mount Taylor did with regard
to Bears Ears National Monument.
Which eviscerated it by
suggesting to President Trump
that it needed more land and
it's land in Utah.
sight
So the whole notion of of uh
respect for cultural.
Uh, concerns is a bit
problematic for me. Thank you.
OK, we have 5 people signed up.
Uh, in support one person signed
up as neutral. Um, I'm gonna
call folks up for support.
Please go ahead and just line
up. We'll each have about a
minute and a half of JD
Bullington or Gina Morales for
public Lucuna, uh, Governor Mark
Mitchell from Tasuke, uh, Chris
Toya from Puebble of Hamas,
Conrochino, uh, for Pueblo of
Akima and Taos, uh, you're Ann
Rogers, uh, well
Melania Ortiz from Pablo Zuni.
Go ahead, you each have about
about a minute and a half.
Madame Che members of the
committee. My name is Gina
Morales with JD Burlington
government relations and we
represent the Pueblo of Laguna
and they strongly support this
memorial. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mark Mitchell, former
governor from the public of
Tasuki and welcome to the
ancestral and traditional
homelands of Tsuki Pueblo.
Um, the pueblos in full support
of Senate Memorial 14 and I
urged the committees for a
favorable result. Also,
Former member of the
properties reviews Committee
on in 2009.
Uh
And I am aware of the efforts
and advocacy of the pueblos of
Acama Laguna, Zuni.
Hopi tribe and then Navajo
nation.
In that committee.
During that time, after careful
deliberations and taking
testimonies and other supporting
evidence.
The board granted the request of
the tribes to declare Mount
Taylor a traditional cultural
property.
He
And have it listed on New
Mexico's registrar of.
I'm aware in
Aware of
In New Mexico Supreme Court
upholding the designation and
2014, affirming a cultural
significance of Taylor.
Again, Mount Taylor continues to
be a ceremonial pilgrimage.
Prayer
Or
tribal communities and other
cultural leaders, and it must be
protected from any attempts.
harm, desecrate, or negatively
impact the landscape.
Environment
Natural beauties.
spiritual significance of this
sacred cultural place.
Thank you.
You
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino.
And I represent the publics of
Taos and Acma.
And we urged the committee to
support this memorial.
Mount Taylor has a significant
role in the um.
Cultural identity and the
spiritual worldview of the.
Tama people.
It's rooted deeply in the
history and songs and the
prayers of my people.
But we're also aware that there
are large, rich bodies of war
that lie beneath the mountain.
But we're also aware of the
decades of.
Heavy extraction activity that
took place in that area, just
west of Mount Taylor in the
flatlands and the
Mesa Thompson, the hills and the
forest areas near Mount Taylor.
And we're also aware of the
extensive
and the underground tunneling.
That took place to get to the
oar.
I know because I worked at one
of those mines when I was in
college, uh surveyor's helper.
We're also aware of the legacy
of harm.
An ill effect that it's had on
the environment, natural
resources like water.
And also on the health of
communities that uh.
are in the area.
We ask that you
With this memorial, madam chair
members of the committee to
protect a living.
Geographic formation.
That is so significant and
important to my pueblo and to
other tribes.
And we ask the state to honor
its commitment.
To uh protect cultural
properties that are held sacred
by many tribes in New Mexico,
for those reasons we are.
Good morning Chair and committee
members. Thank you for the
opportunity to comment. My name
is Malena Ortiz.
And I am a registered lobbyist
for the Pueblo of Zuni.
The Zuni name for Mount Taylor
is Yabahu Yalani.
Which means water storage peak.
It serves as a coordinate for
land acknowledgement and
remembering migration stories.
As Pueblo peoples in honoring
each other as relations, we also
honor Mount Taylor as a
relative.
Within the Mount Taylor TCP.
There are contributing
resources, which include
pilgrimage trails,
archaeological sites.
Plants, animals, and mineral
gathering sites, which are still
used today.
And warrant preservation against
any projects that threaten its
cultural and environmental
integrity.
For these reasons, the Pueblo of
Zuni supports Senate Memorial
14, and thanks the sponsor,
Senator Charlie, for bringing it
forth. Good morning, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terre Via and I'm here
on behalf of uh the public of
himus Tippo, tribal Historic
Preservation offer for Mr. Toya
and the public of human's
leadership. The bubble of Has
strongly supports Senate
Memorial 14 and urges this body
to affirm the Mexico's
recognition as Mount Taylor as a
sacred cultural and spirit uh
spiritual sanctuary for
The pueblo tribes and other
local communities.
We understand that there has
been a legacy of uh uranium
mining throughout New Mexico and
adjacent to Mount Taylor, and
Mount Taylor, known as known to
him as as Zoe is an important
living cultural landscape that
is embodified in our languages,
our songs, our ceremonies, and
our overall way of life. You can
uh see that uh within our
current cultural practices and
within the way that we continue
to affirm that in our daily,
everyday prayer.
So on behalf of the public of
famous tribal historic
Preservation office and the
public of famous leadership, we
ask your uh support and I do
pass on this memorial. Thank
you.
Thank you, I did have we did
have one person, Adela Duran,
sign up as neutral. You have
about a minute and a half
and I represent 3 uranium mining
companies.
Uh, I want to clarify that my
clients have never operated in
the state.
And they appreciate Senator
Charlie's efforts.
Um, they also would like the
committee to understand that
they have an understanding to
the extent that they can of the
frustration felt by our by our
Native American communities in
the state over the uranium
mining practices of the past.
And the Legacy sites that have
been left here and that have
been here for over 50 years.
But the safety measures and the
technology changed drastically.
Over the last
And I'd like to just uh address
very briefly Supreme Court
opinion.
Uh, designating Mount Taylor as
a TCP.
An opinion came from our highest
court.
Not going to change.
And so it's unclear how the
memorial can change that.
What it is, what what that
opinion did, Madam Charis, it
struck a balance between the
desire for consultation.
With every tribe in Pueblo in
the state and beyond.
And the recognition that mineral
holder rights are equivalent to
property rights.
It can be a fine balance, Madam
Chair, but it's one that my
clients have always upheld.
They intend to continue to do
so, and they will surpass it in
any way that.
Uh, that concludes my testimony,
Madam Chair. I'm not sure if you
approve the handout that.
No? OK. Thank you very much.
Thank you. OK. Um, let's go to
members of the committee,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, ma'am. Uh, thank you,
Senator Charley for bringing
this forward.
I want to make sure I understand
this. Um,
But your memorial is doing.
is trying to
Now, if I say it wrong, forgive
me, but we're, we're trying to
impose our
Will
On property that's not under
that someone else owns. Is, is
that, am I saying that right or,
and, and just correct me if I'm
wrong.
Thank you, Madam chair and
Senator for that question. Um,
I'm gonna actually hand that one
to our expert to talk a little
bit more about what that
boundary is and what this means.
Uh
Chair and Senator Townsend.
This does not impact property
rights. The mining companies are
more than welcome to develop
minds.
In a safe way.
With the exception of one type,
and that one type is because of
the extreme.
Danger
The public
From
uh
Our past history with those
minds.
And it is extreme.
You have
A system where
It's a natural national
sacrifice zone.
It is going to take
Close to a billion dollars.
To address the damage.
Done
By the past uranium to the water
resources alone.
That
So you're not prohibiting them
from other forms of mining.
I think that, and you also must
understand that sometimes these
mining lease are.
Subject to federal rules about
Having to report and what to do,
they're not the same as be
simple property interests, and
that's important to remember.
And uh
expert Senator Charlie.
I'm pretty familiar with.
private.
property rights.
I understand that there have
been historic
Issues, grave issues,
understandably grave issues with
uranium mining.
But I also understand technology
has changed.
And to ignore the advancement of
technology.
and, and
is irresponsible, I think, on
us.
And I want to make sure that you
understand that
I believe you have.
Every right as anyone else does
to protect your property rights.
That's your, that's your right,
that's your property.
But so does your neighbor.
And you have to understand.
The, the value of that property
right.
Could be
Considered a taking.
And would have
Uh, imposed.
values
On, on anyone in, in the, in the
power of, of that taking.
So, I um
I think, um.
The flame blows
Any property owner has the right
to protect their property in any
way they seem.
that they should, but imposing.
Um
Restrictions on other
Valued property rights.
Whether it be
A shade tree or mining or
falling gas or whatever it is.
It comes with a cost.
And are those lands that
Our
If I read my my.
Information, right? There's lens
at the base of Mount Taylor.
that are owned by others.
And they're wanting to.
Potentially
Uh, mine in that area.
I am I wrong?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, I'm
gonna have, um,
Uh, Miss Rogers answer the first
part of that, but I do wanna
address them our our community
has already paid the price.
Of what this means. You, um,
Madam Chan sent our Mr. Chair
and senator, you spoke about um
this comes at a cost, right,
even with the developments of
technology.
We understand that cost, and we
have paid for it into the
future.
Um, and so I'll, with that, I'll
have.
The Mount Taylor TCP does not
include lands at the base.
It includes the mesa tops and
the sides of the maces.
Around the mountain. It does not
include the lands at the base.
And most of it is forest land,
USDA forest land. It is not
public property.
Personal, you know, private
property. It is the Forest
Service lands.
Most of it.
Um
I, I think that the.
Um
There's a lot of
Misinformation about what
exactly we mean by the Mount
Taylor TCP as approved by
The um
New Mexico's Supreme Court. It
does not include any land grant
land.
At the base of the mesa, or on
the sides. What it does include
is all the the message at the
mountain tops, the mesa tops on
the side.
And the sides of the mesa down
to the.
Bottom. That's what, that's all
it is.
And those that have their
proposed minds on the bottom of
the, on the flatlands down
there.
Um
That's not an impact on the
Mount Taylor TCP unless it has
some subsidiary impact on it,
such as it removes all the
water.
For the life
For the plants and the
livestock.
On
that and, and I understand and
uh I feel your passion and, and
the argument.
But I would also say that you
have every right to impose.
Restrictions
Protect your property.
But I have to at least
acknowledge the fact that there
are other property rights that
have to be addressed as well. So
I appreciate it, um, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much.
Thank you. I don't have anyone
else on the list.
Um
Oh OK.
Madam Chan, Senator, I
apologize. I had to step out for
a minute. I did have a few
questions. I was looking at this
last night and it actually from
last week.
Um
And I'm just wondering what as
far as a memorial.
Uh, I know in February 7, 2014,
there was a, an article, the
Supreme Court had made the
A distinction for the TCP.
Uh, what does the memorial do?
The Supreme Court didn't do.
I'm chairing center.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator for that question. Um,
what this memorial does, it's a,
it's a reaffirmation and then,
um, within the memorial
language, you'll also see that
it is uh called for the land
commissioner to reaffirm, um,
not
For uh
To reaffirm, reaffirm her prior
statement and not reissue any um
permits. Uh, it also sends a
mandate or, you know, a a
mandate over to the
congressional delegation, as
well as our federal partners.
And I saw that and thank you for
that explanation, uh, one of the
things that I'm gonna ask, uh,
the comedian, I'd like you to
think through this is, um, and
just looking at the
Uh, who you're sending the
information to the delegation
and everything, and Madam Chair
and, and Senator, I'd like to
ask uh you'd allow me the
latitude of an amendment, and
what I would do is on page.
But now aging on page 4.
Uh, line 4.
After the word environment, I
would want to put a comma in.
Strike the end.
Leave the energy, comma,
minerals and natural resource
department.
Then position a common after in
line 5 after apartment.
And Madam Sharon, Senator, what
I was wanting to do is add it.
Uh, some other people that would
need to know the memorial, I
would think that Se
Sevicounting commission.
The city of Grant and the
village of Milan would have
interest in this.
I'm just wondering if you'd
consider that a friendly
amendment, so that way all the
interested parties would have
the same exact detail.
Senator
Madam Chan senator, um, before I
answer that, I'd like to ask,
um,
Here to come up with in the
room.
Uh, uh, especially because this
is, um, the ancestral homeland
right there for Ama, um, to, to
weigh in.
Madam Chair, maybe the question
should be repeated so that we
all know that Mr.
Conroy, what I was looking at is
trying to add to the list of the
people who are going to get the
details and
the oversight of it is just
adding civil accounting
commission, the city of
Granson's village of Milan into
those getting the letter of the
details of the memorial.
Uh, there's some logistics
you've got a
Uh, put a comment in after
environment after uh line for
page 4 line 4.
And strike the end
then it would go on to the
energy, minerals, natural
resource requirement.
A a comma
And the Seville County
Commission, Palma,
And the Seville County
Commissioner,
City of Grantsalla, and the
village of Milan period.
And I, I believe I'm sure.
And Conroy is that would just
give us an overall view of those
are in the affected area.
That they'd have all the great
detail at the same time.
in center and corner, do you,
would you have a list, and I,
and I, I say that because we're
gonna have to
Uh, figure out the amendment
now.
And I do not know the sec is in
the area, so I'd, I'd love to
add them too because it, it
affects everyone in that general
area.
And I don't think we would want
to list out.
Every aaa association, um.
This is
This is, uh, we don't usually
list.
All, all these and a non-state
or federal level folks out in
And, and, uh, memorials like
this. I, I absolutely understand
what you're saying, Senator, uh,
but I, I don't know that they
need to be listed here. I think
they should, they should get a
copy of this for sure if it
passes. Um.
But
I, I think we, you know.
I think there are others who who
could, I think they can get a
copy without us listing them.
Um, Madam Chan, Senator, uh, I,
I think maybe if we put the
general, um, maybe impacted as
like a.
In there, like all of that feels
friendly. I mean, it's a
Saboera, it's bao.
And I do believe that that they
should be made aware of.
Have all the
So center, can I, do you want to
restate your motion. OK,
here, you're OK with me leaving
it where it's at now.
With that I think it's not
something we usually do on
memorials, but if it is
friendly, um, OK. Medicare and
Senator, what I would ask them
to do is on page 4, line 4,
after the word environment.
Place of.
I strike the word and.
And we would go down to line 5.
After the word department.
Strike the period.
Insert a comma.
Silo County Commission.
Um
C of Gratz.
And the village of Milan,
period.
And, and did we want the impact
did the impact of the
association get in there as
well.
I'm OK with that. I just did
not, they're looking to, well,
In in my conversation with them,
uh, I did not know who would be
in the se of that area of the
state.
And I don't know uh what I
understood we didn't want to
list them independently.
So I I think we could say
impacted associations.
Yes.
Impacted a.
OK. And I, I would accept that.
All right.
OK, so let's just make sure that
the but I'm sure so if we, if
you don't mind if we are adding
a second, we will need to also
inform the land grants. So, so
this is the problem when we
start listening everyone out in
a memorial, I think, I think we,
I would urge against this, this
amendment, um, understand that
people everyone need would need
notice of this, but when we
start listening out, absolutely
everyone, we're gonna get
50-page memorials listing folks
out, so, so I don't, I don't
wanna poo poo what you're doing.
Uh, senator, but, uh,
I wonder if you're willing to to
reconsider your your motion
I'd like to keep it to at least
the, the city and county and in
the village of Milan.
OK. Uh, just one thing, we don't
do Oxford commas in legislation
to that last comma.
We would need to not be in there
before between city of of grants
and villages.
OK, does everyone understand the
The amendment
The amendment is friendly. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that amendment?
See none that amendment is
adopted. Senator you off the
floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh thank you, Senator, for that,
uh, I hope that that just gives
everybody clarity, but, but that
all healed. Thank you. Thank
you.
I don't have anyone else on the
list uh center block, center
block, keep in mind your whip
spills after this, and we have
20 minutes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Thank you for bringing this
forward. I
I just want to make sure I
understand uh the language in
here.
Um
I was kind of on the line along
the lines of Senator Townsend,
but on page two, line 12.
Let me just read, um, line 9.
Um, whereas proposed uranium
mining projects pose significant
threats to Mount Taylor and the
surrounding environment by
physically degrading the
landscape and cultural sites
with destructive mining
operations.
is
Is it your opinion that all
mining operations is
destructive.
Madam Chair and Senator, it is
my opinion that uranium mining
is destructive, yes. OK. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And
I am, I'm sure I move a do pass.
As as amended, sorry. All right,
we're on a motion for a due pass
as amended, uh, let's go ahead
and do a roll call vote for
this. Senator Bergman, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brantly, Senator Brantly
is excused. Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused. Senator Stefaniks.
Senator Stewart. Yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Jarami.
Senator, uh, block.
No
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Doigg.
Yes, with 5 in favor, 3 against,
you have to pass. Thank you.
Senator Woods, come on up for
Senate Memorial 16.
One quick comment? No, ma'am, we
can't. No, no, we, we gotta go.
We, we gotta move on with our
work.
Chair, thank you for hearing us
today. I know that it's getting
late in the day and I know we
were old once and I would hate
to be rolled again, so thank you
for hearing our, our memorial
today.
I chair.
Uh
You may or may not know that US
Department of Energy has
considered plans to establish a
national interest electorate
transmission corridor.
Through eastern New Mexico.
While we're not opposed to
establishing transmission lines,
many of our constituents.
are justifiably concerned about
the seizure of private property
just makes this project
possible.
The plan describes a corridor
between 3 miles wide and 15
miles wide,
owned by agriculture producing
families for the senator
Booth and I have both served on
a
Electric co op boards.
And we understand the need for
transmission lines and we also
understand the need for the
eminent domain.
But we can't stand for the
possible use of Eminem domain
over stretches of land up to 15
miles wide, potentially
trampling the property rights of
landowners and using and just
eliminating some family farms
and ranches.
The current comment period for
these pros projects is was
extended to April 15th.
We like very much to Smith this
approved memorial to the US
Department of Energy showing
that in Mexico State Senate
stands with farmers and ranchers
across eastern New Mexico.
So
We invite you to join in on this
message say a few words.
Um, Senator boom.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, I know
time's short and I, I appreciate
the opportunity to get to speak
to y'all on this, on this issue.
Uh, I'll keep it just as brief
as I can, but I want to try to
bring it to be a little bit more
personal, uh, than just what's.
Just what's been brought out so
far, uh.
This land
This big corridor of land that
that's proposed to be.
Taken and, and uh, I, I need to
frame my.
My uh remarks by saying that
that I know that just because
it's been designated doesn't
mean that this is necessarily
going to happen. But I've been
absolutely inundated.
By my constituents and by people
that aren't even my constituents
from across the southern part of
New Mexico and coming up the
state and.
And wondering what do we do?
What do we do?
There's just been no.
Um
There's been no response from
anyone that I understand. I
haven't been at home, I haven't
been able to attend the town
hall meetings and the meeting
other meetings that they've had
around that, that have been
trying to get answers for the
landowners, but, but, uh
The it seems to be the same
problem over and over, nobody
will tell us anything. We're,
we're hung on, on, on the edge.
We don't know where we're gonna
go. I had one lady, one of my
constituents in Southern
Roosevelt County if they, you
know, they've got this
perception in their mind that
that this thing is gonna come in
and take their land and, and
they'll, if they do, they're
gonna lose their whole ranch,
their home, everything they
have.
And, and
And she said, we just can't get
answers from anybody, so I, I
know it's a, a great concern of
many, uh, and this land is not
just simply a a piece of real
estate, a piece of dirt, uh, in
many cases, I dare to say in
more cases than not, this is
generational land that's been
there for 45678 generations of,
of these people and it and it
means a lot to them and it and
it's their livelihood.
And I, I know in my personal
case.
My ranch is, is, is my family
that's come before me. I mean, I
think about almost daily, I, I
think about my great great
grandparents that started there
and, and the ones that have been
there since and we've managed to
hang on to it.
And I just think this is a very,
very important issue of private
property rights.
And, and I would uh.
Just respectfully ask that this
committee look at this very
seriously from that uh.
That point of view that that
we're talking about private
property rights here and uh I
just would ask you to give us
your consideration. Thank you,
senators, um, and we have a, a
whole lot of people signed up in
support, uh, in the interest of
time, I'm, I'm gonna, I'm just
gonna take a couple and then I'm
gonna I'll read out. We also
have other than the folks who
had signed up to speak, I'll
note that there were, there were
around 60 people who had also
lent their names, uh, in.
In support of this. Uh, do we
have Tom Patterson?
Tom, come on up, uh, Ed Hughes.
Uh, I'll recognize each of you
for 2 minutes.
And then I don't see Kelly
Fajardo here, someone else here
for the New Mexico farm. Oh
yeah, she's there. OK, Kelly,
come on up. I'm just gonna have
the, the three of you go, you
can, can each go for about 2
minutes. Then I'll read out the
other folks who are on Zoom.
My name is Tom Patterson. I
serve as president-elect of the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers supports Senate
Memorial 16.
We have to start with the
following principles. Cattle
growers supports responsible
renewable energy.
It is one more option in the
toolbox of alternative energy
sources, we should be developing
to meet our energy requirements.
We support building the
transmission lines that are
needed to transport electrical
energy.
We support private property
rights.
And
We support a level playing field
with transparency and fairness,
particularly with the
government.
As those principles are applied
here, we are appalled at the
southwestern grid connector
corridor.
A national interest electric
transmission quarter that the
federal government is proposing.
At approximately
1.8 million acres.
The proposed New Mexico
corridor.
We're building transmission
lines or other unspecified
facilities.
It's a land grab that goes far
beyond what it's what is needed.
These are lands that have been
in families for generations.
If some high priced, fancy
lawyer.
Chosen already heavily
conflicted FERC.
that his or her client has
engaged in a measure of
generalized good faith
negotiations.
16 US Code Section 824
authorizes the FERC to take the
land by eminent domain.
That would upend decades of
transmission companies acquiring
easements from landowners
without using the threat of
massive legal fees and eminent
domain.
Here, the decks are stacked
against eastern New Mexico.
There's no level playing field.
There's been no transparency or
fairness. Thank you, Mr.
Patterson. Mr. Hughes, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
I'm Ed Hughes from Naravia, New
Mexico and our ranch is in this
quarter.
And it has supported and is
supporting 5 generations of our
family.
In fact, the two older
generations are buried on the
place.
Establishment of this corridor
on our land would mean our ranch
can no longer support a family.
This is not a corridor.
Eminent domain sets the stage
for a 5 to 15 mile, almost 2
million acre industrial zone.
decided on primarily private
land, which would include
multiple massive lines along
with which the DOE calls, and I
quote, Energy storage solutions,
other solutions, even
non-transmission solutions.
And the DOE has also mentioned
on Zoom calls, hydrogen power
generation that that requires
massive amounts of water.
The, the description of an NIETC
in those language uh documents
demonstrates that many entities,
except the landowner.
would be planning infrastructure
on privately owned land that can
completely displace the
landowner.
And take over the whole east
side of Mexico.
Ultimately
Establishment of this quarter
could put us under a designation
that would give through eminent
domain and by overriding state
sovereignty.
The DOE Burke, and private
for-profit developers, the
freedom and the means to bring
about the end of what we were
built. In many cases over
generations. This is valuable in
the 8 counties that are, that
are impacted in New Mexico,
they, they produce annually 1.9
billion in ag products and have
a total value of investment in
ag land and infrastructure of
over 10 billion.
The NITC is not economic
development. It is truly
economic displacement, and I
would respectfully ask this
committee, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, to support
this memorial. Thank you.
Thank you, Ms. Varder.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kelly Fajardo
here on on behalf of the New
Mexico Farm Bureau. I'm here to
speak about the proposed
national interest electro
transmission corridor in eastern
New Mexico, and its impact on
our local farmers, our ranchers,
and our small businesses. While
the project aims to strengthen
the nation's energy grid, the
use of eminent domain to seize
land from private property
owners presents serious
concerns.
For many New Mexicans, their
land is their livelihood,
disrupting agricultural
operations which are central
turn state's economy would harm
not only the farmers and
ranchers, but also the local
communities that rely on them.
The forced seizure of property
also undermines land landowner
rights and threatens the fabric
of rural New Mexico. I urge the
committee to explore
alternatives that respect the
rights of property owners while
addressing our energy needs. We
must find a way to balance
infrastructure development with
the protection with the
protection of New Mexico's
agricultural economy and rural
communities, and we ask for your
support on this memorial. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, because we're
close to floor, we're not gonna
go to other public comment, but
I do wanna note there are a
number of people who were on
Zoom, who were going to voice
support for this. Jerry Rush,
the county uh Quay County
Commission Chairman, Howard
Hutchinson, the executive
director of the Coalition of
Arizona and New Mexico counties,
Roy Lee Criswell, Roosevelt
County commissioner, uh, Mike
Gallagher, Eddie County
commissioner, Cliff Copeland,
uh, Union County.
and NMCGA Northeast Regional
Vice President, Eddie Burhans,
Wake County resident, Addie
Lafferty, uh, San John FFA
say, say it again. Saying home,
all right, uh, FFA president
Frank Gibson of Bard, New
Mexico, Bill Humphries of Tucum
Carry, Amber Watson of Quay
County, Annie Hogland, the Curry
County Clerk and president of
New Mexico counties, and Mark
Harris.
son who is a farmer, but we are,
uh, I have Senator Townsend is
first on the list, followed by
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Be
quick. Um, I'm gonna support
your
Your memorial
But I think you're doing it
wrong.
I think
Opposing it because of imminent
domain is a weak.
Link.
This project was in Oklahoma. We
got run out of Oklahoma because
it was.
Horribly, um,
Rolled out
I think they came to New Mexico
and did even worse.
I, I did projects like this.
Uh, across the Rocky Mountains.
That's about as, I mean, if you
really wanted to screw one up,
this is about as good a job as
you can do.
Coming out and saying that you
have eminent domain.
Uh, and that's the tool you're
going to use just insides riot.
They're not gonna have a 5 to 15
mile corridor. They do that so
they can reroute within the
corridor telling people that
they're gonna condemn 15 miles.
is ludicrous.
But
Um, I guess it's possible. I
mean, I've never seen one. I, I
called a fellow that I know that
runs projects like this all over
the world, he said.
Never heard of one like that
before in my life.
And I said, if you looked at
this, I sent it to him, he said,
that's crazy. And so I think
that is right. I think it's a
crazy project. It's, it's
horribly laid out. There's 5
program managers across the
United States that run big
projects like this. Most of them
are housed within the BLM. We
ought to get a hold of them and
run them out of New Mexico
because they've done a terrible
job laying it out in New Mexico.
We don't need this in New
Mexico, and we damn sure don't
need it.
If the, if this is the MO of
their project management, we
don't need it in New Mexico.
Thank you.
said our steward.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So I certainly understand the
concern.
Um, but
No, I think you're a little
early.
It took 17 years for Sunia
took it up and running.
If you think this is imminent.
It is not. Uh, you're all gonna
be asked to participate. It may
not even happen.
But we're in real trouble with
our electric grid, you know,
Texas has got its own thing.
And the rest of us, and you've
heard Excel, El Paso Electricity
along the eastern part of the
state.
Uh, so we are in need of
upgrading our electrical system.
I, I don't know that I would
agree to any of this, and I
understand the issues with
eminent domain, but to worry
about this now is it, it's so
early.
Yeah, I, I also think that, you
know, we, we can all be accused
of NIMBY, you know, not in my
backyard, um, it's kind of this
human emotion. It's like, oh
well, do it over there, not
where I live. Um, it, it's just
I'm telling you, it's not gonna
happen anytime soon if it does
happen.
So just a word of caution, and
Madam Chair, I am presiding
today. I'm gonna have to leave,
so.
Hurry yet. All right. Where is
the will of the committee,
Senator Gallegos.
Me just really briefly, I, I
appreciate you guys looking at
this. Do you have concerns with
Senator Townsend brought up, but
this goes all the way through my
district into Carlsbad.
And it is a huge swath of land.
I hope that uh as this goes
forward and it does get to a
congressional delegation that
they can look at it and see
exactly what Senator Townsend
said somebody needs to be
educated.
On how to proposal of a corridor
like this, so that way we know
exactly where the piece property
that's gonna be affected, but I
will stay in sport and I look
forward to this going, uh, to
see where it goes.
Fors DC. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Senator Townsend.
That that.
Right, we're on a motion for due
pass.
Uh, let me ask this, is there
any objection to that motion?
See that you have to pass.
Thank you, and with that
