Senator Burt here Senator
Campos.
Senator about this.
Senator Diamond.
Etcetera do heck.
Center guy our.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator me on the Senator
Kernan.
Centerman yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator Padilla Senator Pinto.
Senator Sanchez.
Etcetera smitteez.
Center city Lopes's.
Senator Stewart center Thoman
Center worth Senator Woods.
Spiritual director and author at
mind body health sciences LLC
and ask your main standing for
the pledge to be led by senator
Clemente.
a privilege to be here I'm
really delighted thank you
Reverend Rick for inviting me.
introduce you to what I'm doing
of a little bit here.
I'm going to start with a prayer
from Judaism it's a morning
prayer and if you've ever
the rising sun and think about
the miracle of life itself and
what we're doing here.
And then he'd say a prayer and
So it's a prayer of praise who
in his trust in may in other
words his trust in all of us to
carry out our mission has
Month the funding we live phone
that
he moved on to
who.
only god puts in all of you but
your constituents have placed in
you and the people of New Mexico
May you look for may you find
ten brush off and raise the holy
be on the surface.
May you draw strength from our
creator from this sacred land
and from one another.
So blessed be to all of you and
your holy task have a wonderful
session.
What.
Thank.
Miss America and a replica
Representative the lunacy on
Ontario's in the CBA twenty
budget that you see see a
Once again would like to welcome
each of you for here joining us
today all the senators here in
the gallery all of our staff and
like to thank all those who are
visiting with us in the gallery
Senator Wirth I'll turn it over
your benediction it's also a
privilege to have you here and
to share your voice is beautiful
but also words so thank you so
democratic women is honoring
women in blue day at the capitol
and Senator Lopez has some gas
that show introduce on just a
photo taken for the Senate
composite also today's the last
day for the MVD will be in the
house lounge to help with car
hundred canyon road six to seven
thirty by invitation tomorrow
Presbyterian healthcare is
holding annual governor's prayer
breakfast at the Santa Fe
invitation and finally Mister
president The New Mexico Food
and farm state awards ceremony
will be held in the rotunda from
nine AM to eleven to ten AM
I yield other members for any
announcements and let folks know
we have on the agenda thank you
senator Wirth we do have other
members who would like to speak
and announces miscellaneous we
have Senator Woods followed by
god's blessings that fell upon
eastern New Mexico this this
couple last couple of days with
great snow fall and we so
Thank you thank you center was.
Center for the.
I thank you very much Mr
president members of the body I
just want to take a few moments
their executive director bill
Blair who is up in the gallery I
want to have him stand and be
recognized.
And we also have some very
hardworking cheerleading
players here this morning if we
can have the football team yes
stand up as well thank you Mr
president to recognize the apple
today if the body will help me
Senator there thank you Mr
president point of personal
privilege were very awful player
Senator then no I wasn't there
was no yeah awful
thank you senator Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president first ask
unanimous consent that we allow
cameras on the floor today.
Seeing no objection.
representative from NCSL NCSL as
our national conference of state
legislatures it's a bipartisan
an honor so Maryland is here she
has brought all of us donuts and
there in the Senate lounge
there's a whole variety of them
Maryland is going to be in there
let's welcome Maryland the a lot
of us.
Senate committee.
Thing is present members if you
know that centers get hungry too
delights from the vine the big
house and really worries I'm
unaware if any of these lovely
ladies are here in the in the
Thank you Senate's committee any
further announcement Senator
Smith center how to mail.
Mr president thank you so as you
know you're a proud alumnus of
the university of New Mexico
choreography you give me a call
but I want to welcome them and
think center by the welcome to
the Albuquerque Valley and
Sandia yeah awful programs as
well as rush soccer but most
Any further announces regard to
center to the center Stewart
then center for the Senator
Stewart thank you Mr president
Eliseo Gonzalez I believe that
many of them are in the
gallery sat correct raise your
hand if you're here with
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I I just
doing well and I I also wanted
to extend special thanks to the
state police officers here who
assisted him and waited with
him a speedy recovery.
Senator Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president it is my
lot of individuals a lot of
women we see more women coming
and running and we see more
women helping candidates and
Andrews was a past secretary
state of New Mexico and passed a
New Mexico federation of
democratic women president.
Chris Christie hill Smith this
the coral county federation of
democratic women president.
All MFA loans the Taos county
federation of democratic women
president.
women and also former house
representative.
Recent DO cear okay maybe you
should okay Marie city is also a
member of past federation of
democratic women stay present
Montoya yet Tony hawk is the sun
one federation of democratic
come she did not make it okay no
L. are to make it yeah of the
sun to go County federation
democratic past president and
federation of democratic women
secretary and Santa Fe County
past president they're working
so they can't be here but please
join me in welcoming them to the
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate because
today is behavioral health day
at the legislature there are a
psychiatric residents of wonder
if they would please stand up
these are doctors who are in
their third year of the
residency and the in the field
of psychiatry at the university
opinion to make sure they remain
in New Mexico after they
graduate they practice here in
our state thank you very much
for being here.
you know psychiatry is a very
demanding profession and.
The the skill the experience
disregard and think only of the
bottom of of the human being
from the neck down they're
dealing with the mind and in
dealing with the mind the body
from the neck down doesn't get
health parity bill and how it
will help raise the
reimbursement rates from health
plans to these individuals and
all mental health professionals
Mexico so thank you for honoring
us with your presence today and
thank you hopefully for staying
in New Mexico thank you.
Here no objections center for
the thank you very much Mr
president I also just want to
recognize The New Mexico
federation of democratic women
who are here today in a for the
one adviser and I don't want to
not recognize everybody that's
here but I want to put a special
a special shout out to my cousin
Clara Padilla Andrews if you'll
stand you've done so much work
for so many people for so many
And Mr present I do also want to
recognize the second campaign I
worked on was for county court
of a former state representative
ten years here in New Mexico
County clerk and our former
state president of the
Thank you very much Mr
president.
Thank you senator Senator Shendo
followed by Senator Gonzales
know that the tiles tiles winter
wine festival January twenty six
and twenty eighth will be
happening this week and on this
one some in our it's a wine
persons to attend this this is a
great economic development and a
good for the community from
hotels restaurants and everyone
that announcement.
We do have further
announcements.
Senator on this.
Thank you Mr president and I
apologize for the delay agency
present the Senate Judiciary
Committee has an agenda out for
a one thirty many we're gonna
actually made a two o'clock
today we've had a matter come up
that's going to require some of
our attention so we start with
the agenda start time at one
thirty thank you.
Thank you Senator about this.
Further announcements.
I
reports from rules once those
come down will read them in and
we have three confirmations
today other than that it's just
The reader to read.
Senate bill ten introduced by
senators Shendo Representative
Chandler senator Wirth and
state residents not eligible for
the rebates making
appropriations declaring an
emergency Senate bill ten.
Senate bill ten having been read
introduced by senator by the a
and act relating to business
entities requiring that articles
of organization for limited
liability companies include the
Senate Judiciary Senate bill two
or nine Senate Bill to ten
introduced by senators by the
and pope and act relating to
appropriation Senate Bill to
ten.
Senate bill ten having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to send a
health public affairs committee
thence Senate finance committee
career development success pilot
program making an appropriation
Senate Bill to ten.
Senate Bill to ten having been
by Senator pope and act relating
to military service amending
sections of the NMSA in nineteen
seventy eight to add space
forced to the definitions of
two twelve Senate bill two
twelve having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
public affairs committee.
Then Senate Judiciary Committee
pharmacy act established that
registered nurses and licensed
practical nurses employed by
opioid treatment centers may
dispense methadone tax home
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two thirteen at this
moment I'm gonna go ahead and
yield to senator Wirth before
going to other legislation
One that order business
committee reports the reader to
read the report.
Mr president your rules
committee has had it under
consideration Senate executive
department of public safety for
a term commencing on January
first twenty twenty three to be
served at the pleasure of the
governor your committee
recommends that the Senate
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion in
the the journal reflect that
they're acted upon individually.
Hearing no objection the reader
will read the committee reports.
as a member of the environmental
improvement board for a term
commencing on August fourth
twenty twenty two expiring
January first twenty twenty four
Senate executive letter number
twenty four dated January
twelfth twenty twenty three and
what's the governor makes the
at the pleasure of the governor
can your committee recommends
that the Senate confirm this
appointment respectfully
submitted to senator Katy M.
Duhigg chairwoman.
saying aye.
Those opposed may.
The eyes have it the committee
point of an adopted in the
journal show that they were
acted upon with one motion.
Senator Wirth.
twelve oh one PM the Senate will
come to order Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended in the the journal
show all those present in this
journal has been read in full
and approved subject to the
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I hereby submit the
credentials of Sandra E. Lee who
has been appointed to the
environmental improvement board
Well pursuant to Senate
executive message I move the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Sandra Jane E.
lead to the environmental
for confirmation to the
environment improvement board
she has twenty five years of
experience in working with
Environment Department and a
manager while she was there one
of the things that I thought was
really telling about her
experience and the secretary
Kenny mentioned this and it was
also brought up in response to a
think that's a really important
role for the environmental
improvement board which does all
the regulatory implementation
for many of the department
Senators we're debating the
confirmation the reappointment
to Sandra Jane E. Lee.
Anyone wishing debate.
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Sander Jane E.
Lee to the environmental
improvement board and ask for
show hands Senators your seats
we're voting.
If you wish to vote no.
as a member of the environmental
proven bore for term commencing
on August fourth twenty twenty
two expiring January first
twenty twenty four has been
confirmed by the New Mexico
state Senate Senator Wirth.
so much.
Senator Wirth excuse me center
how to meal.
safety department I now yield to
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president pursuant to sentence
executive message number one
dated January twentieth twenty
three I move the Senator hereby
explain thank you Mr president
I'm very honored to present
secretary Bali again for
confirmation this morning we had
a quite extraordinary hearing in
appreciated is that Secretary
Boeing was able to discuss the
issues that were brought up in
exactly what he's done to
address those issues just one
Very impressed with what the
secretary is done with crisis
intervention training for his
officers and just the
percentages they moved from what
happen and and I was willing to
do that words to describe
describe him this morning
integrity someone with humility
a great character I just think
really cool thing cell I'm
honored to present him and again
thank you the as is doing a
terrific job and will continue
to do so.
Thank you senator.
think Secretary bully for
agreeing to continue in his
position it was really great to
hear his reporting on the state
police and the true upward
it's absolutely necessary for
and and a sign of a good leader
when the when the the the people
that are on the ground are
supportive it shows that
Thank you Senator Baca further
debate.
Semenya's.
Thank you Mr president else
leader in our state police we
all rely on state police but in
rural New Mexico we rely extra
heavy on state police we drive I
forty they go out to the
When there's an accident on I.
forty in in your lan there any
ma'am it's guess who arrives
first state police.
And with his leadership and and
what he's done and and we're
further debate.
Senator Hotmail Senator Lopez
and Senator guess Mr president I
stand in strong support of this
done so much in just one year
but the one thing he did say is
you would like to see a way on
how New Mexico could get retired
law enforcement officers to get
again but in all seriousness
thank you so much cabinet
secretary for you for you and
your leadership and what you do
for New Mexicans thank you Mr
No in all honesty Mr chairman Mr
president I would
first say I appreciate you
sharing the information about
what you have been doing to work
and work with your team the
place the right movement and
again anything we can do to help
support with regards to the
training center sometimes it it
costs money.
Mr president it also like to say
incident I had a chance Mr
president to chat with each of
the officers and how would you
say when you get to talk with
someone you get to know who they
are and get a little get to know
serve us and serve the state of
New Mexico and our Mr president
our officers truly are stellar
thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez we do
have further debate center there
Is this all.
And I so appreciate cabinet
secretary designate valley for
appreciates as officers shows of
that appreciation.
that collaboration and.
Work together he realizes that
Family for all your.
That's all I have Mister
president thank you senator
there goes any further debate.
challenging discussions if your
wife is coming back to work as
part of that so I appreciate
that suggestion but fantastic
nominee and I'd ask the Senate
Joanne's anyone wishes to vote
no please raise your hand.
Senator is here suits face.
The Senate has reappointed Jason
arborea secretary of the
department of public safety for
term commencing on January first
twenty twenty three to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
credentials of Wayne Propst who
has been appointed as cabinet
secretary for the department of
finance and administration I now
yield to senator Munoz.
three I move the Senate do you
have and I confirm the
employment of Andrew probes as
to the deck W. secretary W.
department of finance and
administration DFA.
one apologized to Wayne and his
mother who was watching at a
news on watching on the web and
I know this is important to her
and she's a proud mother I
believe she's ninety years old
what is governments about it's
about honesty integrity and
trustworthiness those are the
three words that I can use to
agency or health care agency
worked in government manage
billions of dollars for the
state and that correctly.
When I first met Wayne I became
the chair of the investment and
scalp and any let me in the
right direction but always
trusted him.
And that's the most important
thing is we can have in the
secretary specially with DFA in
and the dollars they handle it
this is another day but no
Gertrude your son is a great
person you raised him correctly
you you taught him things I wish
matter what happens when will
always be friends and so with
that Mr present I think will
stand for questions thank you
senator debate in the
this nomination.
Mr president I have not got
always had.
Good information every time of
asking questions and I just
to meal thank you Mr president I
stand in full support of this
conferee and so I was able to
meet with Wayne yesterday and
within five minutes we realize
that our backgrounds are so
because he realizes it takes so
many people to work together and
make things wrong he's
definitely a class act and I now
consider him a friend and so he
chair T. shirts made just so you
know what to read go away then I
see center Pirtle has his on his
desk and so this is just as a re
affirmation that we stand in
support of this nomination you
know I I know way from way back
like most of us do probably when
he was with P. R. A. very very
we know to the PRC doing a great
job there the public regulation
commission after he worked for
Senate finance so we were lucky
enough to have been here for
awhile thank you again for that
grateful for his expertise and
just as big heart and commitment
to to public service thank you
and thanks to his wife Sarah for
your service to Mr president
Thank you Mr president I to
stand in support of this
nomination when he was at the P.
R. A. board that was my very
first session and I just
remember how patient he was with
explaining things to me in a way
that I could understand because
his wife Services well thank
you.
Thank Senator Lopez center by
the.
I thank you very much Mr
president I also rise and
support of this country just
always been on the spot and very
helpful and I really appreciate
that appreciate his family's
commitment also to our state in
so many different ways and I I
met a couple of people Mr
I think is weighing in and he's
just a wonderful human being who
continues to give to the state
thank you very much Mr president
thank you Andrew for all your
hard work thank you senator for
the further debate we have
and it it's about trust and I
know that when I speak with him
and he gives me an answer we
have a conversation certainly
can trust what he's telling me
and I think that means
everything thank you very much.
the city of Alamogordo
and Wayne has always been
helpful to always been
responsive and you know one
proud and pleased to to support
his his nomination thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Griggs.
Any further debate we have
senator Byrd.
in a position like this and
someone who is always responsive
every time I've had to call find
out back to the E. are a an E.
in the form that the lay person
can understand so that's very
much appreciated but stand full
support of this and and looking
forward to having one on board
president and thank you the body
I don't always want to forget
behind every every man there's
there's a woman are behind every
woman there's a man that that's
there to support him every state
you to but today's Wednesday so
we're gonna break on him and
don't be a little bit jealous
but with that Mr president I
think that I asked I asked that
the Senate do high do slide here
confirm the appointment of
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
administration for children seen
on January third twenty twenty
three to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the New
introduction of legislation on
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
Senate bill nineteen introduced
of up to date professional law
enforcement and public safety
tell community training and
personal professional
development systems that meet
best practices and involving
development training and
performance standards required a
comprehensive review of the law
enforcement and public safety
tele communicator training
systems at least every five
beginning a revocation process
providing that board
investigation documents shall
remain confidential until final
disposition of the case making
Senate finance committee Senate
bill nineteen.
Senate bill two fourteen
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act making
appropriation to the rural
libraries endowment fund Senate
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee sense to
finance Senate bill two
fourteen.
Senate Bill to fifteen
introduced by senators Moores
prescribing penalties Senate
Bill to fifteen Senate Bill to
fifteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
Representative Chasey and act
relating to actions affecting
property identifying the
limiting exemptions at certain
legal proceedings provided for
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee thanks to Senate
Judiciary Senate bill two
sixteen.
lobbyist regulation act
requiring lobbyists to report
compensation received for
lobbying making technical
changes to the advertising
campaign reporting requirements
seventeen.
Senate Bill to eighteen
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and mowers and others and act
relating to lobbying requiring a
eighteen.
Senate Bill to eighteen have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the rules committee thanks to
Judiciary Senate bill two
eighteen.
And act relating to athletics
removing the prohibition on post
secondary educational
institutions arranging
composition comp compensation
for the use of a student
educational institution in the
past four years to
represent a student athlete who
was attending that post
secondary educational
two nineteen.
Senate bill two twenty
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act relating to
taxation distribute in a portion
of the liquor excise tax to
and treatment fund making an
appropriations Senate bill two
twenty Senate bill two twenty
have been read twice by title is
or printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
act related to taxation creating
the rail infrastructure income
tax credit and the rail
infrastructure corporate income
tax credit Senate bill two
Senate bill twenty two
introduced by Senator Pirtle and
act relating to records
requiring that original
documents relating to water
rights and water data remain
conservation committee since two
Judiciary Senate bill two twenty
two Senate bill two twenty three
introduced by Senator Sedillo
schedule by rural outlining
requirements that the Human
Services Department must follow
an established see the new child
sports schedule updating
statutory references to the
committee thanks to Senate
Judiciary Senate bill two twenty
three Senate bill two twenty
four introduced by Senator so
enrolling their children in
Medicaid Senate bill two twenty
four Senate bill two twenty four
and then read twice by title
sort of printed referred to
Senate health and public affairs
act relating to public safety
requirements certain purses
employed in filmmaking to
complete hunter safety training
Senate bill two twenty five.
Senate bill two twenty I have
twenty five Senate bill two
twenty six introduced by Senator
Lopez and others and act
relating to state person and
acting that diversity act
and inclusion council providing
duties requires state agencies
to develop and implement
policies to identify assess and
decrease institutional racism
twenty six Senate bill two
twenty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of public affairs
committee thanks to finance
Mexico to provide funding for
the operational expenses of the
Chicana and Chicano studies
department Senate bill two
twenty seven Senate bill two
twenty seven have been read
introduced by Senator Lopez and
others and act making
appropriation to the board of
regents of the university Mexico
to fund project echo programs
public affairs committee sense
to finance Senate bill two
twenty eight.
Senate bill two twenty nine
introduced by Senator Lopez.
immigrant juvenile
classification amending and
enacting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight declaring
an emergency Senate bill two
twenty nine Senate bill two
Senate bill two thirty
introduced by Senator Saddam you
and pirtle an act relating to
law enforcement amending
sections of the NMSA nineteen
making an appropriation Senate
bill two thirty Senate bill two
thirty have been read twice by
title is ordered printed
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee thanks to Senate
physician shortages Senate bill
two thirty one Senate bill two
thirty one have been read twice
by title is ordered pre and
referred to the Senate Education
requiring the superintendent of
insurance to promulgate rules
establishing a time frame for
insurers to load information on
approved providers into their
provider payment systems require
thirty two Senate bill two
thirty two have been read twice
by title sort of printed
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
scents to Senate tax business
amending sections of the uniform
health care decisions act
relating to orders not to
resuscitate for un emancipated
minors secretary Senate bill two
thirty three.
Senate bill two thirty four
introduced by senators committee
and act relating to public
schools prohibiting the sale of
soda on public school grounds
Senate bill two thirty four
Senate bill two thirty four
Senate bill two thirty five
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to taxation
increasing the tax rate of tax
from the tax to a new nicotine
use prevention and control fund
making appropriation Senate bill
two thirty five.
Senate bill two thirty I have
Senate bill two thirty six
introduced by Senator souls and
act relating to higher education
and acting the university
faculty research grant act
receive research grants creating
the university faculty research
grant Fund making appropriation
Senate bill two thirty six
Senate bill two thirty six
haven't read twice by title Sir
senator souls and act relating
to higher education enacting the
university analysis and research
grant act creating the
university analysis and research
grant program at the higher
making appropriation Senate bill
two thirty seven Senate bill two
thirty seven have been read
twice by title Sir printed
referred to the Senate Education
Committee thence to Senate
beginning January first twenty
twenty eight Senate bill two
thirty eight Senate bill two
thirty eight have been read
twice by title Sir present
Senator Campos and
Representative Joseph Sanchez
and act relating to water
infrastructure creating the a
second bureau and the Interstate
Stream Commission providing
conservation committee cents to
finance Senate bill two thirty
nine.
Senate bill two forty introduced
by Senator o'neal and
read twice by title sort of
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee cents two cents tax
business and transportation
Senate bill two forty.
economic resiliency Act creating
the prosperity and economic
resiliency council providing
powers and duties creating the
the prosperity and and and
economic resiliency program fund
providing for an annual
distribution from the prosperity
and economic resiliency
emergency Senate bill two forty
one Senate bill two forty one
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
amending the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act to change
the period of the liberty for a
medical cap but cannabis patient
registry identification card and
and public affairs committee
thanks to finance Senate bill
two forty two.
Senate bill two forty through
three introduced by Senator
entities that deliver goods from
making available or delivering
goods and single use plastic
checkout bags providing a
penalty Senate bill two forty
tax business and transportation
Senate bill two forty three.
Senate bill two forty four
introduced by Senator pope an
act relating to child care
Defense in the United States
Coast Guard Senate bill two
forty four Senate bill two forty
four have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health of
Senate bill two forty five.
Introduced by senators Stefan
rural emergency hospital
licensure requirements Senate
bill two forty five Senate bill
two forty five have been read
twice by title Sir printed and
Senate joint resolution eight
introduced by Senator Pirtle a
joint resolution proposing to
amend article eight section one
of the constitution of the
Mexico to allow the percentage
provided by law Senate joint
resolution eight Senate joint
resolution eight had been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
rules committee thanks to Senate
memorial declaring February
thirteenth twenty twenty three
New Mexico National Board
certified teachers recognition
day in the Senate Senate
president's table Senate
memorial ten.
Senate memorial eleven
introduced by senators Lopez and
Correa Hemphill a memorial
declaring January twenty six
not printed not referred
committee placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial eleven.
Senator Wirth.
Madam president your Education
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill three has
had it under consideration
Senator souls thank you madam
chair I move adoption the
committee report.
on adduction of a favorable
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed.
two has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
finance committee respectfully
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed nay.
Committee report is about.
Senator Wirth I thank you madam
but folks we're going back to if
there's no objection we're going
to go back committee reports we
forgot to college eyes for that
five has had it under considered
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended respectfully
them with one motion but that
the journal right reflected they
were acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports Senate bill twenty three
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
thirty one do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill forty do pass and
Ortiz Y. Pino chairman center
Casey PNL madam president I move
the adoption of the committee
report on a favorable adoption
of committee report from the
health and public affairs
Madam president your
conservation committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
one has had it under
provide extra woman Senator
Stefanics madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
Vince referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill fifty three do not
pass but that it be.
Substituted with Senate
conservation committee
Senator Elizabeth to fenics
chairwoman.
Senator Stefanics madam
president I move the adoption of
the committee report on adoption
of a favorable committee report
from the conservation committee
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
saying no objections were
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president members that's it for
remind everyone that judiciary
will be starting at two PM today
thank you any other
announcements Senator creeks.
Thank you madam president and I
just wanted to bring out
And the the bill wears a.
Course.
Going along we we heard
testimony from those in the
audience.
And then the bill.
I get it I understand some of
that but the particular bill
that we're talking about was a
bill that had something to do
to may be show those people.
That we had our backs.
But because of the way that bill
was handled in committee.
opportunity to be fixed if you
were bad it was used kids.
So I had an individual in there
with me and I think a lot of you
know.
We just couldn't hardly take
enough time to even talk about
the bill.
No we need people like her.
Are we had members of the
committee voted against the
tabling.
And so I appreciate those
members it did and actually
the not so much whether I should
have a bill immediately table I
should have a bill kids later.
That's the process that's the
Didn't get the chance to know
what we thought other than the
fact that we don't have time.
I manage to manage we don't even
that members of the body
understand what that did.
And I hope members of the body
really understand how much these
people have suffered.
It's just heartbreaking to she.
What is happened to.
And so I hope.
Address the issues of out of
control prescribed burns.
some approach or we can store
the four servers out and we can
make them aware that we're
extraordinarily concerned about
issues like this that I hope
structure I understand that that
can happen to anybody anytime.
Issues these people that somehow
I believe need to know.
this time ever again thank you
madam president.
Thank you senator creeks I only
learned about that this morning
and so I'm going to have some
and talk about this issue you
know we have another bill out
there wanting to put a bunch of
state money to helping those
Several times.
By doing what they call
controlled burns but everyone of
us to live here know that spring
because our windows so bad in
the spring.
And yet for some reason our
federal government can't get
their head out of the rear ends
and figure that out.
It doesn't take a rocket
Service tries to manage the
force in the desert New Mexico
like they manage the forest in
Georgia.
We as a state and we as a as a
That is not proper management of
are forced.
If they want to look at how to
manage the endorsed properly.
They can go down to do a tour of
Yes it wouldn't really have
legally applied.
To the US government's property.
But I say as a taxpayer as a US
citizen that that is not the
say you know they ignored us as
a legislature and they burned it
down again.
Yet to this day we still can't
use bonito lake.
actually managing are forced
burning it down does way more
harm to the environment.
Than it does to harvest those
trees and keep it healthy.
Washington DC thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator Brett all come
back to Senator Pirtle Senator
Shendo.
Thank you madam chair a this is
for a
think mandatory fire drill at
two o'clock.
And so I'm hoping that if we get
done with the floor session we
start at one thirty but I want
to make a note again tomorrow
before we get the thank you
thank you senator centos Senator
Pirtle thank you madam president
whole situation and and just
kind of the people in the
resilience that I think we
should all be proud of in that
area but just understand that
you know the federal government
floor with me but he was on the
the house floor with with
Representative Castellano
Joe Jacob very.
destroyed and I would talk on on
the phone with them from time to
time you can hear his voice the
smoke just taking its toll on
his voice that what what
physical effects it was having
on him and they were going to
wait around for the federal
government should and do what
they needed to do after they
caused the problem.
And I think the biggest thing
here is after all of that let
down the let down from the
present I appreciate the speech
you gave on opening day I
appreciate your words and and I
know you're going to do exactly
what you said to do and I hope
we do because these are the real
life things that whenever my
wife said.
for pets and we just drove to
Vegas with not really any plan
luckily we were able to unload
the hay get it out to people
that needed it but that's what
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Us other announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Matt madam president
so with that unanimous consent
announcement about the committee
the meeting this afternoon did
we for the for health and public
affairs I don't believe so
health and public information
drawing a lot of interest from
an anesthesiologist assistants
and the nurse anesthetists we
have the
Y. Pino of the Senate is now in
