Senator Burt here Senator
Campos.
Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Etcetera Hamlin.
Senator Hemphill here Senator
Etcetera Lopes's.
Senator.
Senator Morris.
Centerman yes.
Center Neville.
Etcetera now.
Senator to the Pino.
Center PO.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
chamber we're lacking a quorum.
All Senators please report to
the chamber you now have a
quorum Mister president.
voices that ongoing seventh day
Adventist Marcy park and that
you please remain standing for
the pledge of allegiance to me
that but today by Senator
smitteez pledge allegiance to
It is about heads impression.
How is the dear heavenly father.
being able to open our eyes and
see the sun.
Being able to breathe the air.
And the opportunities you give
us to work for your people.
Jesus Christ who came to die for
all of us.
Also we want to ask today that.
This the leaders in these
So that they can make the
correct decisions.
For the good of your people.
And not only for the benefits of
ourselves.
You give us the honor to work
for you.
And I want to ask that you bless
each one of the people here
present.
We thank you in the name of
Jesus amen.
From at the thought hello and.
Thanks to the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
order of business.
Thank you Mr president good
morning everyone a unanimous
consent go that our business now
Smith's and miscellaneous around
that order business
announcements miscellaneous and
certainly at this point just
thinking about why we're here
why we do this and really
understanding how how big what
chief clerk and her staff have
provided some special gifts to
our victorious basketball team
on their desks and we will a
that until we get to that point.
Mr president today's cowboys for
cancer research today and I'd
ask unanimous consent that we
remove Senate memorial three
cowboys for cancer research from
Senator Peter Wirth and Mr
president when we get to that
point out of the center of the
bill and we will read that
memorial this morning he's got
some gas we have five
confirmation so we can get that
done
Mr president I understand you
have a.
Lieutenant governor and training
today that you're going to
A unanimous consent and I'll
just read it up front and it was
so it was a report that got read
out prematurely without an
amendment on it so this is
Diamond it's on today's calendar
it got read out before
incorrectly with an extra
amendment that didn't get read
out in the report so I ask that
we expunge the Senate Indian and
here so I'd ask unanimous
consent that that that we allow
the court to take that action.
Is there a question Adams
consent on house bill thirty
five seeing no objection.
good morning Mr president you
look great up there and thank
you Justine just consent to
allow cameras in the Senate
chamber and gallery today.
Hearing no objections cameras
Further announcements Senators.
Senator Padilla thank you very
much Mr president I know that
you have a very special guests
district I am very proud to
introduce this young man I met
him Mr president weighs about
half as high as he is now in the
U. significantly taller than me
now and so Mister president my
about seven feet tall there so
who knows what's going to happen
by the time is twenty one he's
an honor roll student in the
eighth grade at the southwest
preparatory learning center
engineer when he finishes
college and rebuild New Mexico
from from from the ground up yet
the line is the New York Giants
football fan and plays football
himself as you can tell by his
kids grow like I said I mean
when I met him he was just this
little guy and now he's just
this towering example of of
leadership in his school at six
feet tall and we're excited to
probably earlier today and again
thank you for hosting him in
your office his grandparents are
here James input the Shia
Cisneros from Los Alamos there
in the in the gallery Mister
president and also his father
hard working and I've never
worked with someone who is
picked up the legislative
process.
As fast as she has I'm very
proud of her and as stressed out
as we get in the website is she
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator the.
Today I have with me a young
lady I'm Marlys star via and she
is a student at Santa Fe high
school and is a granddaughter of
one of the Senate sergeant of
high grade point average in
school.
Marla is also a fantastic funny
character artist.
More a plans to attend culinary
ask the Senate to please welcome
Martha Stewart via to the Senate
floor.
o'neill thank you Mr president
of the members of very honored
to have a special guest today.
M. Cameron if you please stand
Seger as she's miss rodeo New
after which she moved to New
York to attend a certain
University called Cornell's my
alma mater.
While at Cornell she competed in
doing consulting and molecular
diagnostics in the future I am a
plans on attending law school
and pursue a career representing
R. Emma has earned the privilege
to compete at the miss rodeo
America pageant in Las Vegas
Nevada this December we're she
will represent the state of New
As of miss rodeo queen thank
you.
Thank you senator o'neill.
see no further announcements.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth take us to the next
order of business.
Senator Wirth.
legislation idea the senator
Neville for Senate memorial
number three cowboys for cancer
research and for our reader that
one will be read we're in that
be not printed not referred to a
committee in the to be read for
the third time in full
preparatory to its final
passage.
The reader to read.
March tenth twenty twenty three
cowboys for cancer research day
in the Senate whereas cowboys
for cancer research was
established in nineteen eighty
projects in the state whereas
cowboys for cancer research
started as a humble team roping
fundraiser in Los crucis that
nineteen eighty one whereas the
alma cohort Memorial cowboys for
research cancer research
endowment was established in
nineteen ninety nine to support
cancer research at the
mile radius and whereas cowboys
for cancer research has made
donations to the university of
New Mexico comprehensive cancer
center for more than forty years
established in two thousand
eleven to support cancer
research and community outreach
projects at New Mexico State
University and whereas New
edge cancer research and whereas
the two endowment funds are
worth a total of five million
one hundred thousand dollars.
inception and they continued to
contribute their resources and
knowledge in the hope of finding
a cure for cancer now therefore
research in New Mexico and be it
further resolved that March
tenth twenty twenty three be
declared cowboys for cancer
research day in the Senate and
in the City of Santa Fe Senator
Steven P. Neville how we see
Morales president Jerry due to
Lujan chief clerk New Mexico
state Senate.
Centerville to explain the
memorial thank you Mr president
Mr president cancers not to nice
thing it's something that
touches nearly all of us my own
this is a terrible disease the
cowboys for cancer research
group works hard to raise money
to go to research and help us
all to defeat this enemy of
Senator is a rare debating
Senator moral three and I'm
again Senator could err Hemphill
thank you Mr president and I
want to thank the sponsor of
was four he turns twenty eight
tomorrow thanks in large part to
the reserves that people have
for bone cancer it used to have
only a thirty percent survival
rate and he's been cancer free
now twenty four years so I know
Mr president thank you Senator
Hemphill Senator Woods thank you
Mr president and not to want to
Roping are to benefit this
particular calls and the they
just really enjoyed ourselves
and because.
the world this is one thing.
We should study and try to
defeat even harder than we're
doing today so thank you Senator
for bringing that forward.
Say no further debate Senate
available close.
Mr president of the Senate
memorials number three do now
Senate memorial three cowboys
for cancer research state has
duly passed the Senate senator
Neville thank you Mr president
if I could I have a couple of
guests on the rostrum to your
very personal cowboys for cancer
research began in honor of his
aunt alma Mexico horn who was
taken by cancer in nineteen
eighty one L. mock albacore
Memorial cowboys for cancer
comprehensive cancer center lets
give.
Tony a big hand.
organizations inception in
nineteen eighty two she has a
small farm I believe she said
the south valley but near
Albuquerque and she's worried
about water this year but I sure
it's snowing pretty good
practice known today up in
applause as well.
And I don't know she still there
but up in the gallery Merion
McCann who is the coordinator
we had a recent reunion I think
is our tenth or something like
that we get together but then
have been long time friends
since high school and I'd like
to recognize Merion McCann up in
the gallery.
Senator Peter Wirth takes the
next order of business thank you
Mr president emphasis that we go
that our visit mount Spence and
miscellaneous where that order
business announcements
miscellaneous.
here with us today the Sikora
warriors girls golf team have
twenty one the state
and they are not just going for
a repeat but they're going for
at a three peat right.
So as I name each champion
T. von and I am.
Natasha Apodaca.
And coaches Christina Griego.
It is me gal.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Hemphill and
congradulations source the court
orders lady golf team.
Senator my SS thank you Mr
president as you'll know every
other year we missed the state
tournament.
Of but I want to give some
chairmanship yeah I give a shout
out of these are schools double
a Escalante will play Texaco
today at five for the
chairmanship girls three A.
And then the I A. girls Hobbs
please volcano Vista center it
to for the championship in boys
basketball Mr president a single
a model and I will play fort
championship game against the
winner of pickles then all that
that's goals from Santa Fe three
a state Mike's awaits the winner
Roberts and Navajo Navajo prep
anticipated chairmanship eight
o'clock Saturday night
vocational Vista will place
Sandia high on all Albuquerque
finals all of the scores a
throughout the weekend and on
Monday thank you Mr president
my Estes for bringing that up
because they do say that your
district is not as good as can
be as good as your basketball
teams that are Representative
within your district and even
teams that are playing and
wished him good luck as they're
under a different thank you the
state has identification Senator
Pinto.
Any further announcement
Senators.
Thank you Mr president Senator
Ingle has some guests that are
you getting M. badged up their
meals Senator Ingle.
reader to read the message Mr
president I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the duly
enrolled and ready and grossed
copy a Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
M. Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk
the journal so the message from
the house has been received
reiterate Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
sixty two as amended by the
house House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two with emergency clause
house transportation public
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
the general show the message
from the house has been
received.
business committee reports the
reader trigger point.
Mr president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificates of
recognition certificate number
respectfully submitted Katy M.
do have chair Senator.
This present ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed treat all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
Congrats congratulations
certificate number nine.
Congradulations certificate
to adopt committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part has been
adopted in the journal reflect
they were acted upon
substitute for House Bill fifty
three as amended has had it
under consideration and reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee report has been
adopted.
The reader to read.
Mr president your Education
Committee to whom has been
respectfully submitted senator
William P. souls chairman
Senator souls Mr present ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
did agree to be allowed to read
all the committee reports that
we vote on them with one motion
Senate Bill for seventeen do
pass respectfully submitted
senator William P. sold chairman
Senator souls I move adoption
the committee report centers we
individually.
The reader to read Mr president
your Judiciary Committee too who
has been referred Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part has been
adopted I'd like to announce of
the members of the body that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senator
Morial sixty two.
had them under consideration
reports that same have been
doing the rules and engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee port has been adopted
I'd like to announce to the
members of the body that the
referred Senate bill three
eighty one with emergency clause
has had it under consideration
and reports that same has been
duly and all rules and engrossed
Senator Campos.
Move adoption the committee
report we have a more motion to
have signed an open session
Senate bill three eighty one
with emergency clause.
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
attention of the Senate here
just a few minutes we're about
to introduce some folks that are
extremely important in this
country.
And there are the commanding
stand on I read their names is a
colonel Terrence Taylor.
Colonel Taylor.
Colonel Britt Greer.
Caption Britney hall.
and there's also Senator Woods
down there and I was out rain
came in the service I was a
corporal.
And Mr president it's my
fifteen years ago or something
that base was under closure and
we work together as a
Unitarianism entered in New
Mexico to keep that open and
it's basically got progress
a great great bass and we have a
former Air Force base here then
this in the Senate Senator pope
is right here and he's a little
president members of the Senate.
Mr president
Senator Ingle forgot to mention
the other person who served in
the Air Force.
And ladies.
Thank you senator rents any
further announcements Senators.
you Mr president so we're we do
have the committee reports from
rules and we'll get those right
in just to give the members a
heads up on this morning's.
o'clock this evening so one
through six and thirty three in
that order with that Mr
president Ms consent we go that
our business committee reports.
message number I dated March
second twenty twenty three and
what's the governor governor
makes the following appointment
string of us move Kamal of Ph.D
twenty eight your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted K.
Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator.
objection the reader to read.
Senate executive message number
I dated March second twenty
twenty three and what's the
governor makes the following
appointment agent Joseph so
December thirty first twenty
twenty four your committee
recommends the Senate confirm
this appointment Senate exit
executive message number I dated
term commencing on January first
twenty twenty three and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight your committee
recommends that the Senate
appointment Cassandra digna but
these to dust as a student
member of the northern Mexico
College Board of regents for a
term commencing upon
confirmation expiring December
dated October twenty first
twenty twenty two and what's
legislature makes the following
appointment Kurt a summer as a
member of the state investment
appointment respectfully
submitted Senator Katy M. Duhigg
chairwoman Senator.
Mr president I moved from their
point Senator is we have a
The reader to read.
This president your ended rural
and cultural affairs committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Shannon D. Pinto chairwoman.
Senator Campos thank you Mr
president move adoption the
committee report we have a
motion to death Committee part
Mr president unanimous consent
we go about our business
confirmations and I yield to
senator hot I meal we're in that
order business confirmations
college and Mr president I would
like to speak on this country's
behalf so Mister more and have a
long history in northern New
Mexico his family was
instrumental in starting
that there was a passage of a
mill levy for the creation of
the northern New Mexico branch
college ability to the
reintroduction of trades at
building the campus and by
gained the trust of the members
of our community and with that
Mr president I yield.
and I should read this I'm sorry
Mr president.
for northern New Mexico college.
Seeing no objection.
Centers we're debating the
reappointment of Michael Allen
Martin.
it was my good fortune three
years ago I think three or four
years ago when he was first
nominated as a region for note
northern New Mexico college to
got great ideas for the full
utilization of that campus which
is long been neglected and do we
we we we have a great
vocational education of I think
it's a great compliment to
what's going on in the Espanola
campus and I would really hope
that the members would reconfirm
Mr Martin thank you Mr president
CNN center how to meal to close
Mr president I just at the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Michael a more
in.
voted in the affirmative.
Except for those voting in the
negative with a show of hands.
We're voting to your seats
please.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
reappointment of Michael Elam
worn as a member of the northern
New Mexico's border regions for
term commencing on January first
twenty twenty three and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight has been duly
him and joining him today is
Kristi Garcia if you can also
stand and ladies and gentleman
of the Senate if you can help me
in congratulating Mr more in.
Senator Hotmail Mr president I
ask that the credentials of
Cassandra of these that does the
presented to the full Senate for
three I believe that the Senate
do hereby confirm the
appointment of Cassandra do
about these that does as good a
board of regents for northern
New Mexico college.
the first in her family to earn
a high school diploma and a
woman who is in pursuit of her
education at northern New Mexico
college she works that embody
above audit which is that as a
the education belongs to
everyone should have the
opportunity to obtain it she
works at the food pantry within
our college to ensure that not
only students are fed but works
not have one in and around the
Espanola valley her ultimate
goal is to become an attorney
and immigrant attorneys she is
the true pride of the Espanola
valley and I am so proud to
confirmation of Cassandra.
The nobody said do is as a
member of the student border
regions from northern New Mexico
college any debate senators.
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senate is here seeds please.
All senators to your seats.
enough but these the Taos as a
student member of the northern
New Mexico's border regions for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty four has been duly
her father who's here Danny but
these it does so if all of us
can please give a round of
applause for miss parties that
down.
Ezzell tree be presented to the
full Senate for consideration as
part of regents for New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology I now yield to
senator Cory I have filled
Senator could entail thank you
I move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Adrian Celeste three to the
board of regents for New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology.
regent he stands out as one of
the most outstanding hard
working accomplished and
determined students in New
Mexico he's an he's studying at
but he's so incredibly grateful
to be here in New Mexico and
parts that he prefers that here
in New Mexico and so we're
hoping to keep him here he's
America also he was named
electrical engineer scholar his
senior year he worked for New
Mexico tech visual light
have no doubt that Mr Celeste
three will use his skills
talents experience and
intelligence to change the world
and continue to make New Mexico
Senators are debating the
confirmation of agent also
Silistra as a student member of
the New Mexico institute of
mining and technology border
regents.
appointment of Adrian Celeste
street and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the rules been
called in those present voted in
the affirmative except those
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
the New Mexico institute of
mining and technology border
regions for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty four has duly been
confirmed by the New Mexico
three on his appointment and
thank you Adrian for your
willingness to serve.
credentials of Dr should any of
us Motco Molla the presented to
the full Senate for
consideration as part of regents
to the New Mexico institute of
mining and technology I now
twenty twenty three I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of sufficiency of us
will come all out Ph.D to the
Senate and those individuals
that were listening this morning
know that this individual not
only brings intellect but he
brings if you will a very
Molla it he is he has that drive
to continue to innovate and
integrated security solutions
along with that he is a cyber
security expert in technology
but many think tanks actually
the current collaborated with
the US department of defense the
US intelligence and so along
with that he continues if you
will of the work to invest in
and he listens and as a very
approachable when he came to New
Mexico he came to New Mexico
tech with ten dollars in his
we perceive possible and he has
had great mentors as so have I
and these individuals are the
former and the late senator
out to meet on a Senator Fidel
from point to the Luna but along
with that has really instilled
if you will so many aspirations
and drive move quemada so with
The appointment as a member of
the Mexico into the mining
technology board of regents
doctrine of awesome Kolomyia.
Senator Stewart.
Please resume and the folks that
stood up to talk about him it is
just really unbelievable that a
young man twenty years ago
from them so we all tried to get
him to take over our cyber
security division here instead
of hit the work he's doing he
politely said well he's already
dedication that he has
Mr president I just must tell
you that I've I've only served
in rules now for a couple of
people that come before us we
just have rock stars here these
students were another just
amazing these two young students
about this man and what he's
doing for the state so thank you
very much thank you Senator
Stewart.
Any further debate Senators.
in our district and I'm so
incredibly honored to have you
here and really really impressed
you Mr president thank you
Senator Hemphill.
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate Senator
forward so Mister president
members of the Senate I asked
the Senate do hereby confirm the
we're voting all Senators.
To your seats.
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative on the negative the
appointment a string of us move
Kamal a Ph.D as a member of the
New Mexico institute of mining
and technology border regions
thank you Mr president of the
members of the Senate will help
me congratulate Dr sure any of
us will come on a thank you very
much members of the Senate.
Senator Leo how to mail Mr
president I ask that the
credentials of Kerr a summer's
be presented to the full Senate
for consideration to the state
twenty first twenty twenty two I
move that's the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Kerr
a summer to the state investment
council Niasse that the Senate
little bit about Kirti summaries
shareholder and managing
director of the law firm summer
you doll for MPA located right
here in Santa Fe New Mexico he
practices in the areas of the of
transaction he has been the
chairman of the New Mexico Bar
Association section on
taxation's two times and is a
member of the American Bar
Kircher the public probate court
rules committee for the New
Mexico Supreme Court for twenty
fifteen to twenty twenty to
seventeen Kerr received his
bachelor's in economics from
I was interested this morning to
to learn all these things about
him but most importantly of the
the testimony regarding his
fiduciary and and for a the
debating the appointment as a
member of the state investment
council Kurt a summer.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you members and
thank you Senator Baca and
individual who I've known for
over thirty years as a lawyer
here in Santa Fe and I certainly
would concur with Senator Baca
served in and worked with
different groups and and when.
Steve we said the investment
council was was looking for
members and Kurt was a
investment council and will
allow us to really continue the
work that's been done over the
years on the state investment
council which now has it
functioning as a truly
independence
were we're in a position now we
can pick good people like this
and we're not in a position
where we're constantly having to
watch over what's going on
that's what we want to have a
Any further debate senators.
CNN Senator Baca close.
give each other an appointment
and I'll tell you I'll be honest
with you I looked far and wide
for an appointment for this
position and for one reason or
another of people that I came
who is well qualified for the
position and I was very
impressed with him and you know
this truly is a bipartisan
appointment of somebody that we
senators present be shown voting
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands thanks Senator Baca
senators we're voting all
The list of now please raise
your hand.
By a vote of thirty for the
affirmative zero on the negative
duly confirmed by the New Mexico
Senate Senator Baca your
colleagues please stand and help
me recognize Kerr Somers as our
newest member of the state
investment health.
Sen Peter Wirth I think it's the
next order of business thank you
Mr president Ms that we go about
our business announcements and
miscellaneous where that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth
for committees and be back
somewhere around six o'clock
this afternoon so with that Mr
president you have is that we go
that the border Business third
we'll to Senator Michael
Padilla.
I thank you very much Mr
president I pass instance into
the Senate that the rules we
suspended the record show that
all action for placing Senate
debate amendment or substitution
seeing no objection.
Senator by the end to explain
the bill thank you very much Mr
president I do have a
potentially other experts if we
hoping he's ready whenever he's
ready and Mamas out here taken
some pictures and so we're in
good shape that way thank you Mr
president so Senate bill percent
tax business and transportation
so it's two percent of the one
universal service fund in New
Mexico that tiny little fee on
all of our cell phone bills and
all of our telephone bills will
wonder where does that money go
well we reform the fund back in
brought together The New Mexico
exchange carrier group the small
wireless companies the big
wireless companies the telephone
companies everyone has stood in
support of this bill now because
we're trying to do here is
requirement that the rural
carriers who receive access
reduction payments spend at
least a sixty percent of the
funds that they receive on
broadband development so really
that we changed back in two
thousand seventeen and more
importantly it takes the the
portion that's not for the A. R.
U. S. A. R. S. payments and move
requires an to do four things
for us tell us whether we need
to re purpose.
These dollars altogether give us
a methodology to determine
broadband support levels and
changes on per connection
assessments so altogether what
that does for us Mr president as
it begins to modernize this very
important funding New Mexico and
your more toward new
Anyone wishing to debate.
I see no debate we do have
debate and we do have debate
up for all of his work on this I
know that it took an incredible
amount of time and effort on
meeting with different groups in
rural communities to come up
attention creating this
important legislation thank you
Mr president thank you senator
today Hemphill we do have
further debate.
Senator Williams thank you Mr
Mr president I do is asking
would you like to yield expert.
He said yes he's right if your
question sentiment us all right
we're gonna get a yield sign
where the where the broadband or
the the fiber is cut in the
state and relay this new fiber
is there penalties.
When they do that if the when
the severity of what transpires
and I know that that's above all
its volleyed over to the public
regulation commission to
determine what or if there are
any of those penalties and I
maybe a try for Kate approach to
ensure the communities don't
lose out whenever one of those
cuts occurs.
And Mr presence in center so if
we were to add this and in this
from Albuquerque to a Gallup it
was like seventy six thousand
dollars a minute.
In our problem was we had no
Mr president I think that's
fantastic I think that's
something that in the rules of
promulgation portion of the
legislation that would would
come to bear and I have to say
that
the good news is that the
broadband office that we just
created recently they're looking
at all these projects and making
recommendations as these things
are come and coming to bear I
we get better why fire our
service in our capitol building
you we know in my office we have
nine people we had one point for
everybody and and so everybody
up the broadband so we're not
losing the links and on zoom
meetings like we did prior in
the session and things going
down with that allow the
Legislature nice to more
point when we have that in the
building Mr president one word
yes but to expand on that a
little bit further you know why
did have repeaters placed in
one hundred years was related to
technology so I think that we
need to work very hard to make
sure that all of these public
dollars that are utilized are on
the front end and that's exactly
what the legislation does it
Representative rapidly why are
we doing this quick here.
Well that's I think that having
the broadband office Mister
president is going to be what's
going to help us to have a
directed in a focus group of
people that probably weren't
what happens and in government
when they get into a mindset
that we can get things move
quickly so with that I'll thank
yes sponsor.
witness to close thank you very
much Mr president I want to
thank my expert witness here
he's done a fabulous job already
has got some more work to do
today yeah this is definitely
gonna move us in the right
show that the roll then called
in those all those present voted
for affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands Senators we're voting
all senators to your seats
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate tax business
transportation committee sub two
percent of the one fifty five
has duly passed the Senate
Senator Padilla thank you very
thank you Mr president this is
Senate confirmation Committee
substitute for Senate bill four
sixty four and ask unanimous
consent of the some of the
See no objections center minus
it messes to explain thank you
Mr president Senate bill four
sixty four rig is regarding the
agro tourism is a flourishing
both multi billion dollar
business nationally there's many
on the a new businesses starting
up in New Mexico like a pumpkin
SS we are debating Senate
conservation committee subs two
percent of bill for sixty foral
you'll to centers committee.
Thank you Mr president with the
bill sponsor please you said SSD
is when these these places is
wonderful wonderful places that
are unique to New Mexico they
are you know looking for some
taken out of or about to vote on
which would you mind telling us
why that language for limited
liability for agritourism was
removed Senator SS thank you Mr
there is limited liability in
New Mexico law similar to agro
tourism as a racist skiing
horseback riding and of course
Thank you Mr president center
thank you I I just I think we
should really pay attention to
this if we're really serious
about growing or agritourism we
really need to to help these
an offer so much more and that I
just like to you know bring up
and there's a body that this is
how we actually grow our our GDP
that I'm gonna support the bill
absolutely but I I am the you
know little this point we
couldn't get that in because
from what I like I said from
what I hear this is what these
are are you hearing anything
about maybe in the future you
know continuing to work on this.
Mr president gentleman.
any statutory fixes it's my
understanding these policies are
treated like a museum parks
which are very very you know
inherently dangerous the the
agro tourism is more dealing
unanticipated I think we came up
with some good language with
regards to negligence
recklessness you know things of
that nature we can is help the
said is present center I I'm I'm
happy to support the bill thank
you for looking at the issue
let's let's not stop here let's
let's keep going forward with
that and thank you.
been championing the outdoor
economic a budget of New Mexico
we saw that with the creation of
the outdoor recreation division
which is done really good things
for rural New Mexico I and I
festivals all of those are
designed to promote the value of
agriculture and so this is this
is a great bill where we get to
our recognize the economic
impacts and really champion an
Mr president with the senator
yield center mass.
Mr president yes Senator Brandt
But
But I don't know.
Currently on a farm Senator read
Mister president senator
One eightieth of a cow in my
freezer.
Senator right this presents
Senator I I I just want to
follow up a little bit with what
Senator committee was talking
Do you know of any insurances
are going to be available for
them to get at a high enough
liability that's going to
protect them from losing their
Thank you Mr president centered
know what's unfortunate is it
under that scenario they they
wouldn't choose to go into this
business you know they would
choose not to go into this
injured makes them whole and
even in that context but I think
we like I said we'll of state
working on this and so we get
some information from the the
Insurance language that you had
the bill protections you have in
the bill who wasn't that
objected to that Mr president at
Senator might me.
its introduction we and we
amended and its first Canadian.
Separate numbers from the center
and I was us figures probably
those trial attorneys who you
control lawsuits in our state
it's not a matter because no
one's going to do this no one's
gonna have this available
to close it down because they
couldn't get insurance because
of lawsuits and if we don't that
that was agritourism and if we
don't deal with that issue.
this bill passed now but it's
probably gonna zero effect until
we deal with the issue of the
lawsuits that are out of control
our state thank you Mr president
center my is this I think this
was a really tough effort and I
have to say that I was really
shocked Mr president the other
day when I was given the status
in the the finance committee
move it's a move in the right
direction and we should
definitely be focusing on this I
mean I don't think that folks
really realize how important
agritourism is to New Mexico I
consent to excuse editor Stuart
and Hickey until they return to
the chamber.
Say no objection.
We do have for the debate
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president and I do
Senator I think agritourism is
legit you know outdoor outdoor
recreation activity and it's a
it's really value added value
added area of economic
candid in saying that I think.
The bill has some extra language
that I think.
Not necessarily appropriate or
areas that they're working on
but then we added extra line
item just for that we're we
don't do that for any other form
of outdoor recreation.
thoughts I mean it's it's good
to add it at the same time you
know you want to have it be in
balance with the rest of the
statute in the other
requirements of the division's
but outside of that coming all
bill thank you Mr president
thank center.
Thanks for any further debate
senators.
point by the Senate founder of
the of the recreation division
the house founder Representative
had like Rubio want to give her
a shout when I think the
president I move that Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
sixty four.
I do not pass that ask unanimous
voting all senators to your
seats.
My vote.
Thirty eight in the affirmative
zero the negative Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
center Maestas going on to item
number three that's going to be.
Senate bill for twenty three
NMFA operating capital and I
yield to senator Nancy Rodriguez
amendment or substitution during
no objections Senator Rodriguez
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president Senate bill four
twenty three allows three small
care capital fund the behavioral
health capital fund and
childcare facility fund and so
on that can only be used for
construction renovation
meet the intent of finishing up
of the work that the legislature
has asked him to do that's all
that does Mister president
that's the main crux of the bill
streamline them because they're
old some of the statutes are old
and they're just making a more
more acceptable and streamlined
and it allows the NMFA to
Thank you center there is
Senators we're debating Senate
bill for twenty three.
Any debate Senators we do have
debate senator to subpoena.
this summer of health and Human
Services over and over again the
issue of providers wanting to
expand into underserved part of
in there's no revenue flow this
would be a way of kickstarting
the the their involvement in
those communities and I think
Senator Rodriguez for bringing
this forward it's a great idea
Senator Regan to close on the
bill thank you Mr president I
move the Senate bill for twenty
three do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
director show throw has been
All senators to your seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty nine the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill for twenty three as
a mentor Senate bill four twenty
County Hospital gross receipts
tax and all you'll to Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
I see no objections Senator
Gonzales explained about.
Mr president I would like to ask
wicks is the New Mexico Hospital
policy director.
Seeing no objection to the
expert witness of the sergeant
at arms a please escort expert
for Senate Bill tool five of
this request is four one half
cent.
For gross receipts.
increments of ten years expiring
into the two thousand one the
first ten years was used to
build Holy Cross hospital in
tiles after the ten years and at
the education part since two oh
one has been enacted twice for
period of twenty years the bond
continue to assist the local
districts and now you know this
nursing program the use of the
G. R. T. for Holy Cross hospital
in U and M. tiles is twenty five
percent as they had it before
improvements and cannot be used
for operational cost or benefits
or salaries Holy Cross hospital
is in dire need of capital
improvements in order to be able
Thank you Senator Gonzales we do
have debate.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president would
bill of is that the only county
is tell us the only county that
that would be able to utilize
this tax.
And and did I understand it it
expired and this is just kind of
restarting it.
Mr president of that is correct
just having re authorization to
twenty five percent of it goes
for the nursing program at
noted at the UNM north yes
branch.
for the nursing program which
has been very successful in
tiles with a very high
graduation rate and you actually
it's a hundred percent
go directly to the hospital or
how is it is it is it like an
engine fund or or how is it
structured Mr president of.
And members what it is is so
So it is a counties initiative
belonging to the county.
And and currently Mr president
Senator Gonzales are they are
they just.
for their overall support.
Mr president the the way it's
distribution is so based on how
the allotments are received.
very much Mr president thank you
Senator Gonzales it sounds like
a really good idea thanks thank
you senator participate we do
have debate further debate
Senator Woods followed by
Mr president and and senator
does tell us county have a
hospital board.
Seven dollars Mr president ten
the way it works is the board is
so.
advisors and board to the
hospital.
Senator Woods.
So the the hospital is owned by
a.
Mr president that is correct.
Okay.
Want me why would you make a law
make this law to cover all
counties I mean it's a it's a
local option Mr president and
senator.
Senator was.
Okay soon thanks.
Criteria of the
One has.
One percent.
president and senator Senator
Gonzales.
Mr
The president
Senator Woods okay so there's
five county so we're talking
about during this down and to
population of a county
president on Senator that is
correct.
Okay.
That helps me a lot and
There's already.
Part of the gross receipts tax
that they already have to a
hospital Mr president and
Senator.
Yeah we passed the law here.
The the last year the year
before.
That.
Turned loose those here March
Which I don't know where there's
a good idea or not but.
Evidently we're gonna find that
with this vote whether it's
gonna be a good or bad so Mister
those are some of my concerns
with this thank you very much
for the opportunity Mister
president thank you Sir whether
to have further debate will
center gonna have hell.
the Senator yelled for question
the bill sponsor Senator
Gonzales to yield Mister
president I yield thank you Mr
president and Senator Gonzales I
was just wondering also why it
that we could include all county
hospitals and Mr president and
senator how many county owned
hospitals are there.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president and senator and of
those eight to ten then is that
accurate to say that there
there's I that to participate in
this.
president senator of the answer
is yes but they also participate
on the property tax.
Senator Hemphill AC okay thank
Saying no further debate.
Senator Gonzales to close on the
bill.
consent of the Senate let the
record shows that roll call has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
Also Mr seats if you wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator one of voting no.
Senator Woods voting no.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
Senator Griggs voting no.
I will now to Senator.
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
gonna take a little break as we
mentioned this morning and I
might say Mr president yield
back to Senator o'neill
you Senator Arthur are order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
And I yield to senator Kerry
the house and the Senate taking
place last night at the
beautiful gymnasium at the Santa
Fe Indian school as we head into
the last week of this grueling
for an important cause with our
surprise with our superstar
Senators we have an incredible
evening working together the
their own Mr president and
keeping the win within the reach
the whole time we had Senator
species willing to take the most
files in the game.
with the stealth move of the
night and the flying Shendo made
us all proud by diving for every
ball possible our minority floor
leader Senator Baca although
O. of the Senate with his
gorgeous hair.
Sinking the winning basket in
bringing the trophy back to the
Senate with a score of thirty
with the crowd helping to
encourage the wind which years
of black that motto and let's go
Lobo's.
trophy back to where it belongs
congradulations Senators this is
senator Kerry hamster signing up
from the floor of the Senate
chambers home of the hoops for
hope champion.
bring in the trophy back where
it belongs.
The chamber.
Week eight have.
With that I'll yield to our
Senate basketball coach Senator
o'neill and other members who
would like to speak Center Neil
thank you Mr president yes it
we will do that but it but
certain performances really
stood out I mean some meaty
Senator Smith is where this guy
come from I mean my goodness he
figures I won't we had ten
points yes.
And then of course you know it
was a team effort everybody
contributed we've never had this
Senator Padilla was a big part
of it with this minute and a
half and I know he knew it was
on a basketball court but yes
yes then and many others it
The funny the flying Center we
survived almost a mishap of
flying sendo who could resist
poking their best player and
putting him on the line at a
crucial moment but of course the
And then I've been instructed
that you get the MVP trophy here
okay and.
That and did broke his hand
there and and they mean is
revisit this notion of unlimited
files like we just discovered
that the organizer of this of
the advantages allows people to
thousand many times as you want
Thank you senator Neville.
Senator Pirtle.
And thank you Mr president and I
do appreciate everybody in this
thank you to my biggest fan that
was there of course my family
wasn't able to be there but my
secretary grace Duran was there
and I really thought there was a
few moments where she's going to
it it really was a team effort I
really appreciate the the team
coming together hustling working
hard we had uh Senator Sanchez
and win the game and then myself
had ten she committee had I Baca
had the one free throw that I
think really was the nail in the
coffin at the end of tied up and
senator souls came in with a
fought hard broke my wrist Mr
president but it's totally worth
it.
and help that Chris the two
years going from the stabs but
everybody I want to know that
that Lobo that was behind that
mask that outfit was our own
Senator McKenna.
maybe twenty seconds I thought
this is too crazy almost poked
out Representative and general
meadows I but it was amazing to
come together as a Senate and
play together as one unified
actually really riveting game
and and everything you heard was
true it happened it was really
cool and it was back and forth
so go to the game in the future
That to the crowd's amazement
almost went in.
And that that was like wow that
was really highlight worthy in
my to maybe sports sports center
Thank you it really was an
amazing game I just had so much
fun but what was really
interesting to me has an
observer with seeing how the
about how people play think
about their attitude think about
what they did very very close
relationship I want to
congratulate each and every
individual the played it was an
Thank you so this is a Lopez
and to our fantastic free throw
shooter.
Senator committee.
Thank you Mr president verily if
Center schools shoot so we we've
got to do some practice and need
a little little tips some tips
there but I want to recognize
our chief clerk sherry for for
showing up with this flag.
for looking my my left knee is a
little sore today Mister
president but but sherry brought
us sitting in a little gift here
that I might need to put on that
Thanks very much Mr president I
I want to thank coach o'neal for
increasing my playtime by three
hundred percent I am just
thrilled with that had one
rebound I really enjoyed it but
I just want to get major major
seen someone get tackled hit the
ground five times I counted it
five times shinny band I'm so
sorry to.
Benny Shendo.
time and did a great job can we
get Senator Shendo hand also.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president both of
my knees are swollen.
As well as my elbow about small
broke my wrist when he stepped
on it.
Mr president a few years ago
after the game we started
calling Senator Shendo the
flying Shendo after last night's
game I suggest we begin calling
him the bouncing rolling Shendo.
he's been the starting guard on
the house team last night he was
a starting guard on the Senate
team and he played a lot and
they played very well
occasionally he forgot that he
Senator there's been no Senator
my SS thank you Mr president
thank you for that is great to
be amongst you last night and I
think one of my passes actually
went to a Senator so those those
that same area was the fab five
team and so I want to give a
shout out to the fab five on the
floor played the entire fourth
quarter and overtime and of
course that's Senator souls
Thank you Mr president what a
great time it was last night I
want to thank everybody who
showed up the boy we have a lot
announcement on you so you saw
that fell by so Representative
Lord on me last night so if any
of you find my wallet.
Thank you Mr president and I
think in the words of vanilla
ice ice ice baby my lake.
But it was great I had so much
here I mean it was just amazing
to play I thought I one time
we're gonna have a heart attack
but Pirtle said you don't have
time keep going so and Mr
Thank you senator Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president I think
the real key to our win last
night was all the rest of you
that came and supported us
not the house did not show near
the teamwork that we showed or
the the strength of their
members and lots more of their
members were not there most of
Thank you senator souls I want
to make sure I have miss anybody
to our leading global lady
Senator McKenna then Senator
Stewart center McKenna.
thank you Mr president and I
I've just of so proud of our
star players here
players and all of you that
joined us thank you Mr president
thank you senator Janet.
Senator Stewart Paul by Senator
pope Senator Stewart.
laughing a little bit that went
away pretty soon when they
showed what they could do and
Sir McKenna said he just ran
back and forth I mean they were
stands with the piles Shendo is
usually in the middle of it and
sure committee was usually
responsible for it.
have a team and they work
together and you saw the spread.
Was up there making baskets we
just went crazy in the state and
thank all of these players it
was just so fun it's the most
nonpartisan thing you'll ever go
to me irrespective of the house
Center poll followed by Senator
minocin Center cels thank you Mr
president I want to thank
everyone that came out everyone
who played and I think this is
got to just have fun enjoying
together remind me a lot of the
military you know we have
different views different
backgrounds well we're on one
mission to bring that trophy
everything else that they have
they're ready for us or as a
center Hermio says and just when
you know they call it a leave a
considerably that's what that's
Sorry I'm still down with an
Achilles issues issue but you
know I I got in a little bit to
give Center souls a little
breather on has a is cut he had
no is a well but I hope to be
Senator Munoz followed by
Senator today Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president that was
a great game last night over
time in in down to the wire and
invents and I are over there
watching from the sidelines a he
actually but I think that silent
and deadly Sanchez because every
time he was under the goal
nobody really looked at him and
he was there and it just dropped
in and every single time so
Senator Sanchez what a great job
feet over the line at one point
and nobody would listen to him
and so Vince was was to him up
before the game and then we sat
there together it was a great
time you know we do have eighty
their building and have a
basketball court that really
turned up this game for our side
and let the winners of control a
cordon and that might help us a
lot but remember the days when
those old memories and Sir Baca
almost called the state police
over when Representative Lord
grow to pretty hard.
game thank you guys that play
your hearts out you play fair
and and it was a great game it
was great entertainment for
everybody to watch and we raise
money for a good purpose of
thank you Mr president.
was sitting with Senator Stewart
and Senator Hamblen and we're so
impressed by all the moves of
the many male members of the US
female Representative spare in
the Senate so I challenge my
female colleagues.
Maybe Senator Diamond Senator
two women on the team at but it
was a lot of fun Mr president
and I really appreciated the
energy and the crowd it was
her energy and and doozy Azam
was definitely contagious so
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the wonderful
entertainment last night.
I want to thank the NM cancer
center want to thank you Mexico
State University the university
of New Mexico at the capitol in
Santa Fe high school
cheerleaders who were there
all enjoy and allowance the
balloons as we welcomed in the
trophy and I just want to share
that are Senate chief clerk was
so far ahead of the game that we
knew they would be reluctance to
And with that senator Pete
already are you ready for the
champions the champions in
basketball here in New Mexico
from Santa Fe New Mexico the New
in.
speak or any of sell the though
yes our Senate majority floor
leader Peter Wirth to take us to
the next order of business thank
you Mr president thank you
members I think the cake will be
wheeled into the lounge and
with that unanimous is that we
go back to that order of
Business third reading of
legislation I yield to Senator
Lopez percentages strict me
subset for Senate bill thirteen.
I as we pass out.
With that I yield.
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill thirteen on
final passage has been taken and
that is in front of us this
afternoon Mister president if
you seek or provide reproductive
for gender affirming care here
in New Mexico regardless of
where you come from New Mexico
reproductive for gender
affirming care normal New Mexico
allow you to suffer professional
discipline or adverse action by
a professional licensing body
merely because you provide care
this time like to yield to my
first call the Sanchez Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you Senator
Lopez just reminder centers that
we we are on third reading that
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr president we are doing
something here that has never
been done before.
And that is mainly because
patients and doctors from out of
state attempts to interfere with
bodily autonomy and ability to
obtain the care we need.
meaningful through protecting
access that requires passing
legislation to protect privacy
prevent discrimination rated
related to abortion and gender
for certain protected health
care information so that
patients and providers can
continue to receive an find out
provide and provide health care
without fear of I'll just a
attempt to stigmatize and punish
providers patients or those who
support them.
New Mexico must remain a place
where people and families are
able to access the health care
much Mr president I now yield to
my next co lead sponsor Senator
Stefanics Senator Venice.
providers in our state and that
other states nearby and
elsewhere should not to be able
to dictate what kind of health
care is provided in the state of
am one of the sponsors of this
bill.
Senator Lopez thank you very
much Mr president I now yield to
one of my colleagues Sanchez
Senator Hamblen.
According to the CDC they
reported that suicide rates are
increasing after two year
decline for younger people and
people of color and we also know
the trans and non binary and
percent have attempted suicide
I've mentioned on this floor how
every forty five seconds a
member of the LGBTQ community
contemplates suicide.
among trans and non binary
binary young people Mr president
and Senate body I do stand here
for my trans siblings I stand
here to let them know that they
I now yield to my colleague
Sanchez Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I stand
regardless of where you come
from New Mexico will do
everything in its power to
protect you.
And protect your information
from the reach of other states.
Care nor will New Mexico allow
you to suffer professional
discipline or adverse action by
professional licensing body
our state our patients our
providers and helpers to hold
bad actors accountable when they
attempt to interfere with
to hear that rural New Mexico
doesn't need this bill.
So in rural New Mexico seventy
seven percent agree that they
abortion for themselves that
includes seventy nine percent of
Catholics seventy nine percent
of rural New Mexicans surveyed
agreed with the following
statement.
be supported and respected and
not be ashamed when seeking
reproductive health care.
This is a good solid basic bill
to ensure that the women in New
for questions thank you senators
we do have a floor amendment.
The reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
eminent Mr president I move
Senate foreman amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirteen.
Sen object center shared explain
with amendment does so Mister
Derogatory names which I won't
read right I will return that
because well it's against the
law against the rules and I like
to play by the rules.
period is defined in diverse
ways depending on the definition
it starts at the twentieth to
the twenty eighth week of
gestation and ends one to four
prosecution punishment or other
means of a person's ability to
act or refrain from acting
during the person's pregnancy
is prior to but also after
birth.
And so we're really going with
this.
At any point.
And consist can live.
Then the doctor can act or fail
to act.
To just sit there lay there and
cry.
And.
Dot dot dot based on the actions
were missions with respect to
their pregnancy or actual
potential or alleged pregnancy
By the first definition.
In one to four weeks after
birth.
One to four weeks after birth.
laws they use the same language
the same language or very
similar language.
As we used in house bill seven
and we use the same term.
seven that we passed last last
week.
Not making it up I read out of
our own bill I read out of
California law I read out of
And yet here we are once again.
Using that word.
And and and I cannot see any
other reason to use that work.
We have post natal.
We have a lot of things in there
that.
That can protect the mother.
birth postpartum menopause
infertility cancer STI care.
Nothing prevents any of that in
in in New Mexico.
We're not stopping anybody from
doing anything.
In in New Mexico we're not even
stopping them from having an
abortion at any point all the
This word has only one purpose
in my in my opinion.
And that's.
These women are given a pill
they go home.
Then they start having
contractions they go to a
hospital.
But because of the word
perinatal.
That child.
And if if if the child is
healthy enough.
At birth.
It might take a long time.
To die.
In that.
Humans aren't like that.
California I know what that word
is in here for at least that's
my opinion.
I believe that's in there for
purpose.
We're about to leave.
The child.
Alone.
Crying.
And hungry and cold.
So what this ammendment does is
it takes that one word out.
Eight everything else in there.
I find troublesome and asked
that one word be removed from
this bill.
So with that Mr president staff
questions Senator debate
in Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
Senators are debating Center
floor member number one on the
list we have Senator Duhigg
followed by Senator the Lopez.
Thank you Mr president.
An abortion after birth is not a
thing Mr president.
What peri natal Kerr is this is
care that I received I was
and I had placenta previa which
is a.
Dangers medical condition and I
also had very low amniotic fluid
so I had to be induced three
We were in the hospital for
about a week all of that care
that I received was perinatal
care that is what peri natal
abortion after birth which does
not exist perineal care is an
essential part of the full
spectrum of reproductive care
care that is provided to to
people giving birth and the
children they give birth to.
Would not be covered under the
spell thank you Mr president we
referring to my comments about
the
About the false and misleading
nature of the amendment and the
explanation of the amendment but
but the information provided is
both false and misleading.
This ammendment is based on a a
false in Scituate insinuation
that this word authorizes the
what perinatal care and Senator
Duhigg just a very nice job of
describing the perineum
perinatal care she received
It is really important that when
we talk about bills I believe
that we read them.
In a common sense way.
Prenatal birth perinatal which
is the time period between of
the for the birth about twenty
eight days in the time period
after the birth about twenty
people from out of state who
want to get involved in
interfere with any kinds of
decisions made during the during
the.
So if the Senator the sponsor of
this bill took offense I was not
referring to him I was referring
to the information provided
Is present with the.
Sponsor the amendment yield for
just a couple questions Senator
detailed a yes Mr president
earlier said Mr presence and
that
More live type death doesn't
occur to the abortion this
Albuquerque that her job was to
take these children that after
the abortion process that had
not died and put him on cookie
protection act we tried passing
the failed in the house.
Mr president senator I do in
fact remember that.
wanted to give a real case for
that young lady was given
of dismissal because she was
caught holding a couple the
children trying to give them
and I know that a truly does but
I just want to bring that light
to the darkness and also say
that I'll stand support your
Thank you Mr president I just a
A brief point
You know that there are many
many medical ethics papers
as a thing the British medical
journal of the journal of
medical ethics many other
journals on ethics discussed
this issue.
that I don't endorse personhood
cost of treatment here's a big
one quality of life and we have
heard on this floor is as well
as the other chamber
arguments for example well we've
identified certain fetal
anomalies and we think the
quality of life would be low or
this person this baby would
morally wrong to allow someone
to be born with down syndrome so
this is very very much a thing.
Youth in Asia in miners is now
legal in certain European
countries.
So I just bring that up I'm not
thank you Mr president.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Si no further debate we do have
the right further debate on the
amendment.
Senator so the thank you very
much Mr president.
Mr president I.
I've been in the lounge
I don't really understand the
panelists.
I need to trust.
I'm called upon to vote upon
these things.
But at the end of the day what
I'm gonna do is I'm gonna trust
the women.
Who are the ones most impacted.
Thank you very much for your
further debate on the amendment
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor the amendment yield
Senator detailed yes Mr
president.
And trying to explain perinatal.
Other than.
Killing.
already legal in the state of
New Mexico Senator.
Mr president I don't believe so.
all of the health care that was
discussed by.
Positive and nobody's trying to
ban that.
As I said last time we had this
discussion my own daughter and
wife.
Went through that
this this this word doesn't need
to be in there.
To legalize.
Care of a child or a mother.
Lack of care.
I think that's the only reason
is here Mr president Senator
Brandt so much present center
As president in fact just
general medical ethics state
care for humans.
That our lives.
any law on the books today.
That says that a.
Postpartum mother.
In any law that I'm aware of on
the planet says that a mother
cannot be taken care of
postpartum.
Senator Brandt Thomas present
center I have to agree with you.
Yes.
Allowing a child born.
Maybe from a botched abortion.
Maybe from.
And so they want to board after
birth the only thing that right
now wouldn't be allowed under
our current law so the only
reason that I can see that this
would be put in there I think it
A baby to be murdered after
birth thank you Mr president we
do have further debate on the
amendment Senator DC Pino.
this bill is intended to do and
it's intended to make sure that
no governmental entity anywhere
in the state.
Passes a law that restricts
can't do something that'll block
these things.
And so that listing of
reproductive health services is
medical term that there is in
fact a peri natal collaborative
that testifies before the
interim cold committee on health
and Human Services every summer
enough peri natal Services.
Services to help mothers during
the last few months of their
pregnancy and the first few
weeks after their pregnancy.
crazed email from somebody named
Appenzeller who says oh you're
just trying to inject California
style morality into New Mexico
this has nothing to do with
California this has to do with
birth the term peri natal Kerr
is commonly used to cover that.
That's what we're trying to make
sure no county or city
government says you can't do
those things.
treating cancers of the
reproductive there's a lot of
things on this list all of which
are included in the
comprehensive term.
Reproductive health and that's
issue.
I I I I just I just cannot abide
the attempt to make it sound
like we are trying to kill
thank you Mr president and I to
rise in opposition of the
amendment insinuating that a
pregnant woman is just sitting
around and then we right before
dangerous to women everywhere
and insinuating that a health
care provider would agree to
that is deeply disrespectful and
To make these deeply personal
decisions in privacy.
And insinuating that women just
sat around and at the last
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator sure to close
on the amendment.
difficult for me because I don't
want to be insulting but I do
know that the.
The discussion is difficult but
I believe that it's that it's
written to me.
I don't want to get the love
letters that were written to.
To senator Ortiz Pino.
And I don't want them to write
those love letters to anybody.
I was intentioned waiting that
women just sit around and decide
to have an abortion at the last
minute the things that we're
doing today.
note the woman went in there
intending to have an abortion
she didn't just sit around and
you know all of a sudden say
hope well it's seven questions
no she she went there intending
I know the least one point over
that one.
I also know with the variety of
To have a still birth not a
living birth.
But in California they have
living births.
They were intended to be still
burst it was intended to be an
So much.
It makes it difficult I try not
to be.
I talk about it there's somebody
somebody in this room somebody
in the gallery somebody
listening to us who had an
abortion it is now being
sickened by this.
And I don't want that either but
I also don't know how to bring
it out and and discuss it.
My speech will not be chilled as
the rest of this bill wants to
Fight on to the ranger objective
the would be the sole survivor I
will do that.
What I also know is that.
pressured into it sixty percent
pressured that's not freedom of
choice.
Maybe freedom of the man choice
but it's not freedom of the
woman's choice.
And pressure the then back off.
Would be responsible in the
first place.
But I also know that I struggle
because there's there's there's
so much about this it is so.
Heart wrenching.
For so many people.
Can period natal care bring life
absolutely it can bring life.
Absolutely.
But in used with.
Period natal care under this.
Really means omission of care.
Because that would also be
illegal under this.
baby what this is about is when
we all met.
Care when we when we when we
have an active mission of care.
That's when people get upset but
At least a better understanding
of what's going on here.
Nobody's coming to New Mexico to
say you can't have.
In fact I don't think Texans are
coming here to stop an abortion
I do that can imagine maybe I
don't know.
But I would propose that as
well.
cold Ian's.
Or the French or the British or
the Spanish.
New Mexico's New Mexico.
because sometimes babies are
born alive.
With the intention was an
abortion the intention was for
the baby not to be a life.
defeat that bill why would you
not take care of that child.
Why would we not take care of
that child.
The born alive bill's been
defeated.
This using reproductive.
Health care and abortion
together.
Reproductive mean to a
reproducing.
And no care.
And I know that that is heart
wrenching for women out there
what's going on they are being
misled.
I believe they're being misled
for money.
Personal reasons.
I feel sorry for these women.
It does hurt.
Sometimes the father would like
the child and the mother doesn't
want that happens that affects
the father who knows.
Who knows.
have a tea party with his child
he knows that.
And believe it or not that tears
up a lot of men.
able to drive down San Matteo
street ever since because that's
where the abortion clinic was
planned parenthood.
And that was fifty years ago and
did not know what they were
doing.
They were young they were
coerced they were pushed and
only later after they hear
later.
It hurts to talk about that and
I'm obviously on the other side
of this in order to meet.
Not encourage it not defended
not protected.
We should be trying to stop it
stop it is loving manner.
what I am trying to do here I
believe because I can read from
our own law I can read from what
California is doing I can read.
Reports about what happened in
peri natal in this case has no
reason.
Except.
Abortion after birth no other
It's not illegal to give care
today.
In fact.
If you show up in an emergency
room.
Mr president.
I know we're we're going.
We're already the late term
abortion capital of the of
America we don't need to become
the after birth abortion of of
America to.
We don't.
We can turn ourselves around to
the we have.
Natural.
Mental health because we're not
doing things that we know.
Harm.
Judiciary Committee committee.
Substitute for Senate bill
thirteen.
And ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show the rules
been called and all those
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
Senator serve on this voting no.
Senator o'neill voting no.
Senator pope voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
Senator Hickey voting no.
Senator Gonzales voting no.
Senator Duhigg voting no.
Center for the voting no.
Senator Stefanics voting no.
Senator souls voting no Senator
Lopez voting no.
By a vote of thirteen
affirmative twenty six and a in
a Senate Judiciary senator
Senator Hickey followed by
senator Morris and Senator
Woods.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you.
this is obviously for me very
personal the safety of my
daughter particularly.
Coming home to New Mexico.
think we do when they're
teenagers and driving us crazy
they can still drive you crazy
in their twenties and and
thirties.
twenty twenties and the the the
the early two thousands
there is a whole new.
But.
Letting them make their choices
live their lives and feeling
safe you will want that for your
Probably in time.
You will to.
So thank you colleagues.
Senator senator Morris.
New Mexico Senate GOP just hates
women.
And people defy women.
The only thing that is going to
centers I know it's an emotional
topic you know what that is that
is beyond so you wanna talk
about massage you Mr president I
hope this body steps up and
defends the Senator.
It's inappropriate I'm gonna
defend her.
It was crap Mr president.
Just a reminder we are in the
bill.
If I could the sponsor of the of
the bill Senator Lopez deals.
Yes Mr president center once.
amended before I start asking
questions or is what's written
in the book here what's in the
bill still Mr president Senator.
Mr president maybe I better go
to the.
To this and look at it before I
ask anymore questions got a gun
to reserve an opportunity before
amendment of the Center sweeties
are you on the amendment.
I'm sorry on the bill on the
bill I'm sorry we're in the bill
yes miss present bill your next
centers committee thank you.
A couple of couple comments
obviously this is.
Certainly I think it's a good
comments
Just because I I do want us to.
Engage as much as we can.
To engage in truth and and
evidence.
you know the a couple things
were brought up in the debate.
I'm not gonna run any amendments
my one of my at my warnings and
cautions to the chamber was on
the definition of gender
affirming care.
don't say your your handicap
person you're a blind person or
the the sorts of things and
allow allow that to
kind of.
but that was shut down so I'm
not gonna try again today but I
want to again warn the body just
so we can't say we weren't
warned.
of the definition here.
provided to support.
An individual's gender identity
okay so that verb to support.
It is acting on.
And not the person that is
seeking gender identity
development if you'd like to
call it that I referred to it as
wholistic gender related care or
this those are all widely
accepted in well published
terms.
And so I I would just urge if
anyone I don't think anyone's
going to go for it but we really
when we have that you are
provided to support the gender
identity once again you're
legally only protecting that
So please please my my plea to
this body I and I don't think
it's gonna have on this bill but
as we as we go forward please
Just just to throw out there
because you may not hear this if
we're we're just in our.
Echo chamber bubble.
That this is life saving care
we're supporting.
I have no doubt that a lot of
things that are done a lot of
Care that these
People receive.
we talk about details but I have
no problem.
With with some of the care that
people receiving absolutely not.
But Mister president.
parents and the child.
About this suicide risk or
whatever it is.
That can be interpreted as
they're not suicidal wow I I I I
might become suicidal I don't
get this care we need to be very
careful about the language that
we use when we talk about
suicide.
identity service colleges for
that for the NHS.
They had if you look at that
that experience okay they were
if you look at the in H. as once
again these are not my words
okay the NHS review they had for
We are conflating I think
suicidality with death by
suicide we're conflating act
suicide and passive suicide and
Something else that is pressing
this very dangerous narrative
into people that are generate
congruent or have gender
understand it's right here at
HHS so you can talk to secretary
to Serra I guess if you have a
problem with that but this is
what they say this is what they
say okay.
And they have a reference to a
paper number one number one
reference paper by the federal
HHS.
This kind of care is going to
improve mental health.
That's a declarative statement.
not my words not mine partition
this is the paper right here.
And it says association.
These people actually the the
the scientist to do this study.
They accurately say that there
is an association they do not
Doctors that.
Do research.
By the way this was a study
predominantly on higher
socioeconomic white adolescents.
delineate any clarifying
statements on suicidality of
adolescence or young people they
did not ask about passive or
active suicide.
So we're we're literally.
This is extremely extremely
dangerous to young people to
speak about suicide in this way
an accurate inaccurate and
centric and and.
More careful Mr president.
This topic requires great.
Tenderness and care.
I appreciate her her yielding
for this I I had a question.
At
The end.
Something in writing
You know Mr president this bill
makes me think that we're headed
towards the national divorce.
We just can't do it anymore we
can't work with you.
We refuse to work with you we
have cities and counties
boycotting each other.
all the sorts of stuff now we're
saying well we don't want to
justice department in your your
police departments.
I understand it is a sensitive
issue.
And I believe in state
sovereignty I don't think taxes
should be suing a doctor that's
But if we're gonna keep it
together as a country I don't
want to see bills like this I'd
rather see bills that that
really focus on state
sovereignty so my my questions
really pertain to are we are we
four in the US constitution.
And it says that
It says that the person charged
with you know crime of
delivered so my question Mr
president center is.
Is this new language in section
nine page nine is is this in
violation of the US
constitution.
in front of us is that we are
not going too far and I think
it's self explanatory Mr
president of who we are trying
to protect.
And the issue in the US
constitution it is does not say
in writing.
It clearly says
On demand.
The federal constitution because
now we're requiring something in
writing were that were that
restriction does not currently
exist in the U. S. constitution
would you agree with me that
expressed here in the section
that you're looking at at this
point in time okay thank you and
I miss present in the center
thank you for that answer I mean
that's I I'm encouraged to hear
that just because what what I'm
in an appropriate one to share
your legislative intent and so I
I I except the COVID.
executive authority from the
other state.
And now we're saying no that's
not good enough guided in
writing so that that's a that's
a major concern and and by the
licensing agreements
you know with this is a concern
it's a concern for me I'm I'm
encouraged to hear the sponsor
Senator on this in this chamber
often says the pendulum swings
right and so what happens of
Jeff sessions are bill bar or
someone like that is the US
Keep it more in line with the
constitution I really do and
protect the spirit of the bill.
on this same section article
interpreted in context of New
Mexico state law.
This is this is a quote.
the purpose is to preclude any
state from becoming a sanctuary.
we're gonna sever two entities
that are close together and and
have them be mutually hostile
I'll.
That's what I really think this
bill is doing.
and let me throw this one out
there the foreign minister of
China just a couple days ago the
foreign minister.
something like that happens and
we are just we're balkanized we
are so much devided you know
just so divided.
I'll move on it just it like I
said article four section to
please look at it I have some
questions on section six.
Mr president and center could
Mister president senator as is
listed on here is we are making
sure that
That a person's health care
mean something a cover protected
by hippa.
So I I see that.
And so
I'm not I'm not sure that this
section.
who are the third parties that
that cannot transmit relation
information related to protected
health care activity.
Senator Lopez.
information from being shared
with others that do not have
access to this information.
And
president center so it's not you
know a lot of this bill clearly
refers to up a public body or
entity acting on behalf of the
not just talking about an
individual or entity that is
related to a public body is that
correct Senator Lopez Mr
Thanks committee thank you and
so I appreciate that Mr
president center so it doesn't
say we're limited to a public
body here so I want to bring
And so if we go but but let me
let's let's take an example
because it could be a person
that's working for the health
Definitely agree with number to
me we don't want to harass
humiliate people.
these things can be almost be I
mean it consider criminal but
but number six assess to
out what what may or may not
determine if if if someone
working at the health department
said you know transgender
medicine is experimental.
charter made illegal or you know
that you know that that sort of
thing is that kind of what we're
we're getting at.
Senator Lopez Mr president
Senator I think the language
that we are looking at at this
I'm not asking hypothetical I'm
asking would that statement be
sort or something like that be
in your bill says information
so.
What what kind of information
are are you are we concerned of
is there are there previous
examples like from from red
something could you could you
maybe give me a few examples of
that kind of.
Share information word we're
trying to prohibit.
Well Mister presence enter I I
respectfully disagree with that
I I think I mean it it that's
maybe the intended needs to be
re written in section six
But what is still disallowed is
information that's outside of
hip a that's not protected by
hippa but does due to her an
because Pippa is excluded and so
subsection a within subsection
B. is talking about the stuff
outside of hip but would you
agree with me center.
I'm sorry miss presents under I
there were some
Rather a rambunctious.
Then right next to me having a
conversation and I didn't quite
section six again this is not
discussing help us correct but
everything else that is listed
is again what we are protecting.
you you you need to write a law
that's that's going to be
constitutional and and not not
subject to a lot of litigation
and so this section six to make
sure everyone understands and I
We're not just talking about a
public body anymore and what it
says is it says you cannot
release any information
electronically that would deter
someone.
information in electronic format
would be what what does that
mean Senator Lopez.
Mr president again any of their
reproductive health information
is what we're trying to protect
here.
health information it says
transmits information related to
the protected activity so any
information about abortion any
information about transgender
once again these be rewritten.
That it is to say transmits
information that is.
Protected health information or
transmits information subject to
have a.
information that is very very
clear in this bill very clear it
is not it has nothing to do with
the individual okay fact
individual isn't even mentioned
in that sentence.
related to the health care
activity which is defined.
As seeking gender affirming care
or seeking abortion.
if you go off to some of the
happen in France.
about hello seven eight years
ago.
on TV so electronic.
And it portrayed.
children with down syndrome as
having happy successful lives.
The band if they pulled it from
the TV's can you believe that
Representative can you believe
that public you're listening
they pulled it and you know they
said the reason was that they
Which is in the bill.
Significant.
Or substantial emotional
distress.
So this bill.
To abort the child just because
they have down syndrome so I'm
gonna send some emails out
electronic format.
That would now be illegal in New
Mexico which of course is a
first amendment violation
illegal to run that kind of add.
What else would be illegal.
people from receiving
transgender care here's a
factual statistics or just a
just the facts not statistics
here's a Cochran review.
Mr president for not familiar
department of health and Human
Services in New Mexico.
Okay.
Under this administration but
maybe a future administration.
And.
That looked at male to female
transition.
Medical male to female
transition here's their
conclusion we found insufficient
evidence to determine the
second no evidence insufficient
evidence I should say
insufficient evidence not only
to determine efficacy.
But safety.
And so you know what we have
insufficient evidence that this
is safe we don't think people
should be doing this if this
bill is signed into law that is
illegal it is illegal.
About a protected health care
activity.
A conclusion from a Cochran
review.
Because what with the intent be
deter because these people the
highest level ever as state.
We don't know if it's safe.
That is very dangerous and I
think we should not.
maybe they want to have have
their speech maybe there are pro
life organization and and they
don't you know they wanted for
women they want to say Hey we
shared in electronic format is
to deter women from going to get
an abortion once again a first
amendment violation let me just
just I think I'm about done
appreciate everyone's.
Well actually the the dissenter
was justice Alito get that.
So it's one you had did Briar
Because it serves the principle
that debate on public issues
should be uninhibited robust and
wide open.
So if I have an organization
You should stick to
psychological and non medical
non surgical therapies.
No illegal in this bill.
would you be okay there.
TVS.
I think this could even apply to
to political campaigns that say
something negative about Planned
Parenthood for about another
have heard I heard a very I
think poignant and.
Very wise prudent.
Comment by someone that I very
decisions like brewing right New
York honestly they they were
careless they they step too far
and I've heard from the sponsor
that that that she saying we
don't think we're stepping too
Let's look at this issue I very
much obviously I'm very much
opposed to this bill as written
but I I don't think it's
impossible to write a bill like
about subpoenas and things but
you get the point.
We're just not gonna work with
the Texas Oklahoma we're not
going to work with you.
That can have severe
ramifications.
Thank you senator further debate
with senator Gaydos.
Ortiz Y. Pino saying that
It felt weird to be here the
same bill and I agree with them
and I am so sorry that I put
this on the schedule for today
I do have a couple questions for
the sponsor she will yield
Senate office.
Mr president yes.
constitution and divorce I was
just wondering if in your
research if you use if you did
any research into the federal
do any research on that Mr.
Mr president center.
Center this.
Thank you Mr president my
before us today if you done any
research on the federal statutes
eighteen US code thirty one
eighty two deals with fugitives
Mr president Sir would you yield
allow a law instructor to give
me some information on that this
presents center.
Sedillo Lopez the top law this
presents center would we be able
to filter Senate Bill Cosby L.
and then Senator Gallegos if you
can if you can just restate the
appreciate you yielding because
your expertise in lawn teaching
law and I was just wondering if
looking at this bill and and
I've heard you speak on it
earlier to know what this bill
under Senator Lopez yes Mr
president so there is a
principle called comity C. O. M.
I. T. Y. which is a principal of
The demanding state must allege
in writing that the cues was
physically present to the
demanding state at the time of
the commission of the alleged
offense and that the the accused
fled from the demanding state.
Does something in one state that
is not a crime in that state
the state doesn't have to
because of reasons reasons of
comity that state doesn't have
you're getting at Mr president
Senator goes this presents and
etcetera I appreciate that but I
guess my concern now is in and I
appreciate the ducation piece is
penalty that they had in that
state and this went to the US
Supreme Court in the U. S.
Supreme Court voted against us
in what I'm reading in your bill
Issue with anything the Planned
Parenthood would do in our state
to their residents and I'm just
wondering if you look at that
and consider what's happened in
the U. S. Supreme Court to New
so the issue dealing with and I
I haven't read the Supreme Court
opinion did that you're talking
about a release I I'm not sure
which where you're talking about
the the requesting state is is
trying to speak to get someone.
Never even set foot in their
state I mean right away they
would be disqualified because
how can one state state this is
try to do that that violates
basic principles of comity.
Thank you for that Mr president
center and then that brings me
to my next question the
fourteen sixty one and fourteen
sixty two why would not federal.
Restriction matter this presents
center Mr president that is not
I thought it was the same bill
and so I'm just trying to
reference how in certain
circumstances will use state and
federal sometimes we won't use
federal sometimes we won't even
there is in our own.
Constitution you it not U. S. of
the New Mexico constitution it
goes into well I went in to look
what they would have to do to
send someone back to the
jurisdiction of the crime agency
presents center in in with your
article because just saying do I
see that I I need to look at the
article it is talking about.
He said article four section
two.
one topic is faith and credit
among states if you go down and
section two privileges
immunities for fugitives it says
up to be removed from the state
having jurisdiction of the
prime.
I'm sorry I'm not finding that
in article four section two.
Amish presence enter I'm taken
out of the volume of the down
with rostrum so I'm not sure
where it is in our actual
constitution but he is actually
and it's again using our fifth
Fishel shaped the state New
Mexico complication Commission.
and our faith and credit among
states and I'm just wondering Mr
present center if you feel that
would be a conflict of interest
for us having asking them to
have it one way agency presents
are full Mr Mr president full
faith and credit under the US
constitution and the New Mexico
Supreme Court has generally
followed those same principles
Say a divorce or say you know
some order and then you need to
respect that divorce so other
states respect that order so
full faith and credit is
constitution but I imagine it's
very similar to the federal
constitution.
Senator goes amiss present
center and I appreciate that I
guess my thing is that
calling for a referendum on this
in house bill seven because the
people in the state New Mexico
aren't satisfied with the work
we're doing here here but any
closing Mr president Senators I
the actual probably most famous
down syndrome person in state
who had his own restaurant in
Albuquerque I had run a bill to
try to protect the first
trimester because of his value
to other statute federal in
other states and what that'll
you'll thank you.
Thank you senator goes Senator
Woods did you wish to speak.
section five.
Section a.
On the of.
Senate Judiciary Committee
When it starts talking about
abusive litigation and I'm not
going to read this because you
know how poor reader I am so I
just want to try to paraphrase
to mean that if it's a provider
is sued.
In another state because they
were doing.
criminal activity.
And.
Where it is not a criminal
activity in New Mexico.
suit is that anywhere close to
what that says.
R. Mr chair chair Mister
president do I need to read this
all out and you can correct me.
president it's a good senator
would yield to a question do I
need to repeat a question
Senator Senator Lopez Mr
president I didn't I had not
I guess my best description for
what
A piece of litigation.
Is that it's a like legal action
to threaten or harass others or
impede lawful activity and again
therefore that's frivolous
invalid and that is what we're
calling here abusive litigation.
within New Mexico Mr president
Mr president Senator what this
bill is is protecting here than
in the state of New Mexico.
Because somewhere in here it
says.
One seventeen it says.
Another state and I just
could then initiate a lawsuit
could initiate legal action.
So it's not just here in the
state of New Mexico but someone
outside of our borders so it
Someone from outside of our
borders.
Could not sue someone with in
our borders.
For an action so listed in this
section.
I can I can see I can hear but I
can see.
And so
A frivolous lawsuit we've been
I'm assuming the same
practitioners will still be
governed by our mile practice
same liability contracts as any
other health practitioner in the
state of New Mexico Mr president
and senator Senate office Mister
president senator we're not
satisfies my questions thank you
Mr president thank you Senator
Woods.
For a second time we have
Senator Gallegos.
And centers I apologize I had
president etcetera I gave way my
copies so I'm sort of going
route that Justin what I've read
I had a question caution agency
presence enter if my child
discussion with my own daughter
about what her wishes and needs
and and discussion about what
was gonna happen to her on this
would that make me
just described in your
hypothetical.
Senator goes so Mister presence
enter then I would have an
In effect the hypothetical that
you just provided.
Senator yes Mr president center
than I must've missed read the
bill I think you I yield per
comment you know a lot of good
points were brought up in an you
know from some of the argument
we've heard here today in the
debate between the full faith
going to have really any effect
I mean most of most of the stuff
is covered in jurisdiction and
venue and so I I don't know the
purpose of it other than to
from some are some of our
neighbors and so with that you
know this to me when you start
looking at that that turns this
radical statement nation so if
you're thinking of doing this or
that with regards to to these
some of the radical surgeries at
the real problem become so is
when you're doing that at the
time of the taxpayer because
these lawsuits Mr president they
cost money there's a lot of
and analyzing some of the
concepts in this been bill
verses our constitution and what
we have in the books in other
sections violates not only law
Get resolved when we put them
into statute is to approach the
courts and ask them to make a
determination then the state has
to defend itself at that point
because this is relating to
public entities and and a large
and it makes us look silly in
the end of the legislature
because we're enacting the
statutes knowing and debating
here on the floor that they have
problems and so when they go
gonna be listening to sponsors
that have no experts out here
because there's no real desire
for divvy there's really just
the desire to put a message out.
so as you can imagine I will be
supporting this bill and I urge
our body to examine bills like
this before we rubber stamp them
through going Hey this is what
in our reputation here and that
has some value and I for one
hold the Senate in high regard
and I think we should hold
ourselves to a higher standard
regarding you know these
conflicts these obvious
conflicts that the this statue
knacks were in acts are really
in essence they're they're
Mister president I'll leave it
at that thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Baca.
Si no further debate.
Senator yes.
Discussions and continued
efforts to stifle my ability as
is very troubling to me these
are.
I I see these as personal
attacks to my inner most being
if I say it myself we have
magnificent abilities and
capabilities to make our own
decisions that no one can make
But us to our baby to the moment
we deliver the baby we are still
attached to our umbilical cord.
That is reality that is what we
go through and that is the
closeness that we have.
And so.
respect but we as women do all
the rest.
To be denied and to be
constantly attacked on our
moment Mr president we share
every cell in our body every bit
of who we are for the baby to be
formed.
whole term or whatever amount of
time.
We're able to carry the baby
then we deliver the baby and we
inside of us to carry nourish in
just continue to to do things
for in addition to ourselves.
And all I ask from this whole
That we be left alone to make
our own critical decisions when
it comes to our reproductive
health care because only we know
So government really should
never interfere in those deep
personal decisions that we that
we may can I ask for that from
I do have a couple of closing
statements and in doing so I
would like to yield to of
Senator Hemphill.
One second.
Yes
may pull up Hey.
president in closing I would
like to yield to Senator
McKenna.
Senator mechanical.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Loss of license to practice.
Those are the some of those are
some of the consequences for
reproductive providers in some
circumstances after some certain
circumstances.
And those include Mister
president significant harm to
the person.
Due to right.
deciding not to provide abortion
care.
Something they've been trained
to do along with their all their
other medical.
president I'm and I listen to
the radio a lot specially
driving
I've always loved the radio but
give her the abortion she needed
because of those risks to his or
her practice that I listed just
a few moments ago.
However now she is fearful to
return home to Texas.
for doing what she needed to do
she needed to get.
Reproductive health care.
This week I read about five
They needed them because they
have grave risks associated with
their pregnancies.
One of them was not sick enough
Mr president I am a proud
suppose sponsor of this bill and
providers and patients seeking
abortion care in that state I
knew New Mexico had to do the
same.
S. B. one three is about
The center for reproductive
rights listed the following
states with interstate shields
thank you very much Senator
Lopez to close on the bill thank
you very much Mr president I now
move that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
of hands Senator call centers to
your seats Senator sees there
has been a request.
For roll call we're gonna give
just a moment for senators to
enter into the chamber.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca center Baca votes
no Senator Brandt.
centers serve on this Senator
Vontaze votes yes center diamond
center diamond votes no etcetera
Center Greg votes snow Center
Hamlin yes center Hammond both
CS Center Hemphill center hand
payload CS Center Hickey center
our meal Senator meal votes yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan both snow Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez both CS Center my
yes centerman you also CS
internet avail.
Center Neville votes no etcetera
now etcetera now votes yes
Senator Pinto votes yes center
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Santo poco.
Center pope both CS Center
Rodriguez center Rodriguez both
Senator Sedillo Lopez votes yes
center share.
Center share votes no center
Shendo.
Center share in this Sendejo
Steinborn votes yes interest to
work.
Senator Stewart both CS Center
Thoman.
Etcetera Tommen both CS Center
Senator Pinto to explain her
vote Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president miss present when I
ran for office twelve years ago.
I made it very clear to my
constituents were stood on this
I'm told.
Because I'm male.
Then I should keep my mouth
shut.
On the subject.
My constituents know that I have
a loud mouth my constituents
know.
That.
I was a little bit of trouble
and you know what they tell me
really strange to be told that
in a bill that's.
As gender affirming surgery at.
That I need to be quiet because
of my gender.
So I'm getting a little tired of
it I wish I could stand up here
and talk about how wonderful and
I'm disappointed in the
leadership.
That allowed personal tax to be
emotional to both sides of the
aisle.
We can do we can disagree
without being disagreeable.
The file ethics complaints
against anyone who attacks me
again I will not put up with it
anymore it is against the rules
One of the things as far as a
topic that came up this week was
about delayed care especially in
our hospitals that any kind of
But recently to one of the
things that I was not aware of
historically and actually it
it's a little bit
not even that long ago.
targets of that.
Issue.
And that always played on my
mind every time I vote on the
bill that kind of moves us
legislation we're gonna go on to
item number thirty three on
today's calendar.
That's Senate joint resolution
thirteen.
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution seeing
no objection.
Senator nail to explain thank
D. the problem the property in
question is four four acres
right next to the EDD sound of
all little league field which is
a big part of my district a huge
four acre lot to put a handicap
accessible field I just think
it's called the challenger leaks
as well as to provide extra
Senate joint resolution thirteen
anyone wishing debate.
C. nobody wishing to debate
Senator nail to close on the
role as being called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those and
voting in the negative by show
of hands.
Some is more voting sinister
By a vote of fourteen
affirmative on the negative
Senate joint resolution thirteen
has duly passed the Senate
ceremonial thank you Mr
president members.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
This president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
rules and a gross copy of house
bill nine as amended has been
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
journal so the message from the
house has been received.
the house have signed an open
session house bill nine.
The offices Senator Sentinel
open session house bill nine as
amended.
The retreat.
officers of the house in open
session and returned same here
with respectfully submitted Lisa
and Marty's McCutchen chief
clerk house of representatives.
substitute for House consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for house bill three
oh six House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill three
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty seven as
amended with emergency clause.
House bill four sixty six as
substitute for House Bill five
twenty five with the emergency
clause.
House Bill three sixty six House
Bill three ninety five as
from the house has been
received.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business
thank you Mr president I miss
that we go that our business
joint resolution eight has had
it under consideration reports
same of the recommendation that
a do pass as amended
respectfully submitted.
Senator is a motion to draft
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may.
resources committee substitute
for house bill one forty two as
amended has had it under
consideration and reports say
with the recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
of the vote on them with one
motion act upon individually.
no objection to reiterate.
submitted senator George when
you lost chairman Senator me us
move adoption committee report
centers we have a motion to
adopt the committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those opposed may.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill three ninety three has had
it under consideration reports
three to be allowed to be all
the committee point and that
we've only been with one motion
that the general effect they
were acted upon individually
hearing no objection to
reiterate.
Senate bill four forty four to
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate conservation committee
committee substitute for Senate
bill four eighty five do pass.
Senate bill four ninety one do
pass and this referred to the
finance committee.
House bill one seventy do pass.
House Bill to twenty nine do
pass.
House bill two fifty three as
motion to document report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those may the eyes have it the
committee report has been
adopted in the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
individually.
business introduction
legislation reader to read.
Senate Joint Memorial fourteen
introduced by Senator Kernan and
educational leaders The New
Mexico school boards association
and public charter schools of
New Mexico to form a working
group to study and to recommend
a plan for reducing school and
having been read twice by title
is.
Order print in order printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee that Senate Joint
Memorial fourteen.
emergency medical services act
to allow certified nurse
practitioners to provide medical
direction House Bill three sixty
two.
introduced by Representative on
in our new and.
D. D. Wonda Johnson and act
relating to the disposition of
authorize the disposition of
unclaimed dead bodies and set
the rate that is paid for burial
or cremation change the amount
of of a of time a County shall
changes house bill four oh
seven.
House bill four seven having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Judiciary
term care the main amending the
long term care facility dementia
training act to update training
program requirements house bill
four forty six house bill four
House Bill five ten introduced
by representatives Andrea Romero
lane this Martinez and Greg
Nibert and act relating to
that's House Bill five ten.
acting a new section of the
motor vehicle court code to
establish a concerns of police
survivors.
C. O. P. S. special registration
committee substitute for house
bill one forty one.
House transportation public
works and capita prince
committee substitute for house
bill one forty one.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two an act relating to
enforcement records X. accepting
from disclosure certain
information concerning
information technology systems
submissions to grant programs
land leases and scholarship
Bill to thirty two.
House Judiciary Committee subsea
for House Bill to thirty two
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate health
substitute for House Bill three
ninety nine and act relating to
counties providing that the
board of county commissioners of
the county with a population
greater than thirty five
district and elect county
commissioners to the newly
established by member boards of
county commissioners providing a
temporary procedure to re
district and elect county
House government elections again
in Affairs Committee substitute
for House Bill three ninety nine
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president UNM's is that we go
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous where that
order of Business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth
we're going to do tonight to be
a little different we're going
to do items on the counter seven
eight and nine that Senator
Brandt centre souls and Senator
Hickey then we're gonna jump
eight through forty three and
I'll just go down there thirty
eight will be Senator Shendo
thirty nine Senator Gonzales
forty is Senator Diamond forty
finish the night going back to
item number six which is Senate
bill four forty two Center
manuals and Senator Duhigg and
that's it for tonight and we'll
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate the Senate
health and public affairs
committee meeting will start at
Senate bills and the senators
whose bills are a on our agenda
our Maestas.
Lopez or had a meal.
She committee.
Campos.
time we have to come back on the
floor thank you senator
anticipate a Senator month this
figure is present agency
president.
Mr president the Senate
judiciary committee will meet at
members of asked to have their
bills roll over until Saturday
and Sunday and just as a little
bit of a heads up will meet also
tomorrow morning Senate judicial
meet at nine thirty tomorrow so
most of you are not too excited
about watching the Academy
Awards we'll have our own Oscars
Sunday evening I'm sorry to say
but please be over at the Senate
fiasco the person that made the
the tweet about my good friend
Senator Diamond deleted their
account instantly and you know
what out of curiosity I'd really
like to know who you are so if
centerman yes minister present
I'll help Senator Pinto and
Senator Pirtle and for fourteen
I think that was inappropriate
on call for and the lack of
and that's how we base our
judgment on if we're gonna be
calling out people like that
that's not how I was raised I
don't think that's part of it
temporal let me know when they
show up
house bill two few prescription
bills we gotta get out that are
there big to save up people in
the state money and and
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms and sent the Senate
stand recessed until seven PM
tonight and Mr president just
before.
Let's us for the sergeant at
The Senate to Senate recess.
