Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator bond this.
Senator Diamond.
center Hamlin here Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna here center
Mars.
Etcetera then yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pulp.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator also.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
you would asset all senators and
all those in the gallery please
rise for the indication to be
led today by father Jeremy best
order the Celtic Franciscans US
marine corps major Iraq.
pledge allegiance and Spanish to
be there today by Senator Brenda
McKenna and the salute to the
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator Woods.
Senate.
This prayer was written by
Reverend Cornelia eaten of the
Episcopal Church of Navajo land
In the house made of dawn.
We are of earth and sky.
From the east we welcome your
holy blessings.
us in the sacredness of our
ancestral songs of our show in
the four directions east.
South.
On the rainbow trail of the
beautiful way.
We are.
Corn pollen.
Red earth.
From metal is not a vendetta
does not allow those videos that
Amedica Republica Representative
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
Once again would like to welcome
thank you Mr president good
morning everyone unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
no objection were on that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
honor to have you here this
morning and to share those words
so thank you very much for that
thank you for your service and.
He's pretty amazing individual
for sure it's and I'm gonna go
through the the line up and we
may juggle some things were
waiting it's a joint session
with the house and the let us
know when they're ready to have
senators and staff up on the
rostrum sponsored by Senator
tall men I think what we'll do
is have them go out and set out
those lunches about eleven
you'd like to have lunch and
then there will be a certificate
so I'd like the the meals on
wheels folks to come back to the
chamber and will make sure they
get introduced at the right time
American Indian day Senator
Pinto has disincentive and a few
certificates and a memorial and
maybe something else.
Valentina so still still still
who's going to sing the.
National anthem for us so that
was unexpected surprise so we'll
that Senator Woods that is going
to be read and we'll do that one
right up front first he asked
for that we're going to make
that happen there's a
there nice to have you here
madam vice presidents and then
we're going to introduce a
Senate memorial twenty seven for
referenced just before we do
national anthem of federation
Republican women are having a
reception tonight at Hilton of
Santa Fe in the Ortiz restaurant
Tina still still saying for us
the national anthem I believe
it's going to be sung in Navajo
so that would be beautiful and
I'm not sure where she is but a
All senators and those in the
Galleria please rise for the
national anthem.
You Schroon done no easy.
I.
It Domingo at the in in the not
he is going to Houston and
he is club early in.
Mmhm it's all one needed a good
in wooed.
Hey it but.
noted or she As shown this
season and New Mexico does not
the whole June.
Is any.
We.
Navajo Nation Valentina **** so
very much appreciate that just
beautiful so thank you for being
here I think what would do given
the time frames working under I
other guests right after that's
a Center woods I'm gonna have
you go ahead and do the
certificate which the reader Is
gonna read says we're on that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous and I yield to
declares of today the National
I'm in the state rural electric
coop day if the reader would
read their certificate please
cooperative date or as the
Mexico's rural electric
cooperatives provide electric
power to eighty percent of New
Mexicos land and twenty two
percent of New Mexicans well
members and donors include
seventeen of the New Mexico's
Indian pueblos nations and
tribes and whereas New Mexico
rural electric cooperatives
rural state and whereas New
Mexico rural electric
cooperatives have invested more
than one billion three hundred
thousand dollars in
infrastructure which includes
Mexico and whereas New Mexico
rural electric cooperatives have
provided more than fourteen
million dollars in higher
education scholarships to more
their community by providing
educational scholarships and
participating in the national
government inaction used to or
by sending New Mexico students
cooperatives in partnership with
their generation and
transmission cooperatives will
meet the requirements of the
state renewable portfolio
electric cooperatives are using
new technologies to ensure
reliable and affordable
electricity including broadband
service to underserved areas
within their service territories
February third twenty twenty
three be declared New Mexico
rural electric cooperative day
in the Senate and be it further
resolved that the rural electric
electrification in New Mexico
signed and sealed at the capitol
in the City of Santa Fe Senator
Pat Woods Mimi Stewart president
we got a request for some
cameras and we didn't make that
motion so just wanna make that
and we'll go right back to you
Senator Woods Senate Eunice
consent Mr president to allow
cameras on the Senate floor in
Senator Woods thank you Mr
president and and again I just
can't tell you how much we
appreciate these men and women
that are here representing the
co ops today they provide the
electric board for several years
I'll never forget the first time
I had to sign a loan for twenty
four million dollars and it was
pretty intimidating but that's
alone they pay it back and I'm
so thankful for you keeping the
lights on I would like to
introduce not particularly
rural electric coop association
and also the president of
spring or electric coop there in
Springer and Tim is from folks
to other members that to
introduce our guest here from
the co ops today.
Thank you senator was we do have
others would like to speak on
introduce my guest today.
It
sent out a mail currently we're
speaking on both certificate so
I'm standing up in recognition
for what they do to keep the
lights on throughout Rio Arriba
county annex specially want to
thank those who are joining us
today in appreciation of the
state I want to thank the Senate
and introduce those now then
we'll go to Senator Campos thank
you Mr president and so joining
us today is Tomas I'm leave us
who's the director of the
northern Rio Arriba Alectra coop
both the northern Rio Arriba el
electric coop and Hamis mounted
electric coops are joining us
members of the Senate Mr
president if you can help me in
rostrum but it's less Montoya
who's the general manager of the
more San Miguel electric coop
couple of things as we dealt
leader when it comes to our
providing if you will the the
electric resources for the more
area and of course I'm again
area so with that I don't see in
move forward thank you very much
there yes I'm sorry I was
looking for there there is right
there in the corner.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Mr president I have blank
Clawson from the continental
divide electric coop who send
text me yesterday and said be
nice to his mother they live
down that Rehm and a great
her picking up her husband she's
and and served in that capacity
thank you Mr president.
provide service throughout the
entire state and I'm pleased
that I think I have a couple
people on the podium who
represent the central New Mexico
association let's please welcome
them to the chambers.
introduce Chuck pension if you
would send a check is the
present the NM all R. E. C. A.
and also general manager of
central valley electric coop
community and for your
constituent for of members I
just want to make sure that the
Senate knows who we are and what
you do for statewide thank you
Thank you Mr president and
members from.
The Senate a little earlier had
Mr did we stray is and some of
Mr radius as the CEO for acute
Carson is very visionary of Kit
Carson has a really expanded
members and also has expanded to
propane so he's always doing the
part of just being a a very
strong visionary for the area
Reyes and the members of the
cars a coop board.
Thank you.
Thank you senator that is.
Senator Diamond.
district for the good work that
they do Columbus electric coop
Sapporo and Sierra electric coop
sitting beside you on the
rostrum as Mr George be all
our county fairs and the
absolute best Christmas light
display in town thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr.
Mr president I just want to
again thank the members for
recognizing the co op members
that are here today and and this
president again thank you co op
members for coming thank you Mr
president.
Thank you thank you Senator
Woods.
frame also for members of the
meals on wheels lunches or in
the lounge and then for senator
Tom and what we'll do is what
they're gonna come back in and
we get to that point we'll have
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you for the opportunity to
introduce I ask unanimous
consent to introduce my guests
in the building and in the
gallery we have the group that
are here there dental hygienist
from around the state and these
are students from the university
preventative and therapeutic
care to the public contribute to
overall health and well being of
the citizens of New Mexico
dental hygienist volunteer many
hours to serve the underserved
participates in the missions of
mercy health throughout the
state I asked that the Senate
would recognize them and welcome
to the Senate.
Thank you Mr president you.
Thank you senator gave us
done for American Indian day and
and I know she's got some
certificates that will see where
she is there she just.
I thank you very much Mr
president I just I want to let
the body know that we have some
years Mr president members of
the body the Los Amigos that all
medical we have a legislative
action actually that's going
making its way through this
round house to to attempt to
pockets to travel all over the
world all over the world to
share the good news about New
Mexico our culture our food our
people our history and all the
experiences that they've had Mr
president over the years I'm
gonna introduce them if that's
alright Mister president
unanimous consent I can
introduce my guests.
a phenomenal job of helping
raise me as a human being and
also work for state government
for many many years and our
family or as close to her family
and and we all kind of grew up
president surely suit habit from
Berlin.
We also have the secretary Debra
Kearns by the end.
We have the treasurer from Santa
board member Janice Hackel rod
also from Albuquerque and I'm
sorry Mr president I Hazelett as
from Cuba Cuban New Mexico we've
all stopped many many times
along the way there I thank you
loves the organization so much
she decided to be with us today
and we really do appreciate that
John Taylor and I do want the
body to to to maybe show a
just all over the country all
over the world our former
secretary of state from
Albuquerque clarify the Andrews
Mr president we give a hand to
all of our guests today thank
you.
guests to to center someone
recognize to introduce a gas
that we're going to.
Going to the next order of
business but I want to make sure
these two before the guests have
to leave Senator Pirtle thank
you Mr president thank you for
young man sharp dressed young
man came to my office and he was
sent to my office by some
members of the New Mexico game
and fish and what he was looking
that there were some issues that
need resolved we we both went to
Shawn as office where he
introduced himself mentioned
youth program T. he hunts and
fishes himself but he wants
other youth to have the same
access to hunting as as he has
and so with me today I have
Thank you Senator Pirtle and
welcome to your guest.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
honorary lieutenant governor in
the gallery please stand and be
recognized Matthew deus please
welcome Matthew deus as our
Wirth thank you Mr president
what we're gonna do is a.
Go to introduction to get sent
memorial twenty seven introduced
and then we'll get that will
honored to have her here then
we'll do go back to third
reading to the memorial and then
once we're done with that she's
got a number of other guests and
certificates to introduce so
Mister president unanimous
legislation reader to read.
Senate bill three twenty one
introduced by Senator pope and
Senate memorial twenty seven
introduced by Senator Pinto a
memorial declaring February
third twenty twenty three
American Indian day in the
president's table some moral
twenty seven.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president a unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
The removal of today's of the
president's table into today's
counter Center worth Mr
president having eleven fifty
nine AM I move we adjourn until
session are present in this
afternoon session no objection
it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the record rules be
suspended the record show that
we're gonna do is ideal Senator
Pinto for the certificate
honoring our Navajo Nation vice
presidents who is here today and
that certificate will be read
The reader maybe direct
certificate.
Right.
The New Mexico state Senate does
January tenth twenty twenty
three as the eleventh vice
president of the Navajo Nation
and whereas Richelle is the
first woman elected to an
husband also need health for her
and she took the oath of office
and whereas at the inauguration
Richelle asked the men in the
audience if she could have a few
Navajo Nation president Nygren
said his decision to select a
woman for his candidacy of vice
president came naturally as he
was raised by strong women his
the and whereas resells maternal
grandfather is Kenshi Jeannie
and heard paternal grandfather
is touching the end whereas
need ultra it incorporated board
and whereas Richelle is an
advocate for the promotion of
the Navajo language now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate the state of New Mexico
the Navajo Nation for her
historic election sign.
Senator Pinto thank you Mr
president and thank you for
joining us today Montoya.
The past couple years of leasing
the nationally and out
seeing a lot of these issues
Madam eight again in which
decisions have to be made and
choices have to be made I hate
to say that sites have to be
Warm up that seat for the next
generation that is coming in to
represent our people and its.
And it's it is it's moving and I
know it's moving for our young
women that are here.
Stepping into these roles that
it does help to see that support
And I'm sure it's already been a
bit of a rocky road just getting
to this point and even deciding
to step into those shoes I
should I say moccasins.
How long we have been here.
But I don't also believe that we
have come a long way but there's
still a long way to go.
just from you but from the
nation.
And thank you again thank you
have.
Madam president I yield to
others.
on TV I was totally moved by
your speech to the mothers and
the women and the grandmothers
following you thank you very
much.
Senator Morris.
Thank you madam president and I
really powerful and reminded me
it's been way too many years
since we heard the potato song
and and that was something I was
very special to those of us who
are here and I'm not gonna put
anyone on the spot of course but
of those of us who served in
this chamber since our Senator
pintos grandfather was here that
of something that was a nice
reminder about that beautiful
mosaic that is New Mexico
hearing that song every year so
culturalism here in the state
thank you madam president.
Thank you senator Morris Senator
Lopez.
Thank you madam chair madam
president and I want to stand in
To see are you in the role that
you are just phenomenal it's a
blessing truly for Dimitri
Pinto for the others who have
also been elected within that in
a community that in the nation
Thank you madam president I I
also rising support in its
historic moment for the Navajo
Nation in and the world right to
see the changes been brought
of the Navajo Nation but it's a
great thing to see younger group
of people coming in any quality
with women in in that in that
response in the in those major
bring these leaders up as we
move forward and Schardin with
that are all equal we're all
compassion and everything
matters the Navajo Nation has
made great strides in the new
a lot of influence them and vice
president of what happens across
the United States what happens
across the world.
Thank you madam president ice to
rise and support of the
certificate and really think
Senator Pinto for bringing it
one of the most powerful I know
Christine's any crews who wrote
an article called strengthening
what remains and it was about
the devastation that was
leadership and particularly in
the Navajo in the Navajo Nation
right now the honor and the
privilege of having a female
vice president is really moving
madam president.
Thank you senator Senator
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr president
I just want to rise and support
introduce a guess I have but I
just want to rise in strong
support to guess I see today I
you know these are the upcoming
children of the future and we
Thank you senator Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam president I to
stand and support along with my
honor agency by president from
the Navajo Nation as you know
madam president we've seen time
and again with these historical.
of the senator and vice
president being with us today
and may you have harmony in your
role thank you.
matters and what I saw you take
office I was moved and thought
about the endless possibilities
for young women and young
leaders who are looking at you
and we'll follow it as you is
madam president.
Thank you senator.
I see no other comments that's
actually the memorial on passage
comments senator Wirth no.
All right Senator Pinto to close
thank you madam president and M.
thank you for members of the
body.
president thank you for being
here so what we're gonna do now
is go to third reading and do
the memorial Senate memorial
twenty seven so unanimous
on and then we can have a
discussion about that right
thank you we're on third reading
of legislation Senator Pinto
thank you thank you madam
president I move that Senate
Senator Pinto to explain the
memorial.
This memorial I believe my
grandfather introduced it and
it's every year.
Relatives are native American
friends you know all our nations
tribes and pueblos to be
recognized to let you know we
are still here that we are here
the leading edge especially when
we talk about meeting our native
American peoples needs.
So I'm so grateful I'm honored
to bring this memorial Ford.
or questions I think we all
chatted a lot if with the
certificate seeing no debate
Senator Pinto to close thank you
madam president I move that
Seeing no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
Senator Mario twenty seven has
duly passed the Senate.
Senator Pinto thank you madam
Senator Pinto to introduce your
guests miss madam president
unanimous is that we go about
our business announcements and
again on the rostrum we have our
vice president Michelle Montoya
and next to her and we have miss
Navajo Nation
niece Sasha Williams and my
sister a camel of Williams
Cornell of and then my brother
Mexico and then I yield to
Senator Sanchez two introduces
guests.
Senator Sanchez will go back to
and I have some friends here
from Malcolm a cell that are up
here in the gallery the the
school of hi creating Community
Academy pueblo of Acoma you guys
of rice.
dentists architects all them so
that they cannot wait and that's
what they're going to be in
their future all my friends here
on the other side from Alamo.
he is one of the council member
of the council delegates and
Alamo and here with me and and
Katie Herrera and also we have
introduce some of the.
Thank you madam.
president I have some guest with
me today no I don't need Dennis
consent now like to introduce
the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of the Navajo Nation
president is one chief the
legislative is another very
chief and the judicial branch is
another chief in tribal and so
that's very interesting that
they call in chief I have
another I don't know if he's a
yes in the heard museum of the
great line of jury if you want
to buy some nice high quality
jewelry he'll still come around
and just give use number but
and I saw a truck with two tanks
of water.
Hauling it out on Sunday morning
it's about fourteen degrees and
we're going to work and I work
on Sundays when they're not here
the lecturing.
We need help.
We understand the complexity of
the Navajo nation's sovereignty
that needs to happen but the end
And they lead us into a new era
but we want to work on those
issues together we want to make
it better for everything my
tell you but it's a great
community eleven they're great
people they laugh we have a good
time maybe the vice president
magus Frederick some day
to go to school broadband and
internet how do we resolve those
issues so those children and
those families want to work from
home just like everybody else I
can the pueblo Zuni it's the
same struggles to and how do we
help them.
So I want that to be a number
one awareness as we move through
and we want to make change in
our districts who make change
for bettors people's life so
thank you madam president.
Thank you senator.
A rise here because of this is
really important I mean we we
clearly are of a hugely negative
I hope that we consider each
other friends I certainly
consider her friend.
And I am very glad that she is
here Senator Pinto.
And now she's over there
Thank you that means little
sister thank you.
Thank you senator I'm sure she
over here anyway of thank you
madam president just want to.
started my tradition again on
Indian data I have my sister
Hey miss my sister Cheryl of the
convicted and so we haven't done
this in three years so if it's
good could to start a tradition
Thank you Mr president just any
any of that I'm sorry man
present any additional gas for.
Indian day today yes Senator
McKenna dinners.
guests today they were so
excited they're probably touring
the roundhouse right now they
might not be the gallery but
meet them this morning
both raven and I did and the
public schools are lost almost
have about a hundred and forty
got a sense of what it's like
about.
Learning what a bill is and how
how important it is that it's
Thank you Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores disincentive for
you members I'll see them in the
room but I just want to give a
shout out to Sandia pueblo which
thank you thank you senator
anyone else with guests Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president so
what I'd like to add that.
he will introduces guests and
tell us a little bit about the
lunch that's provided which is
in the lounge for everyone if
they'd like to go get it thank
you for that Senator Tomlinson.
Thank you madam.
Hi is an indicator a now reading
this certificate but however
Madam like to highlight some
information from that
certificate.
of women from the Presbyterian
church in the Albuquerque area
as you know that there are
chapters all over the United
States.
meals on wheels.
choose between food and housing.
A terrible commentary on the
state of affairs in this nation.
Twenty percent of the meals on
Madam chair.
Four and a half million meals
had been served throughout the
fifty one year history of the
In the last year two thousand
twenty two meals on wheels serve
just shy of a hundred fifty
thousand meals.
That's roughly ten thousand more
meals and they served on the
volunteered to deliver and
thanksgiving and Christmas.
And.
You know this very tragic madam
spending any time with any
friends or neighbors or
relatives.
On a holiday such as
thanksgiving day.
Christmas is still have a hard
on my list but there's only ten
sitting.
So this one person that's
missing so with that person will
not have to raise their hand or
stand up.
d'italia the Chung tuna.
Are you can either raise your
hand or stand up the second one
is the CEO Shawna frost.
I guess that's the one person
missing David Nader.
Dennis Fleming chief plumber
chief strategy officer.
Renee.
Susie the more our food services
director.
Thank you all for for being here
and giving us the opportunity to
recognize all of you do you
behalf of the Senate I want to
thank you for a providing our
our lunch today so let's give
them all a big.
Thanks to the meals on wheels
and that lovely lunch we're all
going to be filled with
happiness today Senator Wirth
session while we wait I think
will work on some of the items
up on the table so madam
president unanimous consent we
go to the other business
messages from the governor.
Mimi Stewart president pro tem
and members of the New Mexico's
Senate state Senate in
accordance with article four
section forty two of the New
Mexico constitution I hereby
department for term commencing
January first twenty twenty
three to serve at the pleasure
of the governor.
Secretary of Lisa to foil
Senator for re appointment as
secretary of corrections
secretary of the department of
cultural cultural affairs for a
term commencing January first
twenty twenty three to serve at
the pleasure of the governor
governor secretary secretary
Sarah cultural Probst for re
appointment as secretary of
entertainer G. minerals and
natural resources department for
term commencing January first
twenty twenty three to serve at
the pleasure of the governor
secretary Stephanie Stephanie
Schardin Clarke for re
appointment as secretary of the
Shroyer Trier for re appointment
as secretary of tourism
department freight term
commencing January first twenty
twenty three to serve at the
twenty three to serve at the
pleasure of the governor these
appointees shall serve and have
all duties responsibilities and
authority of their offices
The messages will be entered.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
inform the Senate that house
that the house has passed house
bill one twenty five as amended
house bill one twenty six as
amended by the house and request
Messages will be entered.
Senator Wirth I thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go that a business introduction.
Before we got introduction you
seven as amended has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommend that Dacian
that it do pass respectfully
favor signify by saying aye.
Compose.
The eyes have it committee
report is adopted.
Madam president your Indian
as amended and that's referred
to the tax business and
transportation committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Shannon D. Pinto co chair
Senator Pinto.
are they were acted upon
individually.
Just seeing no objection the
reader will read all the
committee reports Senate bill
two seventy do pass and that's
referred to the finance
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Post name.
Committee report is adopted.
reports that same has been duly
rules and engrossed preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the Senate.
chairs Senator Hamblen madam
president I move the adoption of
the committee report current
option of a favorable committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
I has been duly signed by the
officers of the Senate.
The reader can continue.
rules and grows preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
Senate respectfully submitted
senator Pete Campos sanitary
Hamblin Senator cliff R. Pirtle
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose nay the eyes have it.
Like to announce that the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
has had it under consideration
reports that the same is been
dually enrolled and grossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
run adoptions that Senator
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose nay.
The eyes have it the report is
adopted.
Madam president your rules
committee to whom has been
reform for Senate bill seventy
three has had it under
Duhigg chairwoman Senator do
that madam president I move the
committee part funded options
favorable committee report all
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill ten has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that a
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee
committee report right favorable
committee report those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose nay committee report is
adopted.
Madam president your tax
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman.
Senator Hamblen madam president
a bit of advice to aid because
acted upon individually seeing
no objection the reader will
read all the committee reports
Senate bill forty six do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Hamblen madam
president I move the adoption of
the committee reports for
adoption favorable committee
Senator Wirth what order of
Business shopping next thank you
madam president unanimous that
we go that our business
introduction of legislation.
associations requiring that no
less than seventy five percent
of the board of a homeowners
association be elected by lot
owners after seventy five
percent of lots are no longer
by title Sir printed and
referred to the Senate health of
public affairs committee since
two Judiciary Senate bill three
twenty one.
Senate bill three twenty two
and paternity to abate upon the
death of a party amending the
uniform probate code Senate
Bill.
Three twenty two.
Judiciary Senate bill three
twenty two Senate bill three
twenty three introduced by
senator Tom and and act making
appropriation to the office of
have been read twice by title
sort of printed and referred.
To the Senate health of public
Affairs Committee sense to
finance Senate bill three twenty
three the Senate bill three
certain provide certain
certified employees in appraiser
offices Senate bill three twenty
four Senate bill three twenty
four have been read twice by
Representative Sarinana and
Act related to higher education
expanding the teacher loan
repayment act to include social
workers and school counselors
Education Committee French to
Senate finance Senate bill three
twenty five Senate bill three
twenty six introduced by Senator
Hamblen and act relating to
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
conservation committee sense to
Senate tax business and
transportation Senate bill three
twenty six Senate bill three
be approved by law Senate bill
three twenty seven Senate bill
three twenty seven haven't.
Read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
introduced by Senate by the and
act relating to children
expanding eligibility for the
fostering connections program
Senate bill three twenty eight.
Senate bill three twenty wait
introduced by Senator Stewart
and act making appropriation to
the board of regents of the New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology for the bureau of
geology and mineral resources
sense to finance Senate bill
three twenty nine Senate bill
three thirty introduced by
senator Maestas and act relating
to executive reorganization
person property contractual
obligations statutory references
and rules Senate bill three
thirty Senate bill three thirty
have been read twice by title is
Rodriguez and act making
appropriation to the children
youth and families department to
fund domestic violence
coordinated community response
Senate bill three thirty one
Senate bill three thirty one
Senate bill three thirty one.
Senate bill three thirty two
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
and Doris by the New Mexico
finance Authority oversight
committee and act relating to
finance authorizing the New
thirty two and I read twice by
title Sir printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee thanks to finance
Senate bill three thirty two
the establishment of single
parent families owning
districts.
Senate bill three thirty three
Senate bill three thirty three
have been read twice by title
and Korea Hemphill and act
making appropriation to the
department of finance and
administration for black fire
recovery efforts requiring
three thirty four.
Senate bill three thirty five
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
pursuant to the Conservancy act
of New Mexico providing
requirements for the conduct of
district elections in twenty
twenty three declaring an
emergency Senate bill three
thirty five.
Senate bill three thirty six
introduced by Senate by the out
and act relating to gaming
control allowing the use of race
that racetrack funds to offset
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation thanks to
Judiciary Senate bill three
thirty six.
security planning act
authorizing the Interstate
Stream Commission to make loans
and grants for regional water
planning requires Interstate
Stream Commission to make rules
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
conservation committee thanks to
finance and build three thirty
seven.
Senate bill three thirty eight
introduced by senator Neville
additional estimates that do not
require an affidavit to be filed
Senate bill three thirty eight
Senate bill three thirty eight
have been read twice by title is
ordered prison referred to the
Senate health public affairs
act relating to juvenile
services renaming the juvenile
continuing grant Fund as the
juvenile equity community grant
fund require the provision of
juvenile juvenile justice
ordered printed and sent to
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee fence to finance
Senate bill three thirty nine.
Senate bill three forty
studies that meet Public
Education Department academic
content and performance
standards providing for an
ethnic studies counsel to assist
the department with curriculum
public affairs committee Senate
bill three forty.
Senate bill three forty one
introduced by senator Maestas
and act relating to public
personal finance to count as an
elective unit prior to
graduation Senate bill three
forty one Senate bill three
forty one have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
introduced by Senator Pinto a
memo oriel honoring forty three
years of service by state
senator John Pinto and declaring
February fourteenth twenty
This ordered not printed not
refer to committee placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial twenty eight.
Senate memorial twenty nine
Senate memorial twenty nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate rules committee thanks to
Senate conservation Senate
memorial twenty nine.
that evaluates the feasibility
of providing health coverage to
all brain injury patients and
the feasibility of establishing
and a brain injury registry that
tracks brain injury statistics
printed and referred to the
rules committee that's to Senate
health of public affairs
committee sent memorial thirty.
And act relating to property
reinstating certain provisions
of a section of law regarding
requirements for the notice and
House bill twenty six having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
education creating a dual credit
task force providing duties
requiring a final report house
bill one twenty five.
Sir Peter Wirth thank you madam
president Ms consent we go about
our business announcements
miscellaneous and I understand
our sergeant at arms have some
representatives with an
invitation Evans Representative
little representative Duncan and
representative Lente.
Welcome.
to a joint session in the house
of in the house chambers thank
you so much for the invitation
we will be there shortly.
Right thank you.
but now the time to announce
committees and then we will wrap
it up we will come back on the
floor.
We're announcements
miscellaneous Senator Ortiz the
session we've got a lengthy
agenda and we're gonna start off
with the I believe we're
starting off with the your bill
Senator to of your bills we also
Gonzalez in moon yo's so it's a
lengthy agenda but if we get
started a half hour after the
floor session will move
expeditiously through the agenda
thank you madam president thank
Madam president senator Munoz
I'd be glad to yield.
Mr Madam presence Senator could
you go from the bottom up
unless.
seven of the bills before we get
to years.
Members of enjoying those for
fifteen years.
I think we should try a new
policy distance to go home for
health is on our agenda how does
not a lot of members here I want
to make sure that everybody
knows Monday have gonna get your
with the exact we can get that
done but make sure you get your
junior money Adrian and the
Senate finance staff is up there
to help with language make sure
your money goes where it wants
reoccurring money so members
make sure you do that thank you
madam president thank you
senator do hip thank you madam
president on recognition of the
joint session of the Senate
Senate rules will meet next
Monday also in at three twenty
one at nine AM and we will be
doing confirmations
business.
I don't think I'm gonna take
that right now thanks for the
order Senator souls thank you
madam chair Senate education
will be back meeting at nine
Kernan Moores masses Lopez and
then the two we didn't get to
today Senator pope and senator
Neville please be on time will
try to knock out we got a little
behind today because of school
in the lounge if anyone would
like a lunch that were provided
for us are absolutely tasty also
it is that time I didn't
remember that it was Friday
we've lost complete track of
Gemma's let's get let's give
them a huge round of applause
for all the work that goes into
this.
just a reminder we're gonna walk
over right now to the joint
session.
I see no objections the Senate
is in recess until eleven
o'clock on the morning and
