You all wait that we're gonna
start this morning with Senator
Wirth and staff at.
I thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
it's my distinct honor today to
present all attached it for a
point meant to the New Mexico
university numbers in Mexico
board of regents
first just a little bit about
her history with you NM she
received her BA in nineteen
seventy two with a may major in
history and a minor in German
and then her juris doctor at the
university of New Mexico in
nineteen seventy seven so both
need the and be a from UNM so
it's particularly appropriate
that she is heading back to be
part of of the board of regents
I was thinking back I've known
Paul for thirty five years
which is pretty amazing.
Yes we were all younger than
in my life Carol was a builder
after the Legislative Council
Service and Paul actually
attended our wedding in nineteen
ninety so it goes way back it's
a really neat relationship of
course then when I came to the
legislature in two thousand four
I had the chance to work with
Paula in her capacity as
director of the Legislative
Council Service she was there
twenty eight years starting in
nineteen eighty two and working
our way up assistant director
and David was the director from
nineteen eighty eight to twenty
ten and of course we all
appreciate and understand the
magnitude of that job
Very early in Paulus
being appointed as director
there was a major capital
renovation that took an
extraordinary amount of work and
I think that certainly her
experience with managing
buildings managing budgets
managing costs are skills that
are going to be very helpful for
her in this new position since
she left the Legislative Council
she's remained very active has
continued to what has been the
chair of the advisory committee
to the New Mexico compilation
commission something that she
does to this day from nineteen
ninety one so now she continues
to be a member of the
international women's forum of
New Mexico and serve the New
Mexico historic women's marker
Committee and for the last
eleven years she's been a member
and is the current secretary of
the governing council of the New
Mexico school for the arts and
has helped transition the school
from a start up to now a very.
Working towards a really
established statewide kind of
landmark school she's also since
nineteen eighty eight and a
member of the uniform law
commission the list of
accomplishments and recognitions
are pretty amazing twenty twenty
two New Mexico state bar
president's award twenty sixteen
the us public service award by
tax ago voices for children
twenty ten public lawyer of the
year two thousand nine UNM
School of Law distinguished
achievement award two thousand I
do rentals public service award
by the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce two thousand
three New Mexico distinguished
public service award two
thousand to New Mexico coalition
of school administrators award
and I could keep going down the
list but I think the governor
has made a fantastic
appointments up with miss
Tackett to serve on the board of
regents at UNM and I'm very
honored to be here to present
our confirmation madam chair
ideal to Paul to say few words
thank you senator madam chair
first I want to thank you for
rescheduling my hearing because
of my bronchitis we would have
an I would even have difficulty
here on Wednesday and I think
you staff Pat all over right for
for coordinate helping to
coordinate it all with with.
Also want to thank Sony Rivera
who is the executive assistant
to Melissa Salazar director
fourteen commissions and
Stephanie Rodriguez secretary of
higher ed.
For all their assistance in
helping me navigate navigate
this process I was around a long
time I had no idea what it is I.
Of there's lots of steps and I
was grateful for all the help.
I think you start with I have a
long connection with with you
and and
I grew up in the shadow of you
and.
Mr Porter Rome.
Representative junior high
MontaVista even highland was in
the corporate have you and.
And I have the right to you and
my mom was from Deming actually
supported Three Rivers but the
ranch was in Deming and she
moved up from there to go to U.
N. M. along with her sister my
aunt and many cousins from el
Paso no college no passive in
and they all moved up about the
same time to go to you and the
college on the hill this is the
other in my day have live just
off High Street on silver two
blocks off Central and you can
just walk up the hill do you
feel that that's where they met
I felt a bit in their footsteps
not probably in sort of the
sequence of time that they did
receive my as Peter said I see
my undergraduate and my luck
with their.
I think.
My family really honored public
service with important and I
also think I grew up at a time
point government service was
something to aspire to it was
honorable and respected.
I was also drawn to public
service and I before I went to
law school I was in DC and I ran
an experiment exchange program
for exchange program trying to
shift from just the.
The sort of high school
structured sort of come over
from a foreign country you go to
high school to do a little older
age or social action we had one
one student from Sweden who work
with congressman Chisholm and
another work with a point of the
black agent black community
groups that was changing Adams
Morgan was a fascinating.
Process and I'm gonna very
engaged and one of the things I
learned was you have to provide
city you have to.
As for the students my mic tips
that I earned working in the
restaurant before I went to law
school with what Senator in
setting the war.
Aware of what we used for their
for their for their allowances
it's also what maybe realize I
want to go to law school because
it was during Watergate and I
waited on John dean but water
junior fed fielding at the
restaurant and Lois had fried
chicken in this very fancy
restaurant I thought that was
terrific but I decided if the
cells could be lawyers and maybe
I could too and I didn't want to
be waitressing forty because
part of the.
Anyway
After law school I'm I'm I got
really clear I want to be in
private and government service
because I spent four years in
private practice and if there's
anything that will convince you
that you're in the wrong place
time is for your private
practice at least for me I was
not is not my sort of deal I
applaud the work of the council
service and this is as the
senators said I've for nineteen
eighty two clave you can
although he hated my father he
decided to give me a chance and
his wife said it was okay
because my father had done after
for after.
Fred Harris in the papers and it
was you know it's to Mexico like
I said that was.
My twenty eight years the
council service the perfect
career for me.
this is an office dedicated to
service thank god services even
in the name thank and I loved
almost every minute there.
The review was appropriate it
was a group of career the
provided the opportunity for
sometimes required.
Me to recognize it as an
opportunity to learn something
new almost every day.
When I retired like Debbie
Romero mentioned on Wednesday
I've not done retirement very
well.
I think you know Senator Wirth
listed several things that.
The the thing that is key to me
for this job is the I've served
almost twelve years on the
governing council for the arts
learning how to work on a on a
board that oversees a public
high school.
Learning what it means to serve
on a board.
Learning that may not mean that
I get to help with all the
decisions you know that's always
a good thing to be serving on
the board.
Or maybe the governor just
thought it was time for me to
graduate to higher ed.
And I am honored to move up to
the college level you and to be
able to serve you NM our
flagship institution as a member
of the U. N. M. board of regents
I'm grateful to the governor for
offering me this opportunity to
serve in this capacity.
because the university means so
much to me without the education
I received at UNM in the eight
in the seventies.
I would never of had the career
that I had.
I value the higher education I
received there.
And I think it's imperative that
we provide this opportunity for
the students growing up in New
Mexico.
I recognize that this service.
Position is a daunting task and
I undertake it humbly.
Knowing that it will require
much listening and hearing.
And learning as I go.
Again I thank the governor for
her confidence in me and asking
me to undertake this talents.
I'm.
The committee for your time and
your service and madam chair on
the stand for questions.
Very much we have five people
signed up to to speak in support
of your confirmation let's do
about two minutes each I'm gonna
start with the folks who
admitted are in the room
Veronica Gonzales.
Come on up to the microphone.
Madam chair members of the
committee so nice to see many of
you here today I'm I am the
former cabinet secretary of the
New Mexico department of
cultural affairs I served in
that position for eight years
but I've known Pala much longer
I have known her for almost
twenty years I was working at
the institute of American Indian
arts at the time that I met her
and sought her help on something
and.
She seemed to know everything
and well you don't know the
process for becoming a region
you know everything else I can
confidently say that
she is a person of so much
integrity she's incredibly
knowledgeable she is dedicated
to making New Mexico a better
state.
And at her to court as she said
she is a public servant and I
can't think of a better person
to serve as a as a regent of the
university of New Mexico which
is also my alma mater and I'm
very proud and and very honored
to be here today to support her
nomination thank you so much.
Thank you
Janet peacock.
Hi my name is Janet peacock and
Hello hired me in nineteen
ninety seven to service the
state's legislative fiscal
analyst
within the Legislative Council
Service I worked with her
Intel I retired for about twelve
years until I retired from full
time work and then some of you
know I went to work has staff
for Senate finance committee.
But my experience in working
with for Paul at the Legislative
Council Service was excellent
from the very start she and I
developed a pattern of mutual
trust and respect she trusted me
to complete various research
projects I was asked to do and
to keep her informed of any
potential issues I was always
impressed by policy breadth of
knowledge about public policy
issues and her determination to
find viable ways to accomplish
what was being asked of us.
Follow was not afraid to seek
advice from me and other
legislative council staff when
she felt uncertain about an area
she often sought my input on
economics finance taxation and
complicated numbers I admired
her need and willingness to more
fully understand things that
were outside her usual area of
competence I soon recognized
policy real talent was to craft
workable solutions to difficult
problems and to build consensus
among people with different
points of view as you can well
imagine these surfaced
frequently and provided for.
For me our multi year work with
the public school capital outlay
task force to develop the new
statewide public school capital
outlay program was the most
simple excellent example of
policy leadership skills it was
really policy untiring work with
task force members who included
legislators members from the
executive branch of government.
Representatives from the school
districts that had sued us and.
members of the public it was for
hard work with all of those that
brought
that ensured that a successful
outcome of that work I think
policy approach to dealing with
difficult public policy issues
and respecting different points
of view will make her a valuable
and effective regent.
As as she has and she has a vast
reservoir of public policy and
finance knowledge and history to
draw upon as a UNM alumni I will
be proud to have polished serve
as a UNM regent and if she's
discussing complicated.
number calculations she can call
me.
Thank you so much I Mister
Alvino because the.
Thank you madam chair up I am a
retired accountant and no policy
for probably is.
Long as Senator Wirth and maybe
more
I will repeat the things that
have been said already let's
another.
Her service on the council
service from very unique because
she followed the legendary Clady
cannon and that was tough that
was a tough shoes to fill to
fill them and then some I too
and am I alone this of you and
and I I want nothing but the
best from my alma mater I
recommend her to you
wholeheartedly and without
equivocation thank you.
Thank you I do have is Wade cafe
are you here in person or
online.
Mr Cavett.
Yes go ahead for about two
minutes.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee I appreciate you
allowing me time the in favor of
this tactic is confirmation.
I wanted to call in this morning
from hops to tell everyone that
it's just not Albuquerque Santa
Fe that sports agency staff but
it's the entire state.
manner over five years ago and I
believe we can invite friends I
find the staff it to be well
informed personable more
impartial in the passion for the
task that she participates in
our background makes for a great
choice for rage and the whole
state of New Mexico I encourage
you to vote yes for her
confirmation thank you.
Thank you and professor doesn't
area see online yes.
Professor go ahead.
Professor.
Fund mute.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it is with.
Right right that I support
following the nomination.
I have no fault for almost fifty
years.
She would in my current plan was
the first class she attended law
school.
Follow follows career with great
pride over the years.
Well we have a very hard working
council point I have had the
opportunity to work with her and
members of their staff over the
years on a particular policy
questions and legislation.
I also serve on the advisory
committee to the compilation
commission with our.
It is without doubt the best I
have seen.
I thank you that.
One for two reasons one we were
reading right now that we have
in the past.
Thanks we've.
She has to route your call to
the New Mexico there's a lot of
what we're the report on the
public to me so that is
available to all citizens
without cost.
You're welcome well.
She
wrote that the commission.
What all of them were extremely
is her ability to we but without
the the.
you know listen.
And public school with the help
of other people.
I wanted as a member of the U.
N. M. but we do have a fall and
one of our region's thank your.
Thank you professor.
All right here at the have a two
minutes left there's a thing
else you'd like to say before we
go to members of the committee
the manager again I just this
and as policy and this is a
fantastic appointments I didn't
mention I'm also you in law
school graduates so again I just
when you bring someone with this
background to position it just
it's going to be a huge asset to
the university so anything you
like to add just to close no I'm
trying not to cry as well as.
They have likely exiting.
All right we didn't have anyone
signed up in opposition if
anyone in the room would like to
raise their hand to indicate
support please to do so.
All graduated from anyone
online.
I would if anyone would like to
raise their hand to indicate
opposition please do so.
Same amendment anyone online.
All right that members of the
committee Senator Moores I I'm
kind of than everyone else.
Thank.
wanted to real business when you
did the manager when you do the
renovation of this building what
were the biggest flaws and
designer had any architect has
to under cover of.
A lot of problems with the this
is
would actually you're a sponsor
of those problems.
I know what you are doing.
I I I got to see what I
sometimes to fix those some of
those.
I was gonna say when I saw your
name
I was.
But.
I thank you twenty four five
years ago when I was a young
culture to staff lieutenant
governor quickly put me in my
place.
Rosicrucian.
I think
Going to the gentle lady of this
bill you have your strong
political beliefs but I don't
figures anyone of the thousands
of legislators who work with
over the last year is hello tell
you what they are and I think
that is a yes.
More as a person if you're able
to work with everyone and I
never anyone ever say a bad word
about you I do think UNM's in
trouble
you know you know hot spot
bullshit and you've dealt with
the the biggest artists of that
tribunal last the thirty odd
years so I don't think you can
understand what they're getting
into
demeanor and professionalism is
the buses of hype factors here
people you will you will love
this said that ships to right
I'm sure of the number of
products one thank you madam
chair so that was football
player at the UNM so's another.
I'm awful Prodi or money and
then just really happy this no
offense all the other regions
we've done that the friends on
many of the board of regents are
on the state including your
mouth but I think you're
probably one of the best I've
seen on by administration for.
So graduation some good luck.
Senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Wirth for bringing this
wonderful nominate I'm just
meeting you right now from a far
the agency had it but it's so
well what a career what a life
and I look forward to getting to
know you and whenever you NM
needs to search for president
after miss Stokes has decided
she's had enough.
There you are I think you.
So impressed was so impressed so
congratulations thank you madam
chair thank you Senator drugs.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you center or this can.
And I'm really pleased that
you're being recognized in this
way and offer service for the
future of mine question follows
some of senator Wirth I think
that there have been some costs
and down at the university.
And I actually moved to Mexico
to teach at the university of
New Mexico that's what I'm here
and so after I love I have
watched with great interest.
How the faculty have been
treated how the.
Graduate teaching assistants
have been treated all the staff
of increase of the sports teams
have been treated how the budget
has been.
There are some.
Issues as has been mentioned.
So I believe.
That this university and other
universities are looking for a
strong.
Leadership that will challenge
the norm.
But the other issue that I have
brought up to some of the other
regions from different
universities is some
coordination and cooperation
around renewable energy.
And often times we have to bring
our skills from the national
laboratories or from out of
state.
So I'd love to see our
universities collaborate to
develop our skill base here in
the state and again time total
please that nominated this.
Thank you very much Spencer.
Thank you Senator Ortiz Pena
thank you madam chairman and
senator Wirth than hello what a
great nomination I.
I can't think of anyone who'd be
better suited for the for the
for that position
addition reading your resume a
couple things struck me.
I wonder if you could share with
us some reaction to this.
He said as as the director of
the New Mexico Legislative
Council Service.
You were you were involved in
working with the Legislature
during with the part time
citizen volunteer legislature in
ever increasingly polarized and
partisan environment.
And what was it like in those
days.
Really was increasingly growing.
So the other thing I noticed
madam chairman was of.
The artwork that you I mean and
that you chose to include that I
think says a great deal about
you and about your perspective
on on our state and our culture
the art collection that you
help.
Thank you financing it answer
yourself if you so the this is
such a big priority and that the
issue wanted to make sure we
have the greatest art collection
many capitol building I can't I
can't imagine a better and I
love to take people down the
hall ways is of way over to the
all state library of.
What why did you do that what
was what was it that led you to
get so involved in L.
we had forgotten to put the one
percent money and for the arts
and so there was a piece of
there was a wonderful sculpture
outside but several members who
did not appreciate it.
I was a blue Jimenez all and so
they said we need to not have
any more art like this let's
let's take some money out of our
our reserve for the for the
building and and and do
something with you know public
art.
So you know that was the way to
speak to solve that problem for
them the way the way it got big
is and I have to give credit to
James Rutherford after he was on
on the committee was up in the
governor's gallery and we were
trying to get that the the the
various pieces of sort of twelve
we ended up with twelve art
pieces we did art furniture and
and the rocks the the native
American rugs that are on the
actually on those on those walls
of time there was that whole
whole way to to to deal with
dealing with the the one percent
for the arts issue within James
came up and said.
Why don't you start a foundation
I agree with the council would
have to direct us to do that so
of a memorial happen to be
drafted that aspect of the
council directed the council
service to actually
In developing a capital or
foundation and that's how that
happened.
Thank.
I can't think of a of a of a
greater thing to let the state
to the matter whatever happens
and in your career is a region
of always look to that when was
it as a crowning success one
last thing that chairman
we're.
We're just about to finalize the
budget for the year and there's
been rumblings in our finance
committee about the.
great growth in the research
program and special projects
part of the budget is University
graduated the R. P. S. P. part.
Not the instruction in whatever
the rest eighth section general
I guess.
And and that that should be that
we should look into that we
should trim those back and we
should put more money into
instruction and listen to those
are PSP I I would just hope that
as a region you you would you
would resist that and to me
those projects.
The that we ask Miss Universe
come almost all of them
originate with provided the
initiatives.
Asking the university to tackle.
At the sustainable energy
development for example the
research into that or into the
causes of health care rising
escalating costs are all the
things that wind up in those or
PSP or even things like the
Chicano studies or the ethnic
studies programs
those are all things that I
think the community needs to
have University take a major
role in doing those are things
that are really important
for academia to come to the aid
of of the community and to I
know it would be nice in need to
re had neither budgets with
everything in three or four
categories but those are really
important things and I wondered
if you that is.
If you have any insight into
that and whether whether there
might be some way to to to make
sure we don't go down the path
of.
Straying from involving in the
community the university's
resources the brain power of the
university.
Madam chair center I don't have
any inside in that at this point
but I appreciate you raising the
issue and I will assure you that
I will.
Understood try to learn
something about it and
understand I mean I do
understand the budget and the
what what you're talking about
but I don't know what the issues
are and I would be reluctant to
step in and say hello I have a
solution because I don't but I'm
very appreciative of you raising
that issue right thank you I
know you'll be looking to thank
you madam chairman that's all
and thank you Senator Stewart.
Thank you.
So personal feelings that you
follow the nominated is I'll get
to see you more you'll have to
be in Albuquerque.
So for me I really support for
this.
So of course when I got elected
ninety four
There were not very many women.
In this building and our
treatment was much worse back
then probably because there
weren't that many of us it was
easier to ignore us and demean
us and not vote for staff and I
came in with Gary Johnson in his
first year the need to all the
bills and online capital outlay.
That was back when.
I was not there I think the
speaker pull that eight hundred
thousand the year that I had a
hundred it all I need to figure
Thomson so Representative few
years in the beginning and Paul
was always there up for two
years that always ended in
laughter and shoring me up short
both of us up to go out and keep
fighting so you're just amazing
person with others you know the
way you work towards
collaboration.
Work towards humor at work
appears that we're both doing
right now and just get on the
other side of that so I am so
thrilled that the government has
to put.
And I want to just talk a little
about the work you did with
capital outlay with the SUNY
losses because.
Just an incredible place because
of you and all that work early
on just check out Senate bill
one thirty one we are now about
to fund to all those structures
and strict that we have to put
it we've spent almost three
billion.
In the past twenty years on
public schools and we have
really good looking and much
better public schools because of
it so we've had we've thought to
undo all the Legislative offsets
which were awful or all we do
all of the taking credit of
course for impact aid but also
not putting restrictions on it
for capital we funded the half
million levy credit we've done
all those credits and we've of
now are being much more generous
to every district for their
state match for their.
Well for a bigger statement less
of a local match so it's just a
bill that celebrates that we've
done the right thing three
committees a joint LA Essie LFC
and post code to create that
that renewable so so you can
celebrate that starting it off
and ending it in such a positive
way so just depreciated so much
Polish UNM will be much better
if you at the helm so fully
support thank you.
You.
Thank you chairman and
the survey pleasure to be here
to get for your.
Information for the UNM border
regions.
I don't wear any dislike for you
at all because of your sponsor.
I'm just.
But.
Fortunately for all of us here
for with you when you have just
been here a couple years ago
acted and.
I need a search warrant Fund
everything I have and the the
state you just need about you is
you really could tell when
people needed help and you were
there for me and sometimes are
folks in the council orders
helpful as of which you were
always there and
So then I remember I was named
chairman of the the regulation
of telecommunications which was
a really a hell of an issue I
mean it was when all the huge
companies were coming in and I
remember the first cell phone us
all there's a thing about two by
three in the trunk make your
cell phone work and.
You know within two years that
all changed but we had a
committee that you're the truth
truly has of course for the
people of the state and if you
ran as well and we had a a lot
of people come in on both sides
and.
I remember the one of the last
people we had in you found
somebody I don't remember his
name but he was an expert in
telecommunications and he can
answer every question that every
side head.
And consequently we had a bill
that was drafted.
Very difficult to understand but
it also built the confidence in
that because the committee had
all gotten behind and we pass
something that I think it's been
amended one time and it really
works well for the state of New
Mexico so we could go forward
and get to get where we need to
be with telecommunications which
Israel known as all over the
place and it's but it was his
job to test of time and but
you're taking this job.
And as I can tell you one thing
there's a lot of times people
don't want to be on board
anymore.
Because it's just not as fun as
it used to be you're just to
make decisions on things that
twenty years ago nobody would
have ever considered border
regions having make decisions
like that and it takes real
depth and want want to be there
and stay there and I think
you'll have that then
Anyway I can help you with
anything you know I'll be here
and I will
Will get along and I know you'll
do a good job for you and each
year so anyway it's
Good to be able to see you again
but you're better you I heard
you were awfully sick last week
so anyway leisure here and you
do have a good sponsor.
People here wonder sometimes
that we're a little partners and
we don't get along my first year
up here we didn't pass a feed
bill for a month.
I don't think that doesn't make
the folks are working mission a
little bit upset.
It it certainly does and there's
lots of things up here that seem
pretty serious but they're
really not.
Some time ago replaces
intellectual quickly here.
It's just hard to imagine the
thought process but thanks for
being here thanks for being
willing to serve thank you thank
you.
Senator and.
Hi a I'm I just got to meet you
the session for the first time
hi and I'm so thrilled that I
have gotten to because and every
single time I hear anyone talk
about you there is something new
that I really appreciate that
turns out it came from you
even just in here now.
One source and the fact that I
can use that for free and our
capital help our collection and
all the working on capital
outlay and.
I am so much of what hi.
Depend on and appreciate about.
This experience up here
apparently is is thanks to you
I and I was just calling you the
other day.
Can hear advice on an issue and
even though you could barely
speak you you jumped right in
and and and totally figured it
out and now I have your phone
number so you're really in
trouble.
By
Video and whatever we're doing.
These confirmations and I'm
ready notes to myself about what
I'm hearing and for you I have.
You know knows everything helped
everyone all the awards.
As I.
I'm I'm just incredibly mPrest
and thrilled that we have
someone of your caliber here and
the U. N. M. we'll have you and
I the only thing I'm mad about
is that I didn't get to to work
with you more here the
legislature while you're here
but I really look forward to to
work getting to work with you
more in the future hi in anyway
possible so I have a feeling
there might be I throw down for
who gets to make a motion but I
think Senators of onyx
thank you madam chair I move you
pass on the nomination of
politics for the Mexico border
region.
That I'm guessing has a second
third or fourth of the teen sex
yes let's go ahead and do a roll
call vote.
Senator practice excuse senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez a sixty Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Munoz Senator Moores yes
senator Ortiz Pena yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator Perdue
is excuse senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart S..
Stewart yes Senator had a mere
six Houston Senator do the yes
thank you with seven yes we'll
see you later on today on the
Senate floor thank you so much.
To.
The governor meters of justice
or if you everyone.
Why sixteen results.
V. Johnson.
In the capitol.
Yes there is a budget eighty
years.
Good morning Sir good morning
Representative good morning
Senators.
What.
Senator Representative go go
ahead thank you.
Go forth Senator
been practicing.
Like to to people I give you
twenty Bucks if they would
oppose.
Actually they were going to
support the here.
Is is a microphone.
Thank you
Madam chairman members of the
rules committee is certainly a
pleasure for me to be here this
morning with well federation is
well known I'm sure the most all
of us and
He was in the house of
representatives back in the
seventies.
And seventy six and seventy
eight representing Travis
county.
And the.
Forty two years later in twenty
eighteen years elected again.
And couple terms and
You know is one of those folks
that has always been a true
service New Mexico all in New
Mexico his family was senator
Bennett was in the biggest
industry we have for New Mexico
the oil and gas business.
He has been a member of the
Interstate Stream Commission.
Board of finance Mexico provided
Senate committee staff.
He is working.
All over New Mexico and and a
lot of these places I didn't
realize that he worked for Tony
Longmont.
In the mood manufacturing
business because I you know over
the.
And
I was always been encouraged by
his friendliness but now I don't
really know.
The numbers madam president
members of the committee if you
just look at his.
Here's.
Accomplishments of life what he
is given to the state in his
community.
In the way of services unpaid
for.
And takes lots of time lots of
time for your family.
And lots of time from lots of
the things that people really
won't serve on these things for
their.
Always there and.
He is truly a real person to be
on the region's Mexico military
institute it's one of the best
schools in the country.
And.
It's a very good school.
I was sent there to learn study
habits and I graduated with a
bachelor's degree with a hundred
and sixty two hours that's
because I enjoyed studying so
much I didn't want to graduate.
And the is really a pleasure for
me to be here sponsor here this
committee.
And this committee does a lot of
good things and this is one of
the best to look at the nominees
we have for these boards because
there's important decisions made
by most of these folks are put
on these boards and there's so
many more things that you're
subjected to when you're saying
yes to these boards when you
ever realized and this man can
do it and I'm real pleased to
sponsor no I yield to him for
his presentation.
Go from there thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle whose
Senate district overlapped my
house district these last four
years so we have many common
yes in challenges behind us
Madam chairman of the committee
members it's an honor to be here
today it's an honor for this
governor to have
recommended me for this
appointment.
I was born in Roswell.
still live in Ross will.
Never went to the institute.
Confession.
And.
It is nonetheless a school that
I've sort of lived in the shadow
of all my life only just a very
few blocks from the institute
lost.
I thank you.
When I look at my background I
used to have a dear friend it
worked with me and he used to
say you know I trained all my
life for this job.
That's a little bit how I feel
about going on to the board of
regents of New Mexico military
institute I
Have known many alarms I've
known many previous regions of
the it is always an honor to
serve as a regent for any.
Institution of higher education
in New Mexico that serves so
many New Mexicans and I know
each and everyone of us has met
an institute alum.
And they tend to be successful
in their pursuits in life.
So I'm I'm prepared to do it
insured after was boarded
Rossell would to school went to
power springs for high school
for four years and came back and
ended up at the Houston
graduating New Mexico State
University shortly there after I
did make the best decision of my
life and married my wife of.
Almost forty nine years a logo.
Always try to drop names to
impress.
None the less she she and I
raised three children and like
so many other New Mexicans a to
live in New Mexico and and let
me one lives in New Mexico in
two dollars and and I.
Painfully always refer to our
number one export is our
educated young men and women and
we've got to do better and I
think serving as a region at
this institution is one of the
ways we make this state better
for the future of our children
and our grandchildren I know
that motivates each and everyone
of you
as we sort through in trying to
do a good job.
Legislature's been a great honor
it's particularly honor
opportunity to return forty two
years later.
And my time is over I was once
the youngest and now I'm not.
In this in this New Mexico
legislature but nonetheless I'm
here this year yeah I know some
of you see me and and the Senate
finance committee recruited me
to help with this largest ever
budget and we're still working
on it.
I appreciate the opportunity
madam chair
And stand for questions.
Much.
And.
And I think that
This is a reflection more of
your humility than of anything
else you didn't have anyone
signed up to you had indicated
that he would be in support but
by the Representative Nibert
here and I think you like sick
of course and and well
chairwoman reaches Cedric page
is here would like to say a word
absolutely we have you have a
good thirteen minutes left of
your time so please we all feel
free to come up use the
microphone
you have plenty of time.
Thank you madam chair committee.
It is certainly an honor and
privilege to recommend to this
committee the appointment of
Phelps Anderson to the board of
regents at New Mexico military
institute.
For the last
Two terms he and I shared.
Representing the institute he
had the part where all the
cadets with and I had the funds
stuff I had got for center on
the golf course and and the
athletic fields.
But we we often kidded one
another about our representation
of the of the institute and I
can tell you working with him
the past two terms
he is keenly interested in the
well being of that institution
not only for Rossel but for the
state of New Mexico.
He works very well with general
grizzle work very well with the
regents that were there we had
many meetings are their number
of issues that the institute
faces with respect to state
government of course and he was
always there to lend his
assistance and he'll do so as a
region.
I'd like to say now I've taken
that District away from him and
I have all of the institutes of
higher I'm pleased to see him
come forward as a region
madam chair.
One thing that I would like to
recommend Phelps for.
First and foremost Phelps is
very community minded.
If there's anything about this
man he is very interested in the
well being of the community in
which he was born raised and
continues to reside.
In the institute is certainly a
large portion of our community
and so his Community minus his
ability to work with others hand
his contacts not only within the
community but in the state and
frankly nationally and
internationally will only be
only enhance the reputation of
that fine institution and so
it's my privilege my honor to
recommend my friend Phelps
Anderson for this position thank
you madam chair thank you
committee thank you and region
couple.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cedric page
Sen Michael.
Hold it down okay.
Area.
There we are.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Cedric page and I'm just sitting
board member the regents of the
New Mexico military institute.
I'm here this morning to well
this afternoon excuse me to
support the nomination of Mr
Anderson to the board of
regents.
I am committed to community
service as some of you may know
and I have had an opportunity to
hear about and read about Mr
Anderson's background and
community service I think you'll
be a wonderful addition to our
five member board of regents we
have some challenges going
forward as do most higher
education institutions in the
state and his commitment to of
serve that community of students
faculty of staff at the
institute is is we really look
forward to working with him and
him bringing his expertise in
making that and even better
higher education institutions.
I just add one thing we were
chatting about our backgrounds a
little while ago and we have
some catching up to do and
Colorado springs
he completed his.
High school education in
Colorado springs as I began my
higher education.
Career and Colorado springs at
the Air Force Academy.
I'll leave that up to you to
figure out how many years ago
that was.
But we've got some catching up
to do and that but also on
community service and how we
stay committed the two in the
and focused on the education of
the young men and women who come
to the institute and go on as
you've heard to do some
fantastic things in life
I want to just kind of reflect
on a comment that was made to me
by
Senator Moores sometime ago
we're working on another issue.
He said to me take care of the
students.
And then we went on to talk
about our business and
I want to say that I'm sure that
Mister Anderson will take care
of the students along with the
rest of us on the board of
regents at the New Mexico
military institute so thank you
very much for your time madam
chair members of the committee
thank you secretary thank you.
I don't know if you want to make
a closing remarks so we can all
closing remarks just again an
honor to be here today
Committed regents that help
build a great institution for
New Mexico thank you thank you
we did not have anyone signed up
in opposition if anyone the
audience would like to raise our
hands to indicate support please
do so.
Whole bunch
anyone want to all right if
anyone would like to indicate
resilience indicate opposition
please do so same none none
online all right let's get
Senator Moores bogus Centers
funds thank you madam chair.
Also always a pleasure your
we're talking about with the all
you're always going to need
gentleman and if you're you're
encouraging as a representative
for the New Mexico is for this
reason we and our author name of
about two seconds to text you
and say congratulations one
soldier.
Senator will also assume we're
ship called in on but I do want
to talk about the need for New
Mexico military institute need
to and you are ready figures one
of the jobs of New Mexico.
Look around even our chamber you
see how many people who went to
no more and what also successful
lives it's always interested me
to no so they join their time
there.
They always credit there are
four earlier successes and
Martin look around the business
community and political
community New Mexico and what's
concerning or the R. of
commissions and student
population and are is that.
Just go kids are no longer
filling out the right I think
it's one third of the population
there masamoto Sysmex of
students now we a.
About shares Representative what
three.
More thirty million dollars of
severance tax bonds today's to
number is or terms I don't
Senator it somehow for the
reported part of a program and
so no those so my concern is
when you look at Albuquerque.
with that you know the program
stable loss of from our our
students on.
Just outside of eastern New
Mexico across.
No.
And you're not to log those New
Mexico students to Rossell.
That I think it's it's decorated
Education Act reviving enforcing
all to you know you look at
campuses mostly international
students and people from out of
state in New Mexico okay a lot
of money for that education for
folks from overseas and out of
state so I really want you guys
to and our product with us such
about this couple years ago to
do a better job of marketing
Getty Mexico is from Albuquerque
from Sanford Bruce's Gallup
there so you want to fill up
those warrants without of state
and international students so
Madam Senator and Representative
if you could address your
thoughts about that those is my
ideas my thoughts but I do think
it is such a valuable
institution that New Mexicans
aren't New Mexico isn't getting
the full benefit of that huge
investment.
Thank you senator Morris madam
chair.
As a native born New Mexican I
to sensitive to
our.
All of our schools of education
serving New Mexicans
I know that the student body as
a whole it needs to reflect
Students who come from
backgrounds that are not just
the great state of New Mexico.
I was fortunate to know general
Knowles who served in the New
Mexico house of representatives
for many years in each
legislative or is faced every
year with the nose scholarship
appointment.
And.
I know.
Other than those of us who live
in the eastern New Mexico where
there might be more young men
and women seeking the
scholarship that many are low
are left unfilled and then.
Fortunately spill down to others
who seek the seat the school so
I I guess my comment is yes yes
I'd like to see more New
Mexicans
be at the institute I think it
is a little bit of a phenomenon
of the tide the tide comes in
the tide goes out but it is
always been for my freshman year
in the New Mexico legislature an
issue of we need to do a better
job of serving New Mexicans it
is not a school that you're sent
to anymore it is a school that
you want to go to and I used to
tell young men and women when
they would say they want to go
to the is to I'd say well listen
there's going to be a moment
were very intelligent trained
person is going to say I'm gonna
have your more parents step out
the door and I want to ask you
one question and they sent out
of state do you really want to
go here and all you have to do
is **** smile or pull on your
here because I need to know
right now we don't enjoy.
Having students come and see
them leave that's not the
business we try to be so whether
they're from New Mexico or
anywhere outside we we we should
for student success and yes I
hear your point and believes
that the I'm unfamiliar with the
current marketing effort for New
Mexico but rest assured that we
will review that in the months
ahead.
Mr chair Senator Representative
I really appreciate that in I
can't speak for Senator Duhigg
were Senators to order center to
see or cannot from several
counties I can't remember last
time I got application for the
minutes it's been a few years I
think the last one I got.
I guess it for five years ago
actually was just go over from
Washington.
That would probably be your
district now
just want to remember for that
was
Want to look at what they're for
the finish of the school so I
think it's going to just a
handful since I've been in the
legislature the mass most
parents and
they don't even know about it
was like you said this recent
the kids back to what Senator
Ingle way back when disciplines
would it's not the it's not the
case anymore also process and
this is for career minded folks
are just a
Misbehaving school.
More so I think it's good so I I
just need to do that because I
want that benefit at the Beverly
again Stuart Ingle benefited
again from Jordan and you'll see
opportunity that this point.
my predecessor Senator can't
create excellent there are you
know I just go on and on.
Yes indeed I mean a lot of
people with that we all know and
respect wonder they always point
to in the US that that that one
of those times alive to help
change and sure guidance I want
more New Mexico that's my point
and I think you to do that
Albuquerque Santa Cruz gets
there just be a.
Extension of the Chavis
combination side of the state
opportunity.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator message
received.
Thank you Senator Sanchez thank
you madam chair thank you
Secretary legal for bringing.
The county
I always enjoy.
Have a chance with false
Anderson is they're very
Independent minded and he is a
strong.
He strongly opinionated but he's
willing to listen to all sides
and that's what I appreciate
about what you are bringing to
this board of regents I know Mr
page well and I believe that
your.
Honesty your scruples in their
independent thinking is really
going to have board
manager I'd like to just mention
that
I've had not numerous but I've
had a few great successes the
school and they have been for
rural areas one from San Miguel
County one from off Torrance
County went from Lincoln County
but the person I'm most proud of
is a young lady from San Miguel
County this is many years ago
not only went to the institute
but then went on to be nominated
and accepted into the academy in
Colorado springs and so I think
that this can be a great
stepping stone for those
individuals who wanted to be but
I have been concerned about the
lack of applicants some years
receive none and I represent six
counties and you think of the
six counties thirty one.
And sometimes they're not so.
The.
Appreciate any outreach but in
my case what I found is that
some of the rural area families
the families that single parents
the families where this the
children wanted to inspire and
needed a lift up those were the
people who were interested thank
you very much venture.
Thank you Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Ingle and I'm still
gonna call you representative
Representative Anderson so I'm
new to the Senate body but our
paths crossed last year and I'm
so impressed the with the
legislators and really revere
all your decades of service to
New Mexico and we're it's
perfectly fine for folks to once
they've left the round house to
ago in word and do whatever they
want to do perfectly respectable
you still want to serve and so I
completely admire that about you
and
With that you take all your
institutional knowledge from the
roundhouse and now you get to
offer it to N. M. M. I. and so I
applaud you Bravo and best
wishes and I'm sure the gonna be
so delighted to have you on
board thank you madam chair
thank you senator Senator thank
you senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you madam chairman Senator
Ingle thanks for sponsoring.
This excellent candidates for
the board of regents at the New
Mexico military institute I've
I've had a chance to work with
him on the interim committee the
interim health and Human
Services Committee and I
thoroughly enjoyed his work on
that committee he he really came
to the meetings which we can
always say about every every
member of that committee that he
made him to a lot of the
meetings it nope nope no
reflection Senator Moores who I
think.
I didn't really mean you.
But.
But that.
Representative Anderson as a
member of the committee would
always just the most interesting
questions I mean it really
thoughtful he really it had had
looked into the matter is and if
that's any indication of the
kind of work he's going to bring
to the board of regents of the
meetings maybe a little longer
but I think they will be very
very very productive so I want
to thank you for being willing
to tackle this one one question
I had about our our lottery not
a lot of our legislative
scholarships do that do they
only cover half the cost of and
that's one of the things that I
ran into it they cover the full
cost I think I think I know I've
had several people requiring the
they said they played and then
when they found out there was
still some more the they just
weren't in a position figures.
I think there's uniforms and
other costs that there there was
something that was getting in
the way if we could figure out a
way to to bridge that maybe with
I don't know if the opportunity
scholarship applies there the
use that as well whatever I I
just think it's a terrific
resource and I've had a couple
of kids from my district go and
do really well
Make careers in the military
there after that and and I think
whatever later on they do in
life I think they will benefit
greatly from that experience but
the wrist we we might want to
look into just how to bridge the
those cost for some families who
who otherwise would love to have
their their their yeah students
go there but with that I think
of of of the of madam chair
thank you Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair.
I like others it just really
enjoyed talking with you.
it's always interesting
it can go in many different
directions and that's always fun
so I certainly support you in
this role I I want to also bring
up question of course us brought
up is that for years you have
three year two year always had
someone from my district and
that has just been chilling
stop.
it's been it seems well the
pandemic quarters ended
everything but I do hope that we
can get that legislative
scholarship back up and running.
Get more kids in into the
institute so whatever you can do
to help us that the more I heard
it used to be it just used to be
it used to really work I don't
understand why why it doesn't
anymore I don't know if you do.
Senator I can't say I do but I
can say for those who are here
today with that thought in mind
that we will be talking about
that is I introduce myself to
the board at the next meeting
because I to share your concern
that that this wonderful
institution that is an
educational Martin in my opinion
and to the point of Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino I think.
You know we should not see any
New Mexicans not come to that
screen for because of unmet
needs and I have been no behind
the renewable scholarship or
other ways of student support
because the school is is well
well in doubt and we need to
make sure that we're meeting all
the needs for those young men
and women who want to attend
that school and so I urge all
senators to say don't let that
stand between you go and you go
back down and meet with them and
talk to him support that's my
attitude because.
But on the percentage of New
Mexicans of.
It is been a long standing issue
and it's probably going to be
one ten years now but we can do
better in marketing is a big
component of that and I will
carry that to the to the board
of regents as I'm sure.
Aged page will as well thank you
thank you so much thank you
madam chair thank you thank you
senator and representative
Here are you it struck me
listening to.
To this discussion that just
like miss Tackett right before
you and that that both of you
seem to share a real love of
constantly learning something
new which is I think a fantastic
quality for for any region to
have
but I I I really appreciate it I
was also reminded a few days ago
we did a confirmation of a
student regent.
I can't remember where I
But he he was a real independent
thinker and as we're doing his
confirmation I was thinking of
you
and and what an essential on
quality The New.
And beneficial quality that is
every time where we're doing any
sort of policy making or are
thinking through what is best
for Mexicans in in any setting
so I'm I'm thrilled that maybe
is going to have the benefit of
your eyes insight and and
independent thinking and and I
think Senators Senator I said
that the willingness to to
listen to all sides and ask
really interesting questions
thank you so much for all of
your service and for your
continued service and with that
what is the will of the
committee.
All right.
Motion made by everyone.
All right let's do a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca is excuse Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is accused Senator
McKenna yes senator McKinney yes
senator Morris yes senator
Morris yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Mr RTC Pino yes Senator
Pirtle is excuse Senators
definitive Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator how to meal
six Houston Senator Ortiz yes
with seven yes we'll see on the
Senate floor leader today thank
you senator thank you committee
thank you.
Senator Ingle don't go too far
Mr o'brien.
All right Senator thank you.
Madam chairman members the
committee is flown this morning
to present to the of the
governor's nomination for the
student region eastern New
Mexico university.
Logan o'brien this young man's
name and he is a
Well he's been in so many places
that I have never been.
And that's the dean's list.
The.
Operative for your.
Of.
My grades would equal his tire
here for and his but money in
one semester.
he's one of those leaders that
you schools that is truly a
dedicated student he has a great
majority and the chemistry in
criminal justice and is involved
in a lot of extra curricular
activities including chemistry
club featured in action in in
years justice league Pavlov's
Hallam's which is the university
so psychology club and the
volunteers for the store
elsewhere foodbank misled
the university discordance due
to facilities better
communication that
accountability between student
leaders and
It's just a real good student
and a real on a real person that
deserves this position student
regent because you'll
represent the students well and
as I say his of his skills and
In the university here are
certainly commend us and I'm
real proud of the
Representative came here four
years for the Senate and this
committee and on the yield to
him I will go ahead Sir I don't
take too long I'm a firm
believer in brevity in taking
out the fluff in conversations
but I will say I am truly
honored and grateful to be here
today as the new initiate
student region for eastern
Mexican over city hall except
all this responsibility involved
I would like to thank everyone
and all of the various
committees in both for pushing
me through and for me all the
way up to this position.
I I would like to believe that
I've uniquely experienced many
different aspects of the higher
education field those who may
not only many connections
throughout the field in the
university but also insight into
the possibility and all the hold
ups within progression through a
higher education.
the members of the past
leadership experience emu I'm
passion about bringing eastern
into the future and I believe
that education is constantly
evolving and we must as well
involved to provide for the
students to give them what they
expect out of university I look
forward to working one side of
the bill regents faculty and
administration.
to make this a reality and
possibly affect the higher
education field and eastern New
Mexico university.
Thank you and we have a
chancellor Johnson.
Come on a few of my user
microphone to folks online can
hear.
And and and is a yes.
Yes as a testament here
privative you also have a lot of
times.
You madam chair members of the
committee
I am also two months on on my
job as chancellor of eastern New
really honored on behalf of the
system to stand in support of
the appointment of Logan o'brien
to our to our board of regents I
think this is a great
opportunity I think Logan's
level of engagement is
leadership roles willingness to
represent the voice of all of
our students are assets that
would would make him welcome
certainly too early to the
regents into our work I also
know that leadership in any role
is is a tremendous our
responsibility it's also
tremendous learning opportunity
for all of us and we look
forward to to again all that
Logan would bring to our board
of regents and we stand in
support of his nomination ask
for the same thank you thank you
When anyone in the audience like
to doing the closing remarks
like to me
You don't.
would anyone in the audience
like to to raise their hands
indicate support for the for the
conferee.
Same hold on to anyone online
they would like to raise a hand
to indicate opposition Cena
online then all right members of
the committee centers funds.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
Thank.
Funny ask you there as a reason
there might be times where us
make decisions that will be
popular.
The other students.
So could you comment on how you
will handle the.
I mean through various later
positions I've had on campus and
initiatives I've started trying
better eastern as a whole
there have been decisions made
that were not popular already on
a smaller scale and I believe I
handled them fairly well you can
explain logically or side of
everything but I think actions
speak for themselves and if it
is truly beneficial they will
see that.
And so madam chair Senator login
page views described the success
that you have at the university
of state one of the most recent
success we had as I was one of
the I believe for students who
work to bring collegiate level
E. sports to eastern New Mexico
university
other universities in New Mexico
and had that our institution and
not and I believe that we should
get that going and when I
noticed that New Mexico state
had poached a lot of our local
Patel's high schoolers to go
there because of the sports
program that really got the ball
rolling for us to convince
athletics to adopt AP sports
program as well.
Thank you very much for your
thank you Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
again Senator Ingle and Mr
o'brien congratulations
congratulations on your wanting
to even serve more in light of
all the things you are doing
already I really applaud you and
this is really interesting
forensic science society that
must be so interesting I didn't
have that kind of society when I
went to college
but I really applaud you for
stepping up and wanting to serve
and I can just see is a great
predictor of where you're going
to be in your career so.
Regulations and thank you for
money to serve New Mexico and
the university thank you.
Senator Ortiz.
Thank you madam chairman and
Senator Ingle thanks for
sponsoring Mr o'brien and thank
you Mr brand for being willing
to step up and do this for years
when will you get your degree
this in my bachelor's this may
and then I pretty been approved
through continue for masters in
communications emphasis in
public relations and journalism
at in New York so and and with
all of the if any of the very
interested you have put your
bachelor's going to be in study
the chemistry in criminal
justice or.
Chemistry criminal justice and
then a master's degree in
communications and journalism.
Very interesting let me ask you
about something else you listed
Madam chairman of on your on
your resume that they've just
jumped out of me
the discord initiative.
you say I love the development
integration and implementation
of utilizing discord within the
university's campus life
department to facilitate better
communication and accountability
that might be something that
legislators could learn from how
do you do that so discord is a
it's like everything you like
and Microsoft teams and zoom and
like texting put into one
program the keys on your
computer or phone or anything
totally free and post comment I
noticed that there is less
involvement among students and
student organizations on campus
and those who were active there
was a disconnect where we we
would talk to the other street
works so I work with others and
we push to.
Create a server for instruments
University industries and
organizations but the campus
life department so that all the
clubs to be able to see all the
clubs that students could joins
the all the clubs available all
the top leaders to talk to other
clubs leisure and orchestrate
and get things going just have
more overall student involvement
because coming back from COVID
that I kind of kids that when
people first or second year of
college experience was fully
online and they didn't get that
that college experience that
most people have so we are
really pushing to try to get
their involvement and get them
informed about all the stuff we
have on campus so madam chairman
so discord is a is in a a proper
name of the of a program yes
okay I thought it was not the
chaos that it
learning and studies chaos
because that could be really
helpful and senator Morris
approach legislation.
Public affairs committee said
that for years we've done we've
tried to do our best we didn't
have a program like this.
So thank you madam chairman
thank you for for your
explanation as it sounds really
very interesting you so much to
be a great region.
Thank you.
Senator Moores.
Sadly I'm sure as level years of
started think works Ortiz
of the same couple very some
thought on your resume
Yes.
About your plans for a master's
degree make sure you're still
there your student reaches our.
also does the resume
the recall of the Chessie tea
research is also about that are.
Senator lost.
So if and when the committee
does not know Chad G. P. T. is a
language based and model that
has come to light most recently
in the effects of people being
in use it to chi and write
essays for them but I've been
working with other innovators a
month campus as this is an event
horizon honestly of a new age to
show that it has more
capabilities and simply writing
essays.
And that detecting if it's
writing an essay to prevent
plagiarism into a university is
capability we can integrate and
bye laws that need to be put
down in writing because it's not
exactly plagiarism but if they
use it it's not their own work
still so we need to clearly
define that and it has so many
uses that we could do outside of
just students using it to try to
revive class so there there's a
lot of work we're doing their to
pushes boundaries and see how
far can truly go.
Because of what I've been
reading on that those actions
is
so.
The state is carriers are.
For you are just regions
Students
and so one of the things you're
looking for higher education
special comprehensive regional
schools this semester would
actually there's there's a
changing demographic profile
next.
started.
Our universities and that really
after the
GI bill after World War two lot
of people are generous for
college but our student graphic
shifts a lot of conversation
higher rate is about what's
going to happen next one three
years of budget and as a kid
and our young man who grew up in
Rio Rancho decided all we also
powers how do you see that that
schools like eastern western
more schools are gonna be
competitive in that age in the
future your track students so by
that learning opportunity.
Not all of a yes the
the research institutions in the
state but now internationally
and nationally with online
ability and what makes it in the
future thank you for her actual
loan move out to our house for
education with a consistent
online that it would from a
issue for Colorado state or
online nowadays I would I
personally think that our
universities like eastern Mexico
and highlands are in unique
situations where they have
potential and the towns there in
half the time so
increasing community involvement
with the institution can really
make a college town thrive I
think that is initiative that
can be focused on to help and
make more attractive not just
university but the city the
universities and that you will
be going to come in addition to
that I believe one of the
biggest selling points for small
universities should be the
reserves because at UNM there
only so many research
opportunities and only the
certainly distinguish students
water the opportunity to
experience them but it's
qualities University there is
less competition and there is
more openings possibilities for
research a lot of these
initiatives I'm in or have
started I had an idea I went and
found someone who wasn't super
busy and they they backed me up
and then we start working on
proposals and projects to get
things approved to get funding
for so I think that is a unique
aspect of smaller institutions
that they can really focus on.
This is given a lot of our
certainly present that
and just again you are student
region for instance your time
your your pressure from the
other regions covers will also
call.
I'd like to think this stubborn
so I could tell that yeah I.
Yes.
Want to always provide students
will do what's in their best I I
plan to.
Very few regulations thank you.
Thank you and.
I want to go something that
Senator Moores just said that
the thought that but what I'm
really hearing here is that you
have really thought deeply and
really thought through it so
many of the issues that you're
going to be dealing with the
student regent
and way that is very impressive
and and very forward thinking so
I think they're going to be very
very lucky to have you and I'm
really excited to see what you
do going forward
most of the committee.
And in the past all right that's
zero five of.
Senator I pays excuse Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
senator places excuses American
yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris yes Senator Moores yes
senator Ortiz Pena yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator Curtis
excuse senator Stefani yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator Emelia
Senator Senator Stewart is
excuse and senator do the yes
with seven yes we will see you
later on the cell phone thank
you right.
Office.
More functions a subcommittee
right now we won't take any
official action to we have a
quorum you can go ahead and get
started thank you very much
madam chair members of the
Center group subcommittee
with which of course we have the
consideration of a nation of
Kodi dentistry that are to be
appointed to the New Mexico
highlands university board of
regents.
Madam chair members of the
subcommittee is I've had an
opportunity to visit very
closely with with Cody there's
several things that continue to
stand out that I'm very much
impressed with but more than
that
I'm really satisfied and
grateful for his commitment to
take on so many additional tasks
so it's not only just working
going to school but it's also
wanting to work very closely
with students Kodi comes from a
hard working respected family
and San Miguel County along with
that he comes from those humble
beginnings where work
definitely is at the forefront
of everything that he does he's
very attentive he focuses on
student success and he's
committed to representing
students at all levels we spent
those hours together focused on
how together we are going to be
able if you will to move New
Mexico highlands university
forward he has quite a few ideas
concepts is very inquisitive he
wants to ensure that he leaves
New Mexico highlands university
a better place so with that
madam chair if I may I'd like to
defer to Mister Cody Dennis
Rivera for his comments thank
you madam chair members of the
committee Senator thank you
senator conference for an
introduction so my name is coder
got on board raising Los Vegas
New Mexico I attended
Representative high school all
right graduated twenty twenty
one soon after graduation I
enrolled at a highlands hi this
is a very special place in my
heart for for many reasons my
mom is a first generation high
school graduate and a young
issue the importance of of a
good education so after she
graduated high school from
Texaco New Mexico which is you
know on the border of Texas and
Mexico
She she she decided to Heinz and
Richard gonna pursue a degree in
social work and is that the act
it was at that time portion of
my dad and I guess you could say
the rest is history and if it
wasn't for highlands you know
what she chose to go to college
I would be here with you all
today so I want to throw that in
there being in my second year
high has shown me the great
opportunities essence you have
can can have at this university
students from all over the world
come to study hearing on in
beautiful beautiful northern New
Mexico and it is just awesome to
see that adversity and and and
people from all walks of life
coming come to Heinz I've been
I've been blessed to partake in
many programs within the
university of being with the the
student Senate for just over
here has a allowed me the
opportunity provide basically
resources for students in need
of you know that that can be
anything from students coming to
us asking for funds to go to
conferences or go to a we'll go
for funding for for any sort of
things that that's related to to
To school at the university can
find another another great
program that I believe has been
a great asset to me has been
this provided leadership
fellowship program which is part
of this last year within this
program I just I can't I can't
explained the knowledge I've
learned from being around all of
you guys this legislative
session it is really taught me
how to you know decision making
communication how those are
public those are big roles of
leadership is a big one and I
really feel like those skills
that I've learned from you guys
here in the roundhouse will pull
really translate to the board of
regents and with that I want to
think of governor the health of
the lawn position for for non
May not meeting me for such an
important position within our
university Senator Campos for
sponsoring me and the numerous
people that have supported me
throughout this whole process I
want to give an expansion of
special shout out to my mom and
dad are there in the back of my
girlfriend level we supported me
through this whole process and
and with that I'd thank you for
your time for meeting on a
Sunday and without center
questions madam chair members of
the US Senate subcommittee were
available for questions
wonderful and I see that you
have.
Three folks signed up.
Excuse me to speak in support of
the president Minner.
Yes.
Again we're we're doing good
times okay thank you.
madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak to you
I stand in full on the quizzical
definitive Fund wavering and
without doubt support of this
young man he's going to be a
great regent I'm confident of it
I would just end by saying this
at my advanced age I'm not in
this category but all of you
should keys on his countenance
because many of you will be
working for him some day that is
my recommendation and my
projections so thank you very
much selected thank you
president
of Max Baca.
What time
yeah we're okay on time so if
you'd both like to go that's
fine as well okay my name is
David L. Smith I'm one of the
sitting regents with the board
of regents for New Mexico
highlands university and I want
to say that I am very much in
support of Cody Rivera to join
our board you know it while
Senator Moores brought up that
he represents the students the
fact this is a yes vote is just
as strong as any vote that we
have as regular board of regents
and there are very important
issues that are facing highlands
university I'm sure as in many
other universities and I feel
very
And much and believe that Kodi
will take his role as the state
student center excuse me student
board of regents very seriously
and I really believe that he
will vote to do what is right
for the students of highlands
university as hopefully all of
us in the board of regents do so
I I very much support his
nomination as the board of
regents the student border
agent.
Thank you Mr long ago as well
the president.
The stock.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's with great
honor to have one of my
legislative fellows of class of
twenty twenty three.
Be nominated by governor and
Michelle Lujan Grisham for this
important role I think Cody is
at such a young age his vision
and leadership even amongst the
the other members of the
legislative fellows have spurred
up right away I think this
sponsor Senator Campos for
always willing to take our young
students and and have a shadow
because we watch them grow in
this whole program we thank you
for your support I know Cody is
going to continue to plow can be
that future leader not only
today but in the future thank
you madam chair and and senator
thank you.
And I think we have online
professor to smuggling.
Yes.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you madam chair too thick
and committee members I service
the chief of staff vice
president for northern New
Mexico college and recently
served as an associate vice
president for New Mexico
highlands university thank you
for the opportunity to speak in
support of Cody Rivera to
service the next New Mexico
highlands student board region
he was born and raised in Las
Vegas New Mexico by a mother who
is a graduate of highlands and
Senator local community as a
social worker and his father who
is an outstanding employee at
highlands who serves as a
facilities manager Tony is a
graduate of the legislative
leadership fellowship program
highlands program intended to
develop and cultivate the next
generation of leaders for state
we all love New Mexico he was
instrumental in lobbying to the
legislature's and to the
governor this past year on
behalf of highlands to fund a
highland student mental health
initiative in addition to being
a student pursuing
he serves in a leadership
capacity on the student Senate
and as a property manager for
his family owned business he has
ambition to continue education
and to law school he's only
nineteen years old he's mature
beyond his years respectful
articulate curious ambitious
hardworking intelligent
responsible is passionate about
learning is an effective
communicator and is an
independent thinker this role is
the launch of many leadership
opportunities that are ahead for
him he has extraordinary dreams
that I know he will make a
reality hello Representative
highlands incredibly well as a
student a region in the future
of our I am honored to support
his role as a region and he and
I both believe you will be
sitting in the seat next to you
in the future serving his local
community and leading New Mexico
tort continued prosperity I have
no doubt that he will be an
outstanding leader and public
service committed to student
success I am incredibly proud of
you Cody madam chair committee
members and Senator Campos.
Thank you for your time today
and I am hopeful he will be
confirmed as the next student
for preaches to serve New Mexico
highlands university students
thank you.
Thank you.
I think we have one more
speaker.
Madam chair Senators hello my
name is Frank such as on the
currently on the board of
regents also served on the board
of regents back in eighty one
ten ninety one before we had
student regents and so it is my
belief that adding that to that
makes has really inspired
universities to have more input
from the students and.
And and and actually help them a
lot more during their studies
also a country that that is
since he's a student he
represents not only students but
he's with this instructors
everyday so he knows what's
going on at the university so
it's my honor to support Kodi as
an exporter even remember and I
University heliport to working
with him and I think he'll do a
great job thank you for your
time thank you to have what I
fifty four and one more very
assistance.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee has to stand in
support of Cody I think he's
gonna be a great asset for New
Mexico highlands university as a
student border region and and I
thank you for giving the time
and wanting to do this so thank
you madam chair members of the
committee tell us your your
first last night
I am Representative rentals
Castellano thank you guys thank
you Representative.
All right
Do I make any closing remarks
you don't have to.
That I would anyone in the room
like to raise their hand to
indicate support.
Seeing pretty much everyone
anyone.
Would anyone like to indicate
their residence in the
opposition saying that anyone on
the line all right Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino fall by Senator Moores.
Thank you madam chairman Senator
Campos thank you for sponsoring
this through the
so your mother is a social
worker where she worked at she
is self employed she does her
own private practice doesn't
profess yes.
And it does she get Medicaid
reimbursement from I'm not too
sure exactly on her that kind of
some questions I'd be a question
for her see she indicated yeah
okay yes.
The madam chairman the backbone
of our Medicaid behavioral
health.
Clinical program or the social
workers in private practice that
they make up the vast majority
of the practitioners of it's
great to hear you you have that
and I imagine madam chairman
miss through the that that
influence your student mental
health initiative what is that
consist of Madam chair Senator
yes so that one was a of what it
was us there was four for
students in this year's
fellowship program and we came
and decided what what we want to
push
for what for initiative this
year and you know being with
COVID still kind of recovering
from COVID and of course the the
fires of North really didn't
help our situation we thought
that our campus needed some sort
of a a wellness hub and with
that we're trying to to
collaborate our our student
wholesaler with the program that
we already have on campus and
kind of put him in one area one
centralized location we're
students can get access whenever
they need it within that we're
wanting for for for rooms that
students can go and relax kind
of detoxify from stress from
school and kind of and just
relax and and no public place
where they can stay grounded and
and kind of reset their money so
they can go back in and hit the
books hard and so we really feel
that having this initiative in
place will keep students all the
way through you know into their
bachelor's master's degrees and
and we're really put you know
great educate the educate people
on a New Mexico so that's that's
why we chose that mischief thank
you and and and madam chairman
just to one last comment about
that the so if the idea is to
Using volunteers or or reserve
rate staff to find a way for
students to just talk about what
they're going through is that
with the idea Madam chair
Senator yeah so with our school
health center already in place
there's already of social
workers and there's already
people on staff that are working
there we just felt like it was
way it was our health center was
right here in or other program
to for for resources for
students is way across campus
and we felt like.
Nobody's gonna want it it's hard
to to.
To put it all it's hard to have
in two different spots and we
felt like if they were together
it would have made it more
welcoming and more a place for
students know where they can get
support and they know what we're
looking at the help and with
that I think that's that's kind
of our Domingo but there's
already social workers on within
our health centers the the staff
of that correct yes so this
initiative that we had is is
more just a location more brick
and mortar of the idea of this
well thank you for undertaking
that in madam chairman I I I I
certainly think that
that gives you an insight into
campus life and and what's still
going through that will be
incredibly valuable on the board
so a good selection madam chair
and thank you thank you Senator
Moores sure thank you senator
thank you Cody for stepping up
quite impressive William and are
ready percent press right now
and so you you live in center
couples's district this okay and
how old are you nineteen ninety
eight so you're not eligible to
run for the Senate to.
You are Republican so.
Four years.
you were so my questions earlier
about the the the the strength
of the conferences schools at a
time and I'm gonna make an
assumption or that probably more
so some of the other top
companies schools
has invested more in the
satellite branch campuses and
they all thought it must be you
know those all the rage twenty
odd years ago now the online
learning and some of its changes
and and the demographic issues I
just caught up with the previous
to reach region.
And you are the student regent
and and madam chair Senator
Campos code what do you by
chance know how many of or how
much of a percentage wise of
higher than student population
isn't a traditional on campus up
there in Vegas students could
you have a campus and our Rio
Rancho you have to have a
silence your online how many
room you're gonna be
Representative all of not just
the ones of this chair Senator I
I couldn't give you an exact
number on that but coming from
personal people that I know on
campus I think a majority of
them but let's just say for the
social work program for instance
I feel like a lot of those this
is my personal opinion a lot of
those are nontraditional
students
and I couldn't give you an
example of number wise of water
nontraditional or traditional
students so yeah I I that's
that's as brief as far as I can
just with that and despite
trying to plant a seed madam
chair Senator Cody that you're
your job isn't just to represent
those ones you're you're your
job is to represent all the
students and others pointed out
you have full voting power to do
that and so I think it's gonna
be more church little more
challenging just because I'm
again I'm making an assumption
but I think I was probably more
invested in the campuses and
percentage wise in your own mind
of some of the other topics as
to your challenge is going to be
to include those students and to
the community it's bigger
challenge for you that I think
the other student regent import
talus but he had the same issue
with Ross will and still here
what Rossell and the the
operator also campus
And on line services and so I
just want to make sure that you
are aware of that that you need
to fight for the students and
continue that for and then about
six years Google more like five
years and give a call to talk
about your future run for this.
Thank you senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Campos and it's really
good to see you here Mister
Rivera really impressed with our
young New Mexicans wanting to
serve in a public position like
this in light of all the other
extra curricular and educational
low that you have so well done
and it's really about presses
really glad that you're already
part of learning about the round
house because I understand.
Your on the legislative
fellowship.
here in the round house so
you're you're learning about how
the bill process and is done and
assisted with the capital outlay
madam chair senator and
And Mr revetted could you give
us any
Take away is that you've
observed since being on this
fellowship here in the
roundhouse medically interesting
to learn from you Madam chair of
the secretary I think my first
impressions my first day I came
up to the roundhouse remember
going home to my family and and
thinking my gosh how do you guys
do it from seven AM all the way
down to five PM nonstop goals
will go online while I'm
nineteen and I was tired I was
like I give you guys all respect
for doing what you guys do
because this is not an easy job
and and I was just I was just
pleased to see how state you
know the state of New Mexico our
government is wrong I think a
lot of people don't understand
how how bills are made and how
kind of you know how the school
to committees and so this and
had to do that I think a lot of
people don't understand that I
was just really blessed to be
part of that kind of you know be
able to see first hand in action
you know go to the committee
hearings and you know go go to
the house for go to the Senate
floor and and you know meet the
governor I think that was just
an awesome opportunity that I
will I I will forever be in in
me know so I I think that was
pry one of the biggest takeaways
that have from that.
madam chair Senator and mystery
Vera thank you because
everything you're been saying
When I was your age and younger
my favorite class was civics and
government and so I can tell
you're so excited about the
legislative process and maybe
you and I could do bills
together about getting all high
schoolers you know they they
have to spend some time here in
the roundhouse and really engage
in learn about how New Mexico.
Shares and approves bills and
how the governor signed into law
so thank you.
And I'll just be all echo
Senator McKenna that hold the
student regions that have come
before this committee have been
so impressed that and just give
it gives me such
Hope and optimism for for the
future of New Mexico because hi
you are clearly a leader in your
community
and.
I don't know about getting help
from that guy over there but I.
What will obviously continue to
do so going forward and and you
you represent a really unique
universe of students that I.
I think is really interesting
and and poses unique challenges
that I you are clearly ready to
me I also just want to say that
the legislative out of the
highlands provided fellowship
program I've been so impressed
by my and my entire time since
I've been here
and it's that for that doctor
monthly at this is the person
who I've heard from a lot on
that and she is always right in
there and it's so well organized
and the students that are coming
are so engaged I'm just really
impressed by that program and
and I hope that or other
universities
copy it because it's that I know
it's a fable for the students
but it's really valuable for us
to to get your your perspective
and to see the the future of New
Mexico and and get the honor
tried of being a part of the so
I can't wait to see what you do
going forward what is the will
of the committee who do pass all
right let's do a roll call vote.
Senator Baca is excused Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is excuse
tenants yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores yes senator
Moores CS Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics is
excused
Senator Stewart please excuse
and senator how to me it was
excuse incentive to do yes to
the yes with six yes we'll see
you later on the Senate floor
and and I also just want to say
before we all start applauding.
President your line of gaze upon
his countenance.
That that's going to stick with
the that's fantastic line.
Congratulations to.
Thank you.
And more research and I said I
just wanted to say my my son
Carlos his wife Katie and my two
to my grandchildren are here
Margaret in job.
All right the center current
health.
Your.
All that
soon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's an
honor to sponsor Gallup online
mulling perk for the appointment
to the western New Mexico
university board of regents he's
an attorney and shareholder for
Gallagher and Kennedy since
nineteen ninety five focusing on
environmental and natural
resources law civil and
administrative litigation and
government relations he attended
university of Colorado at
boulder and received a BA in
economics and Arizona State
University at Sandra day
o'connor college of law
graduated my magna **** laude in
nineteen eighty five he's
admitted to the bar in New
Mexico if in nineteen ninety
three in Arizona in nineteen
eighty five served in the ninth
and tenth circuit court of
appeals US district courts in
New Mexico and Arizona he's also
the chair of the New Mexico
mining association environment
committee vice chair of New
Mexico chamber of commerce
Environment land and water
committee and without madam
chair I'm gonna turn it over to
Mr Mullen Burke to say a few
words.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for
consideration of my confirmation
thank you Senator for sponsoring
me I appreciate that and
I appreciate the governor's
appointment and nomination and
would be delighted to serve on
the western New Mexico board of
regents
A little bit more about my mixed
background I was up born and
raised in rural Colorado on the
high plains
learned pretty early on about
community service and
participating in boards and
commissions in the like through
four H. and FFA activities.
as well as
student government my high
school was very small so we all
had to pitch in and do a little
bit of everything and that was a
very fortunate opportunity for
me.
since then I've probably done
more presenting to boards and
commissions the and serving on
them but I really appreciate the
opportunity to serve on the
board of regents for western New
Mexico
I understand there's a lot of
communities to serve in my own
view students come first as part
of the community but the board
of regents have a lot of
responsibilities not only to
students but to faculty and
staff and the rest of the
community and of course to the
state at large and I want to
assure you that if I confirmed I
would take all of those
responsibilities very seriously.
thank you very much and I stand
for questions.
Thank you and we have a number
of folks signed up to to speak
in support of your confirmation
to do the folks who are noted as
in person first drive demo plus.
Madam chair
Dr David Lopez the amount of
three step program I'm a
recovering university president
now hopefully as a region and
New Mexico tech will help me
move out of that role and
eventually fade away but not
die.
But.
Madam chair members of the
committee I have known this
gentleman for about ten years of
I don't work in a formal way
with him but I come to know his
courage insight that brilliance
he's a gentleman that you can
have any kind of conversation
with and I'm in I'm sure that
he'll add up a lot to the board
of regents at western New Mexico
university I'll be serving up
along with him and I'm delighted
to have that opportunity the one
thing I can tell you is that.
In all my dealings with them I I
find in to the a real gentleman
that has accommodated me and his
facilities across the street
when I didn't even have a any
kind of formal role within the
organization so I know he'll
bring all of that to bear on the
responsibilities of the board of
regents thank you madam chair I
stand in full support of the
nominee.
Thank you Senator here.
Is it on is it okay.
I'm sorry.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Tony trio on
from Silvercity
the registered lobbyist for the
Harvard of Akeelah sometimes
known as western New Mexico
university.
Bill and I go back many many
years working together
that we we see does the area
very well to have an
Representative the mining
industry like I do in the work
that he does not in Grant County
so he spent a lot of time down
there he's in a knows the
players he does the area does a
local initiatives are taking
place down there.
The bill is
really when you see the list a
bunch of Trujillo's listed to
testify for him out of the
secretary treat was one of them
but we could have a caucus here
today the Trujillo as but it
really we've we've the been
great friends of the of the true
heels the more bird bill has
been in and we're very honored
to stand in full support of them
he's we thank the governor for
this appointment and endorses a
as a proof thank you.
And we do have a whole list of
Trujillo's.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Susie Trujillo yes I'm
related to all those other ones
but most importantly I just
wanted to say I no doubt
personally I'm not talking on
behalf professionally I'm
talking about a man that's got
integrity hard he's a wonderful
father of four kids who have all
been to university levels at
various places dal we'll do it
he says he's going to do if it
gives as word he will do it he's
an amazingly brilliant man and
you know I live in Silver City
graduate from western New Mexico
university and we couldn't have
a better to regions the doctor
today and and down all of our so
I really do support personally
double them back thank you thank
you at chair.
I know I look like is that.
Madam chair members of the
committee TJ Trujillo it's a as
an alumni of western New Mexico
university is a pleasure to
testify in support of dollar
Malmberg I have a little bit of
a distinct
pleasure in testimony to talk
about dollars because I've had
the pleasure of practicing law
would dollar for
about eighteen years now with
the law from Gallagher Committee
together we started Gallagher
and Kennedy here in New Mexico
dollars what I I called a
lawyer's lawyer which I think is
one of the highest compliments.
Practices with the utmost
integrity and passion for the
profession.
Dollars also the most brilliant
hard working lawyers and about
the pros to be around.
I'll keep it short there because
you have many trios up there
testifying but I urge you to
confirm Dow has to be a great
asset to western New Mexico
university thank you.
Thank you.
And I online I think we have a
doctor.
After separate go ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair.
I'm here to testify in favor
available in Virgie coming
regions and I'm extremely proud
of our governor for this
nomination because what it does
as a university president we
want to surround ourselves with
the best people because by
getting the best people we have
greeted by great council and at
times great accountability and
dollars that type of person is
full of integrity and yes
Senator more I've no doubt that
it all had to fire me he could I
know that was question and two
previous region because he's
that type of person he takes the
interest of the institution
whatever he does to heart and
yes madam chair I am not a
Trujillo that would be a very
proud piece to it but I respect
tremendously the family and the
contributions they made and they
are wise in terms of their
character judgment in you heard
their testimony here just a
moment ago and so madam chair
and rested Committee I strongly
encourage you to support even
though he says unable to support
the nomination of bills will
ever to become a region at
western New Mexico university
thank you Madam.
Thank you to enter any closing
remarks.
Madam chair no thanks will stand
for questions right I would
anyone in the audience like to
raise our hands indicate
support.
All right anyone online to
I don't want to raise our hands
to indicate opposition.
See non online then all right
members of the committee.
And we all know we're we're
functions a subcommittee right
now will.
We'll get someone in here to to
when we have to take official
action by considering all thank
you for your I'm just curious
Senator Hemphill of.
The regions and the
administration the question
ball.
Uh partly Senator I didn't catch
the last.
Senator that's.
This requirement for more most
of the regions to the ball out.
So madam chair and senator I
appreciate that question I hope
not but I'll double check for
you and and get back to you
promptly for looks like about a
hundred percent.
Thank you and I appreciate
appreciate your willingness to
serve and your cations Paulose
and I certainly am right here if
you're willing to serve their.
You'll be a real asset to them
thank you.
Where Moore's thank you madam
chair thank you senator thank
you of the thanks for stepping
up and
for this position you for some
of my comments about the other
universities in the demographic
changes that the question is
probably
brace distance.
Probably as much if not more
than other other of the
comprehensive school in Mexico
which brings different sets of
challenges so if you're talking
about where you see
question particularly with more
comments or something but if
that's coming towards higher
rate of next year's where you
guys decision herself also
continue to get the best rate
for.
Madam chair senator thank you
for that question
of western service very diverse
community
I think it is is as you
indicated very active in terms
of online learning as well as
providing learning centers in
other parts of southern and
western New Mexico such as
Deming.
in terms of positioning itself
to meet demographic changes
there's a lot of parts to that
funding of course and
adjustments and curriculum
and
I think most importantly western
looks to
career training and
things like early childhood
education and
and of course as always had a
history of serving the teaching
and learning community so up
I know that president shepherd
has
been very innovative and looking
at
the looking ahead to the various
changes that are coming up and
trying to adjust westerns
programs accordingly.
And madam chair Senator and I
think you use processing up
that's always you know there is
a change is a western eastern
highland Nordlund world normal
schools originally that was our
DNA New Mexico state was the
school for the men and women of
toil patrolling of toil and and
you an MOC University but as we
moved on everyone wants to be a
university and look just like
the other ones so there's no
longer that differential in the
market place and I think you
just propped up the DNA for
western was a normal school you
know and posed forward to try to
be a university so that you're
gonna have to figure out what
that DNA is moving forward in a
much more competitive market
place not only in New Mexico but
around this country in the world
for that matter is with the the
market place you guys ran and
one thing that product before
your time here that what she
wanted to do is I want to become
a that liberal arts college of
New Mexico in fact the around a
bill to change their mission to
be a liberal arts school at the
time I raise the same questions
I'm asking you now
and I thought it was it they
were different from their
mission so I want to find out
how that's happened how that's
gone or that now the the St
John's of the human or
I was trying to be the the
harbor that you are what what
was what is the future of on
that program and particularly
western.
madam chair and senator Morris
hi I found it interesting and
looking at
western's current missions and
values and so forth that they
now use the term applied liberal
arts and sciences.
And and I guess I I'm sure
there's a lot of aspects to that
but I take that as combining a
liberal arts education with
also training in practical
applications of the thought
process that comes through a
liberal arts education so
I appreciate Mr Trujillo's
comments about the Harvard of
the heel and I'm sure that's a
very aspirational
moniker took place on the screen
but
you know my own impression is is
that western is still interested
in the type of things that come
from its roots
teacher training health care
training
and obviously looking for other
opportunities as the market
place changes.
I think that support of what we
were talking about in a huge
grant a liberal arts education
my parents live arts educators I
have a somewhat of a little
Garcia green is for you know at
that training of your mind is
very important but I just in my
personal view is that that fit
down there
the study the classics are not
going to go to.
It was off topic it was chair
thank you just keep that in mind
as you move forward and make
sure here our keep the students
first New Mexicans
are investment that we're making
considerable investments we're
making to educate our students
advance their life so they have
life changing opportunities in
mind thank you madam chair thank
senator.
Thank you service thank you
madam chairman and and thank you
senator for bringing this
excellent candidates forward for
the board up at one of the
fastest growing online programs
down there is social workers and
I think they I heard I I you may
know this that there were
already seven hundred students
in the western social work
program many of whom are online
the magic best major from our
online is that an accurate in my
in my off by a factor of ten or
something or is it close.
Madam chair Senator I'm not sure
of those numbers but I I am
aware of the social work program
there and
obviously very very important
and and it's great to see those
programs supported by the
university.
Us and them madam chairman I
just point out the the shortage
of social workers in the state
western is really stepping up in
a big way eastern is developing
of a program that I think will
soon have a master's level
program there.
And then we have highlands in
New Mexico state of course so
we're getting we're getting more
of the pipeline in place to
begin meeting our our needs for
behavioral health specialists
particularly social workers in
the state thank you thank you
for being willing to serve.
Thank you
so I'm always noting like key
words that people are saying
about the conferees hi and yours
was Act courage insight
brilliance was mentioned I think
three times integrity was
mentioned multiple times and
hard and to hear us.
To hear how much and how.
Obviously you are you are
brilliant person but but clearly
on your community sees that as
well and.
And that I love the the the
focus was just as much I think
on your heart serving your
community as your mind and
they're very lucky to have you
so what is the will of the
committee.
I move past right let's do a
roll call vote.
Senator Vargas excuse Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Senator Lopez is excuse Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores yes senator
Morris yes senator Ortiz Pena
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excused
Senator Stefanics yeah Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
and senator how to meal are
excused and senator do the yes.
Successful seo let let and just
affect on some for thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Yes yes it has center against
the committee.
I have Becca Anderson here with
me and she is a willing public
servant willing to serve on the
board of regents of New Mexico
school for that sorry folks and
keep it down as you as you leave
so we can continue our business.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee
I have this wonderful woman
sitting here next to me and she
is Dr Anderson she is a
veterinarian in requests that's
where she lives and she has
spent her life volunteering
helping communities and
especially in the deaf community
because her son is staff and he
graduated from the school for
the deaf several years ago and
so her commitment to deaf
education and continue to public
servants service continues to
shine she is willing to serve
the term that she has been
appointed to and confirmed by
the Senate and she is an author
of a new book called hoops
funders and she has seven
children five of her own and to
adopted she engages in horse
racing and working with
different doctors at racing so I
will leave it at that for the
sake of time.
I may have are just a few words
thank you
I I've been very involved.
Been very involved with the
school for the deaf forty years
when I first found out that my
son was staff and the school
sent out an outreach person to
come to my home to teach me how
to live with the death one year
old and how to get their
attention and and so for two
years they sent a woman out to
my house once month which was
the a blessing for both of us my
my son and myself and my other
children also
And then for the next five
years.
Because we weren't ready to give
up our our son as a tiny baby to
live at the desk school I drove
him from grants Albuquerque four
days a week for five years then
when he was eight we decided
that he could go to the deaf
school so at eight years old he
went to that school and when I
got there they said dropping
Moffit he'll come home once a
month and I said no I'll be here
every Friday to pick him up and
I'll be here every Sunday night
to bring him back.
And he's going to spend the
weekend with his family that's
how my whole family and I
learned to sign my son says yeah
you sound like a fourth grader
but that's alright you know at
least fourth grade is better
than none
I know I've known the last five
superintendents of the deaf
school they're all they've all
been wonderful people I was
there when the when they.
Wanted to hire hearing
superintendent and the deaf
students rebelled and said we
want to death superintendent
that's when they got Mr stern
who was very very good.
And Dr.
And
Jennifer her vault is the
superintendent now is a
wonderful deaf woman with chill
deaf children who understands
and and the things that I want
to do for the deaf school and
help on the board of regents is
to out reach as much as we can
to the families and.
Get them involved.
And I took in another son who's
staff because of
he is a friend of the first son
who didn't have a place to stay
And what our family of of five
children and two adults went to
a debt activity and we all
signed my son became the most
amazing deaf person because the
other kids parents did not sign.
You know only about ten percent
of parents learn to sign and I
want to change that I want to
get the parents involved since.
We picked up our son every
Friday and looking back every
Sunday he was one of the more
advanced children at the school.
Because I know it it's too it's
too disruptive when the kids go
home for the weekend and then
come back it disrupts our
program after I did that for two
years with my son the whole
screen changed the busing the
kids home every Friday bussing
them back every
Sunday night it said the dorm
More interactive with the deaf
school it did bring in some
problems things they never had
if they kept the kids can find
their they never had problems
with drugs and and you know
outside activity things that the
kids kind of brought into the
school but they get that under
control
I think I have a lot to give I'm
still related my debt one of my
sons the oldest son just retired
from the school for the deaf
it's hard to believe he's fifty
and are you tired
and the other one still works at
the school for the deaf my
daughter in law's the elementary
school principal I have a
daughter in law who works at the
pre school in Albuquerque I know
the people at the pre school in
the Farmington San Juan they
call up there I think all of
these things are good and I
think I have a lot to offer as
for forty years we on the
veterinary clinic so I know
about dealing with the public
dealing with budgets dealing
with things you need to.
Buy and sell timeliness getting
things done on time diagnosing
the problem and then finding the
solution so I think I have a lot
of skills that will be good for
this job.
Thank you and I think one of our
earlier conferees it's more a
reflection of of your humility
rather than at your level
support we don't have anyone
indicated at but but if there is
any of this yet that school I
didn't even ask.
Well as I do would like to to
raise their hands indicate
support please do so.
If anyone online.
If anyone would like to
residents indicate a position
please do so state nominee when
online now all right
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you very much chair thank
you so.
Or this candid
I believe that you're
introducing.
entities greatly appreciated
it's already called the school
that's right your unique skills
you are a vendor yes and could
you share how you might see that
interfacing or encouraging and
then maybe and this is your
comments well one of the things
this when my son was was in
elementary school of the deaf
school we had the whole school
have a field trip to our
veterinary clinic and we had you
know kitties and puppies and
chickens and ducks and a lot of
kids can't others who took and
thank
Andrea but while they happen to
be there there was a cow at our
clinic and she had a calf.
And everybody was so thrilled to
see this calf being born within
the next year they were going to
have a field trip and they said
you think you could get another
cat.
Probably not.
and for the last three years I
have brought my wagon I have a
horse and wagon I drive a
Clydesdale with the wagon and
then I have a couple horses that
you can ride the real gentle I
bring them up to the deaf school
and it was for the summer camp
forty six year old and we gave
them horseback rides and
carriage rides
one year we had our team and
wagon in the state fair parade
one The state fair parade with
the deaf school and we had all
the kids on their football
player basketball player problem
clean the you know one of the
things I want to say that why a
deaf school itself is better
than putting them in the public
schools you know one here one
there one the other place
they're always the odd kids to
death here the one W. or the one
that fit their academic school
you can breathe the the prom
queen you can be the basketball
star you can be the student
board because you're you're with
your equals and they form
friendships and that's why.
We didn't send our son to a
public school I I talked to many
many deaf adults
you know what which would you
rather that and they said we
want to the peer group a peer
group is more important deaf
culture is more important than
Justin Education thank you thank
you very much.
Thank you.
And
Yeah it is Senator sciences
referring to your unique skills
and and you also have this
unique perspective that I think
puts you in an amazing position
to really advocate for those
students and those families and
and I had no idea that only ten
percent of parents of deaf
children learn to sign very sad
is that is really surprising to
me because a lot of sent off to
school when they come home they
feel like train puppies sit eat
drink.
but ours our whole family signs
my the Twin of my deaths on is
the head of the Interpol red in
the state of Utah and he
interprets for the governor of
Utah.
It's been an asset as well as
they usually for for that phone
regions for the school for the
deaf we usually have someone
here providing interpretation
for for folks who are watching
and and I apologize that we
don't have that I just thought
that was too much trouble I I
know all those people to death
school but it's Sunday and I
didn't want to ask them to have
to come because they know me
very well I know they would all
be happy to have.
I mean I.
Right.
Yeah I I.
My son still come up and give me
a hug when they see me in
Albuquerque here at the mall or
any place they re for ever so
and we will be happy to have you
thank you yes I think everyone
is happy to have you and and
very lucky to have you as we
move to fast all right did you
want to six.
Earlier chair thank you.
The manager thank you senator
thank you all so much for
stepping up and I think you your
experience a little bit
different what you're talking
about you're probably on the
cusp of those changes where
there's more residents support
just as I was supposed to the
residential school just for your
background my my and went to the
school and
and so was the difference world
act were parents my grandparents
were told not to learn yes sign
because we help with the oral
skills directly but ironically
my parents spoke Spanish from
the grandparents of Spanish
speakers and speakers so that
was the the logic back then and
so when my grandma my aunt would
go home she could communicate
not in English of sign all
right.
With anyone and that's why my
mother learned assignment got it
to death Education ourselves so
that's that that process there
so I think it's a it's kind of
an to change what you're talking
about and so that's why I'm I'm
very happy with the change it
more services and service the
residential model
that you provide more services
to parents I think if we were
redesign the constitution now
and senator creating all that
money just go to residential
school would probably be looking
for more services
because I do agree with you that
about the difficulty of having
grown up on the dollar that
campus yes very familiar with it
so I think it is important
aspect of what the school for
the deaf provides any other
residential schools around the
country and so I think that's
part of what you were talking
about so keep it up I keep
fighting for those services it's
a dip deafness is obviously much
different now than it was forty
years ago and was eighty years
ago.
With some of the better our it
is getting better but they're
also there were challenges with
the multi disabilities and
everything else that you are
well aware of so keep up the
fight then our fight for those
kids thank you madam chair thank
you senator.
Have a motion for two panels
let's go ahead and drop off.
Senator Baca sixty Senator Ingle
yes Senator Ingle yes Senator
Lopez is if you Senator McKenna
yes Senator McKenna yes more yes
from for more yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator pro yes Senator
Pirtle yes centrist defending
yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator
Stewart and senator Harley or
excuse incentive to do the yes
introducing yes seven yes we'll
see you soon on the Senate floor
congratulations after.
Appreciated very much.
Thank you senator.
The yes please do.
We're going to house bill two
thirty three.
Madam chairman members of the
committee
this is a bill brought forward
by my expert witness the
superintendent of the regulation
licensing department the bill
deals with the reorganization
restructuring of that department
in a letter explaining exactly
what we're doing and why we need
to do it thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
senator Ortiz Pena for stepping
in here this is very simple bill
it is called reorganization but
actually what we've done is
we're adding the boards and
commission division which has
been created by executive order
over twenty one years ago and
just is never been codified in
the statute it also creates an
information technology division
as most of you are aware we had
a pretty serious cybersecurity
incident and we have been
working on that since October
we're fully functional but
realize the importance of
actually having a budget
dedicated to information
technology the budget for I. T.
is currently embedded in all of
the different divisions and then
the overhead budget this would
give us the opportunity to have
those funds are not asking for
additional funds we're just
asking not this year but the
next year to reorganize the
budget so money goes directly to
TV rather than I. T. as they
tell me all the time has to go
around with the hat and big
divisions for money to implement
the IT projects that are
necessary.
We you what probably see that in
the first committee this went to
the language about law
enforcement for cannabis control
division an alcoholic beverage
was removed we had some
questions about it there was
some questions internally about
whether that language was
sufficient and did not have the
time at that moment to do the
research and to come up with a
solution and so it was just
removed from the statute from
the from the field.
Things that will stand for
questions
I don't think we signed up for
this.
So questions from the committee
Senator Moores Roger thank you
senator thank you
superintendents it's a to get
out that section three S. R.
which what I think was going to
get a concern why do you guys do
an information technology
division because of the
departments don't have that and
I know you just explained of
course I mean that's a CIOS in
the there were also
responsibilities so seems weird
that we're setting this up only
in this department yeah.
Madam chair Senator other
actually the up some of the
other departments do you have an
I. T. and most other departments
have an I. T. budget for some
reason RLD is never advocated
for what what really is just
technically a P. code on this
will give us the opportunity to
advocate for peacoat and then
get those money specifically
dedicated for I. T. R. point.
Representative
did you have a specific problem
that is bring this.
Madam.
Madam chair Senator we did and
it's under of you know law
enforcement investigation and so
I really can't comment on that I
know do it has made the
committee the interim committees
I believe a subsection of the
science technology committee
have made them come continue to
keep them abreast of what's
happening and they've been very
instrumental in it like I said
we are a hundred percent
functional but we did have an
incident on October seventh that
would be considered a cyber
security incident thank you for
letting me in.
You may interrupt me anytime you
want Senator.
The rest of not.
That you're Senator
superintendent
quite frankly now this is in
front of me would never
introduces bill that I've never
liked the fact that you're not a
cabinet secretary.
Hi not sticker you the area
although I think the world of
you I think there are all the
has a lot of power it should go
through confirmations when we
set it up way before anyone in
this this cherry Avenue Senator
were here set up separately by
the executive order originally
so madam chair with that I want
to give our superintendent
promotional once on page two
line three strike of the word
and not.
And make that a motion because I
I I've always thought the
superintendents should be
cabinet secretaries and also
should go to Senate confirmation
just have it's too boring port
of a position after cabinet
secretary.
Mentor may I respond yeah the.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator and and and I grab a
great respect for your opinions
I really do this is brought up
by Representative Pamela Herndon
who was actually my deputy
superintendent when I served
there for five years under the
Richardsons and Richardson
administration it seemed a
little self serving for me to do
that I did float the idea of it
and it wasn't necessarily well
received and so I would happen
to agree with you I think we
touch the lives of everyone in
New Mexico including those who
passed through we do over five
hundred fifty thousand permits
licenses and such which means
we'd literally touch at least
one in every four people Mexico
and each of those people touch
every single one of us every day
and madam chair Senator super
that we've never talked about
this you have a lobby about this
you never talk about I would
never drop this except for us
right from the such one time
something I've thought since I
was in the executive branch that
that should be there so one of
the commotion sift sticks.
discussion that my only concern
is at this late hour in the
session to make a change might
imperil the entire thing then
this might be something we could
do next session answers your
referral.
yes owner for alleged that
doesn't slow things down I can
concur to our our changes
easily.
I will say I and I agree with
senator to the Pino I wonder if
it would also endanger this
getting signed
whether passage not so much
concerned about time is as
signing but I would I I think
you're you're right Senator that
it happened I.
Talk to anyone besides myself I
would be surprised if this would
be an issue with the executive
the.
Madam chairman this the
superintendent has raised
another issue that is that
currently her position is not
one confirmed by the Senate and
we.
As well as the just this a
manager makes a.
Well I think we would need to
include that language yeah with
the consent of the Senate I I I
I I think this is something we
should we should absolutely do
it next session and do it
correctly and thoughtfully but I
don't know that this bill is
necessarily the place to do it
but go ahead center part of and
thank you madam chair with the
you can bring this bill nation
will go anywhere.
I mean I just I know you have an
opportunity to swing for the
fence I don't think anybody here
would disagree that the this
wasn't a good idea there was an
amendment put on or up quite a
few minutes when we amended the
alcohol Act that made it much
better they got rid of things
that need to be removed if you
try to to those individuals
bills there's no there's not a
snowball's chance in in Haiti's
of getting that done so
as long as governor Kerry
Johnson is not the governor I
don't see this not getting
signed you spoil us and we had
that had a problem with growing
government
and so that I don't see and I
can't speak for for the governor
but just based on history and
see how the how that would do
rail this bill but you know
sometimes that's how some of the
better policy is done is through
amendment of a statute that
sitting right in front of us as
opposed to a separate bill
that's when we can find things
and and do what needs to be done
without having to run through
the whole process so I would
support the amendment I think
it's a great idea even being the
small government person I am
this essentially is a cabinet
secretary in a cabinet
department and we have no say
now.
Full trust in the current
secretary of war of the
superintendent of the oral the
future secretary but you know I
think we have a say in that
as as was stated with the amount
of licenses and things that
Come out of out of the
department so either I don't
think there's a time issue we
have a week one referral
concurrence that can happen in
fifteen minutes
the the I don't think there's a
time issue here's there's more
than enough time especially if
we go to the majority floor
leader and let him know what
what we've done here
but I I'm gonna
kick it back to you madam chair
look I think somewhere in the
constitution it takes it
mentions confirmation of cabinet
secretaries so I don't know that
it would just need to be statute
I'm looking for right now and
and and I think I think that we
could just do it is the same
with the superintendent pointed
by the governor with the advice
and consent of the Senate that's
usually the language that we put
in intended or secretary.
So would you say superintendent
were dubious Act and the and
that's and that's not why I
think if you if we want to do it
on this bill maybe do it is
floor amendment make sure we get
the language right
and I mean all all all support
you on this ammendment on the
floor but I I think we want to
make sure that we get the
language right so that we so
that it.
We at make you a real a cabinet
member of the cabinet for the
record shows a masters right
right.
Okay.
That would work with you in the
right to you as a as a visor on.
I'm gonna ask is currently using
I do not get rid of and I'm not
looking for superintendent of
yeah I have no idea I I have
this this came out of as many of
Senator Moores ideas of left
field.
But it may be a very good one.
Right right I came out of right
field but it may be a really
good idea I I just hadn't
thought about it before.
I.
Of idea and the intent on the
line correct thank you so
Senator you with you're
withdrawing your motion order
them yeah but I do think we
should do this on the floor and
we'll go to our language we may
have to change superintendent
secretary all through the
statute so right right.
Senator Pirtle did you have some
of Stephens yes madam chair if
you look at article I section
five the governor shall nominate
and by and with the consent of
the Senate appoint all officers
whose appointment or election is
not otherwise provided for.
We just stay silent on it will
automatically thank you all
right so I think the plan is set
to.
Figure that language out for the
floor and we do still have a
quorum what's the will of the
committee on this bill otherwise
or is there further discussion.
S. R. S. usually mended.
Yes.
All right let's uh do roll call
the.
Senator Baca is excuse Senator
Ingle excuse Senator Lopez is if
you Senator McKenna yes thank
you McKinney yes senator Morris
yes yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes.
PCP no yes Senator pro yes
Senator Pirtle test Senator
CENIC test Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stewart is excuse
Senator Hermio sixty.
Senator Duhigg yes six yes yep
Defense thank you we will have a
fun discussion on the floor
all right let's you see fit
Senator Liber Representative
let's build a little test.
let's see if we can get Center
Hermio back in here to get this
last one out here
this.
Of this next bill member it just
so that the public knows we're
now we're we're now going to
move on to house bill four forty
secretary for sixty six.
I'm here.
Bill this through here and the.
The letter had bill that that
has been chapters that has been
signed by the governor and
chapters thank you for the fact
that check that yesterday says
astro letter yesterday and
wanted to make sure I have the
ability to do so use your water
yes.
All right representatives go
ahead.
And we're just the all know
we're due on the floor it to so
charters better we were on the
floor so you madam yes madam
chair committee house bill four
sixty six.
Has been amended so all the
changes that we're looking at
are in the program G. of the
bill and what we've found out is
a we have an investigator.
The prosecutor.
The executioner if you will all
tied up in one person and that
was the executive director and
general counsel and general
counsel was a person under our
existing law that would make
probable cause determinations
whether or not the investigation
will proceed.
That's been a problem so we are
recommending that we change it
to an independent.
A hearing officer which would be
a lawyer that the ethics
commission they have a number of
them that are on contract to to
do.
Hearings but in this case if
there's a probable cause
determination be made they would
pick one to make a determination
whether or not the ethics issue
would move forward or whether it
would stop at that point and
take it out of the hands of the
general counsel with general
counsel would be presenting the
evidence to that hearing officer
and then the other provision yep
last sentence of paragraph G.
the hearing officer selected
would then not be allowed to
participate in any further
proceedings involving that
matter so that's the that's the
substance of the change that we
are recommending it passed the
house the inability of over the
Senate from hopefully for right
passes well.
Thank you Representative my co
sponsor of also more like this.
Phase I mean in the context of
the affix Commission we just
again objectively looking at not
having the investigator be also
the judge jury and executioner
but this helps not only
legislative process these for
any legislators that may have to
go through this but also all of
our state agencies and any other
person that subject to this so
it really creates that fairness
that's it right discussion and
have anyone sign up in support
or opposition Senator Moores.
Madam chair is this the only
committee for this.
Yes.
madam chair I'm.
The presentation and the on the
line but it says all new
material new material on
jurisdiction.
On page one
this all new material that were
given the ethics commission new
powers Senator that's been
stricken that about section was
struck so we don't have the
contacts.
we don't have the the income but
but the entire section two was
stricken and house Judiciary so
we're just looking at the
changes in sections or K. all
section two was.
Really I was gonna say we can't
do that.
Those remember recording mmhm.
So the only thing this those
critics
for occuring the letter had
police any more power the.
Section two restricted or not
like given the power to set
salaries or all the other crazy
ideas that come through this
redistricting.
New.
Okay.
The members Senator Sanchez.
I am.
All right Mr role a role.
Senator Baca is excuse to use
Senator Lopez Steve Senator
McKenna yes thank you yes
senator Morris yes senator
Morris yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle is excused
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart is
accused Senator how to meal yes
Senator Hermio yes and senator
do the test was six yes you have
to pay thank you madam chair.
And with that I'll rules is in
recess we're going to be me
actually before we go into
recess just so the public knows
we will be meeting tomorrow
