Senator Diamond.
Senator do heck.
Senator guy across.
Senator Gonzales.
Tell.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator my estimator.
Senator McKenna now in senator
Morris.
Centerman yes.
Senator Padilla Senator Pinto.
Senator Pinto.
Etcetera smitteez.
Senator Padilla Lopes's here
presented the now with center
Senator Stewart here senator Tom
in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You do not have a quorum madam
chaplain major T. trong from the
New Mexico Army National Guard
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
let us pray I thank you for
elected leaders who strive to
make our community state our
families better give them a
special blessing for their
So forgive us for not praying
things towards a will but
praying for things we want as
you disincentive for this and
that I was of each one here see
for the certainty that you'll
hear our prayers when we ask for
what please you even as your
spirit guides our elected
leaders now with your wisdom
I pledge allegiance.
Good morning everyone will go to
our Senate majority whip senator
Michael Padilla for the first
Senator Padilla thank you very
much madam president good
morning good morning members and
good morning to all of our
guests want to think of chaplain
for the invocation
you very much for that.
Madam present I do want to be in
with a couple of announcements
beginning Monday February twenty
seven the department of health
will be providing comment Rapid
determination yet madam
president I want to make sure
that this is completely
understood that the testing is
voluntary it is not mandatory it
is voluntary members and anyone
else that wishes to participate
known as trio trio day that
promotes educational
opportunities for students and
New Mexico child first network
day in the halls of history so
if you have an opportunity to
our guests that we have a lot of
guests here today madam
language and hearing association
day from the president's table.
Seeing no objection we will move
Senate memorial twenty one from
the president's table and place
it on today's calendar.
to be read madam president you
dance consent to please remove
this Senate memorial of fifty
eight Albuquerque metro Arroyo
flood control authority day from
that'll be myself I will be
handling that one that is not to
be read today not to be read for
the reader thank you madam
president.
Madam president I do have quite
today to advocate for universal
free breakfast and lunch in New
Mexico for all New Mexico
students and that is Senate bill
four but we won't get into that
we have the guests are here to
individuals who are waving at us
right now madam president
waiting right at you madam
president and from the gallery
and that their from Polk middle
school we do have a few folks
that agreed to come down to the
Rodriguez Pueblo the video order
a Coleman at continental arena
surveyed Luis Martinez route
the water on this idea ISACA
all this million Navarro.
Julia you just check on some
lad gov you know a keyless
Noriega the V. on fetuses
Jessalyn guy it goes Gabrielle
Gonzalez and their community
schools coordinator at the
tenant through he who is here as
Thank you very much madam
president they all said they
want to turn around here in the
can have a seat now and amend
present all you'll to other
members and may have a folks I'd
like to introduce.
Broaden out Smith's and
miscellaneous anyone else with
is something that means a lot to
me as somebody who received both
programs going to school and a
mom who retired as a public
school school cook I'm sure
students it means a lot to me
thank you madam president.
Thank you senator other
announcements or miscellaneous.
Inavero's consenting introduced
my guess on the floor of seeing
no objection go right ahead.
Then present and Senators I just
wanted to introduce some guests
to start with Virginia of
madrick it should stand of may
be read and then making Gallegos
is my daughter she's director of
Thank you senator any other
announcements.
Signal go back to center Michael
Seeing no objection were on the
order of Business messages from
the house the reader to read.
Madam president.
I'm directed to inform the
two house bill one ninety one as
amended by the house House Bill
three seventy and request the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
have a units consented to excuse
and enter sort of on that is
until he returns the chamber
except for the purposes of the
call.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
reports the reader to read madam
president your tech tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill three thirty six has had it
thirty six do passed and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
were acted upon individually.
Seeing no objection to read all
read all the committee reports.
Senate bill three nineteen that
do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
as amended and that's referred
to the finance committee.
Senate bill two twenty two pass
Senate bill two ninety nine.
That it do not pass but that
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
Senate bill two seventy three
that it do not pass but that
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Shendo.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much madam
president units consent that we
go to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
or back on announcements and
cameras in the Senate chamber
today Senator Padilla thank you
very much madam president you
consent that we go to that order
of Business third reading of
legislation and I will you'll to
Senator Brandt.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing cinema moral
twenty one.
On final passage is was taken is
The reader to read thank you
senator Morrell twenty one a
memorial proclaiming February
twenty fourth twenty twenty
three as the Mexicos speech
that if untreated can present
significant obstacles to
academic achievement social
adjustment and career
advancement and whereas
and whereas audiologists and
speech language pathologist work
to eliminate or minimize the
isolating effects of
communication disorders on
Mexico and whereas the New
Mexico speech language and
hearing association is a
statewide professional body of
speech language pathologists and
Friday February twenty fourth
twenty twenty three be declared
New Mexico speech language and
hearing association day in the
Senate and that recognition be
this memorial be transmitted to
the New Mexico speech language
and hearing association signed
and sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Senator Craig
Senator Brandt to explain the
memorial thank you madam
president The New Mexico speech
language and hearing association
is recognized the statewide
authority in the professions of
field and the overall prevention
and treatment of communicated
disabilities for people of New
Mexico.
and so madam president we just
want to honor this group that
helps take care of people who
are are losing or have lost
their hearing or have are hard
of hearing so thank you but.
Senator Ingle I think that was a
request to speak or was it just
a way.
Representative for doing this
are speech pathology is
certainly one of the better
recognize things that truly
truly help people and hearing
certainly is the same way you
our children because senator
special Pacific need out there
that is always needed and it
needs to be fulfilled because
kiddos that have a true trouble
talking when it starts they have
you thank you senator Senator
Gallegos madam president ten
etcetera I just one sentence
import I used to come over from
the house to the Senate and I
thought you guys had problems
they do my daughters my wife all
appreciate that I have hearing
aids but I appreciate that we
use today to be able to
acknowledge the need in our
state and what you guys too for
Thank you madam president thank
you senator for for bringing
this the.
You know the challenge was some
of the staff and all all kidding
aside is that as I've gotten
But it is still extraordinarily
difficult to to hear in loud
places and hopefully that we
will move forward with that is
challenge and I think that all
of us and I remember remember
when Senator Paypen we're still
here you know we would to we
wish for when you whisper to me
it's very very difficult for me
to get to get that done matter
how close you are to but
with the technology's going to
be better and I'll be able to
hear you guys even better
sometimes wish we're seeing
maybe there's times I really
in your Caucasian that means I
can be about sixty feet away and
still hear what you're saying
so you know you never can tell
there can tell so thank you
supportive I have been to to lot
of the work being done at some
of the Albuquerque but schools
that are doing this type of work
I think they're working really
hard to actually build a school
Seeing no objection she will be
excused any other debate on
Senate memorial twenty one.
Seeing none Senator Brandt to
close.
memorial twenty one do now pass
and just Maez consent in the
Senate that all forty two
members of the Senate be shown
as voting in the affirmative.
seeing no objection of the
Senate has passed Senate
memorial twenty one of forty two
to nothing.
Thank you senator Brandt thank
you madam president if I could
couple special guest of my own
who actually go to church with
me and our related to my LA and
I would like to introduce
Cassandra McCreight.
school due to the sufficiency
she became passionate to work
with other people in that
community we also have Savannah
Preston she's an assistant
executive director of a
same medical services and they
also have with us is there
service animals and so we we
have a great treat today to have
floor today so that's pretty
pretty exciting for me thank you
madam president for that let's
uh welcome all of our folks here
Senator Padilla thank you very
much madam president I'd like to
take is to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Seeing no objection were back on
announcements miscellaneous
that order one through seven in
that order madam president and
now you consent to take us to
that order of business committee
reports.
If there was no objection or on
As recommend has had it under
consideration and report same
with the recommendation that it
do passed as amended.
Respectfully submitted senator
All right so we have one
objection of personal.
order a yesterday during Senate
finance.
one of the members.
Who produce participated
remotely was not there visually
means on the Senate floor or any
Senate standing committee.
Shell be visually present and
maintain property quorum.
A pursuant to Senate rule seven
The senator that made the motion
to do pass motion should have
been absent.
Therefore the motion should not
So with that
I believe that this committee
report should be objected.
Because it should have been if I
quote the exact release
referring to for the members of
the body.
Madam president I am reading
from rural seven dash one dash
one.
committee report we'll turn this
into a vote for the committee
report center then you know just
how would you like to vote to be
done.
Imprison can explain something
present because the technology
want to deliver both at the same
time and leading in that and so
as the chair we reached out to
him by phone because
technology of his location for
cellular data transmit that and
the way that you could do both
at the same time we reached out
to him by phone he was on zoom
participate by both at by face
and by voice and some I
determined that we could reach
out and call him and it would be
there I did confirm madam
president that the Senator was
that it was visually connected
for.
About two thirds of the the of
the hearing and so I did call
Senator has been dealing with
some severe health issues I
don't want to compromise what
those are happen to be
personally aware of them and I
just wanna let the other side in
audio that various voice audio
place.
All right so senator Munoz who
are on an adoption of your
committee report how do you like
that vote to happen the person.
How do you deal absolutely madam
president.
good senator would you madam
presented center would you
describe exactly how that vote
came across how how it was
when it came time to vote
another Senator pulled out the
phone said Hey you're here yes
I'm here and he says it's time
to vote.
yes and he put the phone down by
the speaker and that's in the
senator who was not there and
not physically present voted yes
Whose phone was this was a a
committee phone was it a
personal phone from what I
understand you're describing a
phone was held up to a
committee phone all I could be
wrong about that but it was
certainly the
The majority whip whose phone I
believe was being used but he
was certainly the one holding
visually the the the whip did it
did indicate that it was in fact
to use his phone and so thank
you thank you for a letting me
I I there was some agreement
between between the.
Both sides of the aisle that
these votes were to be cast on
video for three or four hours at
a time madam president will
they're sick and not feeling
well but however
and and it sounds like men and
move some of the members did not
see or this the Senator cast his
we're able to visually see
Senator Gonzales twenty cast is
full.
Madam president Senator Baca no
time we see visually present
anyone in the committee it's my
of events that a Senator share
described accurate.
Madam chair Senator Baca yes yes
Sir he cast his vote through
cell phone.
Madam presence Senator Woods
we're able to visually see
Senator Gonzales casts his vote
at the time the vote was cast on
this particular bill.
thank you senator what state I'm
I'm not gonna go through the
whole finance committee I I
guess there's a couple good a
couple members that did indicate
the orderly fashion we have made
acceptance is for for things
like comment for and and I think
they're they're rather generous
reject this committee report I
think I think it's important we
follow the rules that's why we
establish some and that's why it
Thank you madam chair well I
just want to call time on the
Senate finance committee I was
there I saw Senator Gonzales
struggling with the technology
issue I wish him nothing but the
best I don't know what's going
and facing the state and I just
think
You know we could recognize we
had a colleague who's obviously
not doing well who was there who
participated who actually voted
and.
we can say well we need to go
through gyrations to empower him
to have to do this again the
committee but I think respecting
the time respecting that that
to have as well count but but
that's not I mean speaking to
the rules and I think that'll be
decided independently but just
want to say that madam chair
Senator Padilla and sermon
else's agreed that they violated
the rules.
They both said that he was not
seeing and that's what the rules
say.
agreed that the three people
that are on zoom right now don't
have to have a camera on all the
time so when they're voting that
is not in the rules but we agree
to it.
Shame on you for putting Senator
Gonzales in that position.
If he is so ill if he is so
sick.
Could you put him in that
position to make him do this.
By making him the there to vote
on this bill.
Not gonna fall the rules.
this it's a two thirds majority
vote.
If you think that we need to
change the rules to allow
someone who seq for any reason.
Which might be raise one you
That's the proper procedures the
proper procedure is a committee
chairman going outside of his
authority.
We don't want to call the roll
thank.
They'll be consequences thank
you madam president.
positive COVID test madam
president as anyone.
Maybe the mid.
Senator would yield to that
question notice he does he is
of the time so do you have a
another question or comment we
got a lot of then president
the question I are the point I'm
gonna make madam president is my
heart goes out to our our good
president I've been around that
much last two weeks.
Because of COVID.
I have missed lots of votes on
this floor because of COVID.
in a post partum wife so dealing
with medical issues I have
chosen not to expose myself
imprint COVID.
What I'm now hearing is that I
didn't have to make that choice.
Our rural specifically says you
have to have a positive comment
decision not to protect my
family because of COVID I have
not participated and I have been
here and I haven't voted.
I need to do that I need to
follow the rule I could have
been here occur participated.
And I wish I had.
But I bet the decision of the
because of COVID I have missed
votes.
I hope this doing well and
recover so know how is health
has been issues in the past.
Which means my constituents in
Mexico Representative in this
chamber.
As I was protecting my my family
and my baby and my wife.
participate and vote on the
floor and committees because of
COVID.
So members this is the direction
we're gonna go we're gonna
ignore the rules.
of us are going to actually move
forward to protect our families
and participate.
In this process because of COVID
if that's the standard we're
want to note a couple of things
this visually present language
we've had in our rules since the
twenty one session and I cannot
participate remotely who are not
visually present and and so I I
agree with what Senator Moores
we shouldn't be hypocrites we
should be consistent for the
always encouraging members to
abide by it and the and on the
floor I have seen it certainly
and force and that folks are
marked absent in committees I
votes and we accepted it and we
accepted those Canadian reports
here on the floor so this this
is an exception only and that we
functionally under under quite
different approaches and I see
Senator Baca shaking his head
the center drive your the one
actually but I remember being
remote and voting because I
asset now and that leads me to
my other point madam president
which is that if there was an
objection to be made it should
have been made timely it should
have been made
time to make that objection has
now passed thank you madam
president.
gonna require a ruling from you
quickly as if the if the motion
for adoption of the committee
report is in order I believe the
All right so this will be a roll
call vote the challenge of the
and we will take that action so
voted yes and you uphold the
ruling of the chair of lotus
Senator Baca no Senator Baca
both snow Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt both snow Center
Burt Senator Burt both snow
etcetera do hit both CS Center
guy across the center guy
because votes no center Gonzales
Yes Senator Hemphill votes yes
center Hickey center Hickey both
CS Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle about snow Center
Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez Senator Lopez
votes yes center my Estes.
McKenna both CS Center Mars
Center Moores votes no center
then yes.
Centerman yes votes CS internet
bill.
Center to the Pino both CS
interpret DS.
Center video vote CS Center.
Pinto.
Yes.
both CS Center Sancious Center
Sancious votes no Center
smitteez Center smitteez votes
no centers to DO Lopez yes
cells Center cells votes yes
interested phonics.
Senator Stefanics votes yes
inner Steinborn Senator
Steinborn both CS Center Stuart
Center woods Center woods both
snow and president.
Senator Kernan center count
though no.
Madam president.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president consent to skew
Senators o'neill and Ivy Soto
until they return to the
chambers of the purposes of a
We're sorry Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto votes yes.
I thought of twenty three in the
Fuhrman of fifteen the negative
the ruling of the chair has been
up health.
Senator manuals please make your
on zoom was there that during
the presentation.
And was there during the
committee and when it came down
to whatever reason the
technology of zoom would not
adoption of the committee report
from finance the chief clerk
will call the roll.
Senator Baca center Baca votes.
Campos Senator Campos votes yes
Senator serve on this Senator
Diamond center by dining votes
no etcetera do heck Center do
Senator Griggs about snow Center
Hamlin Center Hamlin both CS
Center hand pale.
Yes Senator Hemphill both CS
Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
Senator media votes yes.
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan
both snow Center Lopes's.
Senator Lopez votes yes center
my Estes.
yes Centamin yes votes yes
Senator Neville.
Center the Neville votes no
Centro now.
Senator Ortiz Pena.
Center Pirtle.
Center prior about snow Center
pope.
Center PO both CS Center
centers to develop just yes
Senator Padilla Lopez both CS
Center share center share votes
no center Shendo.
Senator Steinborn both CS Center
Stewart Senators Stewart both CS
Center Thoman.
Etcetera Thoman boats yes
Senator Wirth.
By a vote of twenty three in the
affirmative fifteen in the
can go first thank you madam
president I I had to vote no and
you know it's really shameful
that that members of this body
want to conflate the health of
some of the comments that this
is the good Senator Duhigg made
of the fact is she was not there
for this gentleman's agreement
so whatever agreement she made
are firstly she made on her own
We start by that our members
have stuck by that I know there
are some challenges with with
the technology and whatnot but
we didn't address that madam
president the in the rules the
back to committee for Revo at a
minimum that's all I have thank
you thank you senator up pirtle
and thank you madam president
is different we've adjusted the
rule since then to be here I'm I
have two basketball games one to
nine one in the morning madam
president with some youth and
I'm gonna be here doing this and
I would love to participate
remotely but I'm gonna have to
be in person and I think as a
body we could have come together
there's plenty of time how many
we all pray for a speedy
recovery but we could have done
that madam president we we we
still can
just just to keep the the
camaraderie and and the good
madam president we can work a
little harder ahead of time so
that we don't have these issues
on the floor plenty of time
should have taken the vote next
Of an objective leadership.
At the level of public health.
Which spills over not just a
comment policy in and how we as
legislators we try to look to
these authorities to figure out
partisan why because our
partisanship trumps evidence
evidence based public health at
this point in this country
that's how deep our partisan
what we should do with our
policies protecting people as it
relates to comment and we
desperately need that last thing
I'll say we are one of the few
They've created these widely
diverse groups investigating the
COVID response the United States
We've got to get over
partisanship and get back to
evidence based public health
thank you members.
Thank you I believe first though
referred Senate memorial forty
five Senate memorial fifty three
has had them under consideration
reports that same have been duly
Pirtle co chairs.
What Madam chair madam president
I move the adoption of the
committee report on adoption of
the committee report all those
in favor signify by saying aye
report on Senate memorial forty
five point of order.
Senator Brandt our rural
specifically say the cameras
must be on if you're gonna be in
Right so we're on a roll call
vote for the approval of Senate
memorial forty fives and Senate
memorial fifty three the clerk
to call the roll.
call so these are this is not a
normal committee report this is
the one at the end of everything
we're we've rolled we've
Senator Baca center Baca votes
no Senator Brandt centre Brandt
both snow Center Burke center
Senator Duhigg both CS Center
guy across.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Center Hickey center Hickey
votes yes center Ingle.
Senator Ingle votes no center
Ivey Soto.
into my Estes Center my Estes
both CS interment cana.
Yes Senator McKenna both CS
Vigil.
Senator Neville both snow Center
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Center to the Pino both CS
vote CS Center Pinto yes Senator
Pinto both CS Center Pirtle
center part of those snow
Senator pope Center pub both CS
Senator DL Lopes's yes center
city Lopez votes yes center
share.
Center share votes no center
Shendo.
Senator Steinborn both CS Center
Stuart Senator Stewart both CS
Center Thoman Center Tom both CS
Senate memorial forty five and
Senate memorial fifty three have
been signed in open session by
the officers of the Senate
Senator Michael Padilla for the
We are not order business third
reading of legislation senator
Ortiz seeping out.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
show.
On final passage be no taken and
that it is now subject.
To debate amendment and
substitution.
Attempting to to make
improvements in the cannabis the
medical cannabis program is just
the medical portion of that
program.
The primary care person in order
to to renew their
Registration in the program the.
Registration correspond to that
so that instead of registering
for three years and then having
to see your provider every two
every year you would not be able
to save a lot of money for
people in the program who now
spend money going back to see a
provider Flynn it's simply a
question of of complying with
come in and and and be my expert
witness.
I see no objection the starter
of arms will escort the expert
in.
In person I don't necessarily
have a debate but I remember
when we pass this that I think I
made a remark on the floor that
you have the medical examination
to a physician and this is
certainly what I thought would
happen and I think we're gonna
regret when we pass things like
this because this is certainly a
forces is the usage and what the
patient is doing and this is
what I was afraid of what
happened and I knew it would
because I've seen these laws so
Thank you other debate Senator
share of thank you madam
president will the sponsor you.
Madam president I would heels
so.
doctor every time or can they go
like other docking also might I
can go to a different doctor
because my doctor retired or
whatever they have to return to
the same doctor every time.
The primary care is not
available or they can get in for
the they've changed locations
there are a number of reasons
seems irrelevant because you
know I can certainly go to a
different doctor if I want to I
can get a second opinion if I
want to and I'm not a cannabis
Center to subpoena madam
president Senator sure there
really are two reasons for for
National Health Service the
Indian health service who are
federal if it they cannot
certify for
what the fed still considered to
be an illegal substance and as a
certified for our state medical
cannabis program the second
reason is because the reason
we're taking this step is to
reduce the cost for the for the
of the patients.
but if we're just seeing the
doctor to honor the state
requirement that's what's being
changed that we only require you
to see them every two years now
not every single year.
Usually for any kind of medical
issue the minimum is to see a
doctor annually often it's much
But for a transplant it's still
annually if you can go ahead and
and so I'm just looking at these
things Sir you know if you have
annually anymore why because
well it's not really that bad a
deal I guess I don't know.
I'm not discounting the the.
Should not the medical
professions want to see their
patient at least annually unless
we're just writing prescriptions
just to write prescriptions
opioid but if we're just writing
a prescription once every two
years without checking on
anybody that seems a little.
Questionable to me Madam madam
Center to see Pino.
Madam president temp and Senator
share of the department still
going well there's been no
problems no need to see it this
would reduce the administrative
burden.
businesses the more burdens
actually harm.
New Mexicans they harm New
Mexico small business they harm
piling in piling in piling on
the people of New Mexico.
Through this through this body
through this whole session what
If this will actually help
relieve a burden if this will
help save money.
Then why can't we use this as a
model for everything else we do.
people with a hammer driving
them to do something.
If this is good for New Mexicans
if it's good for small small
medical offices.
But know what we're gonna do is
we're going to relieve the
burden on some.
Increase the burdens on other
we're going to bash people into
being humane.
burden at all we should not have
any supervision we should or at
least limited supervision.
I think we ought to take that
philosophy and make it better
just horrendous on our people.
We have laws that are horrendous
on our people and our businesses
and we're about to pass more
laws that are horrendous on our
people and our businesses
But maybe what we're Deasy Pino
has the right answer.
Maybe we ought to follow his
lead.
Maybe that's the way we ought to
be going.
Instead of using a hammer to
bash us into submission.
an opportunity to do the right
thing throughout the Senate.
Throughout the state.
Madam president.
Because the trouble was it was
kind of minor in my opinion.
But now.
I'm starting to see the
brilliance of it.
Or do they relief burden.
And in this particular bill were
not only relieving physical
burdens for relieving financial
burdens.
While.
maybe I just couldn't think this
through maybe I should have been
a little bit of a user and I
could have thought it through
better earlier.
But
But that just doesn't just never
Put into our rural certainly put
into our laws at least put into
our hearts and minds and
spirits.
tell the time is that they
should start timing.
Anyway madam president.
That's just where I am with this
I think this bill has some merit
in here thinking that these are.
Brilliant ideas with the best of
intentions.
Most of the things we do.
that went wrong I do think that
Senator Ingle has a legitimate
point here there will be
unintended consequences this
will grow.
Legal list let's just no we
don't even need this but as long
as it's going to be here it
should be less burdensome.
That when we come here quite
frankly.
We don't do things for the
people of New Mexico.
Quite often and I don't believe
How we participate.
In in in making our laws in
coming up with the brilliant
ideas.
I know all of the brilliant
ideas.
good intentions I do believe
there's a chance for unintended
consequences but clearly this
has good intentions white voted
for.
In committee.
for it they weren't there.
Well.
I do believe madam president.
on medical cannabis so we're
like you know more mellow.
Then maybe that's what we ought
to be doing.
Except I don't want to
participate.
little bit of the bipartisanship
that I've been baking for.
And we seem to just be battering
each other with partisan issues
And I hope it's not a partisan
bill here now.
But again that's the example we
ought to be following we have to
The more bipartisan we are the
more the people of New Mexico
believe that we're actually
trying to help them.
The more partisan we are the
more people of the people of New
right thing on almost every one
of these controversial bills
that will you get my vote on on
on them no probably not on any
of them.
other bills come to us if there
was anybody over here at least
several over here that we could
vote bipartisan even if I'm a no
I would accept that as the
The bears.
Or other things.
I think we can do the
bipartisanship madam president.
The good senator has reached out
I know that that that his folks
came and talked to me personally
probably talked everybody over
here.
medical cannabis had value over
recreational.
Cannabis.
And I just really understand
How would relieve certain
pressures and pains in anxieties
and things like that.
Course madam president Senator
And it's been refined into
several medicines actually.
And all of those medicines are
here to relieve the burden is
through the and sanity's of our
regulations all of those with
good intent.
But we don't come back in
measure that that intent
actually happen.
a real interest in what's going
on we want to do what's right.
And I do think madam president.
things right I think we can
follow our rules for one thing
and that would be a very
bipartisan thinks is a
bipartisan rules you know we we
voted on these rules and on
I think this bill is the leading
example.
Of how New Mexico could all
mellow out.
And be cool.
Because you have the votes.
Do that's frustrating.
We can help people do the right
thing.
We can always.
Find a way to move through
things.
But just because.
you know.
Love in cannabis kind went
together.
What I really ask here and have
been asking is that we work
together on things.
We can talk to each other.
One of the things that I really
miss madam president is we use
to dine together.
Maybe Dawn the bears or
something else might help us all
be happier together.
But I do wish we would at least
dying together.
mellow pill will help me or any
I know won't help me because my
take.
But
You know we just don't need.
To be bashing each other.
I believe mostly make sense the
only part of it that I did I
have any real serious concern
about is is that you don't have
to go to the doctor annually
that's the only part that I
disease we're never going to fix
anything we're never going to of
all we can do is relieve their
physical burden.
That's all we can do.
So.
Like we should be doing with
everybody in New Mexico
relieving the burden.
That we in this body are placing
on people.
Instead of continuing.
To have these.
Hardison.
Votes in arguments that don't
one little amendment couldn't be
added.
And so with those kind of funds
How do we help each other.
How do we help the people of New
Mexico how do we relieve their
burdens.
Certainly people would need
pharmaceuticals need
pharmaceuticals and that's a lot
of people.
More people.
Might be everybody in this room
I don't know.
On how we act.
And how we do things.
And how we get along.
And love for his fellow human.
Never.
Anyway.
Where we can help join ourselves
together.
And I would really like to see
us join ourselves together.
legislation we have and had the
view of.
Relieve the burden.
How do we make it better.
that's good.
That are the are that are to be
our model how do we relieve
burdens.
you don't need to go see today
it relieves some financial
burden.
This thing release burdens all
over the place.
Financial burdens can we relieve
physical burdens can we relieve
our spiritual and moral burden
so that we were better focused
on where we ought to be going
and what we ought to be doing.
So madam president.
I do think that we ought to go
to the doctor a little more
often.
So is there debate on the bill
Senator Pirtle.
president Senator unless I'm I
might have missed why do we
shorten the length for the the
ID from three to two years.
Madam president Senator Pirtle
it's apparently been confusing
because if we we've been
requiring the re certification
you get your you're a doctor's
appointment and you get renewed
right after that and try to make
it more systematic.
Miss madam president Senator of
providers fee which in some
instances is been as high as two
hundred dollars.
And madam president and senator
the medical cannabis does not
Madam president and Senator
Pirtle the current tax on
have spent on recreational you
can knock down twenty percent if
it's through a medical card.
So thank you madam president
Senator so a lot of the money
we've we've been here long
enough you know I look at some
of the elements that medical
cannabis can be used for and
it's not like you're going to
ever be cured of Lou Gehrig's
disease madam president and
incurable ailment and so I I I
think it's just strange why we
would lower the the the links
but still require doctors as I'm
using it as medicine are paying
the the twenty percent tax as
they shouldn't have to as
medicine but really I I think it
should stay at three years and
and really you know what this is
an issue that many people face
have within the state of New
Mexico and it's something that
maybe we can address with other
legislation as we look at these
things as doctors are harder to
come by as are being run out of
to see a doctor and really
depending on how much cannabis
you use it's really a wash thank
you madam president and and
madam president just final
comment on that one
as Lou Gehrig's disease that
there's probably a good idea to
check to make sure that the
other medications you're taking
aren't having some kind of
interaction with or that this
physician to every two years I
think continues to be a good.
Anymore the department still
recommends an annual but at
**** yield please yes madam
president of the good deal to
Senators committees one of the
two physicians in the state
answer thank you madam president
center does this bill by by the
standards of care for a medical
cannabis treatment.
yes yes there is still debate
about what the real standard of
care is for medical cannabis so
we can say with great confidence
that we are not violating the
Madam madam presence there I you
know I I really really
appreciate you and and have
greatly appreciate how you
why why don't we have a standard
of care and it's becoming the
worst problem in medicine and I
hear ago beating my evidence
based medicine drum again
this this session and so.
The reason is we are constrained
by the controlled substance and
It categorize this substance.
Medically as a substance one
category.
Well let's just not make it
substance one more if we
from the federal legislation
from the CSA these are the and
I'm not an expert on this but my
understanding is this is this
will be at least eight steps we
campus unless we do this.
We can't really study it.
we can have some anecdotal
studies but we cannot really get
stay within this country wanted
this so bad we just wanted.
So we're not gonna let the
medical professionals develop
the science on this we're just
gonna push it through without
Members and members do we want
to know the answer to that
question.
I don't think we do I don't
a statement relative to every
substance one drug.
That's number one we would
potentially have to
scientifically investigate that
no we know some of that we could
probably overcome that.
Number three the state of
current scientific knowledge
number four history in current
pattern of abuse.
number six effect on public
health that was why is that CSA
when they're very good public
health number seven
psychological dependence
some other things.
Well.
Like I said I don't think we
want to know the answer let me
let me just.
Conclude.
And what I'm about to say I'm
I'm not saying we know causation
or anything else why once again
because the politicians are
driving the science and not the
medical professionals so we
What do we know about the short
term effects.
Of cannabis use couple of
things.
Anxiety panic attacks
hallucinations vomiting ask any
effects okay no I I realize that
a physician is supposed to be
managing this but once again if
we don't give the physicians the
get to rely on our experience
and anecdotal kind of case
control studies and things like
that.
So this is what the World Health
Organization says they say.
Organization.
Okay they also go on to describe
a two point four times risk
increase in schizophrenia that
As well in some long term
studies from Europe.
Now is my point to bash medical
cannabis and to say that for
substance one but my point is do
we as a country are are we just
going to really laugh in the
face of evidence based medicine
and so you know what number one
compassionate about people.
Is that compassion because the
word compassion is in the law
here that it's compassionate use
And I think we need to be more
honest with ourselves of what is
compassion if if we're really
compassion about helping people
and we just politically fly
don't we're not giving them the
tools we we come back every two
years now and talk to these
doctors let's equip our medical
health professionals are are are
to actually have the courage to
answer that first question to
see put all your money where
your mouth is and let's see if
we can actually legitimately and
compassionate bill because once
again it was pushed through.
With ideology and not with
Misting with Cleveland Clinic
their position on this issue.
We've got to control ourselves
and come together or we will
have no more standards of care
the United States for just about
us with Alzheimer's with these
terrible problems because we
cannot get a grip on which the
rejection of evidence based
medicine.
Instead we're just gonna vote
based on our politics and hope
it works out.
And I think it is working out
for some people.
But it's not working out for
others.
don't have a compass are only
compass is politics right now
thank you members of.
Thank you any other debate.
you brought up some some very
good points
I would only make one final
comment as we're talking here
about the medical cannabis
program not the recreational
when cannabis was placed on
schedule one it was for any kind
of scientific evidence that
initial decision I would suggest
is was probably made for
It in an atmosphere of of of
your political considerations
and so with that madam president
I would move that.
the rule is been called and all
those present.
Voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
skew Center Burke separate
purpose of the call madam
president seeing no objection we
will do that Senator Padilla
thanks very much Mr president
just consent to excuse and after
forty two senators at your seat
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Diamond votes no Senator
Senator Baca photo no Senator
Kernan folks know Senator
Gallegos folks know Senator
important affirmative eleven.
By a vote of twenty four in the
affirmative.
Thank you next will move to
Senate bill one thirty six
senator Neville.
Thank you madam president madam
Building I'll take it has been
madam president object.
You checked to what Senator to
All right the reader to read the
bill.
Senate bill one thirty six.
Senator Neville.
An act relating to the public
regulation commission providing
that the salary of a public
section one a new section of the
public regulation commission act
is enacted to read.
New material compensation a.
A commissioner shall receive an
B. no additional salary shall be
paid to the commissioners on
account of services rendered and
commissioners may receive per
diem and mileage for necessary
section to effective date the
effective date of the provisions
of this act is July first twenty
twenty three Senate bill one
thirty six.
inserted the greater of one
hundred and ninety thousand
dollars for the district judge
salary and that's in the first
paragraph after are in the title
bill came out of the LFC we
introduced in the session.
to amend the executive salaries
of the state of New Mexico at
the time.
for that kind of dollar amount
the governor took it upon
herself and I'm not sure if it
was proper not but I will assume
it was to indicate and executive
salary of one hundred ninety
thousand dollars.
judge will track with the judges
the judges are due if.
House Bill two passes and snow
line item vetoes and so forth
the judges are due to get a
hundred ninety thousand dollars
that they're currently receiving
will still be in place of this
explanation the bill now stand
for questions.
Thank you senator start debate
Madam president will gentleman
yield are you madam president
thank you madam president I I
have to admit I'm
I'm I'm conflicted by this bill
Madam president Senator.
You know my understanding of.
Really the PRC is that a lot of
the work done by the hearing
very experienced people but
madam president centered you
know how much the hearing
examiner's make.
Well first you have to ask Miss
Vigil yield I think I did madam
and I realize you may not but
madam president I do not.
Representative I don't either
but I'll just I'll just say that
but to me this feels excessive
and for that reason and it
wasn't wasn't the salary level
we see that it's something we're
codifying but I said the same
thing when we had a confirmation
Thank you next to debate the
bill as senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president I
one of the issues at the PRC
that I think led to the change
in Centerville and I have worked
complex regulatory loss and they
sit in clause I judicial
capacity so they really are
comparable to to judges and so I
serve on days effort to to get
our our judiciary artists the
salaries where they need to be
and and I just think it is time
and and you know.
be able to take these jobs and I
just think the hearing officer's
absolutely they need more
compensation as well but we've
reached a point in state
government where if we're not
of the transition of the PRC and
I just really appreciate
Centerville's work and effort on
this done this legislation thank
you madam president thank you
to echo what senator Wirth said
these are highly qualified folks
who could be making and can
certainly more money in the
private sector I don't think
I've got a ninety thousand very
reasonable thank you.
observation I've I raise my hand
because one of the things that
I've seen very frustrating and
in my new role here and the
precedent not only for here but
as we go across department heads
in a number of other areas so I
stand in strong support of the
bill thank you madam president.
their street the others were
elected these were appointed I
think the exact is a really good
job at selecting the PRC I still
do question for their experience
and if you look at their resumes
still want answered a I know
that centered the good center
carrying the bill center from
northern New Mexico domestic.
As we have that conversation
in a in a good direction with
experience and education so I
still have that question I think
gassing Committee or asset but I
hope they stay with us I think
next year as we move forward so
thank you then present thank you
senator is there further debate
on Senate bill one thirty six is
amended.
will be tied to federal judges
of Supreme Court judge will be
making the same as the of the
the US magistrate judge and so
state of New Mexico with that
madam president I move that
The record show that all lack
I'm sorry of the I move the
Senate bill one thirty six to
amended to your states if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator Steinborn voting no
madam president members of the
body.
Thank you will now go on to our
next item Senator Ivey Soto.
I thank very much then present
madam president before I.
me it is Linda Trujillo the
superintendent of regulation
licensing.
Seeing no objection the starter
of arms please escort the expert
in.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
madam president object.
suspending to put this bill on.
Thank you madam president and
Senator Brandt actually I didn't
ask that that the rules be
suspended by just simply ask
that there be unanimous consent
shorter bills today but as it
goes from Ivy Soto bills but so
so there's a the unanimous
consent and will be in terms of
bill in full.
The reader to right.
licensing adding and clarifying
definitions and provisions of
the uniform licensing act there
I provisions related related to
incomplete applications hearings
decisions allowing for summary
suspension of a license or
appropriations of the licensee
allowing four yield or sis
section one section sixty one
dash one dash to NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen fifty seven chapter
Board means.
One the construction industry
commission the construction
industry division and the
electrical bureau mechanical
To the manufactured housing
committee and the manufactured
housing division of the
regulation and licensing
department.
Three the crane operators
licensure examining Council for
seventy eight and I any other
state agency to which the
uniform licensing act is applied
by law.
reciprocity means a license
issued to a person in the state
based on licensure in another
state or territory of the United
States the district of Columbia
Previously licensed the license
means a cert cert cert permit or
other off authorized.
another state or territory of
the United States the district
of Columbia or a foreign country
as applicables.
G. party means a respondent
H. probation means to allow for
a stated period of time the
conduct authorized by a license
subject to conditions or other
temporary or provisional
license.
J. revocation means to prohibit
the conduct authorized by the
Section two.
Section sixty one dash one dash
three NMSA nineteen seventy
eight being laws nineteen fifty
hearing every licensee or
applicant shall be afforded
notice and an opportunity to be
heard before the board has
authority to take any action
by the board B. denial of the
license after examination for
any cause other than failure to
pass an examination.
A little late for that internet.
Senator Ivey Soto to explain the
bill.
Thank you very much madam
president action madam president
based on the readers very
Senator Schmedes.
Thing then present I do have an
amendment that I would like to
move go ahead and that thank you
Thank you reader to read.
Cinnamon amendment floor number
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty seven amendment
on page yes so twenty three and
what we're doing is we're going
to summarily suspend or or put a
license on probation and for one
of three conditions conditions
found guilty in a court but but
number one didn't have any sort
of Judiciary action and so I was
concerned of that about that
mainly for for one major reason
if your license is summarily
suspended any time you want to
renew your license anytime you
want to license and a new state
you have to say you have to
check that box you have to say
In your license was only
suspended for you know how a
short amount of time so anyway I
just want to put a judicial
check on this gonna judge
involved if if we feel like
there's a public health threat
what the amendment does members.
Thank you debate on the
amendment first to the Senator
Ivey Soto thank you very much of
It's a presenter here when I've
had an opportunity to discuss
this Senator Schmedes was kind
enough to provide this for us
committee has done on this
issue.
And any other debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none Senator committee to
close on the amendment.
for amendment number one to
Senate Judiciary Committee for
Senate bill two forty seven and
ask for a voice vote.
Right we are on the amendment to
Posed nay.
The eyes have it the amendment
is adopted back on debated the
bill Senator meetings would you
like to debate further no ma'am
and Ms consent of the Senate the
record show that the role of the
rules but called all those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by show of hands on
Senate Judiciary Committee
as amended please at your seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative serum the negative
thank my co sponsor senator
Munoz
and also appreciate very much
our reader and I think we all
need to be pitching in for some
that order of business committee
reports three or to reach.
Madam president your rules
committee to whom has been
referred house bill one sixty
nine.
Has had it under consideration
madam present ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion in the
the journal reflect their actual
upon individually.
pass and thence referred to the
conservation committee.
Senate bill sixteen do pass and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee.
chairwoman Senator head of the
committee reports on adoption
committee reports all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may committee
For on that order of Business
messages from the house the
reader all right.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate Joint Memorial
Senator Michael Padilla thank
you very much madam president
units consent to go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous.
From that order business
president will go to the next
order of business
Introduction of legislation from
we went through an extensive a
volley on the rules and I
inadvertently said that I had a
I had made a gentleman's
agreement with the the floor
leader on the other side but
Senator Maestas thank you madam
president on on your desk you'll
see some swag bag from Duke city
gladiators there are indoor
football team that plays in
Friday March the third Friday
March the third so folks will
get tickets for for entry and
those tickets will be
distributed by middle of next
madam president just consent to
go that to that next order of
business introduction of
legislation or on introduction
of legislation the reader to
read.
older adults in the Albuquerque
area Senate memorial fifty nine
Senate memorial fifty nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed not referred
and Perregaux and act relating
to public records providing for
storing official records
electronically house bill one
introduced by representatives
Chavez and comment on an act
relating to insurance extending
the sunset date for the
referred to the health and
public affairs committee House
Bill three seventy.
House bill one twenty seven
assistance house bill one twenty
seven house bill one twenty
seven have been read twice by
title is ordered referred to
Senate Education Committee
notices adding the community all
newspaper to the list of
official Spanish newspapers
house bill one eighty two house
bill one eighty two have been
Representative Dixon and senator
Cory I Hemphill for the
legislative legislative finance
committee and act relating to
ninety one have been read twice
by title is ordered referred to
the Senate Education Committee
sense to finance house bill one
ninety one.
symbols declaring a state
mineral House Bill two oh four.
A school tool for haven't read
twice by title is ordered
referred to health and public
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous and last the
committee chairs to prepare for
some announcements but I will
for seal to senator floor leader
Peter Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
oh one originally introduced by
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino the new
Sanchez gonna be Senator Hickey
and the title of the new bill is
is currently and she packed
Health public affairs which is
the correct committee what I'd
like to do is make a unanimous
consent that we add a second
referral the Senate finance
Senate bill five oh one.
Leave the word this and sh back
and then move IT finance and it
will be Senator Hickey.
Thank you madam chair a U. S.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee will
meet tomorrow at nine thirty in
room three twenty three.
committee will meet at two
fifteen in room two eleven we
have of.
Very long looking agenda it
appears long because a lot of
following the those the
appropriation bills.
We will have built by senators.
David o'neill.
Render and manuals but
everything else looks like a and
and then my bill in behavioral
health.
Thank you madam president the
center to share committee will
go and also at two fifteen in
room three twenty one we're
gonna have a hard stop this
thirty in room three eleven to
do confirmations.
Thank you other announcements
Senator manuals thank you madam
Fishing ships madam president
fish and chips you Mr thank you
Mr president Senator could you
strip malls appropriations of
That's a strategy that we we
would like to leave to you you
you've got much more experience
and stripping appropriations
than we do.
J..
The exact has ran behind we
stayed late last night to to
coordinate with capital and and
we should have that list today I
you guys we will get all the
you.
Council has advised us along
with the governor's staff in the
office at two more afternoon is
going to be a deadline so we're
repercussions and and then
changes again we made just
remember we will be a little bit
flexible on the timeline for
tomorrow afternoon let's all try
to get it done is because we can
will know what the exact has
money in other places and just
in case
so if you with that madam chair
Senate finance we're gonna go in
this afternoon were requests a
the other bills were coming back
in the Senate finance tomorrow
morning to go to do some cleanup
work and then our staff Adrian
through the Senate with capital
and make sure that's all correct
so we'll be.
Senator share you madam
president you're scared to call
on me now I am.
things in the morning so that we
can all meet into capital
because we can't do it yet
because we don't have all the
information yet so I was just a
friendly ask that that committee
three and a half hours.
Other announcements.
Senator Brandt madam president
with the chair finance you'll
for just a question.
yielding to.
Here yielding Senator Brandt.
Ninety seen over there Senator
brilliancy thank you madam
Madam presence Senator they told
us they'd have those sheets to
us in about two hours.
And we are have ours an excel
spread sheet so be very quickly
spend the governor's whole four
hundred and twenty seven million
in cap on our own and we'll have
a fun time doing it.
madam president center I've some
great ideas for how to spend
thank you any other
announcements Senator Ivey Soto
thanks very much madam president
with the with the chair finance
please yield.
You will you.
thirty I'm wondering if maybe we
could set the deadline a couple
hours later that way we can all
work on capital well bills are
being read in full on the floor.
correct about maybe one maybe
again to pay attention.
And I'm telling Council the pro
Council services the way bills
have to be drafted in done in
enter in the system you know
that so they'll be stragglers
they'll be things we've got to
work through the corrections
that we need to make so we can
try to make those adjustments so
as it goes through everything's
capitol bill in full I imagine
everybody will pay attention.
Thank you members of the thank
you any other announcements
Senator Padilla thank you very
week back and forth up and down
left and right north and south
you name it so can we please
give a hand all of our staff
here in the front who are doing
a phenomenal job all over the
building.
need to all stand up and
recognize that Senator Padilla
has stepped in FOR Center were
all week and an excellent job
Present at I think he prefers a
cake according to his testimony
yesterday in committee hi.
That'll be a key lime pie madam
present I know senator Munoz
objection we'll see you all at
eleven thirty AM tomorrow
