The house has passed house bill
Wirth thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to our
business introduction of
legislation from that order
business introduction
legislation.
House one introduced by
Representative Martinez an act
relating to legislative
expenditures making
appropriations for necessary
Having been read twice by title.
House bill one has been referred
to.
miscellaneous run that order
business announces miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I would yield to
senator Munoz I think as a
committee announcement Senator
Williams thank you Mr president
we have the elevator doors
read the bill be back right
decked down about five o'clock
and and get the committee report
out and get the fee bill done
and we want our way.
On.
finance committees going to go
up and work on house bill one
and so I think what we'll do it
is there will only be committee
reports will come back on the
