this and our chief clerk brought
this to our attention I'm gonna
ask unanimous consent that we
expunge the proclamation that
was read this morning and
replace it with a new
session so I think this just
corrected to refer to the proper
special session so that would be
a unanimous consent request
Representative unanimous consent
requests to.
order I'm gonna go to senator
Morris.
Very much present us absent that
Senator Brandt B. excuse of
except for the purpose of the
the reader to read.
Mr president your finance
respectfully submitted George K.
Munoz chair.
Senator Woods option the
committee report well motion
to death Committee port any
business Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so at this time we
are going to go to third reading
of legislation on Senate bill
one so with that unanimous
just before we do that what
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
that all those present at this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session seeing no
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee see no
objection it is so ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business third
amended on final passage is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution hearing no
objection centerman us to
explain the bill thank you Mr
president this is supplemental
live in their districts and and
know what's happening there
districts have put appropriation
in their.
For priorities that they see
need fit everything from police
the house part is in have is in
this bill and so there's there's
a lot of projects that I think
we're very well vetted we as
legislators we live in our
district we we go to the corner
these are priorities for us
these are needs in our community
these are things that that we
need to happen and they're not
maybe not large dollar needs but
we move forward to this process
we've seen how house bill two is
changed and what process were
were opening up to but we need
to change our budgeting system
in New Mexico.
so as we move through this bill
you'll see the house members
adds in here I may not be able
to answer every question some of
those maybe house member adds
bit and so the floor amendment
can be distributed to members.
Centerman Yoshiko.
Senator steel is present yes.
Representative you are you have
a copy of Senate bill one there
in front of you I'm sure.
Duhigg maybe there's one below
hers and I cannot figure out who
that is could you possibly tell
me who that is.
This presents enter I do not
know who that is.
etcetera I I think that's a
physician signature.
Senator increased a lot of the
floor center to participate I
would like to this is just the
Senator signature.
I believe I believe so Senator
Hickey will you yield Senator
that I make sure somebody could
read hers and almost and use the
same school.
Senator Ingle if you will yield
I would like to comment on that
thank you thank you senator this
is a no.
Thank you Mr president just
going to comment that I use that
signature to get Senator pain
killers the other day and it
worked.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one as
amended amendment sponsored by
state senator Jacob R.
Candelaria.
moment as thank you Mr president
the amendment before the body
would strike all amendments made
in the Senate finance committee
to Senate bill one and there was
to reduce the cost Affairs.
Now I understand Mr president
that.
six weeks ago or a few weeks.
But I find it ironic.
Mr president.
That during a session where we
are addressing.
Even less accessible and less
affordable for low income hard
working New Mexicans and
essential Rio Grande corridor.
this body for the ten years that
I've been here.
And I'm not casting allegations
are spurs anyone person I'm
saying we have a cultural
Under fund under value both the
rail runner and the spaceport.
Now we can all have debates
about whether those entities are
To just penalize the City of
Albuquerque.
Some is present I strongly
encourage this body.
First and foremost.
possible to increase public
transportation not D. fundus Mr
president thank you.
Thank you senator Senator among
revenues for twenty twenty to
twenty twenty three if you look
in there you will see that in
faint twenty twenty two they
approve ninety one million
million dollars to cares Act
money.
So when you look in state the
federal government gave us money
to do this the rail runner
should have been able to this
Or do we want to let sixty
million dollars revert back to
the Fred's at some point but in
their general fund revenue in
their estimates from their book
they said their carryover will
confirmation from
the lady from the restroom Rio
Grande director metro that the
reduced rates fifty percent
immediately.
legislators should look at
federal funds and opportunity
use their money first rather
than our money because needs may
come along later and so with
that I'll stand for questions.
Thank you Mr president and the
the senator may as senator
Candelaria makes a good point
about the value in these times
of public transportation.
that a million dollars in
comparison to the large amount
of federal money coming in for
precisely this purpose is is a
drop in the bucket really and
is able to fully capitalize on
the federal infrastructure money
for public
transportation projects that
will be available very soon from
that we all would benefit from
so the Senator makes a good
point about the value of this
but we have another mechanism
that will be a lot more valuable
in terms of the amount of it
Although some of the most okay I
project that you're you
insurance some we do have
Senator Steinborn on the list
next Senators time on.
the amendment yield Senator are
ideal Mr president happily thank
you Mr presents so really might
my questions for the chair of
finance because he said
something that was important
this has been an evolving
affordable rail we all are in
total support as I've been part
of some of these conversations
about making mass transit more
affordable for people at this
district that runs real runner
saying they would immediately
slash fares.
right now for the next three and
a half months is that correct Mr
provide half price motional
fares for the reign of running
for three and a half months on a
one ways zone pass they pass and
monthly passes.
already agree that they'll
reduce those those fares by
fifty percent and I don't know
what cost a real ride the rail
runner.
So there's Steinborn thank you
I think this is why the Senate
finance committee backed off it
but we definitely all share the
same goal of of being able to
provide more affordable mass
See no one else on the list
Sierra that it closed on the
amendment thank you Mr president
I actually have a question if I
may ask the chairman of finance
affirmed our appropriations
power for these funds.
With Senator Baca.
I am I have to admit struggling.
funds for reduction of fares.
That representation has been
made to this body.
I'm not familiar with any such
provision of federal law or rule
handed out and put on your desk
on page seven I'm not an
attorney and I can argue the
legal case but you'll see the
amount of money that came in and
cares Act directed to them for
and you'll see how they classify
and I'm not a.
Rail operational guy but there
revenues are are showing their
and they show for the twenty
twenty one revenues of ninety
million dollars and he turned
over the sheet in the third
paragraph you'll see where the
the rail runner is projected a
sixty point nine million dollar
carry over from twenty two to
future operating maintenance
costs to match or supplemental
federal discretionary grants to
to pay for design our capital
projects so
president I think what the
public the press and members
will notice that was not an
answer to the question I posed.
And that is why I am proposing
this amendment.
out here without any amendments
because everyone wants to go
home I understand that but
here's why I find the arguments
against this bill ladies and
But really being contorted to
suit the argument before us.
And that's what's happening
let's examine the letter that
That's all the federal funds
allegedly if they even have the
federal authority.
We'll cover.
year where we have surpluses of
hundreds of millions of dollars.
In a year where multiple state
agencies are paddling and
patting their budgets.
To deprive the people of my
community with reduced fares for
longer period of time.
Now if you really do believe in
public transportation and in
dollars ladies and gentlemen to
extend that benefit for a longer
period of time or two more
people using state money to
state money so that we can get
every bang for our Buck.
But why Mr president are we
taking that approach with every
other state agency.
We all understand the numbers in
the sheet before us.
They do not answer the questions
I've posed which leads me to
that if you're going close on
the amendment and with that I
move that the Senate do now pass
Senate bills in the form of a
There's been a request for a
show of hands centers we're
voting on Senate floor member
number one.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Baca voting no Senator
Gallegos voting no Senator
Kernan voting no Senator Woods
voting no Senator Ingle voting
Gonzales voting no Senator
Griggs voting now senator
Sanchez voting no Senator
Diamond voting no center how to
meal voting no senator Tom and
you wish to vote.
I don't know Sierra voting no
Senator pope voting no Senator
Ortiz Pena voting no Senator
no Senator Hamblen voting no
Senator where Hemphill voting no
Senator Wirth voting no Senator
Lopez voting no Senator
Stefanics voting no Senator
to pass Sierra Nevada Mr prison
the independent caucus continues
to grow at an alarming rate to
four thank you Mr president
thank you senator Carolina
senators we're back on the bill.
won't send email if the council
service is listening I do need
the other amendment down on
Senate bill one
pretty please so before that I
I want to questions about what
is not in the bill before us
today.
The bill before us today Mister
question Senator we astute
yield.
Mr president yes Senator
Candelaria thank you Mr
president to my to my colleague
from Gallup.
After last after the last
regular session that the
executive identified.
The number of appropriations
within that bill that they found
And what percentage of the fifty
million.
Was found to be problematic by
the executive.
Centerman yes Mr president
center we did not track it by
agency in the right department
and to appropriate the money
correctly so there there was no
dollar amount that I've ever
heard I was not in those
discussions on
create creates a.
Maybe long term problems are
they can't use the unexpended
bell are the mount and so those
are the changes that were made
in the bill.
read the governor's executive
message I am still left your
earning for an answer and just
learning for some clarity.
exercise her line item veto
authority.
Mr president.
Centerman us the governor Mr
presence in I think you'd have
to ask the executive that
and my techs are left on read
but Mr president.
Yeah I think I think that that
is that is that is just
ultimately some of the facts I
clear understanding of why the
governor felt necessary to veto
the entire bill lock stock and
barrel instead of taking a
surgical approach and I think
And those sort of actions are
storied among governors.
I needs of them do it.
Mr president.
So I'm left wondering even
necessary to trigger a special
session.
Now the second issue Mister
president.
Is when I look at the last
session they were to sort of
The first of course is a junior
bill which we've been
discussing.
And the second.
Was a bill that we work to a
Why are the appropriations for
increased additional salaries
not included in your
legislation.
and the way we were a structure
that bill those appreciations
were triggered off several
different things and so this
judicial bill was vetoed and
those appropriations in those
raises for judges will created
in equity in the judicial system
and create a problem we didn't
so there's two things that were
alleged there and I want to
explore both of them.
Is to present the first the
first representation to this
body is that the veto of the
problem is or where the inequity
lies or what is driving the
inequity so Mister president to
the senator yield and explain to
us.
about that the first problem is
it's not inside the
proclamation.
And so we'd be outside the
boundaries of the proclamation
and that would be the first
issue that we run into with that
system over a long term of
executives cutting in and not
helping the judicial branch I am
not an expert and a lawyer but
technical changes and structural
changes on page and and each
judicial branch and then for the
magistrates it would be Google
you know that the good sponsor
the bill could probably answer a
lot more questions on that.
Senator Candelaria thank you Mr
president just present the
legal or factual analysis is it
logrolling to include
appropriations for judicial
salaries to one branch of
branch then that is a statutory
change and then that would make
this bill logrolling the pay
raises and the increases are a
president think we are making
headway here and I think the
Senator touches on a good point
which is that just typically we
that we should not enacted
this body of if we had and
really double down on the
whereas is and the X. cetera as
and the not withstanding
So Mister president I think that
you know no the vote on the next
amendment would likely be like
the same I'm not going to
introduce it logo and pull it.
this legislature came together
and said we are finally going to
fix our judicial retirement
system and we're finally going
important part of that.
And the thing I would leave this
body with Mister president.
Is what I am left struggling
with again Mr president.
Is the reason.
showing a much needed pay
increase for our judiciary.
Because it was a pocket veto.
That is really reeks of
monarchy.
It allows one person to simply
veto a bill that law passed by
And that's why I'm so frustrated
with this bill Mr present I will
vote for it.
Because the judiciary is been
left out and was left out solely
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate center
among us to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president members
Senate bill one as amended do
now pass and they asked and then
consent this mess can do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the sent the rules being
called and all those present
Thank you Mr president and I
would be remiss to thank all our
staff that that worked on this
and worked on the fixes to help
get this I mean it's tough to
leave again in the thirty day
thirty days just after we are
executive I want to thank to
because this really does help
communities it really does help
people it really does make a
difference in people's lives the
everybody for cooperating and
working and fixing things what
this will money will make a
difference in people's lives so
thank you Mr president thank you
centerman also just for
clarification for the body the
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous from that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so I
don't think we have anything
everyone in the loop as to when
those come in
and and again I think both bills
on this side will get referred
to Senate finance and and will
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms etcetera etcetera
etcetera recessed subject to the
culture.
Saying this is the Senate will
stand in recess at the call of
the chair.
