Of order we're gonna start with
Mr mostly because Senator souls
and stick it to education but go
head center the manager it's my
pleasure to Representative
Garrett Moseley as the student
region for New Mexico State
University over the last year
I've gotten to spend quite a bit
of time with Mr mostly he is
then the president of a as an
image to the student body
president and seeing him in many
events for it seems like he's at
all events you probably has a
twin to get to everything I
don't know quite how we does all
of that but he is was up here
many of you probably would be
recognizes space at least but
they were up here advocating and
lobbying for lots of the A. as
an issue issues and events with
everyone was up here for about a
month and learn lots about the
processes that we have up here
and then most recently was just
nominated by the governor to be
the student regent he is a
criminal justice and government.
Student we were just chatting he
was asking me all kinds of
questions about yeah so how's a
committee chair were you how did
they get appointment what's the
rules you have to do these kinds
of things very engaged very
involved in everything going on
loves New Mexico State
University was just chatting
with them and indicated how much
he enjoyed being the president
of a SNM issue because it got
him out of his college in his
department and to see and hear
the problems from the students
around the the entire school and
so you don't hear from me you
want to hear from Garrett mostly
and so it's my pleasure to the
sponsor and introduce you to
carry mostly.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning.
My name is Gerry mostly in I was
born and raised in Albuquerque
New Mexico and currently a
senior at MSU and I will begin a
two year masters of business
administration program this
summer.
My mother was a first generation
college graduate her decision to
pursue a college degree change
the subject here my family's
life.
And it's solely the reason I'm
able to sit here in front of you
today.
I attended valley high school
which has a title one high
school give me a first hand
lived experience into many of
the detriments of the systemic
cycles that have affected our
state for decades I started with
a freshman class of three
hundred and thirty students and
finish with just over a hundred
and eighty students.
I lost peers to gun violence
sauce students jeopardize their
futures by selling drugs and
witness far too many students
get left behind because they
were not given the proper tools
to succeed.
It is my belief that education
is one of the only ways we can
reverse the cycles that have
affected our state.
It is for this reason I'm deeply
passionate about education and
expanding act access to
education.
There is no single endeavor I am
more passionate about and
committed to serving the people
of New Mexico.
During my time at New Mexico
state I served as the associated
students of New Mexico State
University student body
president.
This experience gave me the
opportunity to talk directly to
dozens of student organizations
and countless students.
This is giving me a deep insight
into many of the problems
students face at our university
and I believe this insight will
bring a valuable perspective to
the board of regents.
As president I was able to
secure an appropriation of four
point three million dollars from
the student fee revenue bond to
renovate the NMSU activity
center and I also lobbied at
this current legislative session
to secure additional funding for
that initiative.
I was able to lay down the
framework for a two hundred and
fifty thousand dollar emergency
funding endowment that will
provide wraparound services for
most at risk students.
I spearheaded a philanthropy
initiative that United
associated students of the
university of New Mexico the U.
ten student government
association and the community
foundation of Southern New
Mexico to raise money for my
green assistance.
I believe that any student that
is willing to chase their dream
of pursuing a college education
should be given that chance the
opportunity student the
opportunity scholarship has
given students that chains.
And.
It is therefore my believe NMSU
has a responsibility in doing
its part to ensure the
opportunity scholarship will
benefit students for generations
to come.
As region I will continue to be
a strong advocate for students I
worked diligently towards
providing more equitable
assessable inclusive learning
environment for all students and
most importantly our work
towards ensuring all students
are provided the necessary
resources to succeed.
I like to sincerely thank
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
secretary Stephanie Rodriguez
and senator bill for bill soul
for you believe me.
Only thing every individual that
has helped me to get where I am
today I can not actually put
into words how grateful I am for
the people who believed in me
and invested in my future is
there for why feel such an
obligation to give back.
Is truly an honor to be here
today.
And madam chair members of the
committee I I thank you for your
time now stand for questions
right thank you very much I have
four people noted
as going to speak in support
let's do about three minutes
each service doctor Dan.
Used to do we do we need the
my experts yes
Dr Arvizu please I don't have
for about three minutes.
What will come back to me what
have a doctor Renee scoffed.
Dr Scott you can you all hear me
this is then just that okay yes
doctor visit please please go
ahead.
Anyone here maybe we can hear
you.
You might not be able to hear us
saying we can hear you but.
The world is.
I think we have some folks who
are here in person as well Ely
Baca.
Hello most yes.
I think it can I thank my
colleagues can hear me but I
can't I don't know that the
committee can hear me we can
hear you we can hear you.
Okay thank you I think I'm I'm
on I'm on so I've been told I
want to just give a quick this
is down this you want to get
chance for New Mexico State
University I rise in support of
the nomination of here mostly
for student region of as we have
a talked about before is this
Intersil's suggested I had a
chance to operate and and work
with with with the act last year
when the most rewarding things I
get to do is is engaged with
student leadership and it is it
is an extraordinary to to see
individuals talent capability of
of very mostly as Gary has
suggested he can extremely
active on campus number of
things that have been extremely
important for students to
activity center mentioned that
Margaret social systems work
that he's done work for support
student centric stuff at the not
only at in athletics but it's
point of writing about the
things and advocacy for victims
of that are a our challenge on
our campus he as a been a
tremendous partner with me and
we met on a regular basis
I am confident he will be a
great feature ten he is a I
think mature beyond his years he
has shown great strategic I
think acting with in the wake
approaches problems he's deeply
committed to New Mexico State
University I think you make a
great we could sell it for those
reasons that I and I stand in
strong support here and I
strongly support his the the
program is not much so thank you
very much.
Right thank you Dr
do we have doctors call
us this.
Dr Scott go go ahead.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee it is
my honor today to rise in
support of the nominations for
Garrett mostly as member of the
board of regents as you've
already heard geared to serving
as the president of the
associated students of New
Mexico star State University our
student government.
In this role he has been the
leader of an initiative to
renovate the activity center and
just help secure four point
three million in funding and as
you know he's been lobbying for
additional support for this
project what you haven't heard
is as part of this project he
has been leading the development
of a master plan for this
facility therefore providing
vision and leadership for the
future direction of university
recreation on campus one of the
services our student body uses
very frequently.
Here is also chaired the student
fee review board leading the
student committee and making
very significant and very
difficult recommendations about
how best to use student fees in
support of our students.
He's an advocate for diversity
equity inclusion you this
legislative much leadership
around migrant assistance
program he's also fraternity
brother he is highly respected
on campus and I am very
confident he will give us make
it a significant and thoughtful
contribution to the board of
regents at New Mexico State
University so it is my pleasure
and honor to support mostly and
his nomination as student region
thank you chairperson.
Right thank you doctor up the
life Baca.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Eli
Baca and today I rise in strong
support of gear mostly as the
next student region at New
Mexico state I had the privilege
of working with president
Moseley and his administration
within the associated students
of New Mexico State University
I'm continually impressed by his
commitment to university
students and his passion to
serve our university.
To touch on a few achievements
present Moseley has led our
student government through a
financial crisis he has been
instrumental in renovating our
activity center and he has
provided assistance for students
and community members who need
it most your has demonstrated
inclusiveness transparency and
effective leadership and I'm
confident that he'll bring those
qualities to the board.
There will continue to serve our
university with distinction and
madam chair members of the
committees on behalf of the
students of New Mexico State
University I urge you to support
Garrett's confirmation to the
New Mexico State University
board of regents thank you.
Thank you
Aiden army ho.
Good morning madam chair and
committee thank you for allowing
me this opportunity to speak in
support of care mostly as the
next student regent of NMSU my
name is of the economy ho and I
am a recent December twenty
twenty two graduate of MSU
during my time and I miss you
I've had the pleasure of being a
student leader for our student
government I have the positions
of chief of staff Attorney
General and the student center
for the arts and sciences
college as students senator I
was serving with Garrett
Moseley.
I was able to recruit him into
the Senate.
And the fourteen before we knew
it he took off being a first
year Senator it is very
intimidating to come into the
student government and make
possible make change possible
not only was he his first piece
of legislation co sponsoring
lighting around campus to make
our corporate student you say
for it was also in supporting
our student veterans project
that we had started years prior
working with Gary I have seen
his commitment to the students
during these turbulent times of
COVID we came back into a
financial crisis through his
leadership he was able to not
only explain to the students but
to explain to the university and
the community how he was going
to change this and what he was
going to do to lead us to this
time and this is what he did to
his leadership we have been able
to use less fees to fund more
projects and help more students
on campus Garrett is an
inspiration to myself into the
students around him and as
previous speakers have noted any
time here on campus at an event
you will see Garrett.
And because his smile is the
lifeline and what I think and I
Pandemis you stands for and his
commitment to students I'm proud
to support and rising support of
his confirmation on behalf of
the alumni of NMSU as an ex
student region thank you thank
you Andrew center.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the indulgence when we
speak
to have a now there we go I just
want to stand up no Garrett
since he was in grade school he
was one of my both my sons
friends and his brother as well
and my son Connor goes to New
Mexico State University and I
just want to say he's a great
example of a student at New
Mexico State University and one
of the future leaders of the
state so I'd highly recommend
thank you.
Thank you are we did not have
anyone signed up in opposition
if there's anyone in the
audience who wishes to raise our
hand to indicate support please
do so.
The.
I I'm sorry I apologize clean
now B. had also signed up to to
speak on on this country go
ahead.
Thank you for the intelligence
madam chair members of the
committee to just echo all the
comments that have been
previously stated I've had the
pleasure of working with Garrett
on campus here in the capital he
has often come to me seeking
guidance in along with his
fellow is an image you members I
I have the utmost confidence in
their ability to work with
legislators to work with
students to represent New Mexico
State University to the utmost
and so you certainly state and
strong support and urge that you
will vote in favor this country
thank you and thank you to chair
souls for all you do.
Thank you so it doesn't raise
hands then is there anyone
online who which stores and to
make it support
anyone who wants to raise a hand
to indicate opposition.
See non anyone online.
All right
Senator Stefanics
thank you madam chair and
I really commend this young man
for his
activities in the community and
the community service this is
one of the things that
hopefully.
All young people are learning
about in this world today about
caring for other people and it
really sounds like you are
putting yourself out there to do
that.
Madam chair of Senator and in
Canada are in the past I mean we
still have the of peace for but
in the past we used to have
something called the backyard
piece that was set up for high
school and college students to
commit to their communities and
it sounds like you're doing
exactly that type of thing bring
people together and to take care
of them and I commend you very
much for that I think you'll be
a great candidate thank you.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you madam chairman and and
the Senator soles thanks ranges
I was really struck in your.
Introductory comments
The fact that
So many of your fellow students
at valley didn't graduate same
time into.
And I wanted one of the things
you said is that many of them
were given the tools they need
to graduate what what were some
of those tools that you can see
us possibly needing to know
about that might help us are
provided with.
What what so I would be helping
people at I would say if it
wasn't necessarily there wasn't
good teachers at about but I
feel that in a lot of cases a
needs to be a pro active
approach in addressing some
issues that may come from home
life Steinborn or
also it an educational approach
to some students just not really
being prepared to take on a high
school curriculum and
more than anything ensuring that
students are at school I fell it
was often too easy to not come
to class and even as a as a
student that was very passionate
about my education I felt very
in able to at times to not take
homework seriously not go to
class and just really go through
the motions and I was a student
that could kind of get away with
that but not every student can
and it wasn't because they
weren't talented they were
incredibly intelligent
they just did not have I guess
thank the tools in the vision to
see it all the way through and a
huge thing that I think is going
to make a major change in this
is the opportunity scholarship
for a lot of students that what
I from what I noticed in my
experience when they know from
that for a fact that college
will not be an option because of
financial barriers
there's really nothing stopping
them from saying well I'm just
gonna get Caesar dis because I
just need my diploma and after
that it's fine but knowing that
they do have that chance to go
to college I think that is going
to be a really big driving force
in giving them that extra push
to to really see it to the end.
Madam chairman great great
insight thank you for that
how we how it how did you
finance your college education.
Mr chair so madam chair members
of the committee
luckily I was able to receive a
a fair amount of scholarships
that really helped me and be
able to attend New Mexico state
and I was also
able to rely on some financial
support from my parents and I
was able to also work jobs all
throughout my at my college
career
and.
And yeah I would say that was a
how I how I was able to finance
my my college education mmhm
Madam chairman of and to the.
This this looks like it through
the good nomination the
governor's made for the for the
for I think you'll be a good
representative student body
clearly you you know what what
they're feeling and and have
good communication with your
peers there so I I think this is
great and I want to thank you
for being willing to tackle this
thank you.
Thank you Senator ma'am Madam
chair Senator Mr mostly thank
you for all the just that I was
one of those at risk students
that you're shopping for and
getting those wraparound
services I am a first generation
college graduate from Mexico on.
College was never something I
had even thought and so I didn't
get scholarships because I
didn't anticipate going to.
So with wraparound services that
help me work to full time job
forty hours a week cost going
thirteen to twelve credit hours
a semester and then make sure
that you and and not only
because I loved it but that was
the way that I got my books paid
for and so I want to thank you
because they were having kids
just like you who helped to be
and I think having you as a
student regent who understand
the need for at risk students is
important as I want to thank you
for being the voice for those of
us who never thought college was
something we could accomplish I
also want to thank you for and
knowledge of everybody who got
you here
so many people the best of us
and get us to where we need to
go and I hope that you continue
to invest and one day one of
your mentees thank you for
getting up here that's a that's
all I have is the madam chair
thank you thank you I hate
following the vice chair because
I can't so is back to the
following.
I just want I want to echo the
the the comments of the other
members of the committee I think
this is an excellent choice by
the governor thank you will be
excellent in this role I also
went to valley high school
has back it's a graduate from
their greater freedom high
school but.
I was I was those kids that that
that gap between three thirty in
the one eighty I was one of
those
but I'm I'm very impressed by
what I'm hearing and and I love
hearing here your fellow
students I describe your smile
select that is fantastic also
what is the will of the
committee to pass all right
let's do Raul help out.
Senator Baca Senator Ingle and
Senator Lopez are excuse.
Senator McKenna yes senator
McKinney yes senator Morse's
excuse.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle it's excuse.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
had a meal yes Senator had a
meal yes incentive to do the yes
yes this is that you have you
have a the recommendation of the
committee will see you down on
the Senate floor later on today.
Thank you thank you.
Right next will have Mr
Blanchard.
The wait okay.
Ahead of Good Morning madam
chair members of the committee
and I am proud today to be the
conferees sponsor for Mr Paul
Blanchard I have no Mr Blanchard
for many years before I talk
about him I just want to tell
you a story.
Last year when Christmas was
coming actually since the year
before last
publisher on his own created a
huge party for about four
schools in the international
district all of them very high
poverty but he himself put
together this incredible party
for them including gifts for the
kids shoes and jackets that one
of my constituents who looks
like Santa Claus and has a red
convertible Mustang became Santa
Claus we had to don't Q. rights
there is a Ferris wheel there
was food for parents this was a
joyous occasion with those kids
who don't have much who all got
Christmas gifts and their whole
families got party and play
around in December around
Christmas so that is the kind
of.
The factor that Mr Blanchard is
for people in his life he
employs hundreds of people she
has at extensive experience in
commercial construction and
residential developments in New
Mexico he has served publicly
the state for to finance he was
appointed to the renewable
energy transmission authority of
five previous governor he's a
member of the racing Committee
American quarter horse
association he has put
residential buildings in New
Mexico he has focused on
ranching he said Senator ranches
he K. Justin entrepreneur and
active person who just poll roll
up the sleeves and works hard he
has created the downs at
Albuquerque which is one of the
best race tracks I think in the
state and just turn it down into
a good business employs a lot of
people so he's able to handle
he's his expertise as
international business expansion
operation and general management
revenue and profit growth
strategic business planning this
is the kind of background that I
believe we need for regents for
our universities very happy to
present Paul Blanchard this
morning four regions of the U.
N. M..
Thank you.
Thank you madam chairman I am
moved to New Mexico in nineteen
sixty nine and have never left
the state sense I'm cert.
I want to immerse in New Mexico
I came to New Mexico with forty
dollars in my pocket New Mexico
fed me New Mexico university
Mexico fed me doctored maybe
educated me and introduced me to
the great City of Albuquerque
hi I have been in business since
nineteen seventy six and have
continued mark my businesses in
New Mexico at my employer
through the businesses that hi I
am an owner in I higher
proximity eight hundred and
fifty employ New Mexico
employees
which expands because of our
expansion and the the find
fitness is that our New Mexico
company so we continue to add
jobs
I have donated to the immersion
of Mexico for.
Probably at least fifteen years
somewhere in the vicinity of a
hundred thousand a year to the
university and and
I care deeply for the
institution and I
I.
Of all the jobs that I've done
for boards and commissions I've
got to say this is the one that
has my heart so.
With that I'm gonna make it
shorter stand for questions.
Thank thank you we have two
people signed up to speak in
support of same Breckman to
online.
Mr district attorney please go
hadn't.
Up to five minutes.
Madam can you hear me we can
hear you.
Madam chair members of the
committee it is an honor.
To be able to come before you
and speak on behalf of Paul
Blanchard.
I have no fall for approximately
thirty years he has a wonderful
family and I know he will be a
great UNM regent I think that
for a number of reasons let me
first say that.
As I think most of you know all
the very successful businessman
with a proven track record that
speaks for itself.
but I've had the opportunity to
see Paul also as a consensus
builder.
I have been present when a group
of people have been in a room
together with very different
views on a particular issue and
Paul has come in and work with
everybody in that room and come
out with a consensus among the
group obviously I think that
account we can all appreciate
madam chair so policy consensus
builder but it's also a problem
solver I know you at UNM as it
said of challenges and I also
know how harmful we work to help
the UNM community and all
stakeholders that you would.
To solve these problems.
Madam chair when you think of
the other qualities that you
want someone to help lead the
state's flagship university
obviously you would want someone
who is very smart.
Someone and and public projects
that.
you want someone with the
temperament.
A Paul Blanchard checks that box
you want someone with great
energy.
And publisher checks that box.
And finally I think there's no
question that you want someone
with unquestionable integrity.
And Paul Blanchard checks that
box and I think of every box of
the skills necessary to be a
great changes so as a graduate
of UNM and you in law school I
went to my highest
recommendation I hope madam
chair that you will as well
along with the other members of
the committee thank you.
Thank you Bob Petri.
Who I think is also online.
We do not see this.
All right as Mr Peter here.
He comes on later will will go
back to
in the meantime questions from
the committee
and I'm sorry before I get to
that hello that no one signed up
in opposition if anyone would
like to raise our hands indicate
support please feel free to do
so.
Anyone online would like to do
so they can to.
There are like to raise their
hands in the off position please
do so.
The line anyone online.
Okay
questions
Senator to the cleanup the
manager.
Here is you were talking.
Yes I I I came on a football
scholarship and that's the only
way I could have attended so
that was a that was a great
experience of.
And and Committee chairman of
the to the touched by your
compassion you.
Described as a for the
university as an institution of
what what
but I was also curious about was
earlier in your career you were
part of the renewable energy
transmission authority.
And the Senator Stefanics
pointed that out to me as well
what what the what's your
assessment of the current status
of of that particular.
HSD that we created that we
created to help promote
renewable energy and and it's
finally making some some for
real.
Taking some real steps that are
that are helping that what what
what your current system.
When I got appointed as co chair
that was the regional the
founding of the
renewable energy transmission
authority
and
it has obviously come a long way
since then
it was in infancy and we were
just looking at basically
transmission projects that were.
Being brought up that time wind
hadn't was talked about but it
hadn't really got a hold of
That that.
When the tax benefits to at at
at at that point.
It was a I think the industry
obviously is fantastic for the
state and it's got great
potential
one of the one of the areas that
they have to they're going to
have to work on hard is on their
battery storage and how they're
gonna work battery storage
there's it's hard to do a new
level that.
It's hard to get rid of
Faisal's.
You have to what we called in at
the time firming up contracts
when you sell energy you have to
be able to produce energy twenty
four seven that had to be built
contracts had to be firmed up
which means they had to be able
to deliver power for that period
of time so you have to still
depend on fossil fuels because
we're not there with battery
storage.
So it's it's a lot of work left
to do and a lot of opportunity
to to for the state of New
Mexico and a myriad of areas of
renewable energy not just solar
and wind but but lots of areas
and so I think that's it's the
HSD is got to continue to work
hard and expand them and promote
what it is they're charged to
do.
Well chair of Mr chairman at
that but I just think that the
breadth of experience that you
bring to the position as a
region.
And the Legisla- business
background but also your
interest in so many other things
it's clear that the the you know
you you you're somebody who
grabs life by the by the
shoulders and just.
What's the sometimes a drugs in
the back.
Thank you very the needs of
doctoring.
The so I I really impressed that
you really the service region I
look forward to in that in that
process thank you thank you
senator Senator.
Thank you senator for bring
forward Mr Blanchard I don't
believe we've ever met and so I
was very interested in the
renewable energy as well and I I
see you have a ranch and Carrano
right that's in my district
hello are you part of the wind
farm down there yes I'm I was
the when farmers basically I
border New Mexico state's ranch
okay and so their their ranch I
mean the the wind power was
basically it's all over to the
east of me in that in that first
phase so that's that's all
around me and in there and
including the clear line
transmission line and and now
spirit line so there's there's a
lot of activity in your area as
you well know some well Mr chair
and senator Mr Blanchard I you
know the.
Wind energy and the development
there really brought on the
influx of economic development
to that small community but with
all big projects when they go
away there's a big let down I
recently had a conversation with
somebody from another
university.
About this whole topic of
renewable energy and I really
would like for our universities
and it doesn't have to be all of
them they just need to
collaborate there needs to be
some
Skill and expertise developed in
our own state rather than
bringing in people all the time
and because you've had this
experience on Rita because of
your other business experience I
hope you will look at that and I
guess it was one of the region's
maybe for New Mexico state who
had an expertise in this but it
wasn't high on their.
List of develop course work in
programs so maybe there could be
some kind of confab between all
the universities to discuss this
but Mr chair I appreciate Mr
Blanchard coming forward thank
you.
Thank you
the other members of the
committee.
Mr chair at all I just know that
you said you you came with forty
dollars in your pocket UNM took
you in and.
That they still sound like a
pretty good return on their
investment that.
Your donated about a hundred
thousand dollars a year for the
last fifteen years I think that
was a wise investment but that
you animated you am and and you
are a a wise a mess at the
governor's making a wise
investment you put in you hi has
at that point in you as regions
so.
Thank you for your service seven
hand with four to to see what
you do in that role
what is the will of the
committee.
I'm sorry source It centering
this because of the speakers.
Call.
The more it.
I was looking at of of money to
know how to pronounce the.
That is.
I hit that most of my life.
That's a my grandfather was
following the years well so.
to that gifts from members.
Pointed with you when you.
More help on built on.
No
real good sometimes sometimes we
didn't hear your that they
replace absolutely if we had
some with changing his mind the.
However understand that way.
Thank you for.
In the border region you know
they used to.
I hope we we still in most
patients have them the governing
body of the depression the
higher the ministration of
getting down.
Our our special.
Revisions mentoring for for for
a job.
I appreciate we should we have
much for thank you so much
faster.
I think we have a much Senator
Baca quick if you don't mind
madam chair thank you thank you
for your interest for thank you
for a the willing to sermons
rules it's I I'm extremely.
Excited just seventy business
experience what you're gonna
bring to the table.
UNM I think I think real world
business experience.
Is it's just so important to be
involved in government.
Additionally what what better
the letterman right.
That's Griego anyway receipt.
In certain counties Senator.
I think we are on a motion.
Okay still roll call Senator
Baca yes Senator Baca yes
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ingle
yes your lotus is excuse Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna.
More for six years Senator
supino thank you.
Senator Pirtle sixty Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator had a new test and
incentive to do the test was
seven news that you have a
recommendation of the committee
and we will see you later on
this morning on the Senate floor
thank you very much.
I also want to know the other
UNM regent polytechnic she was
originally scheduled for today
will be doing her on Sunday
she's she's under the weather
that's the only reason we're not
doing our today
doctors of I should ask her
prevention lessons Dr
and Senator office please come
on up.
Morning everyone.
It's a and Germany re uh
introduce you to our mode of
selling is presently on number
four reasons New Mexico State
University she's here for
reappointment to all of them
through this before you have a
resume no front of you Senator
go through that and much detail
except to say that she served as
a president board of regents of
late and I I would just like to
add that New Mexico State
University jewel sure well aware
has been through some difficult
days and the doctor does always
has stepped up along the border
regions to take very meaningful
role in helping university
through some of those very
difficult times that I think
alone in the office of this a
testament to her qualifications
a character but her and her
husband rom up are very well
regarded members of the Los
crucis community very active in
the arts in particular but very
highly respected they're my
neighbors and have been for a
very long time I count them as
my friends and so I'm here to
introduce you to drive this all
wish we have a few words that I
think probably thank you senator
disadvantages.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
members of the committee good
morning and thank you for this
opportunity to appear before you
today.
My name is a native of the study
and I currently serve as chair
on the board of regents at New
Mexico State University I would
like to start by thanking the
governor for nominating me
thirty three appointment to the
board of regents at New Mexico
state I also want to thank ATG
secretary Stephanie Rodriguez
and all the members of the staff
S. also miss Melissa Salazar
director of boards and
commissions and all of the staff
for guiding me through this
process and to all of the
paperwork to get me here.
I want to think madam issue
family some of whom are here
today for this supposed to
during my four years on the
board we have had some great
trans and a few little moments
but I'm kid to tell you that
those trans far outweigh the low
times my most heartfelt
gratitude however it goes to my
family my husband my two grown
children my son in law my eight
year old grandson they have had
to share me with this job which
can be all consuming at times.
I'm also truly great grateful to
senator Joseph said mantas my
friend and my neighbor the need
to be my Senate sponsor today.
During my first confirmation
four years ago I I told you
about my journey my husband and
I immigrated to the United
States in nineteen eighty one we
came with no job no resources
and no idea as to how we would
like to make it in a foreign
accent.
What we had Ben aside you cation
like most immigrants we had a
burning desire to succeed mostly
fueled by the fact that feed it
was not an option.
We had no safety net so we had
to do what they could to make
sure that our one important
asset our education and
training.
Could be made to look for us.
When we first came to Las Cruces
and then animus you gave me the
creative and intellectual home
that I needed really badly at
that time.
Fast forward to March of twenty
nineteen I was nominated by
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
to serve on the board of regents
at New Mexico State University.
This is a big honor band and
Justice today New Mexico State
University with a lifeline for
me.
New Mexico State University such
a large part of the city of Los
crucis as of the New Mexico
commit counties and the entire
state as the land grant
institution for us state we take
a mission very seriously.
And I'm just to has a
comprehensive and well crafted
strategic plan and we have made
great strides in implementing
this plan.
To help in this we have defined
some strategic priorities and in
the interest of time I would not
go through all of that and.
A strategic priorities for the
next few years our renewable
energy and I want to address
something that I had a
conversation with Senate just
defining at her office and you
had asked me the question about
whether we have a degree program
or certification program for
anything that had to do with
renewable energy and I have
gotten some information on that
so we do have a
we do have a program certificate
program in power which request
for courses in the areas of
smart grid energy market and
power.
And there are also plans being
developed for interdisciplinary
degrees and energy and
sustainability engineering at
the college of engineering.
Of the net number two of our
priorities is add modernization.
A number three New Orleans in
student success and let me see a
little bit about that our
enrollment for the entire system
unduplicated currently stands at
twenty one thousand two hundred
and ten.
Yes this is main campus is that
fourteen thousand two hundred
and sixty eight our increase in
enrollment is due largely to
this opportunity scholarship and
I would like to thank the
governor for that.
we have ten thousand nine
hundred full time students and
part time students at three
thousand three hundred sixty
eight.
Let me touch a little bit on
student success as you all know
and misuse home to the physical
science lab established in
nineteen twenty six we have one
of the few universities that
house is such a lab.
How does this lab help students.
This is a small example ten
animus to students was selected
by PSL that is the physical
science that.
By the classified ready
workforce all crucial shot
program the started that journey
into the national security
secretary this fall the students
in the coop program matched with
cooperative education employers
and participate in the national
security seminar series.
Their engagement in this unique
program allows them to graduate
with the national security
clearance and happened and ready
to enter the national security
and defense workforce.
Number four is expanding
partnerships we have several
partnerships with us almost
national laugh New Mexico
chamber of commerce as a put me
in energy development lab Sandia
national lab and many many more
we seek to align animus to the
eight twenty twenty five which
is a strategic plan that the
state of New Mexico strategic
targets.
Number five as such I think
upgrades and improvements.
I just wanted to let you know
that a new football coach Jerry
kill did take on men's football
team to a quick lane Lane bold
van in Detroit Michigan I just
came back from Las Vegas Nevada
that I've been in steam is up
playing and of and basketball
back to amend we've won Office
came on Monday be up for a
second again today at six
o'clock
our students are actually
student athletes the card is
five thousand one hundred hours
of community service the full
COVID shut things down.
Fifty five student athletes have
posted a full point oh GPA and
fifty five student athletes have
posted a GPA of three point nine
and better.
Just a public land grant
institution that is charged with
bringing education to the people
of New Mexico yes New Mexico
state a very valid position to
create equal opportunity for
every Mexico New Mexican to
choose how data and.
The absence of a strong local
online brand is seen.
In a few states The New Mexico
is among them.
Most of the states have a strong
online Brandt and can push back
on May mega universities that
try to come and take a students.
And are able to establish a home
court advantage connecting the
institution with employers and
the larger community at NMSU the
intention I'll see of launching
our online campus has proven to
be effective as we are currently
serving close to one thousand
seven hundred online adults that
is.
We have had a hundred eighteen
students graduate in the fall.
And we need a legislation is
supposed to continue to scale up
so that by twenty twenty seven
twenty eight we can have ten
thousand students enrolled in
this program.
Operating under the NMAA you
Brandt and miss you online our
New Mexico as we like to call it
been bring instruction to people
in remote areas without them
having to leave their families
jobs and their homes.
And with that madam chair and
members of the committee I'd
like to conclude my statement
and I want to thank you for
giving me this opportunity.
Thank you doctor so we have a
lot of people you're very
popular.
The people signed up
we're going to hear six of them
the for for a no more than two
minutes each doctor are feasible
as he if he's he's still online.
Dr entail had yes thank you
madam chair
madam chair members of the
committee I stand in rising
strong support Dr the mood of
the stali.
for a reappointment for region
of New Mexico State University
I've known doctor dentist Ali
and work closely with her for
the past four plus years and I
know she's passionate and
dedicated to the success of New
Mexico State University you have
just heard her husband have been
interest contributors to the
university not just with their
time and energy but also with
their financial resources.
And mostly about her passion for
the mission of any issue and
making it a great university
support the state
It has been I think you know as
you have heard a document called
talk about our strategic plan
and all the elements of it it's
it's rare to have someone of her
intellect to have so much
passion and interest in what we
do and to be able to contribute
and she did an excellent chair
or us provided valuable guidance
to me as we have navigated some
of the most challenging time
that inmates who has faced in
the history of our university
in the context of actually
there's a teacher thinker she's
thoughtful professional care
deeply about our students
faculty or staff our community
and she has been provided
incredibly engaged in helping
this working tirelessly in
pursuit of improving the role to
Mexico State University
supporting state in the fact
that it has
I've worked with for a lot of
termination of the diverse
viewpoints of other regions
state officials community
leaders and all that done in the
context of helping the
university be more successful
first skills a passion for the
mission students social mobility
food shelter and security and
and very strong emphasis on
champion of women's leadership
for these reasons and much of
that you've already heard a
program directly I'm delighted
to.
Stand strong support of the
approval of doctors Dolly is a
region for New Mexico State
University thank you thank you
chancellor Dr Kaylene for Cinco.
Yes.
Good morning everyone here is we
can hear yes wonderful madam
chair your vice chair members of
the committee today I rise in
strong support for the
appointment of Dr new dentist
Ali and three engine for the
state of New Mexico State
University my name is Frank and
I currently serve as the elected
African CENIC chair at NMSU.
I first met Dr Dolittle as I
have a question is in this half
off to meet with her and chair
of the board of regents so that
we can at
thank you can learn more about
the challenges in trying of the
fact that he had an issue.
I think I remember asking her
and first meeting why she wanted
to the region I'm always curious
why people the forward facing
the public service commission as
you all know this is not a R. at
sign and.
The response to this question is
very highly help a person for
value.
Regis Dolly responded that she
wanted to give back to the Las
Cruces community which given so
much to her and her family she
also mentioned how passionate
she felt that higher education
an important role to play in
creating a better life not just
for the individual attain the
degree for the people that are
then impacted by that person.
I am a first generation.
I know the tremendous positive
impact education can make I
almost.
The state to my education and
the privilege it has brought me.
I'm going to end with a quote
that I like to remind myself
from renewable peace prize
recipient Mother Teresa.
Not all of us use great thing we
can do small things with great
love.
In your role as reading at the
university she had sent over she
is a great thing and she's also
doing great thing with all the
right well for these reasons I
ride strong support for the
appointment of Dr and we get it
hello thank you.
Thank you we have a doctor tear
winter.
Dr willow everyone.
Hi everyone
madam chair Mister vice chair
and many members I stand in
support to date for the re
appointment and Dr Dennis Ali as
region is New Mexico State
University.
I had the pleasure of knowing
doctor dentist dollars in her
family for more than thirty
years her dedication to our
community has been evident today
as it was thirty years ago.
I'm just always credited for
raising millions of dollars for
our culture community non profit
New Mexico State University and
our community foundation.
It is with her leadership and
advocacy that we now have a
permanent home and are creating
a lifetime legacy of
philanthropy in southern New
Mexico.
She along with her husband Dr
Rahman does telling created the
dentist telling family
foundation and at the community
foundation in two thousand
eleven which continues to
support our education and child
hunger initiatives throughout
all of the New Mexico.
As an emeritus board member for
foundation she stands ready to
provide support and share the
importance of philanthropy and
community engagement.
She is always.
You to take a phone call a text
messages and be entered for
entire team.
Dr Ali has and we can have on
your amendment of the community
engagement for not only myself
but our entire team our board in
our community.
We are always in awe of her time
management and her current
commitment to New Mexico State
University.
She that every supporting staff
to the evidence for your staff
administration and students this
is miles a high school dedicated
to support I'm always impressed
with her abilities remember each
person's name make a connection
well understanding the
importance of relationship
building and how that is is this
a New Mexico State University
now and in the future.
It is with our connections that
we were able to support your
nose bleed and his UNM and you'd
have student body president
calling the start the rivals for
release in which students raise
funds to support my family
throughout our community.
During her four years you've
been able to ask tough questions
while working to the strategic
plan to support the overall
mission of the university out in
Mexico no matter how much time
and commitment it takes she
truly is an activity.
She is committed to listen Dr
changes and continue to connect
the land grant mission of New
Mexico State University to all
throughout New Mexico myself and
our team and our board of
directors share that our support
for her re appointment as region
New Mexico State University.
Thank you for allowing me just a
moment and share our support for
Dr Dennis Ali and her work
throughout our communities thank
you so much thank you Dr winter
region to cone right.
If you wouldn't mind you
come up and using the microphone
seven online.
Thank you madam chair committee
thank you for allowing me to
speak in support of a new
dentist all a today and and I
were appointed at the same time
four years ago and at the time
has flown in I would just
basically you you've heard about
her passion for the university
hi it's unwavering the kind of
commitment in time that she
spends at leading the university
I'd like to just say that as a
colleague on the board of
regents at New Mexico State
University she's super she's
always prepared for our meeting
so she brings us together is
four she allows us to be
separate when we need to be and
disagree when we need to be
always handled very
professionally and so hi stand
in support of a native of the
cell and I hope that you
supporters well as senator
Samantha's mentioned we are have
gone through a rocky time and so
I think her leadership the
continuity of her leadership is
very much needed at New Mexico
State University so
Proud level I'm gonna take that
hat off to help my fellow Aggie
here because she is just a
tremendous supporter of not only
New Mexico State University but
as a girl who has family agency
keep in New Mexico and could
speak from the community
perspective she is involved at
every single level within the
community of Las Cruces and
beyond and we're truly
appreciative to have her there
she is the current chairman of
the board of regents at New
Mexico State University and I
have to tell you any time there
is a situation that occurs on
that campus she immediately
calls the executive so that we
are aware of what is going on at
all levels that is something
that is not a common practice of
all of our universities but New
Mexico State University has top
notch communication with this
administration and our
legislators I also want to note
that she has had so much impact
in arts and culture and New
Mexico State University there
are many buildings because of
her support that are on campus
and some of the top our
facilities not only in the state
but in the nation when it comes
to education and support of our
students for that and many more
reasons that I will not repeat
today we are in strong support
as an administration in the
confirmation of chairwoman of
Sally thank you thank you and
and oil and with pro tem of
pavement.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair first of all I'd like to
thank the governor from let's
again appointing hello
Dallastown that was traveling up
to the board of regents New
Mexico State University I think
you've heard everything about
her that her passion for the
community of Los crucis an
impassioned.
And commitment to New Mexico
State University.
Earlier and I hope that you will
confirm thank you so much.
You.
and we did not have and and I'm
just gonna read out the names of
of the other folks who who have
signed up and I'm sorry we
didn't get to everyone
Mr Moseley has signed up Dr
sherry Coleman the associate
vice chancellor for digital
learning Dr city or more of that
PED secretary designate Leslie
serve on Dez and miss you chief
of staff to the chancellor clean
nappy interim VP for government
relations and our region
Christopher Sauceda.
and is there anyone in the
audience who would like to raise
their hand to indicate support
this country please do so.
All right anyone online he
stepped away anyone who would
like to reserve hand indicate
opposition I see none all right
questions from committee will
service Senator Stewart all of
us are Baca that Senators
phonics.
Thank you madam chair thank you
so much for wanting to continue
to do this work what your
support is pretty amazing.
I want to chat a little bit
about your background as we
don't have anybody that comes
before us who has got that Ph.D
from Moscow university in Russia
in Representative the Soviet
literature and so you have you
have a you have a BA with honors
and Russian language India you
have then it Ph.D and Soviet
literature from Moscow Russia
thank you came to the U. S. navy
start having fun in may and
print making and MFA in studio
are paid so this just file so I
guess my question is so how many
languages do you speak I speak
three Indian languages and
English and Russian.
You're my my sister took Russian
in high school just left and so
I had a few Russian were.
I bet she talked to the choice
once right.
I guess I I'm just curious as.
I was drawn learn Russian.
Thank you for that question
madam chair Senator I had an
uncle who went to Russia to get
his
degree in electrical engineering
and he came back into my head
with all of the great things
that were happening injection
particularly particularly the
hard part of it too you know
like even just a student he
could go to the ballet he could
go to the theater it was all
horrible and so I'm the youngest
of four in my family so I have
adopted an engineer a scientist
and so I was kind of out there
what can I do different and so I
decided that I would go into
linguistics and languages and
that's that's how I got
interested in Russian language
meant to go at university in New
Delhi and I was sent by the
university to get my masters
Ph.D induction.
Chair that's just so.
So.
Still keep up the rest.
Read books in Russian.
Madam chair Senator yes I do and
we have Russian friends
when I was getting my degree in
Russia we had to the read all of
the classics for the peace and
you know quite close to dawn and
all of those books in the
original that's how we would
tested but I sense so
it is a little hard to keep up
with conversational Russian if
you're not speaking at all the
time be a fortunate that we have
a few friends
that live in the bay area and we
get together every thanksgiving
and they have little children
who they have talked to speak
also ration so we get to speak
Russian at least once a year and
my husband and I can talk to
each other in Russian because he
did that to medical school and
Russian.
That.
So wonderful to have thank you
wanting to work on this are.
Thank you
Senator.
Senator Baca.
Thank you madam chair thank you
doctor.
I.
She that.
See
to it
Acting or.
Some of the things that we need
to talk about that are.
That says.
You're giving person.
That.
She that.
Or.
Sure I.
Thank you.
Spahn.
Thank you madam chair thank you
centered thing.
Probably and I appreciate our
conversation as well you were
sitting here when I and your
land you.
Or.
So I think that I appreciate
very much for the information on
the Energy programs but as he
mentioned the one thing that we
are focusing on during.
Perhaps the university's.
To further economic that you're.
I just want to reiterate needs
you'll be here next on I'm
always.
Thank you for your contributions
and let your.
Thank you madam.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino seconded.
Centers
Plus hearing this is.
I was we had our conversation I
I was very specially years can.
Full willingness discussed any
areas.
And here thank you very.
Find the latest level of the
building that.
This is
From the university.
The necessarily needed the.
Yeah.
At.
I also want to fund the aspect.
Senator.
Madam.
I gave you the.
Story.
These are two of the US.
We're gonna really have.
At one of the legend of.
Over the last year the were
closely with that.
Mexico City Mexico that.
And.
The funeral twenty four seven.
Actually this agency or.
Much that you have read of this
is all for you.
We have
the the twenty four seven three
six five.
Yeah.
So in fact the
Some of the.
And.
the very of.
Source.
issue.
Support.
Thank you sentence thank thank
you.
And I.
Your doctor a.
I can't think of of someone
better to help steer NMSC
through us
others month isn't that kind of
a rocky time and someone who has
a mind frame of the failure is
not an option
thank you so much for your
service and what is the will of
the committee.
You'll recall that.
and I also want to say I would
like to madam I accounting clerk
Amanda Lopez us is here in
support as well.
Yes of this Senator Ingle yes
Senator Ingle test for Lopez's
use kind of yes mechanic yes in
our use Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Ortiz no yes Senator Pirtle
is excuse.
Yeah yeah thank you yes it works
yes.
Your yes it is excuse.
Senator Stefano Senator sorry.
Yes.
With a vote of seven to nil
we'll see later on on the floor
thank you thank you.
I know that Senator Wirth says
is on his way over.
For our love last three of to
for today.
Mr Mero here welcome to to come
up in the meantime.
Well just give it give me a
minute or so to get here.
Our thank you madam chair I am
delighted this morning to
percent secretary Romero for
confirmation to this region
position and I think it's
fantastic that she has stepped
up yet again.
Since she just stepped down from
a very long and successful
career in state governments and
to turn around to be willing to
serve I can do is just
fantastic I was honored to carry
her confirmation to be secretary
and when we went through that
process
we had a chance to kind of talk
about her extraordinary history
and state government and I'll
just go through it's a it's a
it's an amazing career starting
back in well I go all the way
back to
you know working for child
support enforcement September
nineteen seventy seven hundred
and house of representatives
governor's office working in DFA
wearing a variety of different
hats budget division contracts
local governments state budget
division of course and
commissions director for the
governor from under governor
Richardson and then the ministry
of services bureau chief of
homeland security and emergency
management under governor
Richards and during the Martinez
administration to is an
executive budget analyst and
then
October twenty eighteen to
January twenty nineteen was
deputy director of the budget
division then under the Lujan
Grisham administration was
deputy secretary of state budget
director and then cabinet
secretary so really it is an
amazing forty years of loss of
state government experience and
someone who certainly
understands how the budget
process works and financial
issues and boy what a great
thing for University to have
someone of this caliber of
willing to step up so again I'm
super honored to be to have for
asked me to present this
confirmation and we are very
lucky to have.
The secretary I do and so with
that I yield to our secretary.
Thank you senator that good
morning madam chair and members
of the Senate rules committee I
want to thank you for the honor
appearing before you today I
would think senator Wirth for
green to sponsor me and I want
to thank governor Lujan Grisham
for her nomination to this
prestigious position.
Any of you known as senator
Wirth mentioned I've retired in
December it appears that I'm
failing at my new career as
but I madam do my cabinet
secretary confirmation hearing I
come from a long line of public
servants about that bothered my
father was state policemen
killed in the line of duty and
my mother.
This left to raise four children
retired from the state of New
Mexico.
I've come to the conclusion that
once a public servant always a
public servants I would be
remiss if I didn't acknowledge
the support of my family
especially my husband who is
here with me today.
Serving on the board of regents
would be an honor and a
privilege I started my college
career and next State University
of the family brought me back to
Santa Fe where I completed my
degree working while I was
working full time for the state
of New Mexico.
I have numerous in Los seven
nieces and nephews plus my
daughter that have graduated
from in in this you and I have
one if you that's currently a
student at MSU so you can tell I
come from a long line of Aggies.
I love and miss you in Los
crucis.
It has and will always have a
special place in my heart I have
to admit I was a little sad when
my daughter graduated in
December of twenty twenty one I
have missed my trips down south.
We are all aware that their
important matters that need to
be addressed and I'm confident
that I can make that difference
I believe that my many years of
experience most of the media
pay.
Would be an asset to the board
of regents I have direct
interactions are I've had
different director actions was
and with the institution during
my career dealing with capital
outlay the budget and many other
matters I fully understand the
importance of this institution
to the state of New Mexico and
the students it serves.
I'm not naive to believe that
the issues with group be
resolved quickly but I believe
my skills knowledge passion and
the love of the institution will
drive me to work hard to make
the necessary changes.
I envision a better NMAA you in
the near future I stand ready
for to answer any questions and
I want to thank you for this
opportunity you for your
consideration.
Thank you Secretary we have
three people signed up in
support Renee Perregaux.
You all are doing great on time
so you can take up to five
minutes okay thank you madam
chair members of the committee I
want to thank you for allowing
me to speak on behalf of Debbie
Debbie and I worked thirty plus
years together at DFA in
different positions and roles
and I could tell you from
working with her that you've got
a great nominee here for the
board of regents Debbie has a
heart to serve not only does he
have a heart to serve we kind of
laughed at the younger people
who have everything on the phone
is and I have it on paper here
with big letters in my.
But anyway
Debbie has we have many projects
together and we worked on and.
Many a governor's
Challenges but Debbie is one
person you always want on your
team she has an attitude of
whatever it takes to get the job
done she has the ability to work
with others she's a leader she
has integrity and she's at the
call and will do the right thing
she definitely also is self
aware she knows her strengths
and she knows her weaknesses and
she will do whatever it takes to
learn and become an active
member of this point.
She also focuses on others she
believes in training she
believes in giving them what
they need to to succeed whether
it's training or
The the the knowledge that she
has she believes in sharing it
at all times she gives the staff
her staff the tools to succeed.
I must also tell you that.
Working with Debbie for thirty
years I've also known her since
we were sixteen well I was sixty
two is a lot older.
C..
We've known since sixteen and a
few years later she ended up
marrying my brother Bob.
We've been family for forty plus
years
Debbie and I that is anybody
that has has are agreements and
disagreements working together
plus family but you always set
the end of the day walk out
together knowing that we have
each other's back and she will
do that with her fellow board of
regents and anybody she works
with
thank those in a couple weeks
ago you all know that Debbie
received a certificate by the
Senate's of her accomplishments
and if I could just quote them
Senator
yes he said Debbie is when a
hand to.
When I had to me she's just a
good person and if I could pull
him she is and she will do a
great job as a regent so thank
you.
Thank you Ricardo
Representative.
Tell us.
Good morning.
Ricardo madam chair members of
the committee Ricardo rel
recently retired New Mexico
State University and also a
proud NMSC graduate.
I strongly support Debbie Romero
nomination and confirmation I
have no Mr Meryl many years and
I've had the pleasure of working
with their in many positions
that she has held within the
public service sector within the
state she has many years of
experience and knowledge and
working in state government that
will be of great benefit to the
New Mexico State University of
the region.
Mr Meryl as a problem solver and
as she had mentioned earlier she
has worked with the university I
have been one of those
individuals that have worked
with Debbie and trying to get
problems resolved C. uses a
common sense approach to dealing
with difficult situations while
working within the state and
federal laws Mr Meryl is a very
approachable individual caring
responsive and is also very
dedicated and everything that
she does.
She is regarded as an individual
of absolute integrity these
qualities just mention will
greatly benefit the students
faculty and staff at New Mexico
State University.
I strongly support her
nomination and confirmation as a
region of New Mexico State
University thank you.
Thank you a personalised Center.
Sir please go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and.
It's a wonderful.
Once again I wish you could be
there in person I let me start
out by state.
Debbie is the voice of the
people right and I that's one
thing I can really articulate
about that the always keeping in
mind what's in the best interest
of the people not only the
family of the state of New
Mexico I know that the for over
thirty years of my career in the
I know you find recent
confirmation one thing working
with the state government for
over thirty five years now and
so she's an individual weapon
amended to me was always believe
people when they have only been
on the south I am one of the.
So I am extremely grateful to
her for all the to the issues
Madam most importantly in the
way that you were representative
for and I think we outlook
hardships in your life that's
what we need to be the leader
that New York State Council I
want to committee for her
efforts and not always dealt
with
of the professionalism and the
common sense approach always
really looking out for what's in
the best interest of the people
agencies that you work for so I
that in strong support of the
person who's working with her
for many years the person
believing that she is in the
state of New Mexico on the C. W.
and so I'm happy to hear that
she's not doing well in
retirement.
Tell us that we were not able to
keep her in in this in this
round Ryan I think I'm going to
follow her lead so with that
chair and members of the
committee extended strong
support Debbie Romero a recent
study first thank you for the
honor.
Thank you and mark Graham.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee mark Duran hi
Representative Senator clients
here and at the legislature I
have worked in state government
and with various officials for
some forty years this year I
want to make sure and thank
Senator Wirth for bringing
forward this nomination I have
been in front of you many times
talking about your nominees and
madam chair members of the
committee I cut
so honored today to stand in
support of this nomination of
Debbie Romero I've known her for
twenty five thirty years
when we honored her at the
legislature in the Senate just
the other day the comments were
about her being a lifelong
public service and that's
exactly what she is forty seven
years in public service and now
she's going to take on this
difficult job I want to make
sure any knowledge if I could
madam chair her husband Bob who
I'm sure Debbie has convinced
him that she will not get
immersed in this position
and and he probably nodded that
knowledge then of it knowing
that it's exactly what she's
going to do because that's just
who she is she's going to get
immersed in it and she's going
to help that grade school
speaking of that grade school
madam chair that is a great
school and I think we need to be
sending the best people to help
it along of for it to continue
to fulfill its mission I think
you're doing a wonderful thing
setting Debbie Romero to work as
a region to New Mexico State
University and again I can stand
in stronger support of the
nomination thank you madam chair
zero.
With anyone in the audience if
you'd like to raise your hand at
the K. important please do so.
Anyone online.
If an error like razor handicap
session please do so.
The non anyone on the hi
members of the committee.
We would do that.
On the funding.
And second of so it is Senator
Stewart.
Madam chair I just want to thank
you for all the work you've done
for us and founder continue if
it's not like a few other people
I know the line they think
they're retired you just see you
there.
Thank you for you are thank you.
Yeah sure I I suspect the the
lack of COVID is because we just
heard all about you're you're
amazing
those amazing work you've done
for the state on the Senate
floor just the other day I also
want to thank you for your
service and save it
other than being terrible
retiring it sounds like you're
awfully good everything else.
We have a a motion for do passes
to roll call.
Senator Bob Casey excuse Senator
Ingle yes Senator Ingle yes
Lopez's excuse Senator McKenna
yes Senator mechanic yes Senator
Morse's excuse Senator Ortiz the
payment yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle is
excuse Senators defended yeah
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator how to me six fused and
Senator to the yes with the six
does that we'll see you on the
Senate floor later on today.
All right and now we have a
House Bill three seventy seven
Representative Hernandez.
We don't need to we don't need
to.
The committee but there are a
lot of yeah and let's let's get
you on my the staff have been on
that line in the state of.
We got
of better yeah way better.
Thanks.
Representative left.
Thank you madam chair so today
I'm here to present house bill
three seventy seven which would
create a marketing department
center of excellence within the
tourism tourism department the
state of New Mexico currently
lacks a centralized marketing
strategy bureau six individual
agencies with the task of
planning executing and measuring
the success of necessary
marketing initiatives without
the expertise or infrastructure
to make them successful so often
results in a number of issues
including redundancy in
ineffectiveness inefficiency and
lack of outcome measures and
initiatives which may not meet
the goals or standards of the
agencies caring about so we
would like to create a the
marketing excellence bureau
within the marketing division of
the New Mexico tourism
department to serve as a setting
centralized collection of
marketing focused expertise
knowledge and resources to
support the program goes of the
executive branch agencies which
will provide guidance
information support training
strategy alignment develop
efficiencies and overall assist
the agencies
I do have two experts with me
Jason Espinoza from New Mexico
broadcasters and tourism
department secretary Gen
Schreier.
Is would like to say anything.
madam madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza with
the New Mexico broadcasters
Association
are are involved in the came out
good our involvement in this
bill came out of a conversation
with the governor's office you
know we work with agencies and
and a lot of our rural radio
stations and broadcast TV
stations and one of things that
we noticed our conversations
that the current existing
structure marketing is really
fragmented so for example in the
department of health yet
different grant managers want to
grant manager for tobacco
cessation another grant manager
for D. Y. and they're actually
handling the marketing for those
programs and so you know looking
at creating this marking an axle
as per really just it's a
centralized place where they can
get assistance and support so
that we can increase are the
effectiveness of marketing
campaigns around the state.
Madam chair members of the
committee action Trier secretary
of tourism really grateful that
this was propose this is been
something that's been talked
about for decades just the need
of having a center of excellence
where several agencies can tap
into when they're trying to move
the needle
We're really grateful that we
have a legislature that is
providing enough funding for
programs to be successful but
sometimes the communities out
across the state don't know
about those programs and so what
we learned through COVID is
There was a huge need to have
the expertise of marketing and
several different agencies and
so the tourism department was
actually tasked and brought in
to run several different
marketing campaigns to support
the crisis communication over
the course those couple years so
that included with the O. H. the
testing and tracing the vaccine
it also included when we got
additional federal funding and
we need to get the word out
about business recovery programs
so I worked with the EDD a New
Mexico finance authority to be
able to execute those programs
and so it wasn't just the
programmatic part of
administering it was to make
sure that New Mexicans knew that
these resources were available
to them and to get them more
resources to to really get
through that time and so now
we're back at doing tourism
which is obviously my passion
but we know that this could be
really helpful for other state
agencies and that's why stand in
support today.
and before going to questions I
do just want to make sure and we
had an amendment on the house
floor that this just to specify
that this is a can use not a
must use so this is here if they
want to use it but they are no
department as required by any
means to use it so with that
madam chair and committee we
stand for questions.
Thank you we have people signed
up in support on this bill no
opposition Jason Weaks.
Madam chair members the
committee G. Sweetser this from
the Mexico hospitality
association we stand strong
support of this I think it's a
really good idea if you are a
private entity in order to
marketing to hire marketing for
and the entity in the state and
state government has marketing
experience is the tourism
department they've demonstrated
that within Mexico true branding
success as well as with the
vaccine in in pandemic of
marketing that they did to
proliferate that that
registration which ultimately
ended up being one of the best
registration sites I think you
need nationally and that was in
large part due to the marketing
efforts from secretary Schardin
her department this is a great
idea because it allows
centralized marketing to occur
if agencies choose to do it they
will be more efficient more
effective in getting their
message out which will
ultimately improve the quality
of their interaction with the
constituency in the delivery of
those services thank you.
Great thank you and that Chelsea
Canada.
So so so that should have.
All right questions from the
committee search using the NM.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
To see you as well.
I I'm I'm a little confused of
the session to corporation is
that.
Just.
I'm Madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino the The New Mexico that
corporation is the New Mexico
partnership so there the lead
marketing entity that was
created by the state to do
marketing for economic
development purposes.
So what would be the measure.
What's the relationship between.
That corporation and this
bureau.
Hi madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino but we included in the
definition of executive agencies
so that they would have the
ability to access the services
as well so that's all it does is
thing about.
For all of.
I really.
That that is.
The expropriation Hey
we're saying is.
Would be able to provide service
to that if they requested as
the.
Madam chair Senator yes.
and if you really need are
created.
Madam chair members of the
committee it is my understanding
that yes the executive has the
authority to to do some things
but we need we need to bureau
and enabling legislation because
our current statute is has a
mission of doing tourism
specifically and so this would
give us the enabling statute to
be able to expand that to
support other agencies.
Thank you.
Thank you other members of the
committee.
I see I was looking at that
section two as well
Representative and I didn't even
notice the whole.
Alright liability thing
I have I understand that's
existing language and.
I am very tempted to a
restriction on Federal principal
but I will.
I will refrain because I I think
I would need a little more
understand why that language was
put in there in the first place
and and what impact that would
have so I will restrain myself
but I just want to want to make
clear because the the language
that that you have here.
In section two you know says.
And that's that that exists in
language from there on the
statute corporation can't be
part of state government are
state agencies
thanks for the purposes of these
very specific things related to
personnel procurement of goods
and services press receipts tax
disposition or acquisition of
property capital outlays are
pretty amendment and per diem
and mileage so I just want to
make sure that.
In the as part of receiving
marketing services so the year
making it part of the executive
branch agency for the purposes
of receiving marketing services
from the tourism department
that's I just want to.
Make sure the other that's not
going to pick any procurement
the or anything none of that out
everything except for what was
underlined on the bottom of page
two is existing language we just
added in that sense of the if
they wanted to take advantage of
this beer that can everything
else we didn't touch a word okay
okay but what I want to make
sure of is that in receiving
marketing services that would
not include any procurement of
goods and services madam chair
that is correct okay okay.
Right
Further discussion on the
committee yes other than it
breaking my heart we are hi I'm
reading something that is
granting immunity from liability
for tort go stricken
we might we will come back and
look at that.
Madam chair when you're ready
for that let me know what that
will do it together all right
I'll hold you to it let's do a
roll call vote.
Senator Bob Casey Senator Ingle
yes Senator Ingle yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris is excuse Senator
Ortiz yes Senator Ortiz appeared
yes Senator Pirtle was excuse
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes and two for.
Yes I'd like to explain more
about.
Mr Stewart yes Senator had a
meal yes Senator having you yes
and senator do the yes you have
that eight now a Senator to
explain her vote I'm going for
this because you thoroughly got
them all that interesting the
working with.
Late for all of us thirty
depends on the area of the.
Thank you Representative that is
all the bills before us today
just so folks know on Friday it
we're gonna do some more
confirmations were also going to
going to have a couple bills
bring it to a couple bills on
Friday as well.
This chart eight thirty on
Friday.
I don't think people.
This body was you're not.
You know and I and I I announce
on the floor that it was a
thirty but but here I need to I
will make it a point to make
sure that I if we're changing
start times I will reach out to
to members directly and make
sure that that there are made
aware.
Thank.
Right right.
So we will be we have a floor
session on Sunday we will be
meeting Sunday morning to do
some more confirmation to
hopefully finish up I think most
of the confirmations then.
On.
yeah not eight thirty on Sunday
morning I I don't hate myself
that much.
So yeah so hopefully I'm not
will start either at nine thirty
or ten on Sunday morning I'll
let you all now.
We have floor we just need to
be.
Education.
That's why there on set there on
Saturday which is why we're not
meeting on Saturday.
Morning.
If we have a leader floor
session on Sunday we will start
later absolutely.
Yeah that we should count for
something yes.
Our book.
Yes.
The
weekend is this week's at that
and you're on.
I like to work for them.
It is all right with with with
that rules is in recess.
