That
one of the first item on the
agenda which is hearing from our
concrete Beverly Allen as the
New Mexico state land trust
advisory board and centers kind
of thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee and it
gives me great pleasure today to
be able to introduce Beverly
Alan to you and she has been
nominated are.
Ointment for the New Mexico
state land trust advisory board
and I know we're going to hear a
little bit about that today but
let me tell you about Beverly
enough no more freely for over
thirteen years she comes from
mine areas she's from Carlsbad
currently she's the community
affairs representative for
chevron's mid continent business
unit and is held that position
since September of twenty
nineteen based out of Carlsbad
and Hobbs we climber in both
places and she's responsible for
managing community and
stakeholder relations social
investment in communications for
chevron's operations in the
Permian assets in New Mexico
before joining chevron there
really was the field
representative for United States
senator Tom Udall for almost ten
years covering southeast New
Mexico Chavis Eddie Lee counties
in our portfolio included mining
and energy transportation
education behavioral health and
agriculture she worked with
numerous federal and state
agencies and constituent
services she currently serves on
the con alma health foundation
community advisory committee
that addresses health
disparities around New Mexico
she was nominated as chevron's
diversity and inclusion co
advisor for the Permian basin
and she also serves on the
street teaching of that Permian
strategic partnership education
workforce committees in any
county Beverly is on the
Carlsbad department of
development board in the
Carlsbad chamber of commerce
government relations committee
she also serves a Lee County
economic development energy
committee.
It really received at bachelor's
degree in political science in
anthropology from eastern New
Mexico university in Portales
inner master's degree in social
justice and intercultural
relations from the school for
international training in
Vermont Beverly is a proud
Mexican.
She was born in Carlsbad in
their grew up all over New
Mexico the United States and
overseas she returned home to
New Mexico in two thousand five
GS three amazing teenagers who
are attending school in Carlsbad
I just want to tell one personal
story about Beverly in we we
show up at a lot of the same
things and have for many years
and she was in Hobbs number of
years ago when we were at and.
At a meeting of all the local
immigrants in our community to
we're sharing some of the
challenges of of what they had
to do or in Beverly.
I was listening in Beverly was
listening and I looked over in
in tears were streaming down
Beverly spaces and I thought
there really has such compassion
for all people in her work
throughout southeast New Mexico
has had a huge impact not just
as a representative senator
Udall that was a very important
thing she did not just in the
Energy community which is very
important issue no not only to
our area of the to the state
that there really just loves
people and cares about people
and I know what she service on
this board all the things that
she deaths will be reflected in
that worker loving care for New
Mexico and for the people of New
Mexico with that I think we'll
let our I think just a few words
and then go from there.
One of your I'm sorry.
This week please.
Thank you senator good morning
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Beverly
Allen
of.
I'm honored to be nominated and
served in the extractive
industries will for the state
trust land advisory board by
commissioner Garcia thank you
and I want to think center
Kernan for bringing my
nomination forward I just want
to emphasize I'm very proud New
Mexicans from southeastern
Mexico also have some roots in
Grant County was there for six
years lived all over but yeah
this is where my roots are I
have a love for education my
kids are in the schools I'm not
I really a strong supporter of
public schools and
I think I could do the job in
this role very proud of
to be part of this and to be
nominated and I think that's all
I have to see them open for
questions thank you thank you so
much before the questions we do
have somebody who signed up to
speak on your behalf okay so we
have this the very here purpose
if you could come up even though
I said your name once again
stating that yes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Missy Currier and I also live
in Carlsbad and spend a lot of
time and throughout southeastern
New Mexico I have known Mr Allen
for many years both
professionally and as a friend
and her passion and heart for
the community and all of New
Mexico is evident and all she
does she's very knowledgeable
and what she achieves and she
works very hard to not only say
yes to everything but do so
strategically very important to
her that she finds ways to work
across the board and provide
opportunities for folks to come
together on all sides of the
aisle and all with different
interests to continue to move
New Mexico forward she's great
and all she does she's a
wonderful friend she's a
wonderful mom and she'll be
wonderful on this board and we
really appreciate your
consideration thank you.
So much miss now by a show of
hands of the audience is there
anybody here in support of the
column.
Perfect thank you what about on
line is there anybody in
support.
Back to the room anyone in
opposition of the country.
They were not a lot of one of
that will go to questions and
comments the committee and I'll
start with Senator fax.
Thank you Mr chair and I'd like
to recognize and State Land
your.
Thank.
thank you senator.
It is.
End of miss out on the economy
the.
some of your the.
Senator I think some of our
duties are going to be to advise
the commissioner
it when she asked for
Our our according to our role on
the committee I know well the
the mom part of it and all use
that that influence to to help
support her and answer questions
but I will be extracted industry
Representative and I will help
advise heard in together any
questions I'm guessing this is
going to be you know about the
state land money and how it's
used in any questions like that.
Mr chair and down into the.
Mr chair Senator the board meets
three times a year by zoom.
So that makes it.
Well thank you for offering uses
now our state we appreciate that
and we'll rating.
The.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
the people thank you Mr chairman
Senator Kernan thank three.
Ellen and and.
Really interested in hearing
what the.
your master's in social justice
your cultural relations was was
that about and and and.
How did you come to do that with
that and and what have you have
you used it since you got it
sure Mr chair and senator I use
it every day I my first year of
high school I lived in South
Africa during apartheid and that
impacted the rest of my life
So not the masters is also just
in our culture relations is just
about like how we treat each
other and making sure the voices
are heard from both sides all
parties a lot of conflict
conflict resolutions the an
independent thinker and it's
just about of learning to the
now let's make sure that all
sides are heard and everything
is looked at but I use my social
justice background every single
day.
And especially my job believe it
or not been willing yes I I do
and and Mr chairman and and sell
and I would think that that'll
come in really handy and being
in the role of being an advisor
on the land from.
But I'm also curious about phone
number will you continue are you
still involved with going online
is that something that you'll be
able.
Mr chair Senator yes right now
currently of the content of the
board is looking at every doing
some of the term limits I've
been on it a long time I worked
with to the Trujillo of as of
four eighty and then now I'm on
the committee action committee I
think I bring a great voice
about to health issues and
health disparities in southeast
New Mexico so not a lot of
people from southeast New Mexico
and want to be on this board we
have some from Russell up but
I would like to be as long as I
can a bit on it but we'll see
what the term limits going to
be.
Well I think I'm not sure
exactly sure what we would do it
by re.
Analysts by is the the
commissioner on that I think
will bring a dimension is really
valuable whatever that yes
really like your background and
your attitude.
Member of the thank you senator.
Any further questions.
What we do passes for we but I
doesn't tell you was impressed
reading your resume as well the
the comments Representative kind
it shows me that your service to
be here going to roll up your
sleeves and working.
So there's been a motion for the
past thirty years I need help
with that will roll call of.
Senator Ingle and Senator Lopez
Archie's.
K. yes Senator Wirth.
Senator Ortiz yes.
Ortiz yes it is yeah.
Yes.
And I yes.
Yes.
Yes I like to.
Yes
yes.
Mr chairman I I.
A lot of things that I trusted
her so much that whatever he
says I can read.
Remember that.
Graduations Beverly will be
seeing you later on the Senate
floor this morning the
relationship.
Heather Miller the country to
the New Mexico state lab trusted
by the board joining her this
morning is our Senate sponsor
senator Byrd good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the.
Committee thank you for having
us here today would like to
present to the committee and
other Miller.
is vying for the position on the
New Mexico state land trust
advisory board as well
The lives in my District and and
works in my district she is
quite the educator not only from
public education but has really
gone into special ed
over the last several years
and she works at the New Mexico
school for blind visually
impaired
she is has a masters of our
special education doctor of
education masters of science
special education graduate
certificate in teaching students
with autism bachelor of science
in general and special education
she is the special education
director at the school
presently overseas multiple
items there and in her free
time.
She has the our hotel so she has
been doing that for several
years and she she started out
those small with a couple of
acres and grew up to I think
about twenty five was the the
total land package and San Juan
one cattle horses on that and
had to deal with the land issues
as well so it's it's it's I
think it's a great diversion
from our day to day work but she
is looking forward to the
opportunity to work with the
land trust advisory board and if
I may Mr chairman turned over to
I have the for the any
additional comments that she may
have.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members I would just like to add
you know I ended in New Mexico
ended up in New Mexico because
my parents they were both in the
Air Force and they were
stationed in Alamogordo and I
was born there on on home
airforce base shortly before
they quit having babies are and
then.
and they chose a state New
Mexico because it is such a
beautiful state and melting pot
of amazing cultures and the I
can't express enough my love for
the state and how honored I am
for the opportunity to serve in
any capacity in the process sees
and growth that support the
state and I just want to say
thank you guys for your time
this morning and thank you to
senator Byrd for sitting here
with me representing me just as
Mr chairman if I made a point of
clarification recently babies at
Holloman Air Force base.
Downtown because.
We have a very special.
Cooperative agreement with.
With the the champion regional
Medical Center so the docks come
down to all the service and
everything in general champion
so that you don't have that huge
investment on base they have a
beautiful new clinic on base but
they do the heavy lifting
downtown so.
I just want to clarify that.
There wasn't anybody who signed
up in opposition but just if I
can see by show of hands and
support this covering.
Is there anyone outlined in
support of this coming.
Anyone in the room in opposition
of the country.
What about on the.
Not able to go to the committee
starting with Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Byrd.
yes
your statement in your packet
and
S. and lady
For the.
So the New Mexico school for the
blind or visually impaired is
significantly funded by a land
trust monies and so as a
beneficiary I would have the
opportunity to share with the
board how we use those monies
how they affect us different
kinds of things like that.
And
Your personal.
Your I'm reading we were.
When you're older we the.
Four so even though I am past
our a ninety year.
So my understanding of my role
is to serve in as an advisor in
the position I'm I don't want to
restate what I just said I guess
that basically kind of sums it
up as a beneficiary my role is
to come to the board meetings
and speak about how we use the
money how the money benefits us
what would happen if we lost our
land grant money that we receive
and just kind of speak for the
area in general and the impact
that we have in to speak about
what the school does for the
state as well of those monies.
Chair Miller and senator out
thank you.
Three hundred.
I appreciate all the nitty.
Higher education.
A lot.
Thank you for trying to use our
RTC kind of superintendent
rejected asked to make companies
out of the way.
Oh okay the superintendent you
signed up would you like state
few words before I go on centers
to be sure.
And then once again if you could
state your date for the.
Good morning my name is Patricia
Beecher good morning chair
Senators
I am the superintendent of the
New Mexico school for the blind
and visually impaired and I am
here in support of doctor Miller
she is she has been working for
the New Mexico school for the
blind visually impaired for
several years I've known her in
the capacity of a special
education teacher where she
taught our most important little
girl vulnerable students our
students with multiple
disabilities and vision
impairments and now she's
especially director and she's my
go to person for the law and for
IEP process sees.
She is passionate about our
students she's passionate about
our state and I think she would
be an excellent addition to the
board thank you.
Thank you so much Senator to the
piano and if we have questions
the board of commissioners go
free if you'd like to that is
the.
That are to the people thank you
Mr chairman well that was
actually my first question so
it's the land commissioner who
suggests these approach nominate
sees of the hi from committee
and then the Senate has to
confirm them as works.
Thank you senator Mr chairman
hello everyone I'm Stephanie
Garcia Richard yes it's just a
very very briefly you remember
that the State Land Office
exists to benefit twenty to
named beneficiaries okay the
state land advisory board is set
in statute it is a seven member
board that has particular a
particular composition that the
legislature designated for it so
it has to be even in a political
composition it has to be
geographically diverse from
throughout the state and it has
particularly representatives on
it so there is one extractive
Representative so that is going
to be miss Allen should she be
confirmed today there's one of
after collateral representative
that was Paula Garcia that you
all confirmed last session there
is one conservation
Representative that is a joint
approve Cup that you all
confirm last session and then
there are two beneficiary
members essentially they are
folks that in some way are
connected with one of our twenty
to named beneficiaries so doctor
Miller would be one of those
with her connection to the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired and then we
have a colonel west is
associated with New Mexico
military institute which you all
confirmed last time around and
then we have to at large
members.
Thank you that a great deal and
I I just want to say.
Your name some great ones the
new value suggests some great
ones and very impressive
credentials and background and I
think you're going to get a
great diversity of of the
viewpoints of thank you the
commissioner and thank you
senator Byrd for for bringing
doctor Miller to our attention.
Thank you secretary any other
comments or questions Senator
Stewart followed by Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman
right background hi I have a lot
of other things and I would we
would you rather
this.
For those education department
at PED.
That all listed.
Thank you for being willing.
And this is for some of.
so it's so livestock boarding
facility so I mostly have forces
but I've also forty thousand
gallons but folks who want to
have horses but don't have the
ability to on the lands they
keep them with me.
So it's not you're not Dr.
Of course our medical facilities
like that our our bases.
Yes.
It's just a were sold to a lot
of our hospital.
It was like.
If I lived in the rural area of
New Mexico I would.
Right.
Something that.
I know it's a lot of.
Is
on it.
I I don't really know during the
for.
So we we heard the outlines of
the plan.
So if you could give us a flavor
for you know what kind of
decision by sending it you just
change your mind about.
Loading you know more funding
for your this year is on
absolutely Mr chairman and
senator so essentially the board
like we said meets three times a
year one of those times is
actually the meeting is lined
out in statute it says that that
this board has to hear from our
twenty to named beneficiaries
and how the money that they
receive from State Land of
actually affects their their
mission and their programs and
so those are always tremendous
meetings that we get to have
with our beneficiaries but
essentially most of the time
what we do is a financial report
we do an operational report all
of our division heads are
assistant commissioners the will
give a report out to this board
if there's a particular item
that we're working on for
example we just passed our
cultural properties protection
rule that affects a particular
area we can hear both advisement
and advice from the board on how
will affect each of their
industry any recommendations
they have for public outreach
that we may have and then they
act sort of as emissaries back
to their communities four of the
work we're we're doing and also
needs and challenges that come
up in the communities that they
represent so
it is informal because the board
of.
Doesn't necessarily I mean other
than voting for they have
officers the past open meetings
act the past minutes that passed
the agenda they they don't have
any formal role in other than.
In oversight.
That's so.
Mr chairman and madam
commissioner.
So you said that there were two
members of the board that were
part of the twenty.
So our public schools
Representative.
Although Mr Miller certainly
would be a great Representative.
But I have is eighty percent of
the money goes directly K. well.
Yeah and and Mr chairman and and
Senator we actually.
In a prior version of this board
when I first came on at the land
office we actually had a
superintendent of schools Dr
Anthony casados who was the
Chama school district
superintendent was our was our
Representative so we have had a
public school Representative so
we do when we hear from the
beneficiaries we invite the
school board association the.
Of you know
yes and forgetting all my
acronyms now Mr chairman but.
Superintendents association we
invite the school board
association we invite A. S. T.
NEA all of those folks we even
have a representative from PED
all come and talk to us about
the impact of these monies on
their operations they'll show up
then Mr Chairman yes they do.
Okay well thank you thank you
for answering my questions thank
you Mr Miller for willing to
thank you for being a special
education teacher that's what I.
Thank you Mr chairman you all
would like an invite to the next
advisory board we would be
certainly happy to send that out
to committee members thank you
for that.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you.
We're.
Over
the years of our
Hi to.
So part of the.
Learn something.
Very very.
Right
I'm here is that that chairman
Senator Dr your.
Marvel at all the education.
Did you get your.
Right.
Senator yes they were at all
different institutions I did get
my bachelors here UNM which was
a wonderful experience and I
very much enjoyed living up in
the northern part of the state
for.
having activities and things to
do but yes and then one of my
masters was from Walden
university my doctors from
northcentral university my admin
certification came through
southwest university here in New
Mexico so I just kind of been
and my last one my sort of my
second master's degree and
certification as a teacher of
the visually impaired came
through arsons for northern
Colorado university.
It
one of the.
That is really more.
So much responsibility getting.
On that.
Thank you that use that data and
for the questions.
That would you have so we did
lose quorum.
Just a quick comment I think
educators on the work we because
I myself of a former educator at
so we learned how to work with
different personalities right we
try to bring the best out of it.
Three people together is what I
see the patient I I'd like to be
with you offline we are the
county wants to do a **** I hope
first of all terrible.
Yet you for hunters were coming
okay have a really bad centers
as part of the New Mexico State
University extension office
would be eighty four hundred of
the house of.
We live at the office I.
Legislative action out of these
don't have a quorum will we get
someone back in the rules and
for the most.
Okay we're going to see if
there's anybody out of the
house.
Thank.
Mr chairman of the Senator
Pirtle still nursing is injury
from the game also.
Yeah he was.
He was always because risks.
Yeah about two minutes into the
game.
But this is actually is right
right so but the shooting is.
For.
With the with.
The doctor Miller we're gonna
what would we but I want to hear
from the next conservation
district can just hang tight.
So with that I'm that I'm gonna
ask that Mr way in the board I
didn't come forward with Senator
family.
Almighty sized.
That's that last name again
Senator.
In order to.
Good morning.
I.
Okay.
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee it's my pleasure
to present my in New grew and
she and I have worked together
extensively these past few years
on community solar and she has
been very instrumental and
working with the all the tribal
communities to the all India
Public Council which I know has
a different name and I still
stick with the old name for
guess I'm off slow learner.
But
she is moving on to assist all
the different tribes in setting
up solar community projects and
so if you look at her resume she
has a very interesting
Education and she's had the
opportunity to study at Oxford
and you might want to ask her
about how she got there and what
she's doing but besides the
sovereign energy of that she has
now formed as a five oh one two
three she's the executive
director and founder.
You work for both solar and
Representative in the west not
just New Mexico affordable solar
vote solar grid alternatives
it's cetera so her work with
indigenous issues and the
tribe's this going to bring a
unique perspective to her role
on this board and again at the
state land commissioner has made
disappointment and I'm very
excited this money he's going to
have this opportunity so mind
you would you like to make a few
say a few words sure glad to
help us good morning chairman
and honorable members of the
committee honor to be here today
and appointees for the public at
large position by commissioners
Stephanie Garcia Richard
you're ready heard about some of
my background I'm also tribal
member of Santa Domingo pueblo
I believe that my experience
working with tribal nations and
directly with tribal leadership
will help that serve as an asset
to this board as well as my
background with renewable energy
across the west in the different
concerns that come with that
especially with citing you know
large infrastructure expansion
which were already seeing some
discussions around it you know
within the passport and broader
conversations and I believe that
my identity as a tribal member
will help inform you know my
opinion for and Representative a
lot of native issues in
indigenous communities also you
know the necessity to work with
tribal leadership in our
sovereign governments here you
know and have some cross
collaboration and discussion is
fair
especially you know looking at
the work of the state land
office and the cultural
resources office and a lot of
the you know really I think
innovative conversations and
that are happening within that
space
I also serve you know within
different nonprofit boards which
I'd be happy to detail on the
chair of the Albuquerque energy
council is serve on this to stay
renewable.
Task Force Advisory Council and
recognize the importance of the
State Land Office within New
Mexico as conversations have
details for the beneficiaries in
the broader state so thank you
for your time today.
Thank you so much so I didn't
have anybody who signed up for
it is there anybody in the room
with a show of hands.
The that and what about online.
At the which we take comments
from those who signed up twenty
four hours in advance but we did
take note that you're in support
is there anybody in the room in
opposition.
What about online.
With that I'll go to the members
of the committee for questions
and comments Boston office
center or to the people.
Thank you Mr chairman thank.
Thank you.
Interested in being on the line.
are you members of the tribal
nation you have we.
Mr chairman and senator I'm from
Santo Domingo peublo yes of the
reason I I think.
Your.
Is and the reserve fund for.
Senator.
The use of facial.
And that way to.
This is on the you just solar.
All sorts of renewable energy.
Just a few years ago this.
Or.
The.
That money is you were
commissioner on.
There is a.
The elegy Liz's on.
With me.
Right.
Senator lectures.
I.
Track your.
The hydrothermal.
The the the the the the.
Problems.
That was emissions of of the.
Lows in the.
The.
Or I I.
Four hours today availability
five three sixty five days a
year.
Yes over the.
More.
So just for the the.
The.
The.
The rules are.
As you would you like to use or
no.
You.
This legislation.
The very first.
The violations of.
Thank.
Thank you Senator McKenna.
Thank.
We'll see.
I first got to know.
All.
And.
Two very many.
That we have.
So.
Your presentation.
I.
Here the.
your time.
A.
Or.
Year over year.
I know you just.
progress but.
Hi
Press.
Log on.
They are and.
Serve others the last that any
of us have.
So it was hard we.
And the.
this.
A lot.
The shares.
How.
Others.
On
this.
Mr chairman and senator happy to
detail more of that and I know
there was mentioned earlier how
I ended up there I too was
wondering how I was the only
native New Mexico located in
Oxford with all of these quirks
in nice sitting in front of me
and not to use but you know
while I was there I had the
blessing of being engaged in
conversations with people from
all over the world and we really
you know honed into a lot of the
power dynamics across the globe
the global north in the global
south you know how
accountability pieces into that
and you know how developing
nations haven't fully been able
to take advantage of you know
develop the benefits of
developing rows developed
nations you know already so
beyond this curve and you know
strong educator is but it did
look to the west of you know our
leadership you know that once we
make commitments than you know
that will many powerful players
across the world will follow
and you don't really just I
think brought talking about
discussions of such a macro
level really allows me to apply
and micro level as well with the
New Mexico you know all the
different politics and played
the different communities you
know how to get representation
across the board and engage in
the really hard discussions
which a lot of the time we did
it find solutions to but I think
at least bringing them up was
really informative you know to
help me pursue this work.
Karen.
For the concert.
Mr Chairman I'm also hearing.
Background.
Right.
This year maybe Dawn.
That right yes.
This is a.
She was following injuries are
going to be thank.
I need to stop.
What you need to talk about.
All right at number five.
I just don't have any questions
and so first of the new
argument self neglect willing to
do that and also you should be
on track to do other things in
New Mexico.
Right resume.
State here.
The state.
Thank you senator and I was also
impressed at the spice to have
data Representative
Representative that the.
And so the native Americans as a
receipt at the table to talk
about lands because they're
still connected to them.
That's not the class of kids we
get lows and that he could be in
the center so happy to see that
you're gonna be on the sport and
be a voice for our native
brothers and sisters with that
do our eight year motion.
Motion for two passed by Senator
Stewart and a second grader to
the piano unfortunately right
now we can't vote seven have you
wait in place until we have a
quorum but I was very happy to
read your resumes and you pay
for so we'll be voting once we
get one more Senator in the.
Thank you.
Just.
I'm not going to move on to Mr
right then and Birmingham is
appointed to the eastern New
Mexico university board of
regents at seven hundred at it's
here so coach good to see you
again.
Services good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee Madam pro tempore
Appreciate you allowing us to
present coach Birmingham this
morning
Raymond Joseph Birmingham junior
is that the seeking to become a
regent on the board of regents
at eastern New Mexico university
I wish we had about three hours
to talk about him but I know we
don't so I'm gonna hit the high
points I am going to start with
his tagline which is I love
baseball and I love kids and I
can attest to that because I
kind of feel like I want his
kids because I see him often in
our business park and he lives
in the neighborhood in the
constantly kind of puts me in a
headlock and gives me advice and
and he called me at two in the
morning and two in the afternoon
and I'm sure he does that with
many of you as well but the
reason he does that Mr chairman
members of the committee is
because he does love baseball
and he does love kids and he
does love New Mexico we are
incredibly fortunate to have
this kind and loving New
Mexicans who has had a storied
career in New Mexico and really
across the country with regard
to baseball in his time as a
professor and his time is is
just a community leader and
chose to come right back into
service when he was called upon
to do this from seven at to
present he was the chief
executive officer of local
baseball at the university of
New Mexico in the lead any
number of students not just on
the field but also let them in a
direction in their lives Mr
president I Mr chairman and
madam president and all of the
members of the committee and I
have to say that we're like I
said incredibly lucky to have
this individual wanted to serve
again from eighty seven eighty
nine he was a coach and and and
and intense public relations at
the call to the southwest and
from eighty nine to all seven he
was also a coach and professor
in New Mexico junior college he
comes to us with the master of
education degree from the
college of the southwest a BA in
journalism which was news to me
I thought I knew him pretty well
but but he he's got a journalism
degree from New Mexico state a a
for New Mexico junior college
and he did graduate from a when
I was one years of one year old
from Hobbs high school it's.
Why I say that lovingly loving
that.
The state lovingly.
School.
He really is a remarkable New
Mexicans I could go over what I
have as a list of about forty
three awards designations and
and with you but I will tell you
that they're all very impressive
and they tell the story of who
this person is but I really
think they only scratch the
surface of who this nominee is
terms professional references I
could go over that list and you
would know almost all of them
members of the committee so with
that I'm just going to say just
a few words of encouragement to
all of us hi I'm honored to be
here I wanted to to to help
again and again and again and
again.
And the big deal.
It's a big deal and I take the
responsibility to our thank you
for having me.
Thank you so much now we did
have one percent I believe set
up in support.
Right.
So it was actually separate
again but wanted to say
something on your behalf which
is that if you she's also have
high school graduates entry
later nature okay at James
Johnson of the NM you if your
online or here he's percent come
up that once again if you could
just state your name for the
record thank you.
Thank you James Johnson chance
are the eastern New Mexico
university system is my great
pleasure on behalf of the system
to support the appointment of Mr
Birmingham to our board of
regents of being relatively new
to the state of New Mexico the
first thing I learned about Mr
Birmingham is a legendary
coaching career and really
impressed with the work that
he's done with so many of our
student athletes over over that
career I'm also equally
impressed with his commitment to
education and the educational
process he has that same
commitment to student excellence
into seeing the students cross
the the finish line that lend
themselves well to our mission
in the in in your system.
I'll also say that with the such
a distinguished career we never
know the and the the breadth of
the reach of a career so well
spent but I can tell you that
one of his students continues to
lead a very successful career
she is currently serving as the
First Lady of the in in you my
wife Stephanie may feel class of
nineteen eighty two so
again we ask for your support of
the appointment of Mr Birmingham
thank you.
So much and not just by a show
of hands is there anyone else in
the room in support of this
country.
Right thank you so much Mr chair
one online anyone in the room in
opposition of the country.
The number of what.
A lot of light will that go to
questions and comments from
committee starting to Senator or
to the people.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator but the of for
sponsoring coach Birmingham
Not only has a three.
Invigorated UNM baseball
bring it back to life after the
sensually become dormant for
many years but he's rebuilt the
stadium I mean almost single
handedly he did the whole of
fund raising and.
Although twisting and arm
twisting of legislators and
whatever it took mines just
recovering yes yes.
And I I I can't think of
somebody who would be the better
suited to being a region it that
at the end and you just because
of his incredible data.
The young people and to and to
excellence so thank you senator
for bring it forward and
That's all I have I just I've
I've what I say is name on the
list as a what is a great
selection.
Any other questions or comments.
Here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you so.
For years I don't really need
put in your resume is supposed.
Yes Sir we want yes Sir we did
thank you senator.
And one of the.
I.
Thousand four.
We had no injuries.
Eight of one.
One of the pieces that no wait a
minute we do that Mr more
Senator Moores did injure
somebody driving away.
What driving the lane.
Well anyway I want to just
remember back before that that
time I didn't know you
we're getting.
We're.
What we will do is that are at
our university eight point of
that is with the.
To.
The.
We should strive to.
Sample of not only did you do
that.
Is that a week is search local
to.
So I hope you this is the
legislative intelligences.
There.
Thank Senator looks a little bit
better act fast about it so that
seconded where to the you know
if I can have a roll call vote.
By Senator Ingle and Senator
Lopez are you.
Yes or.
Senator Ortiz yes or yes or yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes yeah.
And with six you have a to pass
we'll see you on the floor and
then before you leave it as
senator we can vote on the other
two that we've heard from.
We had a motion and a second for
the do password Dr heather
Miller if I can have a roll call
for that both.
Just because then you can gain
access through the through that
statute but I haven't been able
to find anybody that knew that
for sure I am going to next
hunting season for the state
land you can hunt I'm a go hunt
quail and see if I can.
To get a little closer look.
Thank you just a quick comment I
read about this of the New
Mexico and about seven months
ago so thank you for bringing
this forward and Senator Stewart
have a motion for the past I
hear second.
The second I can get a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca and Senator Ingle
excuse Senator Lopez.
Hello this Senator McKenna yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator more
the ethics.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is excuse.
Senator perfect yes Senator yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes Mr Stewart yes and senator
how to me yes center how can you
yes you have six yes and I got
to do have senator six zero.
Thank you to move on to set up a
memorial sixty four supporting
Ukraine Senator McKenna.
Okay.
thank you chairman thank you
committee members SM sixty four.
There are five of us who are.
Top five Sanchez and then we
have a good amount of our
chamber have respond to have
supported this I first decided
to pursue a memorial for the
legend of for the Senate because
of meeting you crane Americans
in New Mexico.
It was shortly after the
invasion by the Russians.
That I realize there are so many
Ukrainians living in New Mexico
and I decided I would like to do
something besides.
Besides helping them financially
and the like
this isn't the first time that
Ukraine has been under siege.
in nineteen thirty two.
The Ukrainians.
Experienced a famine under
Joseph Stalin
we're in many many starved
there's some heart wrenching.
Heart wrenching history about
what happened
And.
Where are I cannot tell how how
long this conflict this war is
going to last.
I I do maintain that those of us
who.
Who believe in democracy.
Need to stand for them and stand
tall.
And I I have heard that there's
some folks that are sensitive
to.
Are supporting Ukraine and I
think the president of Ukraine
said it said it best when he.
Address Congress.
Helping them financially and
with weapons.
Is a investment in democracy.
And with that chairman and
members I stand for any
questions.
no one signed up for organized
support or opposition but is
there anyone in the room in
support of this memorial.
Not anyone online.
Anyone in the room in opposition
anyone online that that that
will go to questions coming
to pass that we can have a roll
call vote.
Senator Baca is excuse Senator
Ingle.
Yes Senator Ingle yes Senator
Lopez yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna yes the two
mechanic yes senator Morse's
excuse senator Ortiz Pinos
excuse Senator Pirtle.
This excuse.
Senator Stefanics yeah and
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
in center how to me yes I'm here
yes you have six yes and I think
the vote but six two zero you
gotta do pass.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee selecting
Senator meetings are Center pope
here but I can take Senator
popes to memorials and I'm gonna
have the gavel over to Senator
Stewart who provided the
committee thank you.
Are you starting with our one
yes ma'am.
Thank you madam chairs the
Senate Joint Memorial why and I.
It is a memorial that that
centers around COVID and the
impact of COVID nineteen right
here in New Mexico the memorial
also honors the sacrifices that
essential workers put into
ensuring that they kept a safe
while carrying those who fell
ill this memorial is in support
of a COVID nineteen memorial
that is being planted Bernalillo
county and with that I'll take
any questions.
So we have to people online and
support is that correct.
Yes.
So supporters that are online is
Janice noon yes still frontal
available to speak.
Yes.
If you could get yourself and
take about a minute to support
or oppose.
Is this.
Hello is anyone able to hear me
yes we can hi thank you so much
my name is internet and stuff I
don't I am the New Mexico leader
of mark my comment which is the
largest survivor and then
survivor founded COVID advocacy
group in the nation.
Because I lost my father to
comment in may of twenty twenty
one I'm a licensed clinical
social worker and I have found
much healing and my lost by
connecting with others who have
also lost loved ones to comment
learning about their needs and
finding ways that New Mexico can
help validate thirteen and also
have a safe space for us to
mourn and prevent this
Appear to this never happens
again comment period that is
unique in its pain most of us
such as myself could not be with
our loved ones in the hospital
we could not hold their hands we
could not say that I we could
not get working and these
rituals are critical in the
healing process many of us are
struggling with complex three
disenfranchised grief and
continue to feel isolated by
this desire.
To move on this desire to want
to move on and not the knowledge
and have a public reckoning of
what happened to us the
devastation the pain and also
the strength that New Mexico has
shown in and finding the virus
and keeping so many people's
state the memorial will serve as
a place for us to all come
together it was center the needs
of the COVID read but also be a
space for people who didn't lost
someone to comment but lost
something else because we have
also occurred I urge you to
please vote yes in support of
this memorial to validate our
experiences degree fits so many
are are having today and to make
a statement that this pandemic
happens we lost over nine
thousand New Mexicans and we
deserve a place to call and
he'll be with others thank you
so much for hearing from me I
can also take any questions if
you have any specific questions
about the memorial the design
but noting that I only have one
minute I want to make sure to
get to capture
What we are all feeling and and
and the needs thank you so much
for your comments and I'm sorry
for your loss thank you Alan are
Bravo are you online.
However you good morning thank
you so much.
Senators and members of the
committee and Eleanor problem
also a member of mark Rothko
that the largest survivors group
in the country I lost my only
sister to comment October sixth
twenty twenty hi I will repeat
the things that option that says
what we would really appreciate
your support we now have I local
resolutions in support of the
memorial Bernalillo county
Sandoval County village of
Kerala City of Albuquerque of
Sandoval county commission and
Los crucis and so the the
support of our state legislature
is really critical and we are
continuing to work with many
different factions of our
society here in New Mexico so
everyone can have input into the
content of the memorial and and
we thank you so much for your
support thank you so.
Thank you so much for your
comments that would go to the
room anybody here have the
support of this memorial state
one and we have one other
online.
Anybody in opposition from the
memorial anyone online of
opposition with that we'll go to
questions and questions from the
committee Senator Stewart the
capacity to do past we can have
a roll call vote thank you bye
look at.
Senator Bob physics you Senator
yes thank you yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes if you can yes
senator Morris is excused
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino six to
Senator hello I think you
Senator Paypen yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stewart
yes yes and senator harm you yes
Senator have millions to have I
excuse ten sixty six yes you
have a new password one to your
Senate Joint Memorial money
strengthening ties with Taiwan
the morning seven point.
Morning Mr chair committee
members of the Senate Joint
Memorial line is a memorial
street in their relationships
with to New Mexico and Taiwan as
well as United States in Taiwan
in trading exchange of visits by
officials and supporting
Taiwan's international
participation right now Taiwan
actually supporting over twelve
hundred jobs just here in New
Mexico alone exports New Mexico
goods exports to Taiwan or at
thirteen point two million
dollars and twenty eighteen
investments from Taiwan to New
Mexico have totaled a little
over fifty two million and so
really what we're trying to do
Mr chairman and committee
members is just to make sure we
strengthen this relationship not
only from a economic development
standpoint but a relationship
because with this relationship
we've already benefited already
and we can benefit more in the
future with that Mr chair ready
for any comments or questions.
Senator no one did sign up in
support or opposition to the
bill of all go to the committee
room by show of hands anybody in
support of this Senate Joint
Memorial.
The line what about online.
What about in opposition in the.
white state level to go to
questions from the committee.
the past what what do passed by
Senator Ingle what office second
by Lopez roll call.
Senator Baca is X. two center
and yes Senator Ingle yes Lopez
yes.
McKenna yes Senator mechanic yes
Senator Morse's excuse senator
Ortiz Y. Pino sixties.
Senator Pirtle the sixty Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes and senator how to
me yes.
Yes yes and I think six zero
Senator you gotta do pass thank
you.
Thank you and so we're gonna go
to the next
agenda item which is the final
agenda item Senator Stewart as
agreed to present the Senate
memorial one the route sixty six
musical highway restoration a
memorial on behalf of Senator
Schmedes.
This chart I'm just going to do
it from here okay that's west
one all those believe mostly on
consent so we have this
wonderful musical highway
and provide the right one of
them is moving too fast Hey hi.
What should have please have a
roll call vote.
It seems on do has by Senator
Stewart with the second by Lopez
by Senator company.
Senator practices to Senator
Ingle thank you for.
