On the Senate rules committee
website the copies in the back
there those procedures require
that folks who wish to give
public comment sign up ahead of
time to do so so we have the
list of folks who are signed up
to do so if you have not signed
up to give public comment you
you will not be given public
coming here today but we would
encourage you to go ahead and
email in your comment to the
Committee if you would like to
do so with that I will hand it
over to the vice chair.
Yes care I just got a message
Senator Lopez will be a few
minutes like that she's on her
way.
First the Senate bill one eighty
election changes.
Senator will be presenting after
presenting this going to.
Comment and then taking
questions and comments from
committee to consider doing
thank you for.
Thank you Mr chair.
So and I I have with me here
director Lindsay Papen from
secretary of state's office of
the secretary of state hi is
under the weather and so she's
not able to join us today as
that the expert on this bill I
know that she wishes she were
here he's here in spirit he's
here in spirit.
So this is a bill that should
look very familiar to everyone
because it is essentially just a
pared down version of SB six
hundred which both this
committee and the Senate as a
whole passed unanimously last
year.
I'm gonna go through kind of the
the top level so some of the
highlights of what this bill
does I'm not going to go through
it section by section hi given
the the time restrictions that
we have with the rules
procedures but we can certainly
go through any sections that
members have questions about as
we have discussion on the bill.
But some of that the highlights
is that this moves the date to
to re open registration box
currently is thirty five days
after election day this would
move it to the Monday following
the county campus.
This creates a uniform pay rate
for election board members
establishment secretary of state
and increases the cap for
payment on election day two four
hundred dollars and this is
really critical because the
county courts throughout the
state are have really having
trouble both getting and
retaining poll workers and so in
this poll workers are working
awfully hard awfully long hours
we want to make sure that they
are appropriately compensated
for that work.
This bill would have adopted
permanently a lot of procedures
that we use in the twenty twenty
election
that were adopted during the
twenty twenty special session as
a temporary measure I'm
especially around mail to mail
ballots and so it changes the
timelines for this mail ballots
to make sure that folks are
getting ballots for early enough
to get them back and that they
are being mailed back in time to
be received by the county
clerk's and counted.
And these are all procedures
that we likely got to bug test
in the twenty twenty election
and so we know that they work
well both for election
administrative errors and for
voters.
This bill would also codify the
importance of distinguishing
procedures to request voter data
and election information which
contains information about our
national critical on our
national critical infrastructure
and voters personal information
which is constitutionally
protected us through the secrecy
of the ballot.
This would also reinstate
security voter experience and
administrative improvements for
mail ballots again that were
passed in the twenty twenty
special session specifically
around secure pre processing by
the county clerk's staff and
opportunities for voters to be
able to cure errors and
identification providing their
signature or last four years
social security number and also
setting reasonable hours for
for election workers so that
they're not counting ballots
late into the night when we're
all tired and likely to make
mistakes.
This also provides for a post
election audit of our
R. voting systems after every
election right now that only
happened after general elections
this would require that that
happens after every election so
that both are election
commissioners and our voters on
know that those tabulating
machines are working as they
should.
This would require an election
notification mailer that sent
out to every voter prior to
every election so that
everyone's well aware of all of
their opportunities to vote and
it requires mandatory training
for challengers and watchers of
the conducted by the county
clerk using a curriculum that's
provided by the secretary of
state.
This also creates makes
permanent rather than election
security program at the office
of the secretary of state that
is actually already eggs in
existence but we want to make
sure that that state is an
existence on and gets codified.
And it establishes the use voter
convenience centers or BCC's and
all counties which again was
something that that happened
with that twenty twenty special
session temporary bill but also
had just has been the trend ever
since BCC's were started in New
Mexico in two thousand eleven.
And.
We also before I turn it over to
ms Bachman.
There is so we continue working
on this bill with the secretary
of state's office the clerks
and we had a long discussion
last week with the clerks and
there were more amendments that
were born out of that discussion
and so.
I don't know if the committee
secretary has the amendment that
is
How we take a look and
Two two four five seven eight
point two.
You could hand them out to
everyone we will take action on
this amendment obviously until
after we've gone to the
committee but I'll just go ahead
and explain it now.
What this amendment it does a
couple of things
in one section on page twelve
there is kind of duplicative
language about someone needing
to be a voter if they were this
is for qualified residents the
the purpose of this section is
to to make it so that
pre registered sixteen seventeen
year olds can go be poll workers
if they would like to be I want
to I think get them engaged in
the process of our democracy as
early as possible but also
because again are kind of closer
having trouble getting enough
poll workers and so we want to
make that
universes as brought for them is
they can't as it can be but
there is duplicative language
about being registered to vote
in that section that's being
removed in this ammendment.
There's also two changes that
are being made to places in the
bill we're refers either to
County Cork employees or
specifically to chief to chief
deputies of the county clerk and
in both places we've changed
that to say County clerk's
agents again because and and
some of the some smaller county
clerk offices there might not be
they they might have folks that
they have brought on as
temporary workers who are not
technically employees under
employment law but they still
want them to be able to to do do
some of these these jobs that
need to be done so this just
gives them more flexibility in
addressing those issues.
Their one of the other changes
that's made
ten and number six on this
ammendment.
Hi this is dealing with the
replacement ballots the current
language said that replacement
ballots weren't subject to the
same time limits the other that
mail ballots were subject to
generally.
Even when it comes to
replacement ballots that we want
to make sure that folks are
getting them in time to for them
to actually be used and so we
inserted a requirement that they
be in the infirmary placement
ballots that they be mailed out
at least seven days before
election day unless someone is
participating in the
confidential substitute address
program in which case they it
would be handled differently
specific to that act.
On change number seven changes
and onto a by this is just
changing there's a deadline for
the certification Canada
certification to be sent out it
had said that it was on a
certain Friday there some
offices that are not open on
Fridays so for those folks who
want to give them that
flexibility to send that out on
Thursday if they would like to.
And.
The change that is at number
eight on the on this this is
actually changing this was a
really good catch I can't
remember which clerk brought
this up when we are talking but
this is existing language that
originally this building even
deal with and it talked about
when there's multiple people on
the ballot and their names are
so similar as to confuse
potentially confuse voters and
the existing language said that
that what you do then is you let
list their occupation or their
age and that is not a good way
to approach these things because
one how does the secretary or
the county clerk's office verify
what their occupation is a fine
George Santos essay I'm the
president of the United States
they have to list that but also
listing occupation or age is
potentially putting information
on there that could sway voter
one way or another and on these
ballots we don't want any
information they would have the
potential to do that so what we
did was we we essentially just
kick it to to the secretary of
state to develop some rules on
how to address that situation if
it arises.
And then the last change that
this amendment makes.
why is.
It originally in SB six last
year there was a lot of language
that.
That hi in my view micromanage
how locals control their
elections
all that language has been
stripped out this was was one
part that I missed and stripping
that out and that that our
county clerks identified as as
also need to come out because it
micromanages how folks in local
elections it would require that
even in a place where they don't
require petition signatures to
get on the ballot that and then
either folks would still have to
get those petition signatures or
pay a fifty dollar filing fee.
My opinion is that local should
be able to control their
elections as they see fit and so
that languages be taken out in
this amendment as well I know I
went through all of that very
quickly I know we will have more
discussion on all of this
I I would want to hold myself to
my own rules about use of time
this committee so with that I
will turn it over to miss bond
thank you Senator Duhigg chair
Hermio or vice chair Hermio and
representatives from the
committee my name is on the box
and I'm with the secretary of
state's office
in the secretary of state
considers this bill necessary
for the efficient administration
and security in conduct of
elections the amendments
proposed stem from actual
reality is that administrators
are navigating as they prepare
for this year's election and
that they have navigated in
regards to past election cycles
they are non partisan changes
and they provide needed clarity
for election administrators to
efficiently and uniformly and
minister all publicly funded
elections in the state I'll keep
my comments brief as I know
we're we're under time but I
look forward to the conversation
today.
Thank you so much and so we
didn't have any organized
comments Mr chair if I may so we
do have organized support there
are folks who had signed up with
who had coordinated with me to
to speak in support of the bill
I believe there's no organized
opposition but there were some
folks who signed up hi to to
oppose the bill otherwise under
our procedures at the want to
sign up will each be given one
minute to speak what I'm just
for the folks who are speaking
and supports I'm also asking
them to keep their comments to
one minute as well.
Is there anybody in the room who
is in support of this bill would
like to speak.
Well so Mr chair only the people
who have signed out who have who
have coordinated and support
will will be speaking are those
who signed up.
They are so I can go ahead and
and just introduce them.
Yes so and all know that Dick
Mason of the league of women
voters I he's not here he's in
another committee meeting but he
sent written comments that he
urges on written comments and
support that he urges the
committee to review but we have
a couple of county clerks here
who are you speaking in support
or opposition.
Right now so okay and since
we're on support I believe clerk
Lopez us is going to be speaking
in support if you could come up
to the microphone to so that
folks can on the webcast can
hear you and just as a reminder
I will be timing it to begin one
minute.
Thank you vice chair how to me
and members of the committee and
feeling very positive today
frankly I think a lot of the
amendments have been proposed by
the clerks are going to just
help us it's going to be able to
really assist in the
administration this is a non
partisan bill please keep in
mind I am speaking on behalf of
my County Indiana and
representing my approximately a
hundred and thirty five thousand
dollars as I mentioned the
things that are really important
are opening the books in
cultivating the books basically
opening that type of
registration for staff can move
those registrations forward one
of the things I think is such a
disservice to voters is
currently the Thursday prior to
an election we're still telling
people that they can apply for
an absentee ballot and that is
just not fair to our voters and
that's something I think would
really be beneficial all of the
other items that Misbach we
mentioned I'm in support of for
my County I think it will be.
Better for voters to defer more
confident elections the
timelines and I look forward to
a robust conversation connected
to any of the proposed
amendments and know that we have
a that many clicks here present
to will potentially operative
back as well thank thank you for
your comments.
the clerk oh wait on you if
you're if you're not part of the
organised deport we have
Catherine Christiana from the
association counties.
Thank you for.
Thank you and good morning Mr
chairman committee my name's
Katherine Christiana and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico counties The New Mexico
counties is neutral on Senate
bill one eighty however the bill
contains a number of clerks
priorities that we support
specifically New Mexico counties
board voted to make a profit as
it relates to election records a
priority because the clerks are
being inundated with requests
with no clear guidance as to how
to respond we thank the senator
for addressing this critical
issue and look forward to
following the bill as it
proceeds thank you thank.
A former Cancer Lanson.
Good morning morning thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is lance on on
the policy director for the
center Pacific policy a
nationally recognized
organization as it relates to
civic engagement we are standing
in support of Senate bill one
eighty and specifically want to
thank our secretary of state and
senator do you have for bringing
this bill forward as it
addresses crucial changes
specifically increasing get the
cap on the pay for election day
workers when we have and
continue to face election
administrators
recruitment and retain and for
our poll workers and election
workers because of their threats
to democracy not just for
Alexion workers to our elected
officials and those that are
really uplifting can continue to
support our democracies we urge
your support thank you.
Austin we okay from the Celia.
Okay good morning thank you Mr
chairman of the committee my
name is Austin we I can hear
with the ACLU of New Mexico here
to stand in support of SB one
eighty for all of the reasons
already mentioned because secure
and modern elections are a key
to ensuring that we have a
healthy democracy for all of the
hard work on this bill to make
this something that we're proud
to support today and I want to
ask the members of the committee
here to move to pass thank you
the economy and last is Joseph
from and then made a vote.
Good morning Mr chair members my
name is shows a little more New
Mexico native vote we're here in
support of this legislation I
think it's been you know the the
the many of you know tribes a
little late in coming to the
table in terms of being able to
vote in this state we're trying
to make up as much ground as we
can and I think the changes in
the provisions of this bill will
help the tribe's tribal members
and you just general have a
better better chance to get into
the voting process so we are
supported thank you thank you
for.
In click click if you want to go
ahead now before we go to
opposition to free.
The committee and chairman
committee chairwoman I want to
first acknowledge that I want to
thank the sponsor for working
very closely with the clerks in
a very productive meeting and so
ninety five percent of the
changes the clerks are requests
is in this ammendment
I would like to say that this
bill also has the for most
important things that we are
supporting adjusting the books
open and close state increasing
poll worker rate to four hundred
dollars on election day
adjusting absentee timelines to
serve comport with US PS
operational timelines on it
right right so we may have some
minor details that we don't
agree with but and the clerks
abilities currently neutral but
this bill makes important
changes the amendment makes
important changes we hope to see
it in Judiciary for me
personally the one that
technical issue I'd like is to
consider changing the eleven PM
timeline for absentee board to
midnight because some of my
ballots from drop boxes and just
an outer lying areas it takes
them over an hour and a half to
arrive I'd like to give my
absentee for that chance to
process them thank you.
Thank you.
And Mister chair I have a list
here of of the other folks who
signed up who are assuming or in
opposition but it just occurred
to me I did not get to you thank
you do you have any building in
support of the bill of us on so
part of your marketing support
that number.
Before I want to opposition
those are organized opposition I
would assume and check to see if
there's anybody in support of
the bill in favor of the bill
one of the.
Everyone I have on you have a.
Okay.
On to the room and I'm gonna do
the same thing with those are
the opposition of the timing for
one minute is there anybody.
Sorry Mr chair because we're
following the procedures of the
rules committee of those signed
up yes just say same as for
support we're doing it going to
do it equally for support and
opposition.
But those who follow the
procedures are are working to
speak otherwise we would invite
written comments.
This listing you all those in
opposition those are the folks
who signed up for opposition
yes.
Is Caitlyn in the room.
Director of communications New
Mexico farm land and livestock
bureau.
Dave Mason of voting and
elections directors.
Here he is from the league of
women voters who I sent written
support yes.
Thank Caitlyn might be on zoom I
I don't know are you is Caitlyn
that Caitlyn is not identified
itself as the on the on.
from this list Mr chair first I
have the next.
Okay and you will be given in
one minute.
I ask you to New York New York
one of the yeah when I.
Yes you are you there.
Okay can you hear me now we can
hear you hear minute begins now.
Okay thank you chairman and
representatives of the committee
for allowing me to speak today
on this matter.
Me my husband David and and that
the are in opposition of this
bill SB one eighty eight they're
all that it gets more power to
the state and left to our
community and our county which
we've been working really hard
in the last few years to learn
the policies and procedures of
the elections and we enjoyed
that policy that is in place
right now and we look forward to
speaking others about it and you
know just ensuring that we do
have the your elected where we
can
income with more people to get
involved and feel safe with
their information
surely.
In the clerk's office Valencia
County has done an amazing job
with their election and I look
forward to still having that
whole that we have been I don't
agree with the state being able
to you know how you kind of the
universal of thank you I'm not
going to move on to Marci may.
May I ask you to and you want it
for begins or.
Okay thank you first of all this
meeting did not give the public
seventy two hours to notice of
that is going to be occurring
when you look at even on the
first page of the bill are there
hasn't been any committee
reports and I know that you're
trying to recycle this from last
session but you're not not being
transparent you're not allowing
sunlight or discretion the other
part is that are you a changing
language from citizen to
residents that is very the legal
language you you're not just you
didn't tell the public that
you're changing requirements for
working from citizens if you go
to Mexico without any
of the contrarian jail and they
do but yet over here we have an
administration that doesn't want
any accountability and wants to
change the language very
secretive only and you guys are
not here to serve the public
service.
And this needs to stop.
Thank you for your comments Erin
I am next going to move on to
shame why.
Right and not identifying
themselves and secure okay and
the last on my list is how does
the pueblo Martinez how does it
has not identified so from there
we do have very few however.
Okay there is use of the
economic and all state all star
here one minute time.
Thank you chairman I'm calling
in opposition to the spell
there's many things and I
strongly oppose I don't think we
should be doing these monster
built it change all kinds of
things because you're wrapped in
you know procedural things that
will help the clerk's no objects
to with things that are
absolutely at decimating to
public confidence and the one
that I the part of this bill I
object to the most is that all
election records will be hidden
from the public and removed from
the front discovery the only way
to get records will be with the
court order and that order has
to show costs so how is the
public supposed to have any
faith that our elections are
free and fair if they're
completely okay and there's no
way to get records without first
showing because there's no
additional cost without seeing
records so I think that is the
most educational part of this
bill and I hope that you'll take
it out.
Thank you for your comments and
so madam chair woman that we did
on the opposition list do you
have any comment to make sure
before the committee and Mr
chair on it for it for the folks
sitting in the room I got
notifications that there were
some folks who who wanted to
sign up and and and did not know
that they needed to so if we
could do it show of hands for
both support and opposition so
that the committee have a sense
of who in the room maybe
supporter opposing who has not
spoken suggests that this Madam
chair of I'm not gonna take
comments about the future but I
will ask if you can raise your
hands if you are in support of
the bill.
Chair
and keep them up so that we can
take a and tell.
Much
Okay you can put your hands down
and now if I could get a show of
hands for those who are in
opposition of the bill.
It might take those numbers with
us.
Fifteen in support and fifth and
eight in opposition fifty eight
point eight opposition Chairman
do you have any other comparable
to the committee I don't I don't
Mr chair I guess I would just
start off by moving the
amendment that we went over
Unless folks would like to to
have to discussion debate before
we address that any discussion
or debate on the amendment.
None of the amendment.
So I in particular of a question
on the I believe it's the.
Amendment eight number eight on
your equipment after after
identity basically has to do
with candidates being to create
different differentiated due to
the similarity and identity can
you go over what the secretary
of state's we are or have they
been adopted or we just like
that our we don't have nothing
and nothing.
on deck for that right now so Mr
chair Senator Baca so the
existing language in statute
says that when you have names
are so similar as to cause
confusion of the voter that you
would then put something as
simple are their occupation or
their age next to their name on
the ballot
so that that's how it's dealt
with presently I am not aware of
any situations where that has
actually happened but overall
one of the clerks in our meeting
last week identified that as
it's not a great practice
because for a couple of reasons
one by listing someone's
occupation or age you are
potentially giving information
that could sway voters one way
or another which is not
something we ever want to do on
our balance of it too how would
the county clerk's verify what
someone says that their
occupation is that the example I
gave us if I'm George Santos and
I come in and say I am ruler of
the universe that is what they
would have to put down their so
now that said in this discussion
we have we could not we did not
come up with a better approach
for differentiating whether
they're very similar so that's
why we're kind of taking it to
the secretary of state to create
rules around that
thank you Mr chairman I I
appreciate you your your
description of what we're
striking you do have a
representative from the
secretary of state's office is
next to maybe she can like us on
what direction secretary of
state.
Want to go with this.
And and it is a fairly common
occurrence I would point out
that that is similar to you have
of collecting at least three
instances in the last election
cycle that were the names were
very similar similar last same
last names exactly and and
causes a great.
And so if you would like me
these sure chair how to me
Senator in the instances prior
to my role with the secretary of
state's office I was on the
front lines of administration at
the county level and so in my
experience and I think what
Senator Duhigg alluded to these
are not super common situations
that the specific provisions are
contemplating that would be
almost an exact name match range
of known differentiating middle
initial no change on the voter
registration and certainly while
I I don't know what the rules
process will reveal in terms of
a solution to the issue we would
contemplate and have those
discussions at that time about
what the solution might be so I
don't have any further
information about specifics in
regards to future solution only
the commitment that we would
find one thank you Mr chair and
and and a you know all all all
go back to your own language of
the exact names match that
that's not what the existing
language says existing language
sense in fact same or are so
similar as to tend to confuse
that is rather broad and and
I've had people in my own
experience asked me
Example I think was a treasures
races last I I believe they're
both Montoya some balance
who's who how do we identify at
least or something here I I
would hate for this to go to the
secretary of state's office Mr
chair without even some sort of
blue printer plan you know
instead of a Hey let's just
scrap it approach and you know I
I mean.
There are maybe our toll certain
names but there are some very
calm.
surnames in the state so I guess
that concerns me to some.
that that we're just gonna kick
it to the secretary of state and
and she's going to decide how to
differentiate these candidates
and in the example I just gave
that was statewide races to be
committees and so
that that was my concern with
that.
Thank you Mr us all thank you
for.
For questions regarding the
amendment Senator panics no I on
the bill thank okay the no other
debate on the amendment do we
have a they take a vote on that.
But most of the dollar a motion
to adopt the amendment any
opposition.
Signup position will that at the
okay.
Three in opposition.
Well that move forward on debate
of Senate bill one eighty as
amended.
Mr.
Also.
Montel okay senator Morris has
an amendment if we can get that
passed up and there
what is the number which is
seven point seven nine point
one.
Researchers.
this latest news
from the front.
I believe our facilities to.
Services for.
For many of us who we are out of
the secretary of state not
published.
The project is for the moment hi
Mr chair yes this is a friendly
amendment I appreciate senator
Morris bringing this he's right
absolutely addresses at a timely
issue
and I believe it the secretary
of state's office feels it's
friendly as well because this
would create an opt in system
where folks could request to
have their home addresses on it
not produced as public records
on election and finance related
materials and all on just note
that as a little anecdote it's
especially timely I just last
night someone posted an image of
mine one of my campaign finance
reports with my home address on
it on Facebook in connection
with the posing this bill hi so
I I think this is a.
And an excellent amendment from
senator Morris may appreciate
you bringing that thank you
madam chairwoman any debate or
discussion on the amendment.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair Senator this
also included in the records
with regard to a real
toproperties office.
Mr chair I believe it would come
no different from that with the
clerks but I do believe this is
for the election and I and I
wasn't actually sure story but I
will I will go and search for it
I had to infants Ms and my a lot
of.
Those are elected which were.
Learning disabilities including
so called illness to us are you
and the others are talking about
my ex wife and my daughter and
my my previous and then also
that it responded to a tell me
where I lived in a stargazing
creating the males are creating
the mail at the house and so
this is something I've actually
talked about for number years
and this is thank you with the.
scripts which way she goes after
rob here Mexico and I was just
informed that it would not.
the.
Representative properties so
just to the elections
Department.
I think you know I think the
goal here is Justin I mean we've
all I think everybody districts
probably has at least one of
those stories and I do.
with.
Using that information in a way
that's not the best but Senator
Google I mean they could find my
address even if you keep it off
of the clerks maybe does need to
go a little bit further as far
as that goes
I mean we know all the the
company's online spoke you'll
find a person you know all of
those I mean I'd like to see
even go further and and have a
requirement that they do they
not use that information as well
if we could but I do I do like
the intent hopefully we can.
It to go as far as it leads to
thank you Mr chair Senator any
further debate or discussion on
the amendment.
Thing line but.
Mr Chairman I believe Senator
Moores needs to move adoption up
to move to legislative maps this
is been a motion to move the
second amendment and it seconded
it anyone in opposition of the
amendment.
Signal will then go back to
debate Senate bill one eighty of
twice amended and comments from
the committee for questions.
On the bills
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for bringing this
forward I don't want to rush it
the bill so I have a few
questions
this is an important topic to
the majority of people in our
state.
So Mister chair
I understood and then I read
something different.
Are we limiting the absentee
voter applications to fourteen
days prior to the election.
Mr chair Senator yes so we are
moving the deadline to apply for
an absentee ballot I believe now
it's seventy two hours before
election day rooted out to
fourteen days before election
day because with the current our
current post postal service they
need seven days to get it out in
seven days to get it back so if
folks are requesting them.
Hi three days before the
election day they're not going
to get it in time to vote or if
they're getting them five days
before election day and they put
it in the mail to be sent back
it's not going to get to the
county clerk in time to be
counted so Mr chair and senator
what in the bill what other
provisions in the bill then do
you take do you have for
individuals who apply but are
beyond that deadline.
So Mr chair Senator anyone who
up anyone who has requested an
absentee ballot but let's say
has not gone in time or has lost
a or has zero.
This marked in a way that did
not reflect their intention they
can go to any of voting location
either in early voting or on
election day and they will sign
an affidavit saying I have not
voted that absentee ballot and
they will be given a replacement
ballot at that time which they
could then about or let's say
they got their absentee ballot
in the mail but they didn't mail
it back in in time for it to be
received they could drop that
lot ballots off at any voting
location or at any monitor
secured container.
So Mister chair thank you for
that Mr chair Senator Hemphill.
with the.
Current amendment senator Morris
amendment that also in the
field.
this relates to the fourteen
days and some other provisions
can we talk about confidential
address participants what
safeguards there are for those
individuals Mr chair Senator.
Yes Mr chair Senator I'll kick
it over to director Bachman to
discuss that in more detail sure
so those participants chair how
to me Senator those participants
under cap they are able to
utilize a an address that
that is a that is a identified
PO box instead of their address
where they reside in order to
protect their safety so that's
essentially members of that
program that would dissipate and
that use that private their
return I dress the state private
and were able to facilitate
voting through that through that
process.
Mr chair Senator I'll just add
that in this bill we extend our
participation in the cap
procumbens as confidential
address program we extend
participation in that program to
household members of folks who
are in that program so that they
are to the others in their
household can can get the
benefit of that that
confidentiality as well so Mr
chair Senator in some counties
you can go online to look up
properties property addresses
taxes for the properties cetera
what how does this bill dove
tail commute the protections in
this bill for gov tale with what
is occurring in counties right
now.
Mr chair Senator.
To be honest I I the the program
that's in this bill is specific
to election to elections so
getting ballots here election
related mail or would and as of
going through that the secretary
of state's office but and but I
don't believe that that that
existing program would cover
things like property listings
Tax history I don't think that's
contemplated as part of that
program but I I you're you're
here you have a good point it
certainly should not we should
have some program that
contemplates that as well Mr
chair
and perhaps the county
association could look into that
topic for providing protection
is one place so we might want to
be consistent as a then
I'm sorry okay sorry as a point
of clarification chair how to
meal Senator cap does already
include additional provisions
that are outside of the scope of
this bill but pertain to
protections related to those
items that you mentioned.
Feel free to hit me next time.
Okay so
Mr chair Senator this is a a
wide open question.
In your.
Not opinion but estimation.
What what would you say are the.
Top.
Major changes in this bill.
That the that we want the public
to be aware of.
And Mr chair Senator I'll take
it to miss Bachman for that
because I think as a I'm not
talking about a page by page and
also if for what's the top three
what's the top five issues here
so I would say generally chair
how to me Senator at that this
bill addresses critical security
concerns that that we have had
since we've received the
critical infrastructure
designation under federal law
for election infrastructure and
so those items that kind of
codify
security related concerns that
includes the social security
numbers on absentee ballots it's
it includes how the verification
process takes place in regards
to the county clerk's I'm doing
that process being deputized to
to that process it also includes
the administrative needs that we
know we worked at the ministry
of fixes that we know works well
in twenty twenty and that we
know voters relied on it that we
were able to implement and
utilize and those are important
fixes administratively but also
from a voter participation
standpoint and they include
things like the curing of the
ballots the fourteen day time
line that we've already
discussed and then the opening
of the books as the clerks have
identified as well that that
those are administrative fixes
that will bolster our ability to
more efficiently serve the
state.
thank you Mr chair I'm gonna
wait to hear the rest of the
conversation thank you thank you
senator any other questions or
comments Senator Moores thank
you Mr.
One of the.
I just want I want to thank you
madam chair and I've been
working really hard on this for
a couple years and of course we
had the bill last year sent bill
six that we all worked on very
closely which really got diluted
because it wasn't a partisan
bill that some of the people out
there talking about it was
administration bill how to run
elections not from the parts of
stuff now we thought about the
parties and stuff and I was the
my colleagues here no I'm happy
to fight fires and stuff but I
really applaud the work being
done to make this a nonpartisan
bill and moving forward I'm
still not there you will know
madam chair I'm still more on
the on the negative side of this
because but I do applaud the
work that has been done to do
think our Republic needs good
elections and tone and we need
that effort to try to defuse
some of the tension that's been
out there last number years on
both sides of the aisle
and I think this that's by a
commitment to you madam chair
Mister chair of my commitment to
my previous chair many years ago
so and and I I'm.
Going to continue to work in
advance and I'm gonna continue
to fight like hell on the parts
and stuff that we have as you
well know so you applaud you
there I'm not there yet as you
know we had some meetings with
some of the county clerk's they
have both Republicans Democrats
rural urban course course my
County clerk's eyeballing me
right now so and she's not the
same party so we still have some
concerns about the way this is
operated and so I hope we can
continue to work on those as we
go through this legislative
sausage making process and if we
can bring both of us together
Fund we're never gonna get
everyone together but I we did
on Senate bill six Mr chairman
with that passed the Senate
unanimously western unanimous in
this day and age with
partisanship we have an election
bill that passed this body
unanimously and I'm awfully
proud of that and I would like
for us to get back to that
disclose as we can in the future
and then as we go through this
process so some are gonna go
through some of these issues you
know what the issues are on the
continue work with the county
clerk's local public as a
Democrat for rural and urban
maybe we can address some of
these issues as we move forward
because I don't want to have
happen what happened last year
with the
Sen bill slides bill six all
that controversy that happened
want to be able to come together
as a Senator hopefully
Legislature on election bill
that we can all support agree on
the most of us can without
getting into the parks and stuff
which we will later on different
bills so Mister chair Madam
chair on if you want to comment
about that but that's where I am
on this bill currently thank you
senator any other questions or
comments from.
The.
Senator Stewart.
I thank you Mr chairman.
We have been doing this for so
long how many years are we
trying to put in place changes
that we started during the
pandemic that maybe our
elections go so much more
smoothly that brought more
people out
I'm just really proud of us as a
state you Senator to hit can
Senator Ivey Soto before you who
up both of you have been working
on this to ensure that that
we've got the best selections in
the country I think her
secretary states already there
she thinks we're the best in
front.
And so I really appreciate I
know you have worked with clerks
particular for many many months
so this to me is just a.
Anyway some of what we've tried
to do I also appreciate that
you're certainly open to
amendments and continuing
discussion about this I think
this is a good start and I'm
ready to go to the next
committee where it will be
discussed much more.
Then in here so are just thank
you I mean these amendments that
came from Senator Moores and
clerks I think we're all really
good and it's only enhance the
bill that so I'm right
developments chairman for both
know let someone else make that
motion I'll get off and get back
on thank you.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I do have a few
questions with regard to write
in candidates
can you walk me through a little
bit of the process of house on
the path if there's a
certification process correct to
become a writing candid
is that is that correct on this
last election I believe it was
for land commissioner there's
actually a circle the circle in
and Mr chair Senator I was
confused I was ready to write
the name down and then whenever
said a certified riding candid I
just filled in the circle and
walked off thinking that was
going to suffice and so I just
want to kind of walk through
that see if we can clean that up
and then one of the issues that
a lot of of people complained
about was the amount of area
given for the writing candid it
you might have been able to
write in the were like cat or
dog but sure couldn't write in
any normal sized name so I I
think there are some issues with
the ladies and stuff but can you
walk me through how that process
came about with the certified
circle but then
Does the vote count does it not
county you have to write it in
how does that work.
In Mr chair Senator I'll defer
to director Martin on that so
chair had in you know Senator
Pirtle the way that that works
administratively is one of voter
and insert the ballot where they
have indicated or that they're
going to go for right and it
actually goes into a special
place inside the tabulator so
that it can be reviewed by
Alexion board members at a later
time to decide whether or not
the right info counselor doesn't
count the way that that works is
any mark made in an oval in that
scenario would be diverted they
would review the if if someone
was selected and if someone
wrote the name if the name
qualified as the person who had
filed for candidacy to be a
write in candidate so that's
kind of how it works they would
count the vote if the name it
was
substantially the same as as the
person's name it doesn't have to
be exact spelling right like
Pirtle with the why.
what we would get you to get you
to qualify Mr chairman and
senator I believe it was is
quite confused confusing to a
lot of people not just myself
and discussion as to you know
how that that would work if if
maybe we can clarify that on the
ballot or or figure that out how
to how to make that change I
think would
Would help a lot and then I do
have a question with regard to
the signatures I believe it
section twenty last year in SB
six
I think we made it where the
signatures from the NMED could
be used in the verification
process
did we include that language
again or did we leave that out
that was put into Senate bill
six I believe it was in this
committee in a minute.
So Mr chair Senator Pirtle that
languages on there what with
that language is doing is it's
creating a database of those
signatures that can eventually
be used for signature
verification in states where
they do signature verification
they they capture those
signatures of whenever they're
being given and like let's say
at the end we do and essentially
create a composite of someone
signature to to use in the
verification process because
everyone signatures a little
different each time they do it
as we age our signatures change
there's not your signature is is
not ever frozen in one form for
all of eternity so in order to
to eventually get to the point
where we could as a state
realistically do signature
verification we have to build up
that database of signature spurs
but we do still have that
language in here that allows for
those signatures to start being
transferred to the secretary of
state to start building that
that Mr chair Senator can you
point me to
that language the that we had
from last the Senate bill six to
this bill.
Mr chair Senator I have I have
no idea where the top my head to
be honest but let me let me see
if I can figure out what we're
going.
And thank you for that I just
wanna make sure because I I
think that's important because
you know when I signed my
registration at eighteen years
old I basically wrote my name in
cursive and now it's just a loop
swoop in a pool and that doesn't
look anything like my signature
so I think that's that's
important that we continue to to
share that information to to
ensure that the people million
dollars are the people that are
supposed to be mailing in their
ballots and and doing it that
way in maintaining the integrity
of our elections so I appreciate
that and then so in the meantime
if we could go to page one fifty
eight and Mr chair Senator not
to interrupt you but if you it
was that languages on page
thirty four where was that it
was lines eight to ten.
Okay that's I think that's why I
was having trouble finding it it
is a little different.
Language it's not exactly what
we put in is that correct.
Mr chair Senator I honestly
can't remember the state the
truth.
So are analysts just informing
that last year's at all
available signatures so I don't
know if that would I mean I
guess I would include from.
Part of the game in fishing
everybody or would that just be
from NBC still just all of our
available Senators.
In Mr chair Senator I I don't
recall that that being all
available since.
But.
To the extent I don't know I I
have no reason to to to data if
if that's what we call
I'm money this is a guess on my
part I'm guessing the reason it
might have been changed just
just MBT is because they have
the technical ability to do that
at this point where some other
folks might not that that's a
guess on my part.
But certainly I would I would
hope that overall as other
agencies have the ability to do
that as well that that they
could be included.
In that process to.
I don't think there's a policy
risen from committee that to and
the.
Senator Pirtle have mmhm.
Thank you Mr chair and I'm
looking at
What we had under SB six.
says along with any other
available images of the voter
signatures contained in the
motor vehicle division's records
for the secretary of state to
include in the data that
database so that would I think
the language last year was a
little bit more.
All encompassing of of that so
maybe that's something we need
to look at the judiciary to get
it back to to that language but
I will ask you to go to page one
fifty eight paragraph.
D. under section eighty four.
Where it mentions that the.
Petition nominating petition at
the contains less than ten
signatures are are not going to
count any of the signatures on
the nominating petitions that is
that the way.
In my reading it correctly and
that Mr Chairman.
And Mr chair Senator so so this
was a section that that we
amended in that first amendment
that that we adopt on the bill
so I believe anything after
office online twenty three has
already been struck where it's
talking about if there's no
specific petition signature
requirement after from the and
for the local that they would
that have to get at least ten
petition signatures are or pay a
fifty dollar filing fee that
language has been struck.
And Mr chairman and senator
thank you for that I'm sorry
that I but I miss that
but I have no further questions
thank you Mr thank you Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr chair of of all the
I'll be fairly brief here it I
was looking at at section
fourteen which contains a some
challenger provisions in their
and one of them is training.
And it was brought to my
attention as you realize some of
our our clerks are in pretty
rural areas and their staffs are
very small and limited and I I
was just curious here about the
training
is that something that we can
help find from the secretary of
state's office for those for
those people that that are
understaffed out there.
And Mr chair Senator Baca so yes
this was a an issue that that we
had had discussed quite a bit
with the clerks so under this
language and the secretary of
state would develop the
curriculum and then the clerks
would be responsible for product
providing the training my
understanding is that what the
secretary of state's office
intends to do is create a video
training session so that that
kid is something that if the
court chose to show that their
office they could but they could
also just send out a link to the
video to potential challengers
because we understand sometimes
they don't have a person to
spare to to put this training on
on themselves and so whatever's
being provided by the secretary
of state's office will be
provided in such a way so that
it consensually be kind of a
self service
Training where they would get
the link to the video they would
still have to do the
certification certifying that
that they've they've watch the
training and that they
understood it but we we want
that training to to be done in
such a way that it does not
create a burden for our
especially are smaller clerk's
offices but we also still want
them to be involved in that
training because frankly it's
important for them to know who
who the challenges that they're
going to deal with our ended to
the extent that they want to be
able to get eyes on those phones
I want them to have the
flexibility to do that so we
don't want to completely remove
them from that training process
but we do want to make sure that
that train process is one that
does not burn the money.
So he in there it basically what
it says Mr chair and senator
says a training shall be
provided by the county clerk
would you be opposed to adding
language in there that that
would be a something to the
effect of for the secretary of
state.
Mr chair Senator you know I
would this is something that
we've talked to I've talked to
the secretary of state's office
about.
I think I think I our position
would still be that we would
object to putting that language
in there because there is a way
to do this even though that
shell is on the county clerk
there's a way for them to give
that training that would
essentially be pushing a button
sending an email
but all that is agency Papen
address that sure chair had a
neo Senator the the the
provisions that require County
political party chairs to make
the appointment are still in
place and remain untouched in
this bill so inherently it is a
local process that takes place
and as Senator Duhigg mentioned
you know this would provide
county clerks with with an
initial introduction to folks
who who play an important part
of our electoral process which
is like bearing witness right
through watchers and challenger
provisions and so it's important
I think from the secretary's
perspective that that remains a
a local interaction that takes
place in terms of training and
and and we hope that it will
address some of the issues that
that that led to its original
inclusion in SB six so this is
not new language from that bill
it is the way that it was before
in SB six it's meant to make
sure that everybody's on the
same page and to combat any
misinformation about what those
rules are while still upholding
that they are that more eyes on
an election it is that is a
better thing for everyone and
thank you Mr chairman and I I I
I I hear you and I I.
I think that that is one view
point of that but another view
point of that another
another opinion might see that
that this is a curriculum
provided by the secretary of
state now here you go in an act
that curriculum and so another
over **** for what that is would
be basically an unfunded mandate
you've now given them more work
in a small office and you you
you might say that there's the
video out there what have you
and and I might feel differently
but I don't see anything that
says this in here madam Mr chair
and senator I I I don't see
anything that's in here that
says you're going to provide
that to them and that it's going
to be that easy all it says here
is true training shall be
provided by the county clerk
based on a curriculum provided
by the secretary of state so if
they come from the secretary of
state and give you a hand look
like that and say Institute that
training for all of your
challengers and you've got two
people in the office and and one
of them's out with COVID you you
understand how that can go so I
really you know I really like
maybe going forward that we
would take a look at that so
we're not burning this these are
very small offices and I I my my
opposition to that would really
go away because if if you had
some more definitive language in
there saying that Hey we're
going to give you access to this
training now you're just sitting
someone in front of a monitor to
get the training and getting a
verification at the end this
happens and many other
instances where you receive
training verification is done
and you know and and and so on
and so forth maybe it has to
take place in in area that
supervised for I don't know but
but the way it reads here it
certainly is looks like an
unfunded mandate.
so I would offer an amendment I
would offer an amendment on page
seventeen of line eleven
after clerk.
I would add a for the secretary
of state and this just gives
them an option just says Hey the
secretary of state can do it for
the county clerk and do it and
some of the clerks I think are
wanted to so that's good but for
those that are in demand what
not to give them that extra help
from the state rather than us
just bearing down on that.
And Mr chair Senator I I I'm
gonna say that's an unfriendly
amendment just based on what I'm
hearing from the secretary of
state's office as far as just
and practicality.
The that it would not be super
workable that said I I I
absolutely understand your
concern and I wonder if there is
we don't want to be too
prescriptive about you'll get a
video in statute because that's
really something you want the
flexibility of rule for but if
there's other language that
could highlight that and and and
options will be provided that
would.
I don't know the language of the
rice here's right now sitting
here the I I I I am I am open to
to another solution on that time
but but on this specific
amendment I think it'll be on
friendly Mr chair and and
senator
if I get your commitment that
maybe we can work on that
language I'll just withdraw my
amendment here maybe we can come
up with something.
Thank you secretary what the
federal to the people.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
The.
Question increase as I read
elephants that we discussed this
morning I realize there's
reference to referendum on page
one forty eight I didn't even I
guess I when we have referendums
in the state I I didn't know we
have.
Mr chair Senator this is for
cities.
Well.
So.
What is currently yes is Mr
chair Senator of this body will
address that sure and Mr chair
Senator if I can have the laying
from our general counsel of
history of that that would be
helpful.
Good good morning Mr vice chair
senator Ortiz Y. Pino this is
been around for forever any bill
that that you all pass can be
subject to a referendum petition
if members of the community
gather enough signatures to
But the but the bill out to vote
and so what this but these
changes do is just allow us more
time to our office to respond to
the referendum petitions there's
an application process
and the sos prescribes the forms
and so this just gives us more
time to respond fully but every
bill we we received a multiple
request for referendum petition
every after every session and so
there is a time line but but
this is been in law.
For a very very long time.
So Mister chairman is limited to
to that instances not to
initiate a new thing that if we
pass a bill.
And and is there a time frame.
How long do they have to to
submit a referendum.
it.
Mr vice chair senator
parties if you know it is in the
constitution but it's all here
in this section it is pretty
formulaic and and and article
seventeen Mr chairman of we ever
had one actually.
Six overturn the legislative
action.
Not not not Reese not recent we
recently Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
but I'm sure there is one
from from a long time ago
because there is a process thank
you thank you Mr.
Thank you senator.
Thank god there the center point
and just want to point out for
discharge arms we sever
constitutions here so we could
just look that up on page
appendix and with an election
handbook so if we can get those
in the future Mr chair madam
chair our constitution large
numbers will do confirmations
are premature used to have that
big book with all the boards
commissions.
Thank you for that comment
senator Senator.
Mr chairman of the house and
Senate okay we have a do passes
twice the amended.
Seconded by Senator McKenna if I
can have a vote.
Full.
Senator about that no.
Hello Senator Ingle keys excuse
Senator Lopez yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator Moores no
Senator Moores no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator how to meal
yes how to meal yes and Senate
to do the yes Senator Duhigg yes
that is eight yes
And.
Three no.
Mr chairman I believe that seven
seven yes seven three.
You do have a due process and
for the record just so you know
we did have twelve online in
opposition and three and so
forth the gist of the record can
state those that raise their
hands on them you have a two
passed center on Senate bill one
eighty of president and so off
to your next committee thank you
state.
All the handing the gavel back
into the chairwoman is Senator.
I.
This.
Also under tab.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We will continue on with SB
thirty four.
Center pope I know you're
familiar with the procedures
that we have here in the rules
committee do you have twenty
minutes to do with what you like
that would include any organized
public comment that you wish to
provide
and you are looking to go ahead
and get started thank you madam
chair committee members this is
I believe a bill that's been
introduced in previous years
before I was in the Senate
Senate bill thirty four
institutes a two year calendar
cooling off period member any
state legislator accepting
compensation and becoming a
lobbyist following me and other
legislative service the bill
also prohibits lobbyist
employers from compensating a
former legislative.
There are currently thirty three
states that have a cooling off
period.
And these are important to
protect the integrity of our
institution.
This can happen at least three
ways.
Legislators may be influenced an
official actions by the implicit
or explicit promise of a
lucrative job in the private
sector with an entity seeking a
government contract order shape
public policy number two
legislative turn this will have
access to lawmakers that are
available to others access that
can be sold to the highest
bidder on sectors and industries
seeking to lobby.
Number three the special access
and insight connections that we
have said have as sitting
government officials comes at a
hefty price tag providing
wealthy special interests Act
can afford hiring former
provided a powerful means to
influence influence government
which is unavailable to the rest
of the public.
As business interests have
become more intertwined with
government regulations and other
official actions the revolving
door has become even a bigger
problem is so pervasive that
seriously threatens the
integrity of the legislative
process what we do have laws on
the books that restrict former
public officers an employee to
represent for pay a person
before state agency or local
government agency for which the
former public officer and fully
served or worked.
New Mexico still needs to
establish a two year cooling off
period.
I like to finish by saying I
have no illusions that the two
year cooling off period will
totally eliminate special
interest influence but I believe
it's a start.
The public is asking for this
this time that we institute
restrictions to curb legislator
to lobbyist revolving door.
With that madam chair I'm ready
for questions and I I do not
have any formal public comments
Coming have coming for me the
support of the thank you senator
and I understand that you came
with us a post committee
substitute do you want to.
Tell the the committee can what
the differences between the
substrate that you're in an
office and hand about.
Well hand those out and you can
you can tell us what the
difference between those two are
before we go to public comment
and in opposition if there is
any that is correct madam chair
so Senate bill thirty four the
committee substitute and here's
a list of the changes and
section one the work calendar
was deleted after two years from
the original bill.
in section one.
I'm sorry I think that's a
repeat of what I have here
we also deleted from the
original bill making a violation
of the provisions of this bill a
misdemeanor and replacing it
with language that a violator
what shall be subject to the
penalties of the law this
regulation Act and that section
one page two lines nine through
eleven.
We also enacted a new section
section two.
On page two starting on line
twelve amending section two dash
eleven dash three NMSA nineteen
seventy eight.
To add language that a lobbyist
who's initially employed or
retained as a lobbyist must also
disclose whether they have
served.
The state legislature legislator
in the past two years Page three
lines four through five.
We also require that the
secretary of state notify the
lobbyist employers at their law
this served as a state
legislator in the past two years
page three.
Line nineteen through twenty
two.
And those are this the changes
in the committee substitute
Madam.
Thank you senator thank you
senator do we have anyone here
fund up has anyone signed up in
opposition to this bill.
if anyone who did not sign up
whether in support or opposition
wishes to to raise their hand if
anyone here who is not Santa but
is in support of the bill you
can raise your hand.
Anyone in opposition who.
Well hello noted misconduct from
coming because anyone in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Of.
We have anyone online and
support our position which is
the
numbers.
Us again and.
Thank you.
All right questions from the
committee.
No we need to work out the so.
Yes.
I just madam chair I just want
to make sure that Senator he is
offering the committee says is
that correct yes chair okay.
All right so so I hope you do
not has very important tax
and steps to present for for
purposes of discussion.
There any objections that
motion.
I see none that is a adopted for
the purposes of discussion
members of the committee.
I believe our members to the
committee so Representative
tracks with the outcomes of
services to.
You did and and I have an
amendment as well and I wasn't
clear to me if if you who is
needed to go first
Okay.
And this is amendment two to
four five three six point one.
But if if there's other other
discussion before we can get the
amendments the folks would like
to have.
No.
So that one is being passed out.
Senator.
So Senator and you and I just
discussed this ammendment
previously what this ammendment
does in fact is on page two it
strikes lines five through eight
that is the.
The provision that that
regulates lobbyist employers
the reason for that amendment is
that the lobbyist regulation act
is really about regulating
lobbyists not not additional
third parties and so I I I
believe that and and then let me
just say none of these
amendments that I'm offering
here is intended to change the
the overall effect of your bill
whatsoever it would still retain
the the cooling off period
but to me it makes more sense
that we're we're regulating the
lobbyists not their employers
because I I feel like just for
practical reasons of the
secretary of state's office as
well as it's a lot harder for
them to.
To I don't think their reach
extends out that far whatever as
it clearly does extend to cover
from this under this regulation
Act it would also make a change
on page three from if someone
did you know that the change you
made here essentially make it so
that the form that a lobbyist
submits in order to rest service
secretary of state's office they
would either check a box or or
disclose in some way that they
have been a provided within the
past two years under the current
bill if that happens the filing
would still be accepted and and
their employer would be notified
the what this changes is that
instead the filing would be
rejected and the filer forty min
notified of that rejection so
rather than
because I think the point is we
don't want.
Let me back up a little bit one
of the tenants in the this
regulation act is that it
compels the secretary of state
always to attend voluntary
compliance first.
The way that this is written it
kind of it invites the filer.
To do the wrong thing it by
accepting their filing that we
know is not acceptable
It does not respect that it
commands to always seek
voluntary compliance first and
so I not accepting that filing
in the first place that is more
in keeping with insisting on
voluntary compliance and by and
by learning the that I also have
a little bit of a problem with
with telling the employer
because that that to me also
would not be keeping and
seeking to achieve on terror
compliance verses I see that as
more punitive I could see a
situation where someone.
Because this this only applies
to people who are doing
legislative coffee because
that's all our our lobbyist
regulation Act applies to it
doesn't apply people to folks
who are doing lobbying at the
local level let's say so someone
so Senator Hermio had.
Just like it's a great job offer
from X. Y. Z. corporation puts
as a legislator and they hire
him both to lobby at his local
level and at the legislative
level.
He can not remember in this bill
that we passed goes ahead and
tries to submit his lobbyist
registration form to the
secretary of state to do half of
that the job has been hired to
do
and and.
And that I correctly and
transparently saying on the form
yes I was a legislator in the
last two years.
His that his employer gets a
call say in.
Paddling on him basically
and then former senator Hermio
probably loses his job only part
of which he can't do under the
spell the rest of which he is
lobbying at the local level he
would have every right to do
whether this this pastor not and
so these amendments are offered
both as a way to to enhance the
ability for the secretary of
state's office to do voluntary
compliance and also to make sure
that that we are.
This your bill provides a good
solution to a pretty narrow
issue of legislators lobbying
their immediate comics it's not
a global approach and so I would
I would want the the the
solution that we're offering to
be as narrow as the problem that
we're addressing this that's
what this are.
Amendment six to do.
Is there any discussion from the
committee on the amendment.
I'm sorry I'm sorry thank you
Senator hi please let us know if
if if this is friendly or
unfriendly and anything else
you'd like to add on in what is
that all right madam chair I
comment I guess on the amendment
absolutely please so
I think the part you mentioned
page two starting online I
six one the
where I struggle with that is I
just to me it's about that
transparency and letting the
employer know as well I
understand that that might be
considered punitive but I mean
and I know it might be different
from the private sector than in
the public sector but you know
we apply for jobs someone
applies to be a teacher
background checks things like
that you know we let employers
know that you should compensate
this person and we might not
have a way to track that right
now with the secretary of state
but I guess.
If that's the case I I would
wonder maybe that's something we
should be doing to expand that
so for me I would have a problem
with removing that
In regards to what this bill
does as far as logging.
I would respectfully disagree
and say that it's not just about
lobbying in the legislature if
you are lobbying locally
you know we work with are
counties our city government our
mayors and so there would still
be in some ways those conflicts
of after serving being a
lobbyist and that's why you're
being hired to to do that work
so.
I understand some might think
this is a narrow issue but I I
believe that this.
revolving door is bigger than
just what happens in the
roundhouse
you know I I will follow the
will of the committee but I
these amendments will not be
friendly thank you thank center
and and one thing I just want to
clarify for you because I might
have misunderstood some you just
said but but in the lobbyist
regulation act defines a
lobbying and it defines as
specifically as only provided so
so this would not apply beyond
provided money because we've had
that discussion and I talk about
what do we need to I was saying
should we put the word provided
in there and then I went back
and and review that statute it
is already specifically merit to
that so so just so you know.
On that point as a state
legislative races state
provided because to questions
the poll and Tommy electricians
are provided.
And of our rules committee
analyst could bring up that
statute and and let us know.
Going to be and to eleven
probably two dash eleven dash
one and then you get the full
definition of lobbying I would
like to know.
One that is built.
Yeah because it it it is quite
it it's it involves lobbying
executive level officials on
anything that is there's a
legislative issue.
Madam chair concern about.
And I have the definition as
well chair of the yes go to
eleven one this regulation of
lobbying means attempting to
influence number one a decision
related to any matter to be
considered or being considered
by the legislative branch of
state government or any provided
the committee or any legislative
matter requiring action by the
governor or waiting action by
the governor or an official
action.
State right so so it so this is
limited just to just the state.
So I think center has indicated
that the amendment is unfriendly
do we have discussion boards
further discussion on on the
amendment.
Chair.
But this moved either.
I'm sorry thank you I will I
will go ahead and move the
amendment.
Senator us store.
Madam chair I.
I think the and then.
more specifically thanks this
legislation do what the Senate's
walks I think you're manages
clarify.
That.
That is five.
That is the issue not the
employer so if the file has a
lot of these.
And you put on with your
amendment if you file as a
lobbyist for the secretary of
state is one that will recheck
the file with with your.
Not the employer so I think this
I think this really improves the
bill by taking out the issue
about what now what we have to
call we have to interact with
employers we have to tell
employers they can't pay their
lobbyist to me that doesn't make
sense it makes much more sense
that you're you're rejected as
of filing as a lobbyist by the
secretary of state if this were
passes so I think it's a
friendly amendment hi I hope
you'll reconsider Center poll
because I can't vote for the
original I can't vote for this
with the admin thank you madam
chair.
Further discussion on the
amendment.
Senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you Mr chairman it just
seems to me that one of the
purposes of the bills to.
Reminds potential employers of
lobbyists that you should do
your recruiting among the
legislative members for a couple
of years of in you just think it
does make sense to say that you
can't do this as well as the the
law this can't be higher than
the employer is the one who does
the recruiting.
Not the lobbyist so I I'm not
I'm not sure who Senator Stewart
on that point because it does
seem that this should be known
to employers that you can't
recruit this group of people up
here for a couple of years until
after the.
The.
Learn the joys of retirement.
Further discussion on the
amendment madam chair I'm sorry
if I can make another comment so
So
the scores on the lobbyist stand
in that the report gets rejected
my concern is that gets rejected
what stops the employer from
still paying someone from this
and so for me.
Having this in their notify the
employer that you should not do
this
is something I think we should
have.
Thank you.
Any Senator Lopez Madam You
might want in justice is part of
the procedures maybe see if
there's any comments from the
public also.
if you wish on the amendment.
Senator Lopez I I appreciate the
suggestion I don't think that's
a have it I want to get into hi
in general the rules committee.
Yes.
Okay
let's let's do a of all calls on
this one.
Yes.
Senator Baca yes Senator Ingle
is excused Senator law office
nope Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna.
This is adoption of the
amendment of the amendment yes.
And clarify
madam secretary and senator
pope.
so I understand that you do not
like the proposed amendment.
Madam chair madam chair center
it's on from on from.
Okay.
But also I know.
Senator McKenna no seven two
more yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Well Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no
Senator Pirtle.
No Senator Pirtle no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Stewart.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
how to me you know.
Senator how to me no and senator
do the.
Yes and without the amendment
fails and I believe so senator
Morris has an amendment I I
don't know if your language
needs to be reworked based on
that then thank you of the
discussion of what to confirm if
it works or not without that
last moment with this new
coalition just developed a.
Quite baffling
if we could pass out the
amendment that we can if we can
have staffing firm that food
tracks or not we can
of the bill moves out of here
with you know so this
conversation to do sherry if the
sponsor to get the amendment
this Madam center at all plus
you what you're doing
and I welcome you to this debate
I've been around this building a
little long on both the
executive level and as the
legislature for last eight years
so my member will actually put
your bill on steroids because
what happened what this bill
would be used to self
flagellation against us if we
don't adopt this amendment what
the amendment would do would
include statewide elected
officials and also the governor
exempt employees and that is
really where you see a lot of
these lobbying contracts special
towards the end of a governor's
term you see these government
government employees to have a
lot more sway in the day to day
operations of you and I do madam
chair senator and I'm screaming
I'm gonna be bipartisan about
throwing a couple people box the
previous administration had an
executive order that banned the
employees from part becoming law
this for two years we were just
two years reference that you I
mean they had a sign.
And so they left service within
that time they could not get a
job lobbying for two years over
students that day the term ended
that executive order went out
the door and the chief of staff
of the previous administration
knew we was here three weeks
later lobbying all of us this
administration there's some guy
who brought us our friends with
Victor who was the governor's
lobbyists up stairs job was to
develop relationships all Fox
Sports the government's agenda
and I'm not going to one of the
buses good guy I just to keep
under the bus.
and then back to goes over at
our old D. which regulates who
does what percentage of our
economy in the state of New
Mexico just learned within the
last two weeks he's out there
lobbying so not only.
Does your bill to the Senate
with that governor's previous
governors through selected
officials actually go out since
our time here and I know some
others would be even longer than
I have seen that happen on
happen that they go out and they
get a lot of the jobs and I all
the things you just said apply
to them so my bill would
actually expand this to include
the governor exempts which were
included on the executive order
in the previous ministration and
also governors are a governor's
and statewide elected officials
it is not address the issue that
so Senator box brought up with
some commissioners or anything
like that this is just dealing
with us here in legislative so I
hope we see that as a friendly
and I think it does a goes to
what the what you're really
trying to talk about is rooting
out some of this perceive
corruption because of it's just
a legislature I don't know if I
could support it is just a self
flagellation of us feeding
shelter open Senator T. C. Pino
capitol lobby for the libraries
next year
you know things like that but
I think our my member makes is
really addresses the the in
perception of corruption that
you're talking about in just for
my personal experience in this
building for three terms of
Senator and previously as chief
of staff lieutenant governor and
other roles I've played in
politics and government I think
this gets to where you're going
a little bit stronger Madam
chair Senators OP to you can
review it and see those from my
to.
In the intent and the intent
that it's meant.
Senator this first madam chair
Senator you know I I agree with
just the statements and what
you're talking about
my only concern is this is a
pretty hefty amendment and I I
would.
you know the first few pages are
pretty clear
I just.
I don't know what it would do
other impacts with what's there
so in concept of what you're
talking about.
It would be friendly I agree to
it but I'm a little a little
hesitant to see what all this
does to substitute that that
that's my over that very fair it
next that smart on your part I
only for this is your the bill
the substitute the only part
that would be different is the
part even though it is three six
pages long it's just basically
because they have to take the
entire bill put in there for
most of what you're seeing here
is just to read numbering and
lettering publicized section so
the only part that is new art is
working here it says after
legislators elected state
official government employee.
On page two that on the line
section under the the fines
Water government governor exempt
employee is which I believe came
from directly from the state
person act.
And then so those other other on
the lines are you know the
cleaning up of the hold on his
which we have statute whenever
we open up statutes Senator
Lopez actually sponsored that we
wind up all those old go gender
basis
pronouns.
And so that's that's why it's
kind of long related actually is
but there isn't anything the
fair use in the change the
meeting on tenth of your bill.
And so the so the only other
question I would have is on
This item does how even even
with what the bill would be the
amendment right now we have the
under the government conduct act
right we have.
When you're after leaving
government service employment a
former public officer inflation
not representative for pay a
person before the state agency
local government agency at which
the former public officer or
employee served or worked and
and I'm just wondering.
Have with that need to be
updated or is that a separate
thing or was it role like I
guess what impact it would have
on the current regulations that
we have a secure server
excellent question you know I'm
gonna use the example of of the
previous chief of staff under
the old law even though the
executive had that executive
order prevented them from going
to get sloppy jobs to the term
was over I guess theoretically
it would have only prevented him
from going up stairs and
lobbying the bank of the current
governor which I don't think
anyone would have paid him to go
to
so it only be you know it would
prevent the current statute
you're talking about would have
been say Victor from going to
regulate our on a lobbying are
all the but I sure wouldn't
prevented from going left
lobbying any of us are upstairs
or any other status which you
would have obviously a
significant influence over.
And I'm not throwing director of
USCIS blame him for doing what
he's doing is a young man
Smartmatic and he's going to get
a job are you going to do what
he did.
This is a friendly or unfriendly
equipment and madam chair this
will be from.
Is there Senator McKenna and
that's others funds.
madam chair I have a question
about the bill so we're next
time I appreciate back to.
I.
Thank you madam chair I believe
that the bill is directed
towards volunteer legislators
and the amendment is directed
towards paid staff and I think
it's changing the intent of the
bill.
Thank you.
Further discussion on the
amendment.
And and I don't know that we
have to do with the amendment
some of the
though I did not to do we can
for madam chair I think we're
waiting staffs even make sure
it's still tracked since it was
based off of the previous
amendment.
And so yes and I apologize
because it failed Center the our
analyst came over and said what
was that he wanted me to check
and I said I didn't hear must
expect anything so yes Sir
Stafford Center pope the the
amendment was space tracking all
of the other madmen assuming the
other member was going to step
which it did not so what I don't
know for sure so this amendment
actually tracks with the
currents of.
The
the answer was for the audience
that it does.
Senator Stewart.
chair I have Senator products to
me this is just not for
volunteer law office it's for a
lot now I'm sorry madam chair it
was volunteer legislators and
this amendment was for paid
employee health that that was my
comment that is.
Thank you.
Senator Ortiz Pena
Representative just a quick
glance I I don't think it does
track anyone because we reject
the amendment.
Those proposes over back to the
original billing will fill.
Page two.
Lines to.
And so we will.
Are you looking at the original
bill or the the committee south
as we are on.
Right with you.
Okay never mind.
Further discussion on the
amendment Senator Stewart Madam
chair well we're still trying to
figure out if this works.
I don't believe.
yes number three on one line
for.
You.
The regional.
Shares.
Of what it takes now but you
actually here's this is that
that wasn't
done.
So does not track for well no no
I'm saying it does try yes track
because you're to your amendment
is written so that.
On the ritual stuff not with
that that shares amendments.
You know chair simple colleges
but.
This will you know when we have
a substitute amendment.
Those right into the suburbs so
although we use the word mending
it won't be and then if we pass
it will be part of something.
The amendment.
I move the number to a committee
substitute for Senate over for.
Seeing no further the Santo
Lucas addressing some of the.
Senator Baca I don't recall is
friendly run for families.
The second amendment.
Yes.
Is what valuable.
The second amendment is what
what will be voting on presently
unless there's further
discussion on a.
Here is the process yes are you
requiring a second on amendments
I am not no high and I'm not
going to require seconds in this
committee and.
If when when Senator Hermio
sharing if each is to require
second he is welcome to do so.
Thank you.
All right let's go ahead and
do a maybe a roll call vote.
About.
Yes senator Munoz Senator Ingle.
Yes Senator Ingle yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Arthur Smith Senator
Lopez Senator McKenna.
madam chair and senator once
again I'm very different
messages are is this a friendly
amendment madam chair Senator
hope.
Chair Senators from.
Yes.
Senator McKinney yes Senator
Moores yes senator Morris yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
No and explain level.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Noakes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics no
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Stewart now and I will make a
twenty eight.
Senator Stewart no Senator how
to meal yes Senator how to meal
yes incentive to do the yes
Senator Duhigg yes.
Yes.
So with that the amendment is
often and Senator two PM please
expect German just very quickly
if it's just I I agree with what
you're doing here just seems to
me that in line with Senator I
think you really need to have a
separate.
The.
All right so we're back on the
bill as amended or the side of
the committee said as amended
which will just be rolled into
the overall twenty seven Senator
of the pandemic.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator so my question is
really a discussion question.
clarify for myself and members
of the audience and the webcast
attendees
I'm noticing from the original
that madam chair Senator broke
right in we had a misdemeanor.
And now with the current bill
we have I believe it's page two
lines nine a person who violates
the provisions of this section
shall be subject to penalties of
a lobbyist regulation Act and so
I looked it up of madam madam
chair and senator pope.
And I'm seeing here.
In addition to any of the
penalties that may be assessed
any person who knowingly and
willfully violates any the
provisions of the law this
regulation actually punished by
a fine of up to five thousand
dollars and may have his.
We should be for
this recipe registration revoked
or his lobbying activities in
joint for up to three years so
that's that's the penalty madam
chair and senator pope that
someone who breaks this statute
if the doctor will Center right
and no more misdemeanor okay our
current chair person okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center for.
Senator Baca had you next on the
list of stuff Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator for bring this forward
you know I I think
although the intentions are good
this is a definitely a solution
in search of a problem.
I really don't know.
Matt been here ten years I can't
think of one time that I've ever
had an interaction with somebody
that really felt like maybe they
were capitalizing too much on
their experience or something
along those lines I know in the
public there's this perception
that somehow lobbyist or bad but
the real issue with this bill is
you know it's only really
focused on people that lobby for
corporate entities.
When the majority a lobbyist or
actually for five oh one C.
threes nonprofits and things
like that and we don't pull
those in.
Because the the easiest work
around here is
a former state budget legislator
shall not accept compensation as
a lobbyist less easy on the
executive director that's what
you pay for I lobby for free.
So it.
You know although the intentions
are good madam chair and senator
it's just not enforceable you
know there's so many work
arounds of this I think you're
gonna put certain people at a
disadvantage and then those that
are are smart
we're going to find ways around
it and we try to legislate
morality a lot in this building
and and I think we we assume
everybody's bad where some
people might have good
intentions maybe when I retire I
decide I want to lobby on behalf
of the chili Association chilli
growers because I'm a farmer and
and I think they're great well
now I wouldn't be able to use
that knowledge and help them.
And so who who would be better
served or let's see boys and
girls club wanted to hire me to
lobby and I wanted to go in and
receive the funding for their
organization around the state I
can do that madam chair and so
although we think of just what
lobbyist you as bad we have to
understand that that there is a
place for them they do a lot of
good there's lobbyists that just
came to me earlier on behalf of
big brothers big sisters where
if I was a legislator and I
wanted to help the brothers and
big sisters or tell me I can't.
So who are we serving were we
trying to serve there's a way
that we can serve once we retire
and if we make a little money
doing that what's the harm in
that Madam we don't get paid to
be legislators myself I'm
driving back and forth the
Russell two three times a week
just to see my family try to run
a business doing the best I can
as a volunteer and I think it's
a little disingenuous whenever
we we basically make these
assumptions about what lobbyists
do and after all that thank you
madam chair.
Any further discussion on the
sub has amended.
Okay
okay so anyone want to make a
motion.
Do I.
That
is why we have to get.
Senate bill thirty four house
and Senate bill.
At a do pass the Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
Bill Clinton as what we have a
is the which will reflect the
amendments.
All right let's go ahead and and
do a roll call vote.
Senator about that.
Excuse.
Senator Ingle.
No.
Senator Ingle no Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator mechanic
test Senator more yes senator
Morris yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
L..
Senator Pirtle no Senator
Stefanics nope
Senator CENIC's no Senator
Stewart now Senator Stewart no
senator had a meal yes Senator
had a meal yes and Senate to do
the yes Senator Duhigg yes yes
six yes for no and one excuse.
And with that you have a due
pass with six and they've done
that and with that the Senate
