The role of PR 10 so we won't be
hearing that one today.
Um
We'll probably be doing SB 54
last. I don't know that we will.
I think there are some questions
on that one, so I don't know
that we'll get to a vote on that
one today, uh, we will start
that discussion. We're going to
continue today with SJR3, which
we had started on Friday. Uh, we
had organized opposition speak,
uh, in opposition.
To the bill on Friday, we center
our souls was not available at
that time. We didn't know who
has organized uh support was, so
we're gonna go ahead and, and
give them an opportunity.
Uh, to do their public comment
this morning, um, our souls if
you just wanna kind of give us
a, a brief reminder of of what
the spill is about and then
we'll go to your organized
support.
Thank you. And first, I
apologize, I was not able to be
here on Friday. I was stuck
chairing my committee over in
education, uh, Senator Stewart
well versed with what this bill
does and did, I'm sure did a
very.
a very capable job of of of
explaining, uh, but it's been
many years that we've been under
a secretary of Education, and
there have been multiple changes
back and forth, which is not
good for education. This
essentially unwinds that, uh,
this bill is very, very close to
what we had prior for many years
where we had a state
superintendent of schools, who
was elected or was, yes, who was
hired by a and uh both
elected and appointed board
State Board of Education with 5
appointed by the governor to
stagger terms and 10 elected
from the districts around the
state just staggered terms. And
so just kind of a reminder as to
what this bill is and goes back
to what we had had in the past.
I think you have over the course
of about 40 years of that prior
system, we had 3 state
superintendents of schools, that
stability is very important for
education to move forward. But
with that, we're happy to go to
to the organized support.
You will, uh, for this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. All
right, thank you, Senator, and
so I have.
What I have here, I don't know
if this is your organized
support or just other people who
have signed up, so I'm gonna
read the names. You tell me if
you have other people that you
wanted as your organized
support. Meredith Main, Hope
Morales, Alisa Cooperda Uribe,
and uh Martin Madrid.
Is that Martin Madrid certainly
is one of them, who is one of
the superintendents, and I have
with me also is Stan Rounds,
who's the executive director of
the Superintendents Association
and the state education leaders
association.
Well, if you have expert who
also like to be able to speak
positively about it. Sure. So
how about anyone you have as
your organized support, go ahead
and and call them up and then if
we have time afterwards, we'll,
we'll get to these other folks.
I'm sure if I could, I'd like to
make a statement and then
perhaps uh Martin Madrid, who's
the president of the
superintendents Association
who's online, I believe, and
others there perhaps.
I stand rounds of the executive
director of the Newexpo
superintendents Association,
also the coalition of
Educational Leaders, I would
remind the committee that this
bill and its current form is
what had passed this Senate last
session with one dissenting
vote.
That was why we chose that as
the starting point, so as we
rolled it forward. We understand
the opposition that from the
charter schools as an example,
I'd want the committee to know
that I've been working with
them, uh, we have, uh, a, a
workaround that we think is
appropriate. It's not prepared
for today. We've asked that the
committee allow this out of the
committee so we can continue
working on that, uh,
short-lived, uh, madam, uh.
Chairperson, um.
We believe that you can do a
carve out of 5 members of the
12-member body to be the
essentially the public education
commission oversight.
They would have the rights that
are of the public education
commission would be under the
auspices of the state Board of
Education that would be part of
the.
We think something like that
would meet the concerns and
needs for continuity of
oversight.
that they have
Final statement, if I may. The
reason the superintendents voted
unanimously for this, for this
bill.
Is that we have seen
considerable changes in the.
The Secretary of Education over
the last two administrations in
this administration, we've had 5
different secretaries of
education.
sensitize the committee what
that does for superintendents is
every time there's a new
secretary there seems to be new
initiatives, new directions that
are taken.
We know in good management of
school districts and of the
public education policy, we need
to have consistency as you move
through time because you can't
stop and start like.
Hence this uh version over 42
years, there were 3 state
superintendents of public
instruction. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. All right, Mr.
Madrid, is he online?
Mr. Madrid, go ahead.
Thank you. Can you hear me? Yes.
OK, um, madam, uh, chair, I'm,
I'm Martin Madrid. I'm president
of the New Mexico school
superintendent Association and
I'm also the superintendent of
Santa Rosa Consolidated Schools.
I just want to reiterate what
Stan was saying there, you know,
uh, stability in schools is
essential for student success.
It also helps the teacher
retention and overall
educational excellence, you
know, we need consistent
leadership, clear policies.
And steady support systems that
allow our educators to focus on
what matters most teaching and
learning.
Excuse me, freaking frequent
changes in leadership or
direction create uncertainty,
you know, in schools, ah, also
at the NMP, uh, and it makes it
difficult to implement long term
improvements, and this also
erodes trust among educators,
students and families. You know,
I just want to reiterate the
leadership at the NMPED needs to
be stable, and it hasn't been
the last few years, so with
that, uh, it is unanimous.
and also superintendents uh
support center joint resolution
3. Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
So Senator, are you OK going? I
like to let sponsors pick who
speaks on their bill. So if you
are OK with me going to these
other folks, I will go ahead and
do so. Madam Chair, I'm happy
with the other people on there
as well as Joe Guihan, who is
the executive director of the
School Boards Association is in
the room and would like to to
speak as well in in support. OK,
let's have him come up first and
then we'll go to these other
films.
Thank you, Madam Chair of the
committee, and executive
director of the New Mexico
School Boards Association. I'm
pleased to report that our
membership at our delegate
assembly passed this past
December to support going back
to a skate board of education.
So we're here in support of this
legislation and hope that uh
that you give a favorable
consideration, and we thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Meredith Matam
Main,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico and the American
Association of University Women,
and we're very pleased to see
this um joint resolution back
again. I was very disappointed
last year when it uh didn't go
very far, and this is a time we
have had this before, uh, the
body, many, many.
times over the last, well, I
think 20 years, um, and I think
right now you have the support
of the superintendent's
association, the school leaders.
I'm speaking as an educator and
um remembering Governor
Richardson telling me why he
wanted the PEC, um, and he said,
because I can control it, and
initially it was um until
recently it was the PEC was
supposed to be.
uh vocational education as well
as for school charter school
authorization and then um they
decided that they weren't going
to do vocational education, um,
New Mexico does not like to be
compared with anybody else, but
we are at the bottom of all
rankings in the country, and
we're the only state without a
school board. You look at the
top performing states,
Massachusetts, Connecticut,
Front, all of them have school
boards.
We're the only ones and we do
not want in this case, to be the
state different, um, with the
declining populations, uh
demographics of the younger
population, we have more schools
than we need. We don't need to
keep on authorizing more charter
schools, we can expand some of
the charter schools that we
have, and we need um basically
we're probably facing federal
funding cuts, um, and we need to
have some, you know, fair-minded
body that
can look at the whole picture,
pick a superintendent, um,
supervisor superintendent of
work, you know, um, in a very
strategic manner to use the
dollars that were already
investing in education, most
wisely.
So I urge you to support this.
Um, joint resolution, and I want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing him back in the and the
people who've testified.
Um, so anyway.
Right, uh, hope morales.
She online?
Madam Chair, I signed up to
speak in opposition. Is that OK?
No, we, we already did
opposition on Friday, so, uh,
Alisa Cooper de Urita.
Shall I?
Madam Chair, I had also signed
up to speak in opposition. Thank
you.
Oh, you know what? I'm sorry,
our committee secretary
Use the exact system that I'm
supposed to look at to see who's
in in opposition. I did not look
at it, so I apologize. OK. Thank
you, uh, senator. Do you have
any, you have a few minutes
left, you don't have any wrap up
comments or would you like us to
go to the committee?
Madam Jared, just, you know, I
understand some of the concern
of the charter schools, but as
I've had discussions with them,
uh, talked with the
superintendents association and
how I envisioned this is
certainly this is not trying to
get rid of charter schools or
slap them or anything, but they
are public schools and would be
under the state Board of
Education, probably as I see it,
there would be a a subcommittee
or something of that sort, to
continue the work that the
public education.
Commission has currently been
doing. Uh, it's going to be
needed, this new superintendent
needs to make sure that they are
over all of public schools that
would include charters and the
traditional public schools. And
so, yeah, I think the the
opposition is fearful that they
will be left out, but I, they
are 10 approximately 10% of our
student body, it's not going
away, and it should be something
that is within the public school
superintendent's purview.
Uh, and the superintendent hired
and supervised by that board.
Thank you. All right, members of
the committee.
Uh, Senator Brantley.
Good morning, Madam Chairman.
Thank you guys for presenting
this.
You started off your argument
mentioning that we needed
continuity, um, is one of the
reasons of keeping this. We've
heard that also with the cases
of CYFD or the revolving.
Door of cabinet secretaries.
But, but since we've moved to a
cabinet model in 2023. We have
in fact had 9 secretaries.
When I look at it though, under
Bill Richardson from 23 to 10,
he had won.
Susannah during her entire time.
As governor had 2.
And it's only under this
governor.
Have we had a continuing
rotation.
Cabinet secretaries Trujillo,
Stewart, Steinhaus, Romero, and
we have Padilla. Wouldn't it be
a little misleading to
suggestion that it's the
structure that's the problem and
not perhaps this current
administration and being able to
Oh
Qualified secretaries in the
position?
Madam Chair and Senator, um, I
understand what you're saying,
but no, I think it still is the
structure, and part of that is
their major swings every time
there's a new governor that
there's going to be a new, uh,
change in that, and so you don't
have the continuity across
administrations even, that if
you have a governor every 4
years, which is possible, or
even every 8 years, it doesn't
allow continuity across that
transition, and that's very
difficult time for the schools
and
it slows down progress that
we're making in other areas.
I could understand that, so
maybe 8 years, although we've
had a revolving door that's
certainly not helpful for
students under this
administration, my concern and,
and typically I like taking
power away from just the
executive. I think there's a
little more oversight for the
legislator to come in when we
need this. I, I, I applaud the
efforts that's being done with
the game commission, for
example, my fear with PED is
that one of my biggest
complaints is that in New
Mexico, we seem to work in silos
and so we have EC ECD then we
have.
PED then we have higher
education that doesn't seem to
always communicate with what
workforce solution comes in here
and it's like the priorities
never align. My, my biggest
concern with shotgunning
something like this is that we
would lose, it would be
fragmented and so we would
further be exacerbating the
problem of having EC ECD
communicate constantly with PED
and then from PED to higher ed
or workforce to create that
pipeline.
And, and so my fear is coming in
here is that maybe it's knee
jerk to kind of cut out the PED
section, and we would lose that
continuity and leadership across
there. I see both sides of this,
um, that, those would be my
greatest concerns, although I
also see the positive saying,
well, one is that maybe the
legislator would have more
oversight of what this is. Um,
I'm gonna continue to listen to
the conversation, but on a
surface level, I see almost more
harm in doing this than good,
uh, but I appreciate the
presentation from both of you.
I have Senator Towns on the list
so I guess who who would anyone
else like to be on the list?
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, Mr. Browns, good to see
you.
Um, I'm interested in why you
think.
I mean, what your bill does
really is remove the PEC from
the process and replaces it.
And I'd like to know why you
think that makes a demonstrative
difference in the outcome to
students.
Madame Chair and senator, I
don't think it takes the PEC out
of the process. I think it puts
the PEC back under the what
would be the state
superintendent as the leader of
schools. The PEC is technically
under the secretary currently,
they just are elected
independently to oversee parts
of the
The charter schools, but they
are public schools, and
therefore should be under what
would be the new superintendent.
Madam Cher and.
Senator
Would it surprise you that they
see it a little differently. Uh.
I think, I think you know that,
and I, and I think you know that
the charters are very concerned.
I think there's been some
conversation today.
That might have given him a
little hope, but to say that
they've been involved in the
process up to date.
I, I don't believe accurate.
And so I would just, I would
encourage you.
Um, if this bill goes forward
that you do that, I don't think.
Um
I mean when you look at
The effects of charters on
education and their outcomes.
Uh, some of the comments.
On some of what I've read.
Lead me to believe that the
impact
The Charters is to restrict.
Yeah.
And
I
I don't see why the number one,
I don't see why it's necessary.
And number 2, I don't see why
it's good.
I mean, I'd like, if you would,
Senator, to tell me what you
think the impact of charters
have been the public education.
Madam Chair and Senator, you
know, that really is not the
focus of this bill as to what
the impact of charters are to
education. They are public
schools that are within our
public school model, and they
will continue to be into the
future. This bill does not
change any of that.
And this may make come, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend.
Charters are 10% of our overall
delivery mechanism. They deserve
the attention.
That that that that draws.
From our standpoint, it needs to
be a unified system.
That is taken out from under the
kinds of changes that we have
seen. It's escalating. Senator
Townsend, Senator Bradley gave
us a nice history of how that
went, um.
The early implementer of
Governor Richardson understood
that this was in replacement of
a state board of education that
have been in place since the
Constitution of this state was
written.
So part of what we're doing is
we're going back to the original
constitutional mechanism.
That have been designed in our
constitution for the state.
It allowed us to have
consistent.
A4 momentum and education, it
gave us a constitutional leader.
Which is what this would do,
that the state superintendent of
public instruction would be a
constitutional officer.
That allows you to take someone
who has the skill set.
As the understanding and an
elected and appointed in this
case, combined board to allow
the insights from all of the
above.
To guide what the public policy
should be.
Madam Chair, Senator, I was the
public school finance chief for
the state of New Mexico when
Alan Morgan.
was the state superintendent of
public instruction.
I lived my life with you all
during that period of time, as
his mouthpiece on what public
school finance needed to be.
We've lost that Mr. Chairman or
Madam Chair, um, uh, Senator
Townsend.
We're simply trying to return
back to that constitutional
value.
Uh, Madam Chair, final point.
Charters are important to the
fabric of New Mexico.
So are the other 90% of the
business needs to be lifted into
an oversight that works.
I recall from the public
education commission was formed.
It's after we formed the
Secretary of Education.
There was nothing assigned to
the, to that commission because
still remain on the books.
Wisely and appropriately.
We have you assigned it as a
legislature, the duties of
overseeing charters in New
Mexico.
We don't see this in any way as
abrogating that.
But instead recombining the
effort.
So that it is in fact a single
point of effort, a single board
of oversight.
As I said earlier, we, we don't
have this in this yet.
Moving out a a a part of that as
a commission structure to
oversee the charters in New
Mexico and to do that continuing
work but Mr. Chairman, I see
this as a consolidation and a
free focus rather than somehow
trying to take power away from
one or the other. Thank you,
Madam chair.
chair and um.
Mr. Rounds, would you support
expanding the role of more
charter schools in New Mexico.
As Chairman, I don't know how
this would inhibit that because
as you carved out a commission,
they would still have the same
right, charters have a right to
be approved two ways locally.
And by the state, the commission
only oversees by the state part.
Local districts do the rest.
And so that would still remain
in in statute.
I think as we move through time,
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
know what the ultimate.
construct of public education in
New Mexico should be. I think
that's something that should
grow.
With the state of New Mexico
to solutions that work for all.
That includes charters.
I think it did.
Madam chair, it includes though,
opportunities to maintain varied
calendaring which Madam Chair,
uh, as the superintendents
association just.
Uh, prevailed in district court
after a year of determining
where that power sat by the laws
you as a body constructed.
We support the legislature in
those kinds of efforts.
With the body of the state board
of education.
The opinion of the
superintendents hold is that
will give even more of that kind
of continuation of.
Of uh response to legislative
action than it does now because
it doesn't insert the executive
in a um
Potential adversarial position.
Thank you, ma'am.
Madam Chair and Mr. Rounds, my
real question was, you look at
the performance of charters and
public schools today.
It would lead me to believe that
we ought to expound on what
works.
So my question was, would you,
would you
For the expansion of arables in
New Mexico. Senator, you're,
you're out of it. You're, you're
off the bill at this point. So
you need to Mr. Rounds is doing
a good job of trying to keep you
on the bill with his answers to
your questions, but your
question is off the bill, so you
need to stay on the, on the
topic that we're we're on right
now. I appreciate that, but I
think in my opinion,
Oh
Madam Chair was, there was other
implications that I was trying
to draw out, but I, I respect
your question.
And, and I respect the
The quality of your answers.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Senator Gallego, followed by
Senator Block.
I'm sure Senator, uh, Stan, um,
a couple of just quick questions
and then I've talked, um.
I have opposition to the spill,
and the reason being is, uh,
looking at in a
I regret now, Madam Chair and
Senator, that we had the
opposition speak last week.
Uh, it would mean refreshing to
understand their needs now.
If I understand right.
Humanitarian senator, you talked
about negotiations later.
On, uh,
The stuff for the charters.
Could you tell me how that would
work and what that would look
like.
So, so Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Through the legislative process.
Again, as I, as I.
told the committee or expressed
to the committee. This bill is
simply picking up.
What had passed the Senate in
the prior version, which
Has been my process is my
forty-second session, Madam
Chair, that's always been my
process in moving things forward
legislatively is to is to work
with the sponsor in doing that.
We recognize the concerns of the
charters as an example, and I've
talked to Matt Paul even this
morning again and, and what I
would recommend, Madam Chair, is
that we move this forward. We
are committed.
To working with the charters.
On getting a design that they
can be comfortable with.
That this does not impede their
progress to date.
But it, our, our vision is how
do we consolidate, how do we
consolidate that oversight into
one body, which is what this
does.
And put it in an elected slash
appointed body to do that work,
which goes back to the original
constitution of this state, uh,
and, and get it back in that
form and that's simply what
we're trying to uh to do. Madam
Chair, Senator Galgos, my
commitment to you, Mr. Paul.
is that we will continue should
you be able to move this.
out of this committee, uh, to
continue that work and amend the
bill through the process.
To get to that spot I've
suggested, what I suggested to
Mr. Paul, in fact, before this
was brought to you last week.
But again this morning, uh that,
that we, we perhaps carve out a
standing commission that has the
power of that oversight, retain
it within that body, but they
have it act in its own.
In its own.
And be overseen by the state
Board of Education.
To maintain that legitimacy.
He, he can speak for himself,
Madam chair, he indicated that
that might be a solution. We
would love to vet that out. This
process will go on for 40 or
more days, we're committed, my
pro my promise to this
committee.
As I've done for 42 years is
we'll continue working to
resolve the matter should the
committee allow this out of this
committee and to move forward
for. Thank you for that, Madam
Chair and Senator and stand, uh
just give you some background.
We actually only have 33 days
left. Uh, I've been in 23 years,
a school board member here, and
I think I am the only school
board member still on the
legislature.
Um, but I've been in the
legislature for 12 years. So
I've got a safe haven bill. I've
got other bills that are
critical to my area, but they
are in limbo till I get the
wording right.
Because my theory is, and we
talked about this if you go on
with no wreck. I think it's our
job as legislators to get the
bill right.
Before it gets to the floor and
is heard by the full membership
and uh and, and I appreciate
you. I've always had a lot of
respect for you. It's one of
those things I understand and
understand school boards and
school needs.
But I'm just in opposition to
this. I think this discussion
should have happened between
Friday and now?
We will have the charter schools
on board to be able to show that
they don't have any fear, and
I'm just gonna continue, I'll be
listening,
but I'm gonna continue my point,
I don't think this bill needs to
go forward until it's repaired,
we had it last year.
We have it this year.
I've got pills I've been working
on for 4 years, the process
holds it back.
The clarification is done.
With that all you chair.
And Madam Chair, we appreciate
your service number one
Senate minority caucus leader
and I've, I've worked with him
over those years and does a fine
job. We understand we don't
always agree how to get there,
Madam Chair, I'm trying to get
it there.
Thank you
Center block followed by Senator
Armio.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Senator, I look forward to
working with you in the upcoming
Senate basketball game, by the
way, so.
Um,
what?
No
Uh
Thank you, Senator. I, I
appreciate both of you being
here and um.
Advocating for education. Um, I
just got a few questions here.
I'm on my 4th cup of coffee, so
I have a little more patience
with me.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, I wanna,
um, I, I'm sorry, I forgot your
name, sir.
stand rounds, R O U N D S.
Mr. Rounds.
I, I was struck by the, the
woman from the uh the Mexico
League of Women voters who
talked about this bill, uh, last
year. This is a
100% carbon copy or is it pretty
close?
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Block, I believe this is
what was left.
On the table after the Senate's
action as it moved to house
educationless. Perfect. Thank
you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So was that the previous
60 day session was up to 30 day.
Mhm because these are germane
because they're constitutional
right, thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair.
So
Has this bill, Senator, or Mr.
Rounds, is this Bill?
Um
Been through the system before
the um a year ago as well.
Madam Chair and, and senator,
yes, and, and last year it was
co-sponsored as the lead sponsor
was Senator Neville out of the
Farmington.
Area, but we've run this bill or
something similar for a couple
of years, uh, some of the
opposition had come from this
administration, because, you
know, we, we had would have
impacted this administration.
It's now between
administrations, so it would not
impact the current
administration. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, as I, as I hear that being
shaped.
Um
And then I think I heard you,
Mr. Rounds, talk about.
Well, we gotta work out some of
the policy with the charter
schools.
We, we've had over 2 years to do
that now to work out the policy
with charter schools for over 2
years now, according to what.
Uh, you guys have just said that
we've had this bill for 2 years
now, trying to get it through,
didn't get through. This is
what's left on the table. Here
we are today with 33 days left.
Trying to get through this
through the um committee to pass
on and then we're gonna worry
about trying to
Develop and shape the policy.
That's, that's, that's just not.
That's not a good way of doing
policy of passing a bill here in
committee and hoping
That it works, um, because Mr.
Matt fall.
test, he, he texted me while you
were testifying, sir, and said,
He does not support this going
forward at all either, you said
he was good with it, but he just
texted me and I can share that
text with you, he's not good
with this bill.
And
That set aside, um, Madam Chair.
Senator Mr. Rounds
Let me just understand the bill
here, how it affects local
school. If a school board.
Say in Eunice
would like to cut the school
year from 180 days to say 165
days.
Based on community needs.
Would this
Body
Overrule the local school board.
Madam Chair, this body would be
the body responsible for
rulemaking, which is part of
your question.
Um
We, the superintendents
Association sued this
administration.
Because you as a body, we
believed, spoke finally and
firmly in
saying that ours.
was the basis for calendars.
So, Adam chair, Senator Block
in, in your question.
My assault would be that this
body would
Perform according to law.
The law is very clear and so we
would assume.
There would not be an issue, but
they would be the rulemaking
body.
In lieu of the Secretary of
Education who is now the rule
maker.
One of the difficulties of
rulemaking, Madam Chair, that
this solves.
Is it that once the rule is
made.
The field after making making
their comments can still go back
and appeal the final rule to
someone being this body under
the current system, there's no
one to appeal to.
Thank you, sir, for that. I, I
appreciate that answer. Um,
In a way, I thank you, Madam
Chair.
So what you're telling me?
I want to make sure I understand
you.
The Eunice school board or any
other school board in New
Mexico.
says we don't want 180 days,
they pass.
resolution or an ordinance or
whatever it is school boards
passed, I was never, never on
there. So Eunice passes that
resolution, said we're doing
165.
Madam Chair, Mr. Rounds.
What do you say? Yes or no?
Madam Chair, assuming only that
it meets the 1140 hours, which
is your statutory provision, the
answer would be a yes. There
would be no way to block it.
Thank you, sir. All right, I
appreciate that a lot. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um
So, again, I want to understand
the process here, Madam Chair,
uh, Mr. Ron and Senator.
What powers or what authority.
Would this take away from local
school boards.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
nothing.
Then
Madam Chair
Sir, why are we doing this?
This is just another layer if,
if we're going to leave the
local school boards alone.
Then why, why do we have to have
a 15 member body.
When you get 15 people together,
even 15 Republicans, it's a food
fight.
You can't get us to agree on
anything.
But a 15-member education board.
So now I'm really, I'm really
trying to understand the roles
and responsibilities and the
relationships between the school
boards and this brand new body
I'm sorry, Senator, Madam Chair,
and, and if I might,
um,
What this would do that 15
member body.
does not act like the Secretary
of Education does now. Their
main role is to hire a qualified
educator to be the
superintendent of schools for
New Mexico.
Uh, they are not then directly
beholden to the administration
and the changes within that or
one person there who directs
them what to do. They are
managing the
The policies that the larger
body does, the body does not run
the education in the state of
New Mexico.
They provide guidelines for the
superintendent they hire, they
evaluate the superintendent.
They evaluate that performance.
They are not running or directly
answerable to the school boards
or the school districts, they
are elected by the people of New
Mexico to hire a professional
educator to be the
superintendent of schools, who
then is the one who runs and
manages. So it does not put an
extra layer in there, it removes
the, the governor's office and
from
a cabinet level position and
puts it more within the
The public people hiring.
A school board to oversee a
professional superintendent who
runs the schools. Thank you,
Senator. um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
The, the one thing in the bill I
might have missed it is where
where the meetings.
So Madam chair Senator Block.
Under the prior practice when I
worked for Alan Morgan and I uh
it was that body we're talking
about. The meetings were held
across the state of New Mexico,
there were meetings here in
Santa Fe at the education
building in Maybury Hall where
they sat, Mister Chairman, the
body at that time also went
around the state and met in
different districts of that
membership. Uh, that's elective
on their part.
They would have to have meetings
uh.
To do the business
that I thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
And these meetings are held.
They, they
Quarterly or
Mr. Chair, uh, madam chair, um,
Senator Block, it's not
Specified in the statute, it
would be part of their of their.
process of rule making, it would
be at their election when I was
there, they had 6 a year.
On every other month roughly,
although when exactly that, um,
OK.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, man. A
couple more quick things here.
I, I, I think this.
I've had every charter school in
in my district.
Say no, this, this is not a good
bill. I have had overwhelming
opposition to this.
I know this was a complete
disaster and when we had it
during Richardson and Martinez
as well. It didn't go well
because we couldn't get anything
done with the 15 member board,
it was just more.
Just
And, and you're smiling, and I
get that.
Um
I'm very concerned about charter
schools, I don't want to get
into it in this bill as as the
as the uh Madam Chair said.
But I think this is cutting out.
Parents at the local level.
And we're not getting good
access at the local level to.
Have these meetings, whether
they're once a quarter, once
every 2 months around the state,
a big state, and you know,
people are gonna have to travel
a big distance instead of going
to their local school boards.
The big part of this, sir, I
have an issue with is we've had
over 2 years to get this policy
right. We don't even know when
they're meeting in here, have no
idea.
And we've had 2 years, I don't
know if the charter schools are
here or not, to work it out with
them and, and Mr. Fall, who's
adamantly against this bill does
not want it to go forward. Um,
maybe you guys just kind of talk
past each other or something
like that, I'll, I'll give you
that. I'll concede that, but.
Um, Madam Chair, I
I want to say thank you to the
senator and Mr. Rounds for
bringing this forward. I look
forward to working with you on
the basketball court if you'll
take it easy on me, cause I know
you're a good player.
And uh
I know we are and, and, but
there's no way I'm going to
basketball practice at 6:00 a.m.
Um
Thank you both. I appreciate it
and I yield, Madam Chair.
Senator Harmio followed by
Senator Bergmans. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and just, um, I
know that you had Senator Block
that there was a board with the
Richardson and Martinez
administration, there wasn't a
school board at those times. It
was a cabinet secretary during
those times as a former middle
school teacher senator, I
appreciate this bill, and I'm
gonna tell you why.
Every time we change a cabinet
secretary, we changed the vision
of what it is for students in
New Mexico and public schools,
and we're always chasing a
target, and we can never truly
gauge the success of students
when we're changing what we
think that target should be. And
so if there's consistency and
leadership and consistency with
the board as educators, we
better understand what's
expected of our students and
where we're trying to get them.
But when it's always a moving
target that's hard for an
educator to try.
to adjust when we've gone down
one road and then we change
course and then we change again.
And so I wanted to thank you as
a former educator for the board
idea. Now I do have a charter
school that um isn't in
agreement with the bill, and I
heard them loud and clear, but
as a former middle school
teacher, I see why it's needed.
And so, I'm thankful that you're
having a conversation with those
charter schools to see what
their issues are. I had no
question, Senator, just as a
former middle school teacher
wanted to say, I see the.
big picture and see what a state
school board could do to ensure
that we keep moving our students
forward and hopefully move from
bottom of the list and see some
improvements with consistency
and leadership. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator
Bergman, followed by Senator
Stewart. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, for bringing
this again. I'm just curious, do
you have expectations or fears
that the an elected board might
develop the same reputation that
PRC had.
Also you'll have to lay me on
how everything functioned
beforehand because I was not
around when this model was in
use, was much younger. Madam
Chair and senator, and you said
the PRC, I'm not sure I
understand where I can clarify.
So the PRC wasn't elected, um,
entity that was moved to a
non-elected entity under the
executive, and that has, from
what I understand, had to do
with the way the PRC was
functioning because of the
people who are getting elected
to it.
And
From what I understand also, it
didn't have a great reputation.
So do you have any reserves or
fears that the members who would
want to be elected to this
board, might not be the most
qualified. Madam Chair and
senator.
I believe in elections.
And I don't always agree with
the outcomes.
I believe in elections, um, and
I think that what we need to do
is make sure that we educate
people about how important this
board would be for the running
of the schools and the future of
New Mexico, where our children
are.
uh.
In the past, and I did was an
educator under the old system,
and I kick myself because one of
the electeds out of my district
to 1 by 4 votes.
I absolutely did not agree with
the policies that he was
promoting, um, and so I could
have changed that election if I
had been more involved in it.
Uh, that's part of what got me
more involved in in elections in
general is because I saw what
happens when people don't get
involved in elections. And so I
think there's a lot of work that
needs to happen in order to
ensure that we get highly
qualified people elected to this
board. We have lots of retired
educators around New Mexico who
want to continue to be involved
in education, and this would be
a great place for them to be on
an elected board looking out for
The future of all of our
children in New Mexico. It also
still gives the governor 5 seats
as appointments, and so there is
still some control at the
governor level over what happens
in education. 15 member board is
very large and unwieldy.
But again, the board's main role
is oversight of the
superintendent not running the
day to day of the education
policies of the state. I think.
Thank you for that.
Cancer
Looking at the bill.
It does say that the state
school board shall determine the
public school policy and career
technical education policy.
And you'll have control and
management of that and direction
of it.
So I read that as them having
more oversight than just hiring
the superintendent.
But separately also.
The hiring the superintendent
would be enabling legislation.
Am I correct on that?
Madam Chair and, and Senator
Bergman, if this passes, there's
lots of enabling legislation
about details and specifics, uh,
but in the past and in general,
school boards in the same vein,
don't run the public schools.
They hire the superintendent,
and then oversee that
performance and set broad policy
goals.
Thank you. And how long do you
envision the superintendent
serving or how did it work
previously? Do you want to
answer both.
I envisioned the superintendent
serving as long as they are, uh,
doing a good job running the
public schools again over the
prior
30 or I, I think it was about 40
years, we had 3.
We had 3 superintendents that
were highly respected in New
Mexico was in the low 30s, high
or low high 30s, low 40s in
performance across the country,
we aren't anymore. Um, I don't,
I'm not saying that's a direct
result of changing the system,
but it certainly bodes towards
uh those superintendents doing a
reasonable job in New Mexico at
the time, um, was not a wealthy
state, was but was
Providing fairly decent
education.
The
There isn't any perfect thing
that's going to fix everything
in education. I'm certainly not
promising that suddenly we're
gonna be up near the top because
we changed this. I think this is
part of what we need to do to be
moving forward in it. Thank you.
That's all. Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh, thank you, Senator Soul and
Stan for coming back and doing a
much better job than I did last
Friday.
Um.
Uh, I think it's really
unfortunate that this has become
a a fight with the schools, no
intention for that.
Um, I will say that back when I
was teaching, we did have the
state school board and it just
seemed like educate education
community was not part of the
whiplash that it is now.
And certainly under Governor
Martinez was Secretary Scandera,
but we had to sue her multiple
times because the teacher
evaluation, it is tied
everything to Park test scores.
So it, it's not been fun.
Since we've made these changes,
um, I certainly talked with the
Secretary of Education under
Richardson, asked her to use her
bully pulpit, uh, to make
changes in how we teach reading
and she refused to do that.
So, we, we started an experiment
in 2003 and uh sure, there's
great things that we have done,
but I think overall it's just
kept the education community
going back and forth and back
and forth.
Now I don't even actually know
now what we do for teacher
evaluation because we made such
a miserable batch of it under
sandera.
Uh, so, um, uh, uh.
I, I really liked Leonard Delay
Alan Morgan, uh, Mike Davis.
They were good.
They lasted a very long time.
Um, we had less.
We have less teacher vacancy.
Uh
So I don't know what the answer
is. All I know is that I'd, I
really don't like the political
whiplash that the education
community has been part of now,
uh, thoroughly since we made
this change.
So, uh, I'm in favor of this.
Certainly we need to keep
something like the PEC for
charters. That was always the
intention, um, but because
they've weighed in early and
won't wait for a change, you
know, I, I just think it's
unfortunate.
So thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, um.
Are you, are you wanting to
speak for a second time, Senator
Gregos?
All right. Uh, briefly for a
second time.
Madam Chair, thank you and
Senator and,
uh, I just want to be totally
clear. I, I totally agree with
the current system does not
work.
I actually like the idea of.
The superintendent schools, uh,
statewide, the superintendent,
um, but I think that it needs to
be able to protect all the
process and all the partners,
um, and I look forward to that
going forward. Unlike the
protam, I don't like this
education being political
football.
But I'm just gonna ask you,
Madam Chair and Senator, uh, how
would we tell, I, I, I know it'd
be great to have a
superintendent or uh secretary
more than 6 months, but how
would we tell in 5 years, uh, it
was made that we did an
experiment.
I do not like experimenting with
the lives of our children. How
would we tell what kind of
matrix would you use?
That we would be able to see
that this process going uh right
in the future.
Chanson.
Madam chair, you know, and that
actually is a very good
question. I wish I had a good
answer. Um, we can look at what
happened in the past.
Uh, when we had, again, over 40
years, we had 3 superintendents.
I was in middle school and an
elementary principal, um.
Elementary in two different
districts. The second time was
when it changed, and people were
talking about it, and I warned
them, don't do this. You know,
this is not good, and it was a
power move by Richardson to get
to gather more power into the
administration and away from the
legislature and from the people.
Um, I can tell you when I was a
principal in middle school and
an elementary, I always felt
like the public education
department.
Or what was the public school,
I'm trying to remember what we
called it at the time, not
public, not the pad.
The State Department of
Education. Um, I always felt I
could call them as a principal
when I needed help with things.
When it shifted over and then a
principal in in elementary
school and then a teacher.
I always felt like the pen.
We were always nervous about
what they were going to do to us
next.
And I didn't get that feeling. I
didn't hear it from other people
under the prior system.
And so that's why I'm hopeful
that 6 months in a year in that
we will start feeling like the
State Department of Education is
really there to help districts,
to help teachers, to make sure
education's moving forward
rather than what is the next
public policy that's going to
come out that schools have to
obey.
And Madam Chair, I'll just make
one comment, Senator, that's
always a great question.
And here's where I'll put my
money.
Consistency of leadership.
Always works.
asked
This system
I believe
I've lived under both, worked
under both.
I believe will be the better of
the two.
To assure that consistency.
As a practicing superintendent
who now is is uh
8 years out of that seat, the
working to lead their
organization, I'm convinced. I'm
convinced we have to get to
consistency of application from
the state level.
Over time.
Continue changes as Madam chair,
uh, the minority caucus chair,
uh, Senator Jaramillo said as a
practitioner.
You can't just have this.
Bouncing back and forth, it, it,
it, it is awkward for education,
but most importantly, it gets in
the way.
Of good progress as you make it
just about the time you get
momentum, it moves to a new
system, a new direction, a new
set of expectations that serves
no one well.
final point, and then if it's
not working, the people get to
vote.
Whether or not
They are those that continues by
speaking to their elected
representatives for that, Madam
Chair and center and stand and,
and, and I agree, um, when I was
Early on, uh, in school, we
actually went into the
classroom, knew our teachers and
students. Very good process
right now I'm financial advisor
to our superintendent. We are
him and that's all the value
that I see in school board.
Uh, I enjoy what I do there, but
it's, it's limited, um, but I,
I'm still concerned that we're
Formulating
A bill here that's not a
complete address, and I know
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
they say our kids are 50th
nation. I don't believe that. I
think it's reflective of the
process.
And our accountability in this
room.
In this capital
We are 50th in the nation to our
students because it's a
political football, and I would
ask that those are in the
audience that are part of this
would get together, come to one
resolution so that way our
children who matter most to us
are the ones that are
benefactors of the decisions we
make here in the Capitol are
you?
Uh, Bergman's briefly for a 2nd
time. Thank you, Madam Chair, I
forgot I wanted to ask, um,
would these elected and the
appointed positions be unpaid,
only receiving per diem.
Madam Chair and, and Senator,
yes, uh, they would be receiving
per diem when they travel to the
various meetings and such, but
would not be paid positions,
which is different than with the
PRC.
And do you think that might
hinder who could run and serve
for them positions.
Madam Chair and and senator.
Unpaid positions, certainly this
is not like being in the
legislature where we have to be
up here for 60 days. It is the
formal meetings are much less
burdensome, uh, but they're
typically are lots of people
who, again, lots of retired
superintendents, teachers,
others who I think would be very
interested in continuing to be
part of the leadership of New
Mexico.
OK, thank you.
All right. I don't have anyone
else on the list, um.
I am very torn on this. I have
voted for it twice, um, I don't
remember the charter school
issue being an issue when we
voted on this twice before. I'm
not sure why it's come up this
time. I don't see this as
getting rid of charters in any
way.
That that would just, it's just
a reshuffling. Um.
My, uh, my concern.
This time is more around the
fact that we are
We're seeing
An increased politicization of
school boards.
Uh, and people who running for
school boards with uh
who are not
Retired educators who are not,
uh, who, who have a, a very
specific political agenda, uh,
and that is why they are running
for that position, and so I
worry that creating
An elected state school board.
We will just see that writ
large, um, on the state level.
Um
At the same time, I absolutely
hear what you all are saying
about the instability of the
current system, uh, the loss of
momentum, uh, and for our
practitioners and
And not not being able to get
much done effectively, uh,
because it keeps changing over
and over and over again. Um, I
am
I, I don't, I, I feel like.
We kind of have two not great
options. And I'm not sure which
not great option is better, um.
So
I mean, to the extent that.
I, I do think they're.
While there's clearly a big
difference between 3
superintendents over 40 years
versus 9 cents uh 03. I do think
Senator Brantly has a point that
That we have seen a lot more.
Instability, uh, of late.
Then, then overall. And I don't
know that that is necessarily a
reflection.
That that's not that that's
necessarily a permanent
condition.
Um, I, I would hope.
But if this did not pass.
That, that that would not
continue. Um, with whatever
administration is coming.
Um, but
History sure suggests that it's
more stable.
With this kind of an approach.
Um
I really don't know. I'm really
glad I get to vote last on this
one.
I
What is the will of the
committee, Senator Stewart.
Uh, my chair having tried to
listen to everyone. I move I do
pass without recommendation.
Right
We have a motion for a due pass
without recommendation.
Go ahead and call the roll.
Senator Bergmann's.
Uh
Senator Block.
No
Senator Brantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Lopez, Senator Lopez is
excused.
Senator Stefaniks.
That's
Senator Stewart.
Senator Townsend. Oh.
Senator Jara meal.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Doig.
Yes, and with Senators Gallegos
and Stefaniks to explain their
votes. Go ahead, Senator Geos.
Madam Chair, thank you and
standing Senator, I, I
appreciate the dialogue, but I
still think it's
A sacrifice to our kids.
If this goes forward without
considering those are.
In fear of what you're doing.
Uh, so I would stand, look
forward on the floor if you
resolve the charter school
issue, voting with you because
as a school board member, what
this governor, this
administration has done changing
them every 6 months is a wrong
way to do education.
Thank you, Madam Senphonics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
had discussed this with the
sponsor on the floor, and I'm
comfortable with the no wreck
versus a do pass, um.
I believe we are trying to
Deconstruct uh state agencies.
And that concerns me. I also
believe we're putting too many
joint resolutions out to the
public.
But I'd like to see where this
goes. Thank you very much. Thank
you. So you have a do pass with
No. Thank you, I appreciate it
and we will continue to try and
work with the, the those who
might oppose this to assure them
that it is not intended to shut
them down in any way. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Padilla, uh
SJR 6, and for anyone who is
here for SB 254, we are going to
be rolling that.
So, we're going to SGR 6 next,
then we're gonna go to SJR 11,
then SB 299.
Also, we have a Spanish
interpreter here for SJR 6, I
think there are earphones in the
back, um, if anyone needs those,
those services.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
whenever you're ready.
Go ahead, senator. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair and, uh,
vice chair and ranking member
and members of the committee.
Senator Michael Padilla, I'm
here with the cabinet Secretary
Elizabeth Gorginsky of the Early
Childhood Education and Care
department.
And also the general counsel for
the early childhood education
and care department.
Uh, we're gonna make a brief
introduction, Madam Chair, and
then we do have a, a
choreographed list of folk, uh,
for your rules on how uh we
we'll have folks speak in favor
from the audience, but
essentially I introduced this
legislation, as you know, I was
the sponsor of the legislation
that created the Department of
Early Childhood Education and
Care, and then we've sort of
been moving forward with how do
we fund this massive decision
that we've made as a state here,
and this is one of the, uh,
additional efforts to make sure
that we protect the monies that
that are eligible to to fund
right.
Available to a fund to fund
these practices. So, um,
basically proposes uh SGR 6
proposes a constitutional
amendment to establish the early
early childhood trust fund, uh,
this fund aims to provide
dedicated financial resources
for prenatal and early childhood
programs and services, enhancing
support for children from birth
until they are eligible to go to
kindergarten, uh, some of the
key provisions are that we
create the early childhood Trust
Fund, uh, the resolution seeks
to create a permanent trust fund
within the state treasury
design.
exclusively for prenatal and
early childhood programs and
services, um, and that where
investment and earnings are
concerned, uh, the funds within
the trust will be invested
according to state law as we do
for many of our our for all of
our other funds through the
state investment council with
all additions and earnings
including realized and
unrealized gains and losses to
the credit of the fund's corpus,
uh, the annual distribution plan
will change with this
legislation. The resolution
proposes that an annual
distribution be made from the
fund.
to the greater of 5% of the
average of the funds, 5, I'm
sorry, year-end market values
over the preceding 3 years or
500 million.
Um, some of the pros on why
we're trying to do this, it
creates a sustainable funding
model for early childhood
programs again that we have made
a big decision to do and provide
to our children here in New
Mexico. We've all made that
decision over a very long period
of time and under much
consideration.
Uh, we also, uh, by doing this,
we enhance child development
outcomes, which we all know,
don't just uh arrive within K
through 12, but also long term
gains like lower, uh, instances
of, of uh dropout rates, child
abuse, teen pregnancy,
incarceration, all of those
things if we continue down the
road of making sure that this is
a part of our New Mexico fabric.
There's also an economic
benefit, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, and,
and if you summarize it down to
the uh study conducted by Doctor
James.
Heckman of the University of
Chicago, uh, he found that there
is a 13 to 1 rate of return on
every dollar that we invest in
early childhood programs for the
rest of that child's life. So
that's a significant return on
our dollars and our investment
here. Um, and then, of course,
support for families, providing
robust early childhood services
offers critical support, uh, to
families, particularly those in
low income backgrounds promoting
equity and social mobility and
helping these families to be
able to get into the workforce
in many cases, etc.
So again, we've made a major
decision here in New Mexico,
members of the committee to
provide a holistic approach to
education.
Uh, this fund
Um, set up 6 years ago, yes, it
has grown to over $9 billion.
What a phenomenal, wonderful,
terrific. I can't even come up
with enough words to describe
how wonderful that is.
It's doing, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee exactly
what we wanted it to do. It's
simply doing it a lot faster.
How wonderful is that for the
children of New Mexico and for
all of our futures. So I just
want to make sure that that that
that is not lost on our
discussion today. There's
nothing that's been different
about what we intended
originally when we passed this
legislation.
What we want to do here is we
want to enshrine it in the
Constitution and make sure that
it lasts forever.
So, uh, with that, I'm gonna ask
our, our cabinet secretary to
say a few words and then we'll
go out to some comments from the
audience, Madam Chair, thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you, Senator Padilla, for your
sponsorship of this. I really
couldn't add much more uh to
what the senator has shared. Uh,
I do think it is a risk that we
face. First, we're not meeting
all the needs of families and
children in New Mexico, prenatal
to age 5, so there are families
right now that are not getting
services that they're eligible
for because the resources aren't
in place. We also risk having
much of the work that we built
together, um, over the last 5
years.
undone or eroded, uh, without
the protection of the trust
fund. I do want to clarify this
is a fund of last resort, so if
the state couldn't meet its
budget deficit, the fund could
be tapped, um, to meet those,
um, meet those revenue needs,
um, it also doesn't protect
health funds get put into the
trust fund. So really what it's
doing is saying this corpus that
we have is protected and the
distributions to the department
remain intact, um, and that
protects us from any future
political considerations and
things.
that change, but knowing that
children and families in New
Mexico in the prenatal to
kindergarten entry, uh, will
have the services that they need
in this period of human life
that we will never get, you
never get a better chance at
developing strong humans, as in
the period of life from prenatal
to age 5, addressing issues like
behavioral health, substance
use, public safety. So I think
this is a great opportunity for
us as a state to um say that
this period of life is a period
that we need to continue to fund
and that all New Mexico.
and young children who are
eligible should be able to
access these programs. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and we
do have a counsel here who to
help us if we have any uh sort
of
Things that we need there. So
we'll hand it back to you
wherever you'd like to go. We're
happy to.
Go wherever you want to go.
I have a list of 7 people here
as your organized support. Uh,
anyone who's in the room, go
ahead and line up, uh, Diane
Dennis, Gabriel Ubae, Kate
Noble, Karen Gonzalez, Doctor
Gwen Perea what ornament, uh,
Bridget Dixon and Rob Black.
Uh, so if anyone is here who I
just read, go ahead and and line
up. Other folks, if they're
online, we'll get to you after
we hear from the folks in the
row.
And
You will still have about
11 minutes left on your, your
time, so speakers, I'll I'll
leave it to you to. Good
morning. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm so happy to be back here to
support SJR 6 and its companion
legislation to institutionalize
early childhood education and
care, and once again give voters
the opportunity to express their
support for investment in early
childhood in early childhood.
When the fund was created by
Senator Smith and the governor,
the expectation that it was grow
much more slowly, but to the
good fortune as the senator
mentioned, it's exploded in
growth, and it's given you a
once in a lifetime opportunity
to stabilize and increase the
investment you have made in the
1st 5 years. It's doing what we
designed it to do, only at a
much faster rate given the
growth. Now I understand that
some people say, well, what if
we need that money for something
else.
I would urge you to reverse that
question and say what if we need
that money for New Mexico's
children when federal funding is
threatened for childcare,
Medicaid, disability programs,
or how do we insulate the
department and the fund from
political consideration and
whims which might erode not just
the fun.
But dismantle the department and
the ability to continue to
promote the health, safety and
welfare.
Our kids and
In early childhood, as in any
business, predictability and
stability for funding allows for
very smart planning SJR6 should
be approved, should it be
approved, gives you and future
legislative bodies, predictable
source of income and a
framework.
know, the great House Speaker
Sam Rayburn once said.
Any jackass can tear down a
barn, but it takes a carpenter
to build a barn.
The legislative body of New
Mexico governors for 30 years
have been those carpenters.
And it's been a very long road,
but one that can now provide New
Mexico families with all the
services that they need and
retain and recruit an early
childhood workforce.
All of this leads to healthier
families.
More productive and reliable
workforce, and an added benefit
has been the mixed delivery
system where we grow small
businesses.
So I urge you to think of SGR 6
as your crown jewel.
The linchpin, if you will, of
the carpentry work you have done
in the past, the roof on the
barn.
And others have done in the
past, it's an affirmation of New
Mexico kids and families deserve
a strong, robust, long-lasting
effective system of care made
possible by the early.
I urge your support. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning, committee. My name
is Gabriello Baez and I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
Voices for Children, and we
stand in proud support of this
joint resolution, I would echo
it as a crown jewel of New
Mexico. It is the envy of other
states across the nation. The
number of phone calls we get at
Voices asking how did you do it
in New Mexico or more than I can
count in my one year. States are
coming from across the nation to
see what we're doing here by
investing in early childhood.
And that it's, it's
bigger than just young kids,
it's our childcare workforce.
It's an investment in parents
and their ability to work, and
it's an investment in the
future. Um, at New Mexico Voices
for Children, we're particularly
excited that this includes a
comprehensive view of what early
childhood looks like, which is
prenatal care, and so we urge
your support of this joint
resolution.
Buenos dias nombresales.
OK.
Buenos diassen Gonzalez so mero
name quirogra deer senor Padilla
propone constitutional.
A tura alograva la mejoras de la
recipesar estas mejora
todavisquedanorecoria de la
seducaas de la primere infancia
la pobreza.
He is moor debajo de la
compensation
the chemeremos.
Esta constitutional is necessary
projelos de la la la
seguar queciendo permanentes.
This porque
This porqueta
de la pobrea sales
the valoris.
Baloreusallous credenialesusanos
the uh
the experiencia Mexico the
Beiranoimber and temprana esta.
Estemisia infantildo de paisa.
Good morning. My name is Karen
Gonzalez, and I am a member of
OA. I want to thank Senator
Padilla for proposing this
constitutional amendment, our
governor and legislative session
in our legislators have made
significant process of progress
in improving the pay of early
childhood educators, despite
these improvements, we still
need a, we still have a long way
to go. Most early childhood
educators still live in poverty
and are well below the
professional compensation we
deserve. This constitutional
amendment is necessary to
protect the funds that the
legislator created for.
Early childhood education and to
ensure that they remain
permanent because until all
early childhood educators are
lifted out of poverty and enjoy
professional wages that value
their credentials and years of
experience, New Mexico must
continue to increase its
investments in early childhood
education. This amendment will
allow us to continue building
the model early childhood
education system that all our
communities want and that the
rest of the country can follow.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Giovanna
Archuleta with the Lana
Foundation, a foundation that is
focused on education.
And we strongly support the
Senate joint resolution.
The Atlanta Foundation organizes
an early childhood
collaborative, um, part of the
ECEC ECD.
And it is made up of members
from Los Alamos, Taos.
Henry Reba.
Um, these communities are still
trying to build their systems,
especially in more rural areas
like Chama, Tierra Maria, out
towards the Colorado border, and
it takes time. Um, so we urge
you to pass, um, as we continue
to support the system, build the
system, and invest in the
prenatal to 5 in our rural
areas. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for your time and attention this
morning. Thanks also to the
sponsor for bringing this. My
name is Kate Noble. I am the
president and CEO of Growing Up
New Mexico. We are a statewide
community organization. We have
a home visiting program, a
preschool, um, a number of
programs that serve primarily
Santa Fe and Rio Ariba County,
and we have a long history of
working in statewide policy and
advocacy, um, through my
predecessor Catherine Friedman
in a long partnership with
Lieutenant Governor Diane
Dandish and our organization has
looked at the system of early
childhood for a long time, um,
and did a lot of work with the
Thornburgh Foundation and others
in the early childhood funders
group, um, on a business plan
for early childhood and in
building this system, one of the
key pillars of that plan was
creating stable and predictable
financing for the early
childhood system.
We strongly support this joint
resolution as we believe this
fulfills that promise in part to
provide uh long term and ensure
stable, predictable financing
for the early childhood system.
We've hit the time limit, so I'm
gonna need you to, to wrap it
up. OK. Um, thank you very much.
Just want to also say that we
appreciate that this funds
anything available to
appropriators in the prenatal to
5 system. It is not just for the
early childhood department,
again.
Thank you for, uh, hopefully
your support.
Senator, I know you have 2 more
speakers, 30 seconds max, uh.
Good morning. My name is Bridget
Dixon. I'm the president and CEO
of the Santa Fe Chamber of
Commerce. We represent over 600
member businesses. The Santa Fe
Chamber strongly believes that
access to quality, affordable
childcare is essential for a
thriving economy and workforce.
We recognize the childcare
challenges place a significant
burden on our working families
and in turn the business
community. That's why the
chamber prioritizes childcare by
offering it every major event,
because we know that when
parents have reliable childcare,
they can fully participate in
the workforce and contribute.
to New Mexico's economic
success. Thank you, Ms. Dixon.
Secretary, 30 seconds.
Rob Black, Secretary designate
for EDD. I'll quickly say, uh,
I, I served as the chair, vice
chair of the early childhood
education and care division task
force for the last 4 years. It's
been an amazing opportunity to
watch it firsthand, uh.
Childcare in America is a market
failure. We need this sort of
intervention in order to ensure
that we have predictability in
the workplace and investments so
that we build our workforce,
build our industries to support
it. And I'll say just from the
EDD perspective, when I'm
talking to new companies who are
interested in New Mexico, and I
can say we are providing
childcare subsidized childcare.
It is a huge opportunity for us
to bring those workforce here.
Thank you for your time.
All right.
He did not have anyone sign up
in opposition. Thank you, madam.
So I'm gonna go to members of
the committee. I have Senator
Gallegos on the list, who else
would be on the like to be on
the list.
Madam Chair anden Pam.
Uh, thank you all for, for this
presentation so far. Uh, I do
have a really quick question.
So, uh, in understanding this
blocks in prenatal care.
Uh, would organizations use an
RFP to be able to do, let's say
a 501c3 if they are coming into
the program looking to help on
prenatal side. Do they go to
your department, and Senator,
to, um,
Access these funds, is that how
that would work?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'll ask the secretary to, to
comment, but yes, I mean,
essentially the RP process is
used for all of the services
essentially provided by the
department.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator Gallegos, um, programs,
anything that's administered
through our department is done
through a competitive process,
but many of these funds are sent
over to the healthcare
authority, and they use it to
fund Medicaid, um, uh, infant,
um, maternal and infant health.
Uh, also in this year's budget
proposal, some to DOH to support
Doula credentialing. So I think
it just to keep in mind that it
is a broad, um, it's all the
health, um, and the ECECD
agencies that can benefit from.
the funds in that prenatal
period to age 5.
think I'm chairing Senator Madam
Secretary, uh, and I like the
idea earlier is talked about um
the discussion of some of the
facilities up north.
That are using this, I think
that it'd be great that it's
statewide. That's why I was
asking for my area in Southeast,
you already have some targeted
um
Facilities for assistance with
prenatal.
Anderson, Madam Secretary.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Gallegos, we have, um,
sorry, sorry.
The other day he goes, uh,
Senator Gallegos, uh, we have,
um, and you're in the southeast
like Hobbs and Eddie Lee County,
we have an infant mental health
consultant down in that area
that works with uh many of our
childcare providers, uh, and
also, of course, we collaborate
with the women, infants and
children's program and our
family's first nurses, um, are
are based down there in Hobbs,
so they work with pregnant women
and, um, up to age 2, children
up to age 2. Madam Chair and
Senator, um, the department
including the cabinet secretary
has toured many times that area
of the state. I just want to.
Let you know that they really do
everything they can to get
across the state to learn as
much as possible. I've seen her
there myself personally. Thank
you for that, I'm chairing
Senator, Madam Secretary, I
appreciate it. I just wanted to
make sure we had a broader view
than up north because we have
some very, very poor people
living in the Southeast, even
with all oil and gas and all the
jobs and work that we have down
there, there are some critical
needs down in our sector. So
with that I thank you, Madam
Chair. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Senator.
Secretary.
Um
The first opening.
Paragraph in, in the bill talks
about except when state funds
will not meet previously
authorized expenses. Would you?
Uh, explain that, uh.
Exactly how you see that
working.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, uh, senator, can you just
take us to that the the the line
that you're referring to, I want
to make sure that we address the
right item.
Um
Age 1 or 21 page one line um uh
starts on 11 and goes through 15
in the title.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Townsend,
that's, um, if the state could
not meet its, um, uh, budget
revenue you could get into the
fund, uh, to use it to meet any
state, um, deficit.
I
Um, Me.
It's a little different language
than we normally see it, it, it
says when except when the state
funds will not meet previously
authorized expenses.
And so it looks like
Who will make, who will
authorize those expenses that
don't have funds previously.
Allocated for him.
That's what I'm trying to.
Is that what that means?
Mr. Chair, uh, I mean Madam
Chair, Senator Townsend, it
means that, yes, if the
legislature has up
You want to take that one,
Shelly, except when state funds,
yeah.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Gallegos, uh, the
language.
Senator Townsend, Townsend. Oh,
I'm sorry, we moved over. My
apologies, uh, Senator Downsend,
um.
In section D on page 2, you can
see the language there that, um,
I believe the section you're
referring to is in the title,
and it's referring to Section D
here. So,
When, uh, the, as provided by
law, the levels the state fund
balances will not meet the level
of appropriation authorized for
the current fiscal year, then
these funds can kick in and uh
fill that gap. And that would
be, um, what would be
appropriated authorized, etc. by
the legislature.
OK, um, Madam Chair, when you
look at, uh, on page 2 lines 7
through 11, it talks about the
fund having, um, you know, the
ability to distribute 5% or the
greater of.
And, and I think.
Correct me if I'm wrong, I'm
sure you know it off the top of
your head, but wasn't the uh
As from early childhood this
year, like almost $800,000.
I was uh Madam Chair, 800 800
million. I'm sorry, yeah. And
essentially the, the, the, uh,
I'll let you get your, I don't
wanna interrupt you, but just,
uh, respectfully, um, senator,
so eventually the 5%
distribution will bypass $500
million as the fund continues to
grow. That's why we word it that
way, so that it doesn't ever
just stop at 500,000, I'm sorry.
Now you've had me saying 500
million, excuse me.
Um, madam chair and uh Senator,
what do you expect the growth of
the fund to be with a
distribution of 500 million.
The the growth of the fund based
on the I think it was 5.85.
um
0.85%, so the 85, the fund will
continue to grow, it, it
probably won't, we won't, we
probably won't see these
massive.
Couple of year massive
increases, but the fund will
continue to grow, which will
also continue to increase the
distribution until there is a
complete self funding, if you
will, of early education in New
Mexico, and 0
ask to the taxpayer instead the
the return on investments will
fund the operations itself.
Madam Chair, and uh
And if I remember right, it was
expected the sun may be about
$11 million.11 billion, you got
me doing it now.
Madam, at the moment it's, it's
projected this year to be at
about 9.1 billion and then um
and then it's gonna, uh, it'll
just continue to grow from
there, but it won't go probably
quite as fast because of the,
the increased distribution that
we're looking at.
But to be fully, Madam Chair,
uh, to be fully self-sufficient
at current ask. I mean, the
fund's got to grow to about $16
billion if you're gonna drive
off.
800 million, say it right,
eventually, $800 million
annually, and you expect that to
occur.
At some point, I guess we all,
we hope it occurs at some point
and Senator, if the current
investment strategy continues as
it has, I would see us reaching
that pretty quickly. We do have
uh in the in the FIR there is
some analysis there that
demonstrates some of that for
you, but yeah, essentially the
goal is to self-fund early
education in New Mexico.
I think Madam chair and Senator
the the one issue that
Most
Um
Fiscal hawks would have with
this is that it doesn't have any
off-ramps.
Uh, that allows
Um, anyone, the state to enter
the fund in the event of.
Uh, a turndown in the economy.
Can you speak to that a little
bit, um, or does it?
Please.
And ask the experts from the
department to respond to that,
but we do have off ramps based
on what we start the opening
line of your questions. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend.
Uh, the section that we
discussed a little bit earlier,
Section D, that the money may
and the fund may be expended in
the event of a failure in
revenue does allow access to
those funds in the event of that
darn down
uh that was the answer I was
trying to get out of you, the
first time around. So, I
appreciate it very much. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Block,
followed by Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Senator Padilla, and,
um, Madam Secretary, thank you
for coming to my office and
talking to me about this, um.
With your lawyer.
That's OK.
it.
Uh, just a couple things on the
funding here, I want to make
sure I understand, uh, the
Senate Rules Committee analysis,
um, I don't know if you've
looked through this or not, um,
I just want to ask you a couple
of quick questions here on the
significant issues piece.
says presently in case when
state revenues are insufficient
to meet authorized expenses, the
ECECF.
May draw from the appropriation
contingency fund, the general
operating reserve, the tax
stabilism stabilization reserve.
And the tobacco settlement
permanent fund.
Do we, do we know, um,
How much is in each of those
real quick if you don't, that's,
that's OK. I'm just curious.
Uh, chair and, and, uh, senator,
I, I don't know what the exact
balances are on those funds now.
That's OK. Thank you, Senator
Patilla. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Do we, uh, draw on those funds
on other
Programs that are set aside, do
we draw on those funds by
chance?
Thank
Chair and and senator, I I don't
know if we draw on those either.
OK.
All right, if
If possible, um, thank you,
Madam Chair, if possible, Madam
Secretary, could, could you ask
that question and just get back
to me if, uh, the state of New
Mexico has drawn down on those
funds for whether it's
education.
Healthcare infrastructure,
whatever it might be, I'm I'm
very curious there maybe the
Um, now, uh, legislative Finance
Committee notes or something.
So lastly, when you look at this
bill,
It, it
Just some concerns, Senator
Townsend had.
It doesn't
What would be the priority, say,
for instance, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Padilla, Madam
Secretary, we had a
A downturn.
In the market
And now we gotta go to one of
these funds, um, which, which
fund is the priority and who is
the one that decides which fund
we're going to take from.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
um, I think it would be the
legislature would make the
decisions about the source of
funding for the use.
And what it should be used for.
Thank, thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Other
Are these the only funds that
can draw from or there are other
funds out there that uh we can
draw from.
Uh, chair and center I those are
the ones that are currently
outlined this could draw from
you. Perfect. Thank you.
Uh, Senator Padilla, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Lastly
Well, let me ask this, let me
ask you this way, have we,
Senator Padilla, you've been in
the Senate for a while now.
Um, I have, you know, 4 weeks of
exceptional experience.
Um, have we ever borrowed from
Any of these funds or other
funds to pay for permanent
funds.
Um, Madam Chair and, and
Senator, I don't believe we've
ever borrowed for permanent
funds, uh, or taken for
permanent funds and the time
that I've been here, the only,
we had a downturn, um.
Several years ago, and we did
need to go back to school
districts and uh pull on cash
balances that occurred, but
that's the only thing I'm aware
of that's ever happened. OK,
thank you, sir. And it could
have happened before I was here,
I've only been here 13 years.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So if we have to go in
and take from some of these
funds.
Do we, do we pay it back? Is
that, is, I didn't see that in
the bill that we would, we would
pay it back.
Uh, chair and senator, I'm not
aware of of uh payback
provision, but those funds would
continue to be funded the way
they are today and the reason
they would be tapped or or or
touched is in an extreme
circumstances because moneys and
inflows and they are in a
positive position. Otherwise,
there would be no money there
to.
To borrow or to take
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, that's, that's.
I'll support this, but I think
one of the things when I when I
looked at some analysis on oil
and gas, somebody did it here
and in the uh
Wonderful roundhouse where our
oil and gas revenues would be.
Uh, peaking by about 2030 and
then potentially a downturn,
it's just a.
Um, it's a study.
And
I worry about because we've set
aside how how many Madam Chair,
Senator Padilla, how many permit
funds do we have?
Madam Chair and senator, that
that is a a very good question.
Um, I've been, I've been given,
I've asked this question several
times, I have seen personally,
I've seen 77. I've seen 268,
there's multiple funds for
multiple reasons and multiple
reasons why they're set up.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. So between 77 and
277, and are you, are you
talking about funds or talking
about permanent funds
permanent funds. Gosh, there's
not that many. I guess 3 or,
yeah, 3.
OK, 3. The land grant permanent
fund and there's severance and
the yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Padilla. What,
what, what were you talking
about?
Well, I've established a couple
of funds. This is a fund that
was established. I mean, so if
you use the word fun, there's
multiple of those that are out
there for different reasons, you
have the.
Higher ed fund, you have the
this fund, you have the land of
enchantment fund, now you have
any number of funds out there.
OK. Thank you, sir, for uh
clarifying that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, so you don't foresee then.
Where the market could take a
downturn where we would dip into
these other funds, I mean, it is
possible though, correct? And if
it's
The 3 permanent funds or other
funds out there.
Do those other funds have the uh
flexibility to whether they're
permanent or not, Pia, do they
have the flexibility to dip into
the.
Appropriation contingency, the
general fund operating reserve,
the tax stabilization, the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund.
Uh, Madam Chair and uh Senator,
the only one that I'm aware of
is the land grant permanent
fund. You'd have to go through
the Constitution as we did
recently, which took a good, it
was the whole reason I ran for
the legislature to begin with.
It took about a 10 or 13 year
effort to get that done, might
have been 16 years. It's not an
easy process, and that's why we
do it the way that we we do
that. Here is another one of the
funds we'd like to move to that
status in our state, so that it
is always there for the reason
it was intended to, to fulfill.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Do you see any other, is,
is this kind of a new way of
doing business to protect funds
by kind of firewalling these
aside, so it takes a lot of
effort to.
Pull money from these other
funds to help support that
particular permanent fund.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, no,
it's not a new idea. I mean, the
land grant permanent fund was
established at statehood, which
was, I think at this 0.114 years
ago.
And Senator, thank, thank you
for that, Madam Chair.
You said there's 3 permanent
funds?
I believe there are 3, yes, and
what, what are those out of
curiosity?
The land grant permanent fund,
the severance.
Yeah, and then there's, I think
there's one other.
Tobacco, tobacco, yeah.
Yeah
And that one is almost empty,
but that's for a whole other,
that's an example of it had a
purpose and and because it
wasn't protected the way that it
should have, it, it wound up,
it's almost at a zero balance.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate you walking through
that for the public that's
watching that may not be aware
of that and how this works and
and the amount of effort it
takes to
Go back to the voters to um take
that fund which
It's kind of
Kind of high risk, I would think
because you're depleting one
particular fund and waiting for
the voters to approve you to go
get another source of funding,
which puts a program or programs
at risk, in my opinion.
But I
I appreciated your time in my
office, Madam Secretary, to walk
me through this and um.
I, I do support it, so thank you
for your time. Thanks, Senator
Padilla for answering those
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Brantly, followed by
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, uh,
Senator and secretary.
Um
$500 million distribution is a
lot of money, but so is your
trust fund and and beneficiaries
of that it's pretty narrow,
prenatal programs and services
for early childhood programs and
services. What would you spend
the money on? Give me your top
top programs of where that
money's going to be spent.
Madam
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
thank you for that question. Uh,
some of our top programs that we
administer are, um, the
childcare assistance program,
uh, which enables families to go
to work or go to school and
pursue their career.
um, New Mexico pre-K is another
big, um.
Use of the funding that we use
the funding to support and, um,
home visiting.
And we are really expanding,
we're home, we're expanding home
visiting to reach every baby
born in New Mexico through a
universal Family Connects model,
which will be 1 to 2 brief
visits and then connecting that
family. And so that's exciting
work. And then again, we partner
with the Healthcare Authority,
uh, around their maternal and
infant health, their increased
Medicaid rates that they put in
place. We help support the state
match, um, now with Doula
certification, we also sent
money over to HCA to support
Doula and lactation, um.
certified to be able to pay them
with that. But our, our largest,
um, infusion is around the
workforce because the early
childhood workforce, whether
it's home visiting, early
intervention, childcare or
pre-K. Uh, these are individuals
that have been um paid very low
wages and so the efforts over
the last 5 years have been to
really stabilize the industry.
This year you'll see a big ask
for our family infant toddler
program. They work with infants
and toddlers with developmental
delays and disabilities. Uh,
they, um, you know, all
also are struggling with
attracting and recruiting and
retaining quality workforce. Um,
so those would be the biggest,
those are the biggest areas and
the, the biggest investment is
directly in improving the
compensation of the early
childhood workforce. OK, thank
you, Madam Chairman. My next
question is gonna be how much of
that was going to operational
expenses, and it sounds like a
lot is going to salaries, walk
me through to clarify state.
3K teachers, I, I, I guess what,
who, who was, who specifically
is getting the salary increases
and how, how does that structure
work? Who do they work for?
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Brantly, um, another
great question. We have a mixed
delivery system, most of the
country does, uh, to deliver
pre-K. So we have about 53% of
our children, uh, in New Mexico
pre-K being served in
community-based programs and
about 47% being served in
school-based programs. Uh, so,
um, this year, I mean, we've set
it at 50,000, which is the
salary for a bachelor level
teacher in the public education
system. And so that's who's
getting those salaries and.
then our assistant teachers are
required to have associate's
degree in pre-K. So we want to
again, make sure that they're
they're compensation is
commensurate with the
credentials that they're
required to hold.
Um, so that's where those
programs go. Home visiting is
primarily done. We've about 36.
Um, private, nonprofit or
for-profit organizations all
over the state. We have home
visiting in every state, and we
fund, uh, those people directly
based on the model they're
offering. Um, we, we fluctuate
the rate because some of the
models have to be delivered by
nurses, so they obviously need
more per child than a one who
can be delivered by somebody
with an associate's degree or a
bachelor's degree, so, um, we
could get you a detailed
information though on all those,
um, but that those are the ways
that we
We use cost modeling to set our
rates, and it is about 80% of
that cost is in personnel.
8% increase in personnel, but to
clarify 80% of the overall cost
OK in personnel.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
to clarify, those salary
increases would be in the
school-based pre-K, but
obviously um community,
community pre-k.
OK
Centers would have to keep up
with that so, it is gonna put,
it's gonna put a little bit of,
of, of a, of a pressure on
private pre-K centers and
community pre-K centers in order
to stay competitive with
government. That's a little bit
of a red flag because you're
increasing those government
salaries to the point where, uh.
private business has to compete
with government in order to keep
up with this, so you're probably
gonna see, I would assume in
doing something like that a
closure of some pre-k centers if
they can't keep up with the,
with salary increases, senator.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Senator,
great point, and I'm glad you
mentioned it. I know there's the
pre-K parody and therefore the
salaries would increase along
with whatever the services that
are provided apples to apples in
the community, so that that
wouldn't be an effect on the
private providers at all. OK. I
think they would be in very good
shape to continue the
Salary trajectory that we're
trying to do with everybody who
pays the parody, the discrepancy
of cost.
and senator in the contractual
agreements, all that's laid out
how that would work. OK, so
there would be no, that would
not miss a beat at all. OK.
Thank you, madam chair, here on
the bigger picture of this, you
are, we are dealing with we, we,
New Mexico, uh.
What a, what a success. We
should champion that $9 billion
in a trust fund, we should thank
those that had the visionary,
you know, uh, leadership back
then to to establish a trust
fund like that. We actually see
many attempts this session
because of models like this.
Yeah
Creating trust, right? It's,
it's financial, it's, it's good
financial money management
practices, and so we're saying
start your own little savings
account. I'm torn on a bill like
this because you're gonna
continue to take a lot of
criticism because you have so
much money that the legislator
and really people of New Mexico
are wanting to gonna want to see
solid outcomes of how that money
is spent on a bigger picture, I
feel like we encourage.
We encourage not just, not just
ECECD, but a lot of, we have,
for example, the legacy,
whatever it may be, we encourage
the creation of these trust
funds.
And then shame on the legislator
to come back years and say
you've, you've done well. This
has worked out well that we're
now gonna come in and break your
piggy bank and open up the
beneficiaries. It's not fair,
and I know that that's happened,
um, in, in not specific cases,
but, but when we rated uh school
districts, for example, whatever
it is, you come back and you
seem to punish those who have
managed their money well. And in
your case, you've grown a pretty
impressive piggy bank.
I don't like the idea of having
to break into a piggy bank and
say because you've done well,
we're gonna use your money to
pay for other programs.
But I also see.
I also see
Those who are wanting to tap
into this thing.
But we're not getting the return
we need or there's other
programs that would have a
greater impact, not just for 0
to 5, but maybe it needs to be
expanded from 5 to whatever it
may be. I, I would say this, I'm
gonna vote for this bill.
Because we created this to do
exactly what it's doing.
But there's a lot of pressure on
you.
For New Mexico to get a return
on this, or they're going to
come after your money to say if
you're not spending it and
you're not creating the outcomes
we wanna see someone has a
better idea that perhaps, well,
um,
And with that, Madam Cha I'll
end. Thank you, Chair, and thank
you, Senator. You're right on
mark with what you said. Simply
happening faster, uh, and that's
why we need to do it. So we do
give it enough time to, we're 58
years into this thing. I mean,
yes, we want overnight success.
When was the last time we saw
something happen just because
the fun grew that quickly
doesn't mean that the results,
you need to give it time to
actually get it where it needs
to be. If we start chopping it
off at its kneecaps or whatever.
I may never see those outcomes
that all of us want to see. And
so I, I couldn't agree with you
more there. Thank you.
That are followed by under
hernia.
Thank you man here.
So I certainly agree with uh
The increased distribution now
after listening to what the
secretary.
is planning and wants to do.
Certainly with 0 to 5, there are
so many needs.
Um, you know, center so I
suggested a guaranteed basic
income.
For women having babies.
Um
So, I wanna look at that.
I just don't see the need to
turn it into a different kind of
trust fund.
9 billion, I mean, we've done
nothing.
It's grown because of the
revenue from oil and gas and
other areas.
So we, we haven't done anything
to make it grow. It's just
growing on its own. And yes,
thanks.
Senator John Arthur Smith and
representative Doreen Gallegos,
but it seems to leave her out
over on the Senate.
So to me, this is a, a good
trust fund now. We are using it.
It's nimble when you need more
money, we can take more out.
Um, I, I don't believe putting
it into this.
But it's necessary, frankly, so.
That's all I have on here.
Thank you, Senator Hemi. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I hosted a
round table with early childcare
providers in Rio Riba Los Alamos
and northern Santa Fe County
before the session, and there
were 2 major issues that came up
during those round tables, and
we hosted it at the Lannel
Foundation, and you saw that
Jovanna is here from the Lannel
Foundation who served as the
mediator and let us house the
meeting in there.
The number one issue was salary.
Was talking about how they could
make more working at the local
Starbucks than being an early
childcare provider, and that was
huge for the number of women who
showed up. And it was all women
who showed up to the meeting.
The second thing that they
brought up, which I want to work
with the senators with and
Senator Lopez has told me she'd
worked with this with me on the
interim is the number of
grandparents raising
grandchildren who aren't the
official guardian. And so we
have, um, parents or either
users or who have
not been who have not given up
the guardianship to these
grandparents, and they don't
qualify for state programs
because they're not the official
guardian. Now I know Hawaii ran
some legislation to ensure that
grandparents raising
grandchildren could apply for uh
state funds or state programs
when they're not the legal
guardian. We ran out of time
before the session started to
really look at a bill that could
address that. So because of the
district that supported this
initiative. I'll be supporting
the bill, but I wanna sendator
Padilla, maybe.
in the interim that you joined
with Senator Lopez and I to see
how we help those grandparents
raising grandchildren who aren't
the legal guardian. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Chair
and Senator. I will commit to
that. I've been doing a lot of
work in that area, the time I've
been in the legislature and, and
we all know that 49% of children
being fostered or being fostered
by their grandparents with
almost zero support, and we need
to do a better job of reaching
them. I completely agree with
both of you. Thank you.
All right. Anyone else?
be on the list.
Now, so.
Senator, secretary, um,
I am, I am leaning towards no on
this, uh, because
And Senator Brantley said we
shouldn't punish people who
manage their their money well.
Um,
And Senator Stewart said, right
now it is nimble, and I think it
is important for it to be
nimble.
We've talked a little bit about
that if there was a downturn.
These funds would be available,
but I'm looking at the language
you have here, and it is really
restrictive.
So
First, we could only.
Use those funds if a downturn
for the current fiscal year. So
if we were here right now and we
and some economic disaster has
happened.
Uh, and we are budgeting for our
next fiscal year.
We would not be able to use
these funds, even if there
weren't other funds available.
Um, we could only do it for the
current fiscal year that we
would be in now.
The other thing is it says only
if the legislature has
authorized transfers from the
state fund balances that exhaust
those fund balances. So it is
only if we have, have used up
all the other money.
If we have emptied out our other
accounts that we would get to
use these funds.
And so I, I understand from your
perspective why you are, why you
are making that a very high bar
to access those funds from a
legislative perspective, I have
a problem with that. It does not
allow us to be nimble. It does
not allow us to respond to
economic disasters that happen,
um, it, it, it allows us to only
if we've used up all our other
money, plug a hole in our
current budget.
But not to address what happens.
In a few months, uh, when we get
into our next fiscal year, even
if we don't have and we've or
even if we've already spent all
that other money.
Um, so,
This is a great fund. The work
you are doing is great work. It
is absolutely critical work. It
has some of the, I think the,
the most profound downstream
effects of anything being done,
uh, by state government. I, I
don't question that whatsoever,
um.
I, I don't think this is a good
approach.
Uh
And so I'm, I'm a no on this.
Um,
I also
I also don't know that, so.
Senator Townsend was was looking
at the the title there, and it's
really important when we have
joint resolutions to look at the
title because that's what the
voter sees. The title of our
joint resolutions is the
language that goes on the
ballot.
And so
I was looking back at the the
one.
That, uh, in 21 that went on the
ballot.
Cause I was looking at this
language and I was thinking if I
was this is all I saw.
Would I understand completely
what I was voting for.
Um, now, and it does not.
Talk about, bless you. What,
what is effectively an increase
in the annual distribution.
Which I'm a fan of, by the way,
like I that part I have no
problem.
Um
I don't know that it would need
to in in that in 21 it did, but
that's because it was an actual
change to existing
constitutional language changing
the
The distribution, whereas this
would be establishing this in
our Constitution, but
But I don't know that I would
completely understand what I was
voting for.
If this was the only language
that I saw.
Um
I'll, I'll leave it at that.
Thank you.
All right, what is the will of
the committee.
I'm overdue past.
All right, we're on a motion for
a due pass.
Go ahead and take a roll call
vote. Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Block.
Senator Brandtly.
Senator Gallegos, Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Stephonics, Senator
Stefaniks is excused. Senator
Stewart.
Senator Townsend.
Yes.
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Doig.
Oh, I did, um.
Senator Block.
Yes, I'd like to explain my
vote.
Senator Gallegos, Senator Doig.
No. Senator Block to explain his
vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
So, Madam Chair, I, I gotta tell
you you're, your argument was.
Very compelling, uh, to bringing
that up, and I appreciate you
going back and looking at the
2021 ballot.
Um
But, you know, when I
Had the secretary in my office,
uh, I gave her my word.
And while I might not appreciate
some of the things in this bill,
like you, I'm a little worried
about them, I hope they get
changed.
To the next committee, which is
what?
This goes next to education
after that to finance.
I'm hoping there will be some
changes maybe, but um, I gave
the secretary my word and I'm
going to keep my word, but Madam
Chair, your, your comments today
were
Um
Very good, and I appreciate
that. Thank you.
Thinner you have to pass.
All right, we are now going to,
uh, Senator Trujillo.
SJR 11.
It is SJR.
Center, go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, um, thank you
members of the committee for
hearing us this morning. I have
with me an expert witness, uh
Lindsay Bachmann from the
Secretary of State's office, and
I first want to say thank you to
my co-sponsors, um,
Uh, board member and senator
Gallegos as well as former board
member and house member Dale
Armstrong. This joint resolution
proposes to amend Article 7,
Section 1 of the Constitution to
permit school elections to be
held at the same time as
partisan elections.
And what this does, Madam Chair,
is let, let me just do a little
bit of history and then I'll
tell you why, why we want this.
The limiting language in this
section came in the original
state's constitution. So women
were allowed to vote in school
elections, um, but not any.
It doesn't move.
I'll lean closer. Um, allowed to
vote in school elections, but
none other. And so the elections
were put at separate times as
any other election. And I always
jokingly say just to make sure
that we didn't accidentally vote
for governor or state
representative or senator or
something of that nature.
And so that obviously went away
in the 1920s when women were
given the opportunity to vote.
Um, when school districts are
unable to place their ballots on
Partisan elections.
It makes them have to have bond
elections in a special election
every other year.
And so, school board elections,
the actual members are voted on
during the local election.
But bond issues can come up
nearly every year. And so the
information that I have for
school elections is that in
2024, the Secretary of State
notes that there were 6 special
elections for school districts,
and as of January of this year,
there's 5 special elections, and
the problem with that is that
they're expensive.
And the school district has to
pay for them, where if they go
on to the general ballot during
general elections that are
partisan elections, the school
district does not have to pay
for that. So, Madam Chair, I
would like to give an
opportunity for Ms. Bachmann to,
um, share anything.
Further, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, the secretary
thinks the sponsors for bringing
this forward. It's something
we've received feedback on in
every even numbered year from
the school districts who are
needing to pursue ballot
questions on the general
election ballot but are unable
to do so constitutionally, um,
for the reasons outlined um by
the senator, um, we're
supportive, um, additionally
just want to note all other
local governments who
participate in the local
election.
Act, um, who are required to
elect their representatives and
members pursuant to that act,
have the opportunity to put
ballot questions on even
numbered your ballots, so
general election ballots, um, so
this just brings the school
districts into alignment with
the rest of the local public
bodies in that election.
With that, Madam Chair, we stand
for questions. Thank you, we did
not have anyone sign up in
support or opposition on this.
Uh, actually, the only person we
have signed up is Ms. Bachman,
so.
Um, so we will go to members of
the committee, Senator Stewart.
Man movie do pass.
Southern Townsville.
Ma'am, thank you. Oh.
They
Uh, does this allow or require?
Those elections to occur.
Um
In in partisan elections.
Uh, thank you, um, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, it allows it to
happen. And so if an election,
uh, bond election can happen
during the local election that
and school districts are doing
that, but this allows it to also
happen during a general
election. Thank you, madam.
Yeah. All right. Um, before we
get to our
To pass motion just just to
clarify for everyone watching,
this doesn't make school board
elections partisan elections,
right?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee correct. All right,
just allows their, their bond
issues, their their ballot
questions to go on a general
election ballot.
Uh
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Uh, real quick, you, you said
that the school districts now
are paying for these local
elections.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator No, um,
what I, um, meant to say, if I
misspoke, is that when board
members are up for election on
the local election, it's paid
for by the Secretary of State's
office, but when they want to
put a bond question during a
partisan election, the general
election, then they have to pay
for it because it's considered a
special election outside of the
general election that's paid for
by the Secretary of State's
budget.
OK, thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So.
I did you mean to say on the
bond issue that the school
boards are paying to get that,
that, that doesn't make any
sense to me. School boards, are
they paying to get bond issues
on the.
On the ballot
Um, madams, uh,
Madam Chairwoman.
Um, Senator
If it's not on the local
election ballot or it's not on
the general election ballot.
It has to go on a special
election, and those are paid for
by the local school district.
All right, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Um, does that, is that coming
out of a certain fund for the
school school board or the
school budget, or is it coming
out of some type of other fun
they set aside, and if so,
Where, where's that, where's
that money gonna go back into if
they're gonna be saving all this
money.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I, I'm not aware of a
specific fund that would exist
within the school districts,
that would be a question more
appropriately directly, directed
to someone who's a member of
those districts or represent
those districts, but what I will
say is my lived experience when
I was a chief deputy clerk at
the county level, is that there
were budgeted considerations for
a special election because they
were required to do so in order
to get their bonds. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would,
I would yield to.
Senator Gallegos, who would know
that answer, but I mean, I'll,
I'm more than willing to support
this. I'm just, I was curious
how much money is coming out of
the school board budget.
Like for instance, Rio Rancho is
a very large madam chair, um,
Senator Rio Rancho is a very
large school district.
Um, well, obviously, APS is one
of the largest in the country,
and I'm just curious how much
money is coming out of the Rio
Rancho public school system that
could.
Go to something um.
Directly affecting uh the the
students, Madam Chair, Senator,
that's a really good question.
And for the larger districts,
it's very expensive. It can cost
um for even Santa Fe Public
schools back when I was on the
school district, on the school
board, it could cost between $75
to $200,000. I suspect that it's
more than that for a um uh Rio
Rancho or Albuquerque.
Thank you, Senator Trio. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Yeah, I'm, I'm
gonna give Doctor Sue Cleveland
a call.
Uh, because she's our
superintendent there and
hopefully she she would know,
but, uh, that's something I did
not know, so I appreciate you,
um, I don't think a lot of
people knew that quite frankly,
um.
Yeah, it was, it's, we could
spend our resources in a better
manner, so thank you, Senator
Trio. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I would yield to
Senator Gallegos. Thank you.
Just, just so you know, Senator.
Members have to be recognized by
a child, recognized guy goes,
but you can't, you can't choose
who picks next. I hope you pick
them.
Go ahead send guys
Thank you and thank you both.
Uh, I signed on this bill
because it does affect its uh
line item in our budget.
But it's an estimate, so if uh
costs exceed that, and we have
to pull from other areas of the
district. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, sir.
And some, as I'm sitting here,
I'm again looking at the ballot
language. And I actually think
this will be confusing for
people. I think if someone read
this.
Proposing to in Article 7,
Section 1 of the Constitution of
New Mexico to permit school
elections to be held at the same
time as partisan elections. I
think they will think.
That this is electing school
board members during a partisan
election.
So I would suggest.
On page 1 line 12.
After school, this is not very
elegant change, so if you have a
better one, let me know. After
school, inserting ballot
question.
So it would say it's many in the
Constitution to permit school
ballot question elections to be
held at the same time as
partisan elections. LCS won't
like that, uh, I suspect, but I
think that actually informs the
voters of what they're voting on
and in a, in a better way. Would
that be a, a friendly amendment
or unfriendly? Madam, that's a
very friendly amendment.
All right?
What is
So it is on page one.
Line 12 after school inserting
ballot question.
Is there any debate on that
amendment?
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, can you
wait,
wait to be recognized.
Go ahead. Can you repeat that? I
didn't hear that.
Page one, line 12.
After school, inserting the word
ballot question.
Ballot question elections sounds
weird, I just can't think of a
better way to phrase it without
completely redoing your, your
title there, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
think within the election code,
the, the language that's
typically you used would be
school ballot.
Uh, question contest ballot
question contest. I think that's
gonna be even more confusing to
the voters.
Um, I, I understand what you're
saying about, but I, my priority
with with titles on, on joint
resolutions is always what what
makes it easiest for someone
sitting there filling out their
ballot, understand what they're
voting.
Um, so where do you go?
this, you go to education, uh.
Senator, Ms. Bachman, if you
guys can come up with a better
title uh between here and there,
I would encourage you to do so,
but for now, we'll go ahead and,
and make this amendment unless
there is any objection.
Yes.
So, Madam Chair, I, I just don't
think, I, I don't think it
sounds good.
question elections.
Alas,
ballot question contest
elections.
I mean, why don't we change the
word partisan.
Why don't we be held at the same
time as nonpartisan or partisan
elections.
If you think it's that's the
issue is partisan.
You know, and, and so that
senator, I think I, I, I don't
think what I'm suggesting is a
great, a great fix. So I will
Senator, I, I trust that you
between here and, and education
will come up with a, a more
understandable, uh, amendment to
do there that, that will address
that issue, Madam Chair, we will
commit to review that and um
look at uh uh language that is
more understandable and will
actually come. Thank you. So in
that case, I will withdraw my
amendment. I think we're on a
motion for a due pass. Um, so
let's go ahead.
And and let me ask this, is
there any objection to that
motion?
See no show all members present
voting in the affirmative, you
have to pass. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator Tyson,
come on up for Senate Bill 299.
Senator, go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Happy
Monday members. Um, requiring
the Secretary of State to inform
a county commission within 15
days of a legislative vacancy is
essential to ensuring swift and
transparent appointment process
that upholds the integrity of
representative government.
With the legislative seat, when
a legislative seat becomes
vacant, the people of that
district are left without a
voice in critical decisions
affecting their communities.
Delays in not notifying the
county commission can lead to
prolonged vacancies, reducing
effective representation and
potentially stalling important
legislative work, a clear 15-day
notification requirement ensures
that county officials can
promptly begin the process of
appointing a qualified
replacement, minimizing
disruption and maintaining
public trust. This policy
promotes accountability,
efficiency, and fairness,
ensuring that every New Mexican
has continuous and timely
representation in their
government.
My what brought this to light
for me was, um, my prior
senator, Mark Moores, retired in
September, um, as the process
stands, he did notify the
Secretary of State.
But he did not notify the county
commission and the Secretary of
State did not notify the county
commissioners either.
So our district, our
constituents went without
representation for an entire
quarter.
Of 2024.
So, once we started looking at
this, we realized, um, the
Secretary of State is
responsible for elections and it
would be
A common sense approach for the
Secretary of State's office to
in that timely manner of 15
days, notify the appropriate
county commission manager.
Thank you, Senator. We did not
have anyone sign up, uh, in
support or opposition on this
bill. I, I have to apologize to
you. I have an amendment that I,
I would have usually talked to
you about. I did it over the
weekend, uh, that does not
change the what you're trying to
accomplish at all. Um, I can go
through that first or we can go
to members of the committee
first.it, it might make more
sense to do the amendment first.
All right. So, Senator, with
this amendment does is
It has, it has the resigning
member, when they notify the
Secretary of State, they notify
the county commissions too.
Ah, so that way there's no kind
of middleman doing it. Everyone
gets noticed at the same time,
uh, and it still achieves the
purpose that I, I believe that
you're, you're looking to
achieve, um, but I think is is
just an easier administratively
easier to have that just all
happen at the same time and put
it on the member to, to let, let
everyone know.
Is that a friendly or unfriendly
amendment?
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's a
friendly amendment, and I just
want to make sure that I'm
hearing you correctly because
the, the requirement for the
Secretary of State to still
notice, notify within 15 days
would stand. Would that be in
addition? Because how would we
know if that member actually
told the county commission.
So, so, no, that would be taken
out. Uh, it would just be on the
member to, to do so the same way
it's on the member to notify
the, the Secretary of State. So
if a member was derelict in
their duty and, and did not do
that, they, they would not
actually have resigned. They
would still, in order to achieve
their resignation, they would
have to give this notice to
both, both the Secretary of
State and their account and any
county commissions in their
district. So, I believe, you
know, I think Senator Sponi has
like 5.
Um, so it would have to go out
to all of them. I have one. It
would go out to, to my one
county commission. Go ahead,
Senator. Madam Chair.
Are you designating who the
county that they should notify
us that the county clerk.
What we have here, senator, is
just that it would, it's the
county commission. It says it's,
uh, the county commissioners for
all counties in the district,
because they're the ones who do
the appointing. That's fine.
Yes, I'm, I'm fine with that.
It's a friendly amendment.
All right.
So members, you have a copy of
the amendment in front of you.
I, I can go through it if you
want, but it.
I don't, I don't know that it's
necessary. Is there any
objection to adopting this
amendment?
See none, the amendment is
adopted. We're back on the bill
as amended. Uh.
And Senator Brantley?
We talk about the divide being
not our versus D, but rural
versus urban, and this is one of
those cause I couldn't get
through the 1st 3 aisles of
Walmart after I'd resigned in a
small town, they would know
exactly who it is, but I could
see you saying, well, Mark
Morris, they didn't know he was
resigned. Heck.
I wouldn't have been able to
pick my kids up from school
without getting stuck on it.
Flocking around, but I, I see
why it may be needed in some of
the urban areas, but I think in
small towns, we would know we
resigned before we did.
Uh, thank you guys. All right.
Any other debate? I think we're
on a motion for a due pass from
Senator Townsend. All right, is
there any objection to that
motion?
As Amanda, at the end, yes.
Motion for Du pass as amended.
Seeing none, show all members
present voting in the
affirmative. Senator, you have a
due pass as amended.
And welcome to the Senate rules.
I think this is your first time
here with us. Thank you. Thank
you so much.
All right, that is all of our
work for today. We are still
working on our agenda for
Wednesday, but we will let you
all know as soon as, as we do,
