The two eighty the cybersecurity
act as the rules to Wednesday so
we won't be hearing that today
but we're gonna be starting with
senator Neville and Senator
Stewart I believe you have
of committee substitute proposed
committee substitute for and
just share what we do.
Thank you madam.
So madam chair I move that do
not pass on Senate joint
resolution one item for
discussion purposes a two passed
for Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate
resolution.
Any injections that motion scene
and that as a doctor for the
purposes of discussion very good
thank you madam chair we discuss
this of that some length the
other day but we have a new set
of this new serve I worked with
the Senator Stewart to come up
with the concept and also
consulted with Senator Kernan
how my two favorite educators in
the Senate so that we can try to
come up with something that's
workable we need stability and
education that's the bottom line
on this if no matter what the
situation is we're gonna be
looking at governor share aging
and just the natural flow of
things and we need to have such
a system where we can put
together a stable environment to
develop or education policies
that's what this does this
essentially takes us back to a
system very similar to what it
was up prior to the last
constitutional amendment to the
status of secretary of education
the few minor tweaks but nothing
of significance of.
With that I'll turn over Senator
Stewart who might have some
additional comments and I'll
just say for you Senator Stewart
after saying we won't take any
official action we have a quorum
we then think about on top in
the submarket for discussion
purposes about a quorum but so
it is not officially adopted for
discussion purposes but we will
discuss non the less I can take
my Moseley's got hacked.
Thank you madam chair.
The so of you might recall that
when senator Neville came first
he was proposing a seven member
appointed board of what this
does is take it back to similar
to what it was before the two
thousand three so we take the
ten elected Public Education
Commission districts which have
been redistricted and we turn
those into the state board of
education membership districts
this would be in if so this is a
constitutional amendment so
we're hoping that it works we
would pass this in twenty four
the election would be in twenty
six so it's designed to have
this going to affect essentially
at the end of our current
governor's term so one twenty
six those new those new
districts would elect a state
school board member from those
ten six districts in addition
there are five governor
appointees with restrictions no
more than two for many County no
more than three from a single
party and what a what a minimum
of one tribal representatives
are for appointees and so
they're staggered their terms
are staggered and we always do
that by law.
On a lottery system.
So it it takes us back to the
time that we for forty fifty
years we had basically three
superintendents we had Leonard
delay OO then we had Alan Morgan
and then we had Michael Davis so
the school board would appoint
the state superintendent and we
would be going back to those
times where we have more
consistency in education instead
of the differing policies that
happened between
administrations so that is the
purpose and what it looks like
and you have to stand fast.
Thank you and we did not have
anyone sign up as a proponent or
an opposition
if you're here in the room and
you'd like to indicate your
support could you please raise
your hand.
If you're in the room you like
to indicate your opposition
could you please raise your
hand.
Of everyone online.
Okay great thank you.
So and since we don't have a
quorum we're any any objections
to
moving the the the sub for the
purpose of discussion seen done.
There's a doctor.
We had one she already made one
that but we're just we're just
waiting for use and that.
I I have one amendment that I'm
gonna offer can do that now or
we can committee for discussion
do discussion the committee
first
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you madam chairman and
thank you Senators.
It is it's been discussed
thoroughly during the interim
with the interim committees.
Mr chair and senator no this is
a relatively recent idea I had
to after some of the issues that
have been coming up over the
last couple years and I felt
that we needed to establish
stability it takes five years to
keep you to come up with a
concept for education you don't
know if it works for several
years you put it into place we
need to have a superintendent
and in a system in place that
allows for something longer than
a governor's term frankly in is
not being faulting any single
governor whatever but we change
governor's ever forty years no
matter what and if we change
secretaries that often and and
that's an ideal situation than
we would be looking at
Changing the whole system every
eight years at a minimum and
that's just not a good way to
run a something as important as
our schools schools after and
madam chair Senator I will say
that this has been proposed
repeatedly I think Senator
Padilla has put it in three
times so
it's you know it's it's a
political question.
It's it's it's a it's a
philosophical suggestion that we
go back to more stability than
what we have now so I don't I
don't think anyone committee
would either support or oppose
it in the interim I don't think
the L. E. S. C. L. E. S. C. did
not bring this up so yes and no
we've been talking about it for
years but we it hasn't come from
an interim committee.
And madam chairman of I think
I've.
Absolutely agree that but we've
had is it's been fairly chaotic
with the superintendent changing
every year
The dilemma is
Does a fifteen person board I
mean really superintendent and
the letter delay days letter
delay around the board the board
didn't run letter to let go of
and that's that was me what
you're really saying is do we
need is our who would be
independent of gubernatorial
fluence.
And.
And nobody runs those boards I
mean.
They've been years when when we
when the only person who will
put themselves up for me the
party one because nobody really
cares about that so I I
understand the attraction of
this but philosophically what
we're getting we're we're going
to go back to is it a wind like
the all state engineer ran
things you know independent of
whoever the governor was the
state engineer ran Water
policies the state
superintendent of education read
Education and maybe that is
preferable I I would just be a
little more comfortable I guess
if there were thoroughgoing
exploration of this idea I'd buy
it my initial reaction was well
this must have been something
that came up from one of the
interim committees but.
We couldn't vote on it until the
following year and a half.
But if we what if we just had a
thoroughgoing debate about it
discussion.
And then let the interim
committees take a look at it and
then if they come back next year
with that recommendation we vote
for it and then it would go on
the ballot.
No later than is going to be
able to go on the ballot if we
do it now.
Well madam chair that is
certainly an option this has
been around for quite awhile and
I believe that the
superintendents round four I
mean yep people don't run for
the PC because they have nothing
to do they have nothing to do
except for mandate state charter
charters that's all their job so
when we had a state school board
it was a lot more competitive
people did run for those those
seats and the state school board
I did a lot that was the state
school board that came up with
the dossier process for moving
from level one to two to three
in the tier that teacher
licensure a Reno went after we
passed house bill two twelve so
you know the the issue really is
it's it's the agreement between
the administration's you'll
remember under governor Martinez
they up into the teacher
evaluation system and the the
school rating system we lost a
lot of teachers under that
administration because of the
teacher evaluation system was
very onerous and unfair so it's
those up processes that we've
been battered about over from
between administrations that's
really the intent of this bill
is to put some more stability
and the states are thoroughly
mixed some states like Tennessee
elects a state commissioner of
education Act I met her last
summer some districts some
school some states have this
kind of process and some states
have a an appointed education
secretary so there there's no.
One system that's better than
others so you know a thorough
review wouldn't come up with
anything different than well
it's up to us to choose which
one and so we're offering this
so that we have another option.
Madam chair and just to an
additional comment is you know
the joke used to be thank god
for Mississippi Mississippi is
now like twenty fifth or
something like middle of the
pack they made tremendous
progress in the last few years
because of stability that's the
main difference I can't to give
you the details another system
runs but they have had the same
guy running the show for a long
period of time and that's been
the key factor in trying to get
a credible education system in
the state that suffered many
many years.
Madam chairman of a just a.
Of like to get your feedback the
senators on one other issue the
way this is set up the existing.
Commissioners were the state
board of education that only
deals with charter schools.
They would be the ones that
would appoint and the
superintendent no no no three we
should hold a new election the
substitute the original one I
think I had it was that way that
the substitute specifies a new
election in twenty four no
twenty seven twenty six twenty
six that's the number of new
election there's no board of
election in the appointees
happen at about the same time so
the current Public Education
Commission that deals with
charters would stay in effect
until then until the new
election same districts but the
state school board election.
But so this is this change in
the wouldn't would only take
effect in twenty twenty six
correct.
And new elections new
appointees.
In those people would certainly
run that those seats with
educated on a staggered basis
some random process.
Okay so so we wouldn't we
wouldn't see this change over
for another four years three
track.
If that that if it were to pass.
What about my idea of of of of.
You have a of their going debate
in the public and everything and
and because we can't vote until
twenty twenty twenty twenty four
anyway.
Madam chair it's been my
experience that you know when we
say that it that has never
really happened I mean we could
bring this up in L. E. S. C.
we wouldn't do any more than
what we're doing today and
they'll just see except that the
public would have had a chance
to really weigh in on this.
Well they certainly have a
chance now.
I mean you know we have public
comment in the only a C. like
other every other interim
committee
certainly your major education
lobbyist here is the one that
raises hand in support
know if you want to ask him a
question.
So nobody's sign up to comment
on it.
That is our center I believe.
Committee really really
restricts public comment so we
don't have a real good feeling
about how this is being viewed
by the public it would be
appropriate madam chair if we
ask Mr around or somebody to
make the comment I know he
didn't if I pass with that be a
program manager.
And I think it sounds like a
member of the committee is is
asking him so so yes please go
ahead but I'll note Senator we
we manage public comment here we
we're not looking to restrict
that point that we set out
reasonable procedures for the
purpose of all of that and and
ask them to follow those
procedures but yes if if you
like to hear from.
Come on up to and it says to the
microphones that we can please
state your your personal.
Thank you madam chair staff
rounds of the of the executive
director of the school
superintendents association.
And also it's it's much
different I'm sorry madam chair
of for the states to protests
Association also the coalition
of educational leaders so
essentially I represent every
administrator in New Mexico
public schools we support to the
amended version of this bill he
goes back to a process we think
will work better than our
current process has been working
we are concerned about
stability.
And all the changes of of
superintendent sees there for
directions rules at center are
problematic for public schools.
I worked for the state
department of education I was a
public school finance chief from
nineteen eighty four to nineteen
eighty seven under Alan Morgan
who is the state superintendent
and we found that that process I
think Senator Pinos madam chair
allowed could public input in
fact we went around the state of
New Mexico as a as a work force
for the state department of
education to get public input
and in fact even in school
budgets I held a budget hearing
in each public school of New
Mexico every year on their
budget so we have good public
disclosure is an example of what
went on there so we're in very
strong support of this bill as
it's written we think it's
important because the timeline
madam chair and little to
participate in the last part of
the COVID because I know it's
getting along it will.
Will remove the question whether
or not this
is timely and when it changes it
changes with the new
administration which allows us
to finish out our current
trajectory under the current
process and start fresh with
with the new check out changing
governor and so for all those
reasons we support this bill we
instituted Act favorably on its
behalf and madam chair thank you
for changing the rules for
minute to allow me to comment.
And madam chairman of.
Lands in a position.
The razor and again everybody.
Would you like to say anything
about this our illustrious madam
chairman if you would like to
say something about this you can
and and and I just want to be
clear about our procedures
because we're not changing our
we have a member of the
committee who is asking to hear
from folks and and and that is a
reasonable request that that I'm
happy to accommodate but in
general procedures are you have
to sign up to get public comment
one hour before the committee
that is a I I think a reasonable
limit and so and we do want to
hear from the public
but we also have a lot of
legislation to get through and
so we want to make sure we're
managing our time for please
appropriately Senator Ortiz
piano if you would like to it
what why don't from one but not
both when it when we have one of
them come up and.
And if you'd like to make a
comment in responses that are it
was pretty easy Pinos question
you may do so.
Isn't.
Thank you for.
That on thank you thank you
madam chair members the
committee and we certainly
respect to following the rules
are that we should follow the
rules on that I was actually on
where we had to sign up an hour
before I'm Judy Bullington and
I'm speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce to you this morning the
chamber of commerce respectfully
opposes this proposed
constitutional amendment because
back during the bill Richardson
administration it was one of the
leading proponents to support
the change to move away from an
elected state school board and
move the accountability over
directly out to the to the
governor and have a cabinet
secretary and.
And you know have a department
of education so we feel that
that policy is sound we do
appreciate you know senator
Ortiz the Pinos concerns that
there is turnover and some of
these positions but basically
the reason we moved away from an
elected body was that it was
perceived to just be to
political in a very similar
manner as the public regulation
commission was and we've now
moved hope for over to an
appointed appointed a group
arrangement with that without
organization so for those
reasons we we don't we don't
think this is a move in the
right direction the step forward
and we percent prefer to keep
the status quo madam chair thank
you.
Thank you madam chairman at one
of the things that.
Billington said I wanted to
throw out there for the members
consideration as well of when
you have.
All the cabinet secretaries
reporting to the governor then
you have.
Opportunity for them to to
collaborate more of more
effectively I think there's a
children's cabinet for example
no sub cabinet within the
cabinet that includes the
education department if the
education secretary is not
really answerable to the
governor.
That might become much more
difficult to achieve that kind
of collaboration among the
department and you know I'm not
sure to what extent it's working
all that well right now I you
know I am not privy to I don't
sit in on those meetings all I
know is that you know when when
they report to the interim
committee for example they
frequently will say things like
well we we had this meeting with
these members of the children's
cabinet and we all came up with
this plan or this program where
this agreement to to work in a
in a coordinated fashion on on
the issues of whatever
vaccinations for children or
early childhood the programming
that blends smoothly into the
into the education department
and if they're if they're really
working at odds if you have a
governor's cabinet.
It does not include education.
That is respond and the
education secretary's
responsible to a separate
elected board you you lose that
opportunity I just throw that
out for the members
consideration.
Thank you senator Senator
phonics.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Centers for bring this
forward I mean general support
of this but my question is on
language on page two one
sixteen.
Could you explain to me.
Why there are two AM this.
Shall be nominated and and by
and with.
What was a line okay Page two
line sixteen sixty.
I'm sure there's a reason for
it's a mistake that I just need
to know what to.
Thank you madam chair.
Chair that looks like a
reference type of.
So how do you think it should
read madam chair Senators.
School we've.
Delete the first or I don't want
to change the intent here if
there's some kind of content I
think the first and the should
go nominated by and with the
consent.
That's where we need.
Please.
So it shall be nominated by the
governor it's like they try to
do too much in those two lines
shall be nominated by the
governor and with the consent of
the Senate.
So.
That sounds like we agree that
the first and should go.
To be deleted.
And senator I think I think
Senator Stewart language and
less we want the Senate to be
nominating and confirming this
for us we need to add so strict
the first and so page two line
sixteen struck the first
instance of New after I insert
the words of the governor thanks
and that should fix that.
The way I explained him with the
consent of the.
It sent out you're right thank
you.
Take count appointed by the
governor so shall be nominated.
I governor and with the consent
of the Senate for staggered
terms of six years.
Okay I'm sorry could you repeat
that one more time yes so on
page two lines sixteen a strike
the end after work the word
nomination.
After the word hi insert the
governor.
And then online seventeen
strike appointed by the.
In and senator I think we need
to change that nominated online
sixteen to appointed of the
trackpoint.
So the overall amendment would
grief page two line sixteen
strike nominated and and and
certainly there of appointed and
then after by insert the
governor.
And one seventeen strike pointed
by the governor.
Thank you madam chair that's my
only question and when you're
ready for a month I do have to
make sure if we will just move
that amendment that for are you
is that your the amendment that
you're always ready for the
whole thing but okay I'll move
the amendment all right any
objection to and often that
amendment.
Senator you just a minute of all
right I like to hear.
that amendment is adopted
and then Senator Hermio so madam
chair by it's just a comment as
a former educator I appreciate
the support of legislation when
we think about teaching and
teaching scores we have nothing
to go back on it and see how
we're improving or if we're
improving because when there's a
new cabinet secretary that
certainly see changes and what
the requirements are and what
testing is going to be.
Madam chair I really think that
by having this in place they'll
be someone jeopardy to see
testing scores and see how our
students are improving
throughout time rather than
having to interrupt it and I
just wanted to have that comment
made and to thank the two
sponsors for this bill.
Additional discussion from the
committee.
I have another amendment
announcements on that same page
and all this is doing is adding
language that we we've been
adding to built in general
whenever there's an appointment
and we say only so many can be a
one party
there's just language we've been
adding that says and they shall
not have changed their party
affiliation within two years
prior to the appointment so
that's all this amendment would
do it is page two line twenty
one before the period inserting
a comma and then and shall not
have change their party
affiliation within two years
prior to appointment.
The.
That's good from the moment
absolutely I.
any discussion on the amendment
me yes Senator and madam chair
wouldn't that be covered
we're says as provided by law
that we can do that through
statute this when we when we
make our adjustments that
any kind of requirements or
anything that we would have for
the terms or.
For members I reading that
correct Senator I I think you're
right that that we could put
that in in a line legislation
but we don't have language in
this constitutional amendment
that.
It's a staggered terms for six
years as provided by law.
I I think it's cleaner to have
it here
And and was more in keeping with
the what are legislature has
been doing in general but you're
right it could be done in the
billing legislation which which
is an another reason why I think
it's a good idea even if this
isn't gonna be on the ballot
just wait for it and it's not
going to be actually gotten
going into effect until twenty
six I like the idea of passing
this now so that we have plenty
of time to do that enabling
legislation
But you're right it could go
either place.
And and thank you madam chair if
it was up to me is the about two
sentences the state school board
created
as provided by law but I
understand there's a little bit
that has to go in here because
we don't even trust ourselves
sometimes madam chair.
And and senator you're I mean
this is this is a.
Certainly not as long as we have
a constitutional members flown
out there right now but if you
write it it is kinda long but
system admins but
I I I I still make the motion
set for for that and other
additional discussion on the
amendment.
Objection to adopt in the
amendment.
The scene and that is a doctor.
back on the constitutional
amendment as amended any further
discussion from the committee.
What Centers phonics of review
you're going to come up madam
chair I
move set the
Full action of of I'm sorry I
move I do not pass on sent
Senate joint resolution one and
a do pass on committee
substitute for Senate joint
resolution one as amended but.
Just on a technical note don't
we just put the amendments into
the substitute so just be the
substitute what we do right so I
don't at all all out this is a
new steps to including the to
mimic what I'm here to okay
right any objections to that
motion.
Register me is as in the
case manager for the public at
their I think there needs to be
roll call so everybody can hear
sure the real problem.
Senator Baca is excused Senator
Ingle is exclusive Senator Lopez
Senator McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris is excuse Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino hello dollars.
Three parties Pino snow Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Pirtle yes to
Savannah yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Hermio test consider
to do the yes connected to the
yes that's
but the six one you have a do
pass and center to the theaters
Wednesday.
Just quickly actually.
This bill this because the
funding for changes made
for three three.
I was association.
My view is is what it is and.
Hello.
The the.
Would be for that.
On the other thousand twenty.
But we still.
The
manager I'd like to point out
that the two thousand and three
is an odd year this was a
special election for
constitutional amendments and
the voter turnout was Neil so
whether the public wanted this
occurrences your system or not I
don't know because I don't we
had a good sampling thank you
Carol Pappas.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez come
on up and also this US senator
Clemente has asked the SP one
eighty five the rules that we
will not be here in that today.
Now we have just be one fifty
three.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
this bill is about transparency
and disclosure and we can more
relate to it when I presented as
disclosure and transparency for
what we call the junior bill it
is for a supplemental
appropriations act and it
requires the Legislative Council
Service to publish a list of all
the allocations that are
allocated in the June your bill
it is currently being done as of
last year individually in the
junior bill the requirement that
these allocations by each
legislator and all amounts
including portions of it and
allocation it's already in there
individually last year's bill
however when we came back and
special session by the way but
this year what we're trying to
do is put it in statute so that
it's a permanent disclosure and
transparency that we don't have
to be doing that every year in
the bill or another
appropriations bill comes up
that's a supplemental
appropriations act comes up that
we have to do individually this
here will present a searchable
list for the public to be able
to to find not only total
numbers of allocations and
projects or programs but in fact
individual legislators and the
amounts that are allocated and
it will be published if approved
thirty days after the
legislature approves that and
that's really what it does Madam
chairman members of the
committee thank thank you
senator we have Jason Espinoza
who signed up to speak in
support of this bill if you come
up and use my phone.
The state your name and who
you're with.
Sure.
That madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico foundation for open
government we stand in strong
support of legislation really
think the legislature you know
last year the Senator at
indicated you put this provision
in the junior bill and we
appreciate the additional
transparency we do stand in
support of this cause the skin
and trying to in statute pre
consistency so don't we don't
have to included in every junior
bill so we stand strong support.
Thank you
anyone signed up in opposition
would have anyone online in
support or opposition if you're
in the room would like to
indicate your support by raising
your hand please do so.
Would like to indicate
opposition by raising your hand
please do so.
We'll go to questions from the
committee senator Ortiz Pena
thank you.
Senator thanks for this did we
already had this in love that
yes we do this is what we did a
few years ago for capital we are
ready currently have a list for
both okay but what is different
now in this junior bill is that
we have a total appropriated
amount like for example to one
shelter or something homeless
shelter we have a total amount
but it doesn't say by whom and
so this here would indicate each
the allocation by what
legislators and so on the answer
your question more specifically
the capital bill did the same
thing before but we change that
to do just this now the public
is able to get a searchable list
of with individual applications
by legislators if they wish to
and this with.
So madam chairman one other
thing at this point it also
lists also include vetoes yes.
Yes.
Yes thank you the capital the
capital surgical capitalists
have the the ability to madam
chairman yes Senator it does.
Thank you.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Rodriguez
my I don't have a question madam
chair have more of a COVID
and I I absolutely applaud this
bill when I was new to this and
I was really surprised to find
out that capital and junior
we're not at appropriations were
not public information and so I
think it was with Senator
Commons Bill that capital is
open to the public which it
should be because it's public
money and they should see where
where public money is being used
and worse being vetoed so Bravo
thank you thank you madam chair.
Additional US center for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator for bring this forward I
I mean I I I have the same
concern every time we we do
bills like this
but I understand the need for it
I just I'm afraid and I had to
have a concern that
appropriation bills like this
moving forward is going to be
used for fluff for
reelection type purchases and
again it's just up to you to
legislature let legislative work
to ensure that that they're
doing the right thing and you
know I also on the other side it
was brought up that in the past
in the in the junior bill that
there was a allocation for a
purchase of a building and then
the building turned out to be
only by a member of the
legislature will never know if
who or what or how and you know
this will help prevent that from
happening in the future knowing
that Hey that had nothing to do
with a certain legislators so
you know I I I I understand the
importance of it but I just also
know that there might be some
projects I won't get funding
because they're not as flashy or
funder
gonna get people on your side
that you think you might need to
impress or something so that
that's going to always be a
concern of mine but you know
each one of us has to answer to
our electorate in this will just
help them it's already public
but I know it doesn't say
specifically which legislator
gave it but if you look and see
eastern New Mexico university
Russell got some money is more
likely for myself for candy you
know I don't think Mimi might
Senator certain might throw some
down there wouldn't be too
surprised you know but you know
I I think I I understand the
concerns but I also know that
it's it's pretty public already
I don't think it's as dark money
is a lot of people try to
portray but I mean we're moving
forward making it even easier
for people to figure it out so
I'm gonna support this go round.
Thank you senator Hart madam
chairman I do remember you
expressing concerns to the
Senate floor.
Hi any additional discussion
from the committee.
What's the Senator phonics madam
chair and move the past Senate
bill one fifty three.
All rights still hadn't.
All the.
Senator Baca is excused Senator
Ingle it's education Senator
Lopez is sixty dollars Senator
Lopez is I'm sorry Senator.
Okay.
To look up Senator Lopez yes yes
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores is excuse.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator spent yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator Hotmail yes Senator how
to meal yes and submitted to the
yes and to do the.
Have a due pass with eight eight
yes votes thank you senator
thank you madam chair members of
the committee sorry.
C. would go
yes it would go to Senate
finance.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Next up we have SB three twenty
four which Senator Hermio is
going to put on for Senator
Gonzales.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Senator
Gonzales couldn't join us this
morning so I'll be introducing
this bill and I have an expert
witness the highest and so this
is Senate bill three twenty four
which is The New Mexico
certified appraiser
certification pay increase for
employees and assessors now the
purpose of the New Mexico
certified appraiser certificate
is to recognize professionalism
and competency in the valuation
of property for property
taxation purposes certified
appraisers use this designation
in conjunction with the
evaluation of a wide range of
properties within their
assessment jurisdictions and in
accordance with New Mexico
property tax division commitment
to excellence.
This education opportunity
provides qualified with the
third respective deals awarded
by the New Mexico property tax
division as part of the
certification process there's an
element of continuing education
that results in a recurrent
learning progression that
benefits the assessors office as
well as the property owners of
the county now this
certification madam chair it's
an initiative which is similar
to teacher board certification
bilingual different pay and
certification pay afforded to
journeymen electricians and
plumbers the certification pay
provides by the statue also for
the means to retain the
certified and qualified
individuals once these
individuals are educated trained
and experienced very recruited
by the appraisers surveyors real
estate brokers government
vendors and even other stated
agencies.
Counties provide the training
and should have the means to
retain these highly trained
appraisers now trained and
qualified individuals are
critical to the success of any
assessors office throughout the
state in every county and fair
and equitable valuations are
product of field reviews data
collection stratification and
statistical analysis qualified
appraisers ensure that values
are current and correct so the
property owners are paying their
fair share this remains a County
option and not a requirement so
that's really important to note
that once again remains the
county option it is not a
requirement there is zero impact
to the state general fund and
joining me this morning is my
expert witness Clyde wired the
Bernalillo county deputy
assessor who is here on behalf
of the New Mexico counties
assessors affiliate and Clyde if
you'd like to add a few remarks
thank you very much
madam chair members of the
committee when we come for these
things that we ask about it's a
county option and we're very
fortunate that I a lot of
counties due to use to do this
because what we see is the
senator said we're talking about
qualifications for appraisal
work and years ago when we
started out I started in this
twenty years ago there were no
qualifications really for
assessors office and we moved it
from something very simple to
something nearing the way fee
appraisers are treated and their
education level and we require a
hundred and twenty hours of
education through the
international association of
assessing officers and those are
in key elements of the appraisal
process and then we even get
into the mass appraisal process
because what we do is a little
different than your normal fee
appraiser as well so we
requirement we hold that to a
high standard for our appraisers
and this will help us retain
that as well there's also the
element for assessors to get the
same kind of incentive as we
know.
Elected officials may or may not
have the experience when they
are elected so this puts an
incentive in place for those
assessors as well to be highly
trained in their offices as we
see Bernalillo county as I
currently reside there we have a
hundred and thirty eight
employees that are on the books
Harding County I believe has to
and that's the assessor in the
deputy assessor so we need
training at all levels and we
need that incentive to do so and
we ask for your approval on that
based on the fact that we really
need to retain those and
incentivize that training thank
you very much thank you we did
not have anyone sign up
in support or in opposition to
this bill in person or online if
anyone in the audience would
like to raise our hand to
indicate support.
If anyone would like to raise
their hands in the K.
opposition.
Okay.
Of those issues with committees
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Hermio for stepping up
for a colleague I've got a
question and I am pardon me if
it's here and I'm not seeing it
I'm curious what the current
rate is for appraisers one
through four.
Madam chair Senator McKenna if
on page let's see let's just
start at the beginning and talks
about page one I believe yes
page one line twenty three it
was originally five hundred for
the first class and we're moving
that to seven fifty once they
complete that first class and
then it goes incrementally
through the classes as they go
along and about your raise is
that not what you're seeing
madam chair senator are you
asking what their current rate
of pay is yearly has assessors
yes salary amounts yet.
madam chair and senator McCain I
do not have the salary amounts
that are sanctions by four
assessors at this that would
this amount as by statute is
currently allowed to be above
that salary amount so it would
be salary plus this
certification pay right and
madam chair and senator and that
I understand this is in addition
to I'm just wonder what their
their salaries are now and I
don't.
What are they provide yeah okay.
State.
Madam chair funding support as
forty four dash for.
That's not.
We'll look it up here at the if
there's further discussion what
we're looking at that answer
Thank you madam chair and
senator
How many states do it the way
New Mexico does where we kind of
like to be Big Brother and put
these.
Interesting I'll say caps on
counties and and what they can
pay and what they can do
I I know Utah California a few
others.
For sure that just to leave it
up to the counties
Do you know how many states do
it this way where the state sets
the rates.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle I do
not I know more counties are
more states that just like
yourself do not have a cap on
that in New Mexico be a
legislation has capped a lot of
salaries and incentives such as
this
and so we we have to move on
these as occasionally somehow
even including a.
inflation factor if you will but
it was not deemed as necessary
per se in regards to something
like certification pay for
appraisal qualifications.
And madam chair the reason I
bring that up as I think on page
one after online twenty two you
could say something along the
lines of county assessors may
receive additional cumulative
increments for continuing
education the end.
And then delete everything after
that and leave it up to the
counties to determine what they
need to do to to incentivize
their employees to continue
their education maybe in Harding
County they don't need to pay a
lot more but in Bernalillo they
do or vice versa but it leaves
it up to the board of county
commissioners to really set
those rates I know madam chair
they don't really they they
really enjoy whenever we do that
because whenever we raise the
limits there they go back to
their constituents say Hey the
legislature set and they raise
the limits so they like using us
as that backstop instead of
making these decisions on pay
rates themselves as they should
but I really think to me that
would be a better bill because
ten years from now we're gonna
do it again because of inflation
have to raise the cap again and
and so
you know moving forward I think
that would be a a good amendment
to this and and put it to the
counties because they're the
ones making their budget if they
want to pay more than seven
hundred fifty dollars for
certificate one they should be
allowed to do so if they want to
that should be the Prague of so
that's really just all I have
madam chair.
Thank you senator and the answer
for county assessor the the
salary set in statute is eighty
six thousand six hundred twenty
six dollars annually.
Of course the the employees
salaries are set by statute
those might be different but
that's for the the assessor
themselves madam chair and
looking at annual averages of
employees and assessors office
from ziprecruiter New Mexico
averages at sixty thousand two
hundred ninety seven a year when
the national averages seventy
two thousand to forty eight.
Chair on.
It when you look at that to I
Eight million.
Basis for eight year that thank
you sent us a point that that's
just for classic County and then
yes class B. thanks at seven
seventy five thousand seven
hundred and thirty three in
class and lower the class B. is
sixty four thousand eight
hundred forty four right after
that because.
The very long have.
Thank you for that clarification
center additional discussion on
the bill.
What is the.
The will of the actually I have
a question who provides the
certification training.
Madam chair our training through
the international association of
assessing officers and those are
certified mass appraisal type
instructors that have to go
through a certification process
for them as well through the
international association of
assessing officers.
Great thank you.
What is the the oil and Senator
**** each item Senator Pirtle
and madam chair I hate to make a
the amendment that.
Large this kind of on the fly
but I don't know if it's the the
rest of the committee shares my
my thoughts on coming back over
and over.
On many of these caps on what we
can do on education and just
leave it up to the counties
address change the language to
to allow for that.
Senator Sanchez.
Chair just for discussion of I
believe county assessors are
term limited is that correct but
I'm sure that is correct sell.
I'm not sure.
I think there are chair and
senator pirtle I think there's
some counties that would resist
paying them anything.
So
I think they would cry that
they're having budget issues
finance issues so.
That's one reason I support
having definitive.
right.
Thank you mentioned it and and
madam chair I it's it's a may
already so the counties don't
have to pay it anyway we're just
kinda handicapping those
counties that do want to reward
those that continue education
and just capping capping them at
what they can receive in and so
I'm just thinking moving
forwards that have to come back
in ten years and do this again
due to inflation that we could
just get out of the way like
counties handle their own
business but I I I understand
exactly what you're saying to
especially in our conservative
counties down in my neck of the
woods.
Senator are you are you making
that motion are.
And madam chair I don't think
for for cleanliness of the bill
that I'm quite ready to make
that motion what committee does
this go to next.
Ashtead sprach not on staff.
Okay well I'll just wait for to
get to the floor and just get a
feel for the whole body thank
you he.
Question back is so fun to say.
All right so any further
discussion from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee on this bill.
Okay motion for disaster Senator
a second presenters to drugs we
have a roll call vote.
Senator Baca yes senator Bob for
yes Senator Ingle was a few
Senator Lopez yes Senator Lopez
yes.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morse's excuse Senator Ortiz the
penal yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator had a meal yes.
I'm here yes and Senator to the
yes Senator Duhigg yes nine yes.
We have a Mr Senator Gonzales
has a do pass thank you madam
chair thank you members thank
you madam to thank you.
Hey and because.
The role had to bills get rolled
today this is our last bill
looking to get out of here
shockingly early SB three thirty
five Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee this
bill is occasioned by the fact
that when we consolidated all
the elections into the local
election act
the Conservancy district have
different
Voter.
Requirements you don't have to
be necessarily
the landowner to vote in most
elections but you do in in the
look and Conservancy district
where those were set up back in
the thirties and so there was an
effort made this year does that
do everything possible to work
around it tried different ways
of.
Holding elections for the
Conservancy district of board
members at the same time as the
local election act calls for all
the other boards to be elected
school boards look look that.
And that they the secretary of
state's office did their best
but they simply couldn't figure
out a way to do that as a result
we're asking for a one time
delay.
Give them a little more time
ISIS spect it's also going to
require really the Conservancy
district to reevaluate its own
voting requirements and and with
that unless the secretary of
state's office of of the
development from the secretary
of state's office is here.
Good morning everyone madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Lindsay Bachman I'm
the legislative director and and
director of executive affairs
for Maggie Toulouse Oliver I
just wanted to
expand upon of the Senators
introduction of the bill
certainly had we had resources
and time that we spent during
twenty twenty addressing a
global pandemic in the way that
we run elections we might be in
a different position today to
say that we would be able to run
this election this year with
these groups included and as a
senator indicated current law is
that we are to run the election
with them included on the
regular local election and we
are moving forward with that but
we need more time in order to
make sure it's administratively
workable so that's why we're
here before you today and I'm
happy to help answer any
questions thank you we don't
have to people sign up and
support
John Thompson.
Representative and argue CTE was
one I don't see him here yes
sorry use your just sitting
behind so the gentleman so would
you come up on up to the
microphone.
Our chief engineer one of
speaking my place with that
permissible that's fine.
Madam chair senators I
appreciate the opportunity
I just wanted to say thank you
to the bill sponsor thank you to
the secretary of state's office
and the the Rio Grande
Conservancy district fully
supports this bill and we
believe it's needed to ensure a
secure and and efficient
elections is administered this
year so I appreciate the
opportunity thank you very much
tell us your personal last name
chasing Kasumba I apologize for
that thank you.
Thank we also have simply and
not home.
We wanted to find yes the COVID
on behalf of the Pueblo of this
let us she online.
Sam can you guys hear me we can
hear you okay perfect well good
morning chart chairwoman did he
can Senate members of the Senate
rules committee my name is not
hot and I'm appearing on behalf
of that city the governor public
is that it the public is let us
support Senate bill three thirty
five we extend our appreciation
to senator Ortiz C. Pino and to
hit for sponsoring this bill the
problem is that I shared a good
working relationship with the
middle Rio Grande conservation
district Highlander Sir by MRG
DC which operates and maintains
irrigation facilities within the
public foundries pursuant to
federal law the policies and
actions of the MI GDC impact the
problem is that a and our
members are qualified voters
pursuant to the Conservancy at
the provisions of the local
elections Act will require
substantial changes to MRT DC's
election process and more time
is needed to implement those
provisions in a way that will
not disenfranchised public
orders for those reasons the
problem is that a support the
lady implementation of the local
election act for the twenty
twenty three and my GDC election
only we respectfully request
that the Senate rules committee
support Senate bill three thirty
five I thank the committee for
its consideration and I will
stand for any questions thank
you.
Thank you discussion from the
committee Senator Lopez followed
by Senator funds thank you madam
chair and thank you senator and
and I'm so sorry Senator to
interrupt you I I did not
address any opposition I we did
not have any time up in
opposition if anyone is in the
audience who would like to raise
their hand to indicate support
please do so.
Raise your hand indicate
opposition please do so.
Thank you I'm sorry Senator
please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bringing forward
this bill I definitely remember
us going through and flagging
this particular issue and how it
was going to change the
elections and I remember Senator
Baca we were kind of like.
There is something very
Much that needed to be addressed
especially the way that the
Conservancy holds its elections
because this would have totally
changed the way that the
elections are held up and I
appreciate working at the
secretary of state of courses is
working on an issue but it's
still something that goes not
just in the valley right north
and self always but of course up
with our pueblos and Devont'e
only as you County all the way
down to support so it is an
issue that affects
those who have been voting cards
to the Conservancy so I just
want to say thank you and I do
support of this bill thank you.
Senator.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator this is the only refer
does this bill only refer to the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
and it would not affect the
others.
I'm thank you for the question
Senator madam chairs Senator the
the Conservancy's statutes
actually includes three
Conservancy districts in the
state of New Mexico one of those
I am aware have has made
modifications to the way it runs
its selections internally but we
wanted to make sure that all
were included and were able to
have an election this year so
the bill includes all of them it
does include a date certain for
emergy CD that was at the
request of that organization.
So madam chair and senator.
Is it possible that the that the
different districts would have
different election days.
Madam chair Senators yes.
And madam chair Senator wasn't
the purpose to ensure that all
the elections were one one day
and I'm not talking about.
The entire.
group I'm talking about this
modification.
Would we not want all of the
districts to have a similar
election day.
You for modifying this.
Madam chair Senators from the
perspective of the office our
concern is that they are able to
administer their elections
without interfering with the
regular local elections that
includes resources and and and
so those things were
contemplated what we know is
that for many of these
Conservancy districts we are
outside of their normal time
line if they were to have their
election pursuant to their
governing statutes and so that
flexibility was included for
them to be able to pick a date
and still meet the needs of
their organizations however we
did put some some guidelines and
there in regards to dates that
that have to do with resource
availability in order to run an
election in the state Senator
Hughes penitent yes and and
madam chairman Senator product
this is just the this one
election.
By twenty twenty five they will
have to consolidate into the
local election act date so madam
chair that was my next question
Senator is that specific hearing
this bill and it says it will
this is the one and only time.
Yes.
And you pointed out I'm.
Kind of confused this is the
page two.
line three the secretary of
state the districts to identify
barriers provide recommendations
and coordinate efforts to ensure
each district's participation in
the regular local election of
twenty twenty five thank you
very much Madam chair I think my
questions have been answered
thank you.
Thank you madam chair
I I just have a couple questions
yeah and I remember we had an
extensive discussion forum
Senator Lopez did did have some
real concerns with this and
looks like and I'm I'm
supportive of this I just have a
couple questions one is managers
that isn't necessary that has an
emergency clause and interviewed
dissipating election prior to
July one.
Thank you for the question
Senator madam chair Senators yes
because we know that they have
shaped requirements leading up
to the election that they need
the flexibility in order to make
sure that those are happening
timely in order to have an
election later this year.
Of thank you for that answer
okay so so that serves the short
answer that is yes there are
some election actions that will
take place and so forth July of
then therefore we.
So my second question is this
we're we're putting this into
statute right.
So we're gonna have to come back
in with the state.
Staff for the opportunity after
the fact.
Madam chairman no I've been
Senator book I think because
we've made it very specific to
this one election and say that
they're after starting in twenty
twenty five they will be part of
the local election act we
shouldn't have to this and
senator that's a temporary
provision okay if you look on
page one line eighteen so this
all this temporary provisions so
of the comp compilers will end
up taking it out once we don't
need it anymore.
Thank you madam chair on.
That's that's all the questions
they have thank you for.
US.
They're not any additional
discussion from the committee.
All right have a motion from
Santo Domingo second from center
to the Pino let's do a roll call
vote.
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca
yes Senator Ingle is excuse
Lopez yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris is
excuse Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator had a meal yes Senator
how to meal yes and senator do
yes yes yes ninety I have a due
pass thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
that we are done probably
earlier than we ever will be
before.
