Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna your Senator
Moores.
Etcetera then yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Paul.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez
Center smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Etcetera Tommen.
thank you would like to welcome
everybody to today's session I
would ask that we all please
rise for the invocation.
To be led today by a very on
Reverend father Richard energy
New Mexico state Senate
chaplain.
Senator Joseph Cervantes and the
salute to New Mexico flag to me
that today by Senator quite a
Hemphill.
Morning everyone.
said good morning everyone three
times to.
Used to yell at everybody if.
I'm always honored to be here to
be praying with everyone here
smiling faces and seeing the
light of life in everybody's
eyes.
Do you work here as leaders of
Mexicans you are all appreciated
more than you can know.
And I guess we're halfway
through the session perspective
You are all here is part of that
divine partnership to.
Serve the people of our great
state.
As a former green beret have
spiritually as a kind of lived
hope a way of getting up again
and again that has its roots in
god's permanent faithfulness.
figure forth the hope of the
community not least in the face
of difficult challenges.
But sometimes the most ordinary
things and what you feel may be
ones we make no laws are
memorials but the ones you put
forth.
So may you be blessed as you
continue to walk in our creases
creators resilient curries and
I'd like to.
hear this prayer it's always
provocative and it always
touches us no matter what our
tradition is because it touches
us down that would be place.
Where there is discord harmony
where there is our truth.
Where there is doubt faith.
Where there is despair hope.
not so much seek to be consoled
as to console to be understood
as to understand.
To be loved as to love.
Once again like to welcome
everyone for joining us today
and I yield to our Senate
majority floor leader Peter
hearing no objection we're on
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you father Rick
for your words this morning
appropriate for you to.
I thought it particularly
appropriate for you to talk
about resilience and each day
because I feel good this morning
and come in and realize that we
are the voice for many here in
our state in our districts and
Madam each day and started go
over again and give it our
native Hawaiian day so that is a
new thing Representative Sapan
ski has initiated that so we
will have that on a plate for
We are going to do I
confirmations today when those
reports come down and that'll be
our primary focus.
let's see County day off the
president's table and we'll
place it as the next on today's
calendar Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president that'll be Senator
also The Village of Los Lunas is
provided a lunches for us box
lunches so we're very
appreciative to them for doing
drafted so one week from today
is the last day to have bills
drafted and then Thursday
February sixteenth is the last
day bills can be introduced in
C. starting at five thirty PM Mr
president with that I would be
able to Senator Padilla.
Senator for their thank you Mr
president and you just consent
to allow cameras on the Senate
floor.
Hearing no objection cameras
have Senator Baca followed by
Senator Burt Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I want to
take this opportunity to
introduce my guest today with me
atmosphere in Santa Fe so if the
body would please help me
welcome my guess.
you will find the New Mexico
school for the blind visually
handicapped as provided copies
of the pledge of allegiance and
braille along with the tactical
instructional resources center
who provide this service and
supports braille production
throughout the state of New
Mexico School supports braille
across the whole state and just
a personal note
To remind everybody that the
school for the blind and
visually impaired is a real tool
made brand new dorm coming
online very shortly all of this
is provided by the the
superintendent of the school
Patricia Beecher and thank you
Mr president for the time.
the Albuquerque balloon fiesta
and it should be in their box
all that we had a room on the
table today but is very
important there have a lot of
the borders here today and the
spores of blue Fiesta are here
your mailbox is a should be a
little different you there I
just want to say thank you to
all the people from the balloon
fiesta they're here today thank
you Mr president.
Thank you senator Morris.
president I just want to
recognize our friend and local
superstars superhero Priscilla
lose that who's up on the
everyone recognize my our guests
Priscilla loose that out thank
you Mr put.
Any further announcements.
Thank you Mr president just I
think we'll go ahead and do the
memorial now and then give
everyone a sense where I just
think trying to get committees
up and really get them to work
so and I wasn't aware there's a
joint session tomorrow which I
just found out some of the need
to look at that so certainly
calendar what it looks like so
Mr president what will do is go
to third reading and senator
Sanchez is going to do Senate
memorial twenty three and then
ideal to senator Sanchez percent
Morales twenty three hearing no
objection we're on that order of
Business third reading of
legislation.
Senator Sanchez.
no objection senator Sanchez.
Valencia County date in the
Senate whereas Valencia County
is part of the area of a whole
and whereas but it's a county is
Valencia county is the home of
the famous to more land grant
which the king of Spain granted
to thirty families in seventeen
thirty nine and whereas the
our lady of build an end over as
better than means Bethlehem in
Spanish and whereas bill then
was a street strategic point
along the community out of also
Mexico and whereas billion has
gained the nickname hub city
because of the bill and cut off
of the at this in Topeka and
Santa Fe railway now known as
sparsely populated agricultural
community and whereas that I
thought was the site of a minor
engagement during the ember
whereas Valencia County is the
home to the Decalogue stone
which contains an inscription
that is interpreted to be an
abridged version of the ten
commandments in a form of the
museum of heritage and arts and
whereas Valencia County is home
to parts of the Cibola National
Forest and the months on a
fun event that raises funds to
provide scholarships to students
while preserving Valencia County
traditions by promoting and
enhancing local business
development through civic social
twenty three be commemorated as
Valencia County day in the
Senate and be it further
resolved that copies of this
memorial be transmitted to the
And Rio communities signed and
sealed at the state capitol in
the City of Santa Fe Senator
Joshua a such as senator Gregory
A. Baca Senator Elizabeth Liz
Stefanics Mimi Stewart president
are on third reading we can
please keep the volume down.
Senator Sanchez.
Mr president I move that Senate
memorial twenty three be put on
Well Mr president my family goes
back in Valencia county from the
seventeen hot late seventeen
hundreds as it was read in the
memorial.
Mr president some of the finest
people their neighbors and
farmers and ranchers
Valencia County is always be
home to me
Pinto beans were not grown in
Valencia County and our family
brought it back five years ago
now we farm three hundred acres
of Pinto beans which are
distributed through New Mexico
to minority floor leader Senator
great Baca Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Sanchez for for leading
the way in this memorial most of
share we share many
commonalities with all areas of
the state I think is what makes
us so special Valencia County we
share the rural areas the
of the woods and and find great
bird hunting and and large game
hunting or you can you can head
up north to north Valencia
County well we're we're my
ten miles Mr president it's
quite amazing to see you of the
difference in landscapes and and
the difference in industry and
Valencia County our rich history
our culture the the the families
that have been there for so long
as well as transplants that have
came and made it their own home
and culture you'll find their
and I'm glad we're celebrating
this today we have arranged my
fellow senator as well as
representatives of for just a
president thank you Senator Baca
we do have for.
Other than that would like to
debate on seven March twenty
contingent that represents
Valencia County and right now I
representative of the parts of
Rio communities which has quite
but to put in many more
businesses so while my district
might expand further right now I
am of.
Proud to represent Rio
in children reading hours we
have many other services there a
senior center that is dependent
upon the rest of the county and
many other areas we
and visit Valencia County thank
you Mr president thank you
centers of addicts we do have
further debate.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I am from Valencia County I am a
proud much at this which means
that I'm from Los Chavis
Of where Dennis Chavis was from
there including my mother
I am an heir to the mainland
Grant descendants of the city
owes that'll summon as outgoing
as good Liz Chavis is the run is
Frankie still operates I
attended Los Lunas public
schools and the Lynn public
schools.
I
and so I'm very familiar with
and I agree with Senator Baca
the people in Valencia County
are the heart and soul of the
state so say I want to again
thank the sponsor for bringing
this memorial and stand in
Stewart followed by Senator
gonna Hemphill then Senator
Padilla follow us center how to
mail center Stuart.
Thank you Mr president I stand
up and strong support for this
then state Rep Andrew but at us.
And he was very funny he would
say to me hope in a might might
primo lives over here he's got
know they can off of me
everywhere we went to the there
was family so yeah it's it's
family groups down there it was
thought to so it was a very fun
days of beautiful communal love
Tommy hill haven't hiked up yet
but I will one of the state so
Thank you Mr president I to
stand in support of this
memorial and want to think
Senators
Sanchez and Baca for bringing
this forward I have been able to
has a ranch there on the Travis
ranch and I'm also the proud
descendant as is
Senator Antoinette Sedillo Lopez
on to run for Congress she was
the very first Hispanic woman to
ever run for Congress in
nineteen twenty two so thank you
again senators for bring that
Senator Padilla I thank you very
much Mr president I also rise
and support I think you know Mr
president I spent a lot of my my
formative years along the way in
Valencia County graduated from
Los Alamos high school.
around that area as well and
everything that you heard today
is true it's a really very
special community I think it's
one of the monikers for Los
Lewis is now a small community
Facebook it likely is likelihood
is your messages going through
loss on us right now on the west
side of Los Lunas but that there
are some of the most
technologically advanced
businesses that are choosing
chili a lot of alfalfa and and
now they're diversifying their
economies with.
With blood companies like meta
and Facebook and and multiple
others and they're such large
the south of of of the district
that I represent right now I'll
just tell you one story Mr
president that you're probably
familiar with the point we have
a similar background I think a
lot of ways but if you wanted a
job in Valencia County in you
would be the throwing the but
the bails on the truck and it
was my job to stack them so I
took that skill set Mr president
into the business I own today
from a logistics standpoint and
influence you County if you're
younger than fifteen thank you
Mr president thank you senator
for them Senator Hotmail.
Thank you Mr president I also
be in with open arms as a matter
of fact I taught several of
Senator Sanchez's cousins went
to visit him this summer and was
able to see all of them at one
of the parties that he hosted in
thank you senator had a meal.
Valencia County is just a great
place and where my family's been
for hundreds and hundreds of
years I think almost four
hundred years now going back so
with that Mr president.
See no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
on the negative Center moral
twenty three Valencia County day
has passed the New Mexico state
U. S. senator Sanchez for that
memorial
at this point unanimous consent
we go that our business
confirmations and.
reports the reader to read the
report.
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
upon individually hearing no
objection the reader to read.
Senate bill one thirty two do
not pass.
transportation committee.
Senate bill one thirty three do
passed as amended.
Senate bill one forty five do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill one sixty to do pass
and that's referred to the
committee report centers we have
a motion to adopt the committee
reports all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee port is been
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one.
Has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that a do not pass but that
Senate Judiciary Committee
unanimous consent of the Senator
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we act on
them with one motion with the
general effect that they were
acted upon individual saying no
objection the reader to read.
Senator Montez with option three
reports centers we have a motion
to that the committee reports
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee part is been
adopted and the journal reflect
We do have more committee
reports I apologize.
Reiterate this president your
rules committee has had it under
consideration Senate executive
for a term commencing June
sixteenth twenty twenty one and
expiring on June fifteenth
twenty twenty five your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment
the the journal reflect that
they're acted upon individually
hearing no objection the reader
to read.
Senator executive letter number
two dated February twenty second
two to be served at the pleasure
of the governor.
Your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment Senate executive
commencing on January twenty six
twenty twenty two to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment Senate executive
corporation for a term
commencing on January twenty six
twenty twenty two to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
here committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment Trent Owain Jones as
a student member of the western
New Mexico university board of
regents for a term commencing
January first twenty twenty
three and expiring December
chairwoman Senator.
Mr president I move the
committee reports centers we
have a motion to adopt committee
reports all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
has been referred Senate
memorial twenty seven has had it
under consideration and risk
reports that the same has do
been duly rules and and grossed
Hamblen Senator cliff R. Pirtle
co chairs.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report centers we have
body that the officers of the
Senate have signed an open
session Center moral twenty
seven.
Major floor leader Peter Wirth
to take us to the next order of
meal hearing no objection were
on that order of Business
confirmations would ask the
body's attention as we introduce
the comfort and the conferees.
board I now yield to senator
could at Hemphill.
Mr president Bill.
Mr president pursuant to Senate
settle up to the water trust
board hearing no objection
center where to explain
Grandfield explained thank you
Mr president it's an honor to
in nineteen eighty seven she's
very experienced she's been
executive director since two
thousand and three she
represents our region on several
including today she provides our
region with technical assistance
support for economic development
transportation housing water and
waste water and I know that I
of knowing and the state of New
Mexico is so incredibly
fortunate to have her working on
our behalf and I think of her as
a friend as I know you do Mr
Senator Padilla.
I thank you very much Mr
president I do call I do price
in favor of this confirmation
every single interaction I've
ever had with this individual
true New Mexican who really
cares about her craft in the
work that she does and I just
want to the rise in strong
support thank you thank you
senator by the.
that you do and bring to our
communities down in southern New
Mexico the true value of the
cogs are not down the amount of
resources or funding that they
each have the value is in the
they're not even in her car and
she is quick to respond thank
you not just for the service you
provide your car but really what
you do throughout New Mexico I
can't thank you enough I'm proud
Senator about this followed by
Senator Steinborn next Senator
mantas he was for the agency
present know all the good things
we can say about Priscilla but I
think it's probably an opportune
time to recognize the importance
really of the state as a whole
the water trust board is largely
dominated by appointees of the
governor of the governor
executive branch in over the
years the authority of the water
transport to make a funding
available to our small
be the type of person who's
going to make sure that Southern
New Mexico's well represented in
the funding of those projects
because too often times when you
have water trust board with the
composition is almost entirely
better champion and familiar
with what our needs are and so
it makes on water issues and
then Madam is the Serra so I'm
pleased to Senate support of our
nomination also recognize the
Thank you Mr president with the
with the senator yield for a
question to Senator Hemphill do
yield yes Mr president thank
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
president gentle lady to this
nomination that we add Dona Ana
County to mislead Cerro service
area that be appropriate Senator
could entail.
know that she's only one person.
Thank you Mr president and
Priscilla Mrs Sir was not
smiling when I said that
question she's like
jealous but you're doing a great
job and I have no doubt you will
do a great job on this board and
happy to support your nomination
so thank you miss present
occasionally thank you Senator
did want to take this minute to
just also follow up a little bit
on the water trust board because
there was a reference to it
being Santa Fe focused and there
may be some of that but it also
challenge and it's been
interesting working
You know with this board and
making sure that the real intent
of the legislature when this was
passed is followed which is that
the floor Senate bill one of
which it will encourage smaller
systems to regional lies and one
of the things that has come as a
result of the work and that kind
of the leadership from the water
so again this is a very
important position and again I
think this individual will do a
great job of bringing some
diversity in terms of the region
but also it's the types of
Say no further debate Senator
where Hemphill to close thank
you Mr president I asked that
the here the Senate do hereby
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
commencing on June sixteenth
twenty ten one expiring on June
fifteenth twenty twenty five has
been duly confirmed by the
Senate Senator Kernan Hemphill
Senator huh.
Mr president I hereby submit the
senator Rodriguez center this
thank you Mr president pursuant
to Senate executive letter
number twenty six dated January
twelfth twenty twenty three I
Center the Regus explained thank
you Mr president we are very for
that the an individual like
Wayne willing to serve in this
to serve the two years that he
hopefully will be appointed to
after we vote and he is amazing
percent tobacco free campus he
has that played he's a football
player for two years and just
continues to to do more and more
that what you know trend
continues to look for ways to
serve more than just learned he
wants to serve also which is
what we're all about here so
Mister president I urge the
The confirmation anyone wishing
to debate.
I see none Senator Rodriguez to
close thank you Mr president I
ask the Senate do hereby confirm
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative on the negative.
Mexico university for term.
Commencing on.
January first twenty twenty
three and expiring December
members of the Senate I will ask
Trent to stand up thank you for
congratulations.
investment committee I now yield
to Senator Shendo Senator Shendo
thank you Mr president pursuant
to CENIC executive message
number two dated February twenty
second twenty twenty two I move
explain thank you we have a very
qualified individual and has an
extensive background in
nonprofit por for a for profit
Lives in my district now open
Youngsville and I'm sure many of
you by hazel vandals or where
that is but the the there we go
small business corporation so
with that hi
Mr president.
Thank you senator Senator as
we're debating the confirmation
of New and Beckett.
importantly with the corporation
she serves as a voice for rural
New Mexicans representation
matters and having to add on
this Corporation insures that
Thank you senator how to mail
any.
No one else was in the debate.
See none Senator Shendo to
close.
Thank you Mr and I just to the
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
Senator Pirtle voting no.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative form the negative
and Beckett.
Has been appointed as been
Senator Shendo thank you Mr
president I'd like to ask and
back it to stand to be
recognized by the New Mexico
state Senate.
credentials of Robert E. Val de
yes who has been appointed to
the small business investment
corporation I now yield to
senator committees.
appointment of Robert Joseph
Bellavia's to the small business
investment corporation hearing
no objection Senator meetings to
explain.
Thank you
experience in extinguish career
and in banking and finance
carries a master's degree in
business administration from the
to join me in supporting him
today thank you center street is
Senators we're debating.
Anyone wishing debate.
investment corporation.
Senator dance thank you centers
where voting tier seats.
business investment corporation
for term commencing on January
twenty six twenty twenty two to
be served at the pleasure of the
governor has been doing
confirmed by the New Mexico
Schmedes Senator meetings thank
you Mr president
pursuant to Senate executive
message number two dated
February second of this year I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Josh
of the body Mr Smith carries
agree in finance from the
university of Colorado boulder
and he has decades of experience
in finance and banking.
including as a division manager
Thank you senator Munoz anyone
wishing to debate.
The confirmation of Joshua Lee
Smith.
I see no debate Senator Schmedes
your seats please we're voting.
If you wish to vote no.
Senator is a bill.
ask that all members nation
president except those voting in
the native I show answer seeing
no objection.
negative the employment of
Joshua Lee Smith as a member of
the small business investment
corporation for term commencing
on January twenty six twenty
twenty two to be served at the
unanimous consent we go that a
business committee reports.
We're on that order of business
committee reports.
The reader to read the report.
This president Education
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
William P. souls chairman
Senator souls Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
as amended and thence referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
William P. sold chairman Senator
souls I move adoption of the
committee point been adopted in
the journal reflected they were
acted upon individually.
Senator Majority Leader Peter
Wirth to take us to the next
order of business Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president unanimous
Senate bill three forty two
introduced by senator how to
meal and act relating to public
records providing an exception
Affairs Committee that's Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
three forty two Senate bill
three forty three introduced by
retailers that sell E. bikes the
low income residents Senate bill
three forty three Senate bill
three forty three having been
read twice by title is ordered
introduced by Senator Campos and
act making appropriation to the
higher education department for
the small business development
center program Senate bill three
forty four Senate bill three
bill three forty five introduced
by Senator Campos and act
relating to senior citizen
services providing for
investment of the Kiki survey
Senate bill three forty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three forty six Senate bill
three forty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
and mathematics mathematics plus
center of excellence for
teaching and learning at New
Mexico State University making
an appropriation Senate bill
three forty seven Senate bill
introduced by Senator Shendo and
act relating to employment
excluding motor carriers
overseen by United States
secretary of transportation from
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health public
affairs committee then Senator
chant tax business
transportation committee Senate
bill three forty eight.
Senate bill three forty nine
prepare the bottom and banks of
the macho drop draw canal
channel to prevent this scouring
bill three forty nine.
Senate bill three fifty
introduced by senators that the
Lopez and act relating to crime
victims and acting the U. visa
printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill three
fifty.
Senate bill three fifty one
serve as a voting member on an
interim committee appointed or
created by the New Mexico
Legislative Council Senate bill
three fifty one Senate bill
introduced by senators Stefanics
Lopez Ortiz Y. Pino and McKenna
and act making appropriation to
the Human Services department to
committee that Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
fifty two.
Senate bill three fifty three
introduced by senators Stefanics
Lopez Ortiz Y. Pino and McKenna
meal programs Senate bill three
fifty three Senate bill three
fifty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee vents Senate finance
making appropriation the to the
Department of Health for a match
of federal funds for on expenses
of the senior more farmers
market nutrition program Senate
bill three fifty four.
finance committee Senate bill
three fifty four.
Senate bill three fifty five
introduced by senators to fenics
Lopez RTZ Pino McKenna and
others and act making
loss of eligibility Senate bill
three fifty five Senate bill
three fifty five having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health Public Affairs
McKenna and others and act
making appropriation to the
Human Services Department to
adjust the average senior
supplemental nutrition
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
fifty six Senate bill three
fifty seven introduced by
senators hot I meal and pope and
employed in the performing arts
Senate bill three fifty seven
Senate bill three fifty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health public
relating to economic development
and acting the healthy food
financing act creating the
healthy food financing program
in the economic development
department creating a fund
transportation committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three fifty eight.
Senate bill three fifty nine
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act making appropriation to
Senate bill three fifty nine
Senate bill three fifty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health public
Affairs Committee then Senate
exempting exempting from the
gross receipts tax and
compensating tax.
Do I. E. do diesel used for
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three sixty.
Senate bill three sixty one
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and act making appropriation to
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate conservation
committee thence Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
sixty one Senate bill three
sixty two introduced by senator
agency by agency annual
financial audit process with a
singular audit of all state
agencies Senate bill three sixty
Senate Joint Memorial money a
joint introduced by Senator pope
a Joint Memorial supporting
strengthening relations between
Memorial money Senate Joint
Memorial line having been read
twice by title.
Is order print and referred to
the Senate rules committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Joint Memorial nine.
center and declaring February
sixteenth twenty twenty three
New Mexico small business
development center network today
in the Senate Senate memorial
The Senate memorial thirty two
introduced by Senator Korea
Hemphill a memorial declaring
February twentieth twenty twenty
Having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed not refer
to committee to be placed on the
president's table that Center
memorial thirty two.
But I think a reader for reading
hearing no objection we're on
that order business analysis
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so
members if I could just have
everyone's attention
world doing humanitarian aid and
over the weekend Pete reed who
was the director of Ukraine
they're they're out
a doctor based doctor program
the news last night on the
national news I didn't realize
though that it was the Santa Fe
group that he had been working
for and so I just wanted to take
a stand up and have everyone
stand up just a moment of
From home to silence.
members just puts into
perspective.
Kind of how important.
All of us play and and the
controversies going around the
world are going on around the
world and here's here's a group
be in tomorrow at eleven o'clock
because we have the joint
session initially we I was going
to start third reading tomorrow
but because of the joint session
for this afternoon thank you
senator Wirth will start off
with Senator Pirtle then Senator
souls Center Stefanics in center
DC Pino.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president just want to announce
we're recording this for him to
watch later but his first name
is actually George is named
after the chair of finance so
many years ago but no he shares
and and the one thing he wanted
was a backwards birthday party
and I didn't really realize
agency present what quite
entailed with that I'd put my
shirt on backwards but really
all he wanted was he does desert
today thank you.
Thank you Center fertile Happy
Birthday.
Senator also.
The latest New Mexico kids count
data book.
Twenty six percent of New Mexico
children live in poverty
compared to just eighteen
percent nationally.
levels of childhood poverty are
McKinley County at forty six
percent and support a county of
forty five percent.
The counties with the lowest
included ensuring sufficient
funding and expansion of the
early childhood education
childcare and pre K..
Enacting a more progressive
And increasing the amount of
cash assistance that families on
Canada the temporary assistance
for needy families and remove
the full family sanctions and
time limits.
sometimes called the financial
cliff.
We allow children in our state
to live in poverty.
We allow it.
president essentials would have
Sierra X. all of us in our DC
Pino then Senator Woods.
Senator I just thank you Mr
president your conservation
committee will meet tomorrow
department we will hear bills
from senator Wirth Senator
Thomond Center Hamlin Senator
Stefanics and Senator Steinborn
meeting will be at one thirty
today in room two eleven we have
built on our agenda from
senators renewable Kernan
have a pretty long agenda so be
there right at one thirty and
we'll get started.
Thank you senator this panel
Senator Woods thank you Mr
president of enrollment
Council Service.
That I could not ask for a
meeting with the PRC to ask him
finance something like that and
I was told that the ethics
committee has made a reset
along his name to the tax
revenue department because he
hadn't got a rebate now I've got
get that done but now I can't do
that because it would be on
ethical for me to do that so I
am wondering exactly what my job
constituents I just wanted to
make that known to the body
thank you so much for the
opportunity Mister president
thanks center was Senator Baca.
talking about a recently the
ethics could ethics committee
put out an informal opinion
stating that is sensually we are
opposition to a previous opinion
that was put out many years
earlier I I I think Senator
Woods gonna brings up a good
point what exactly are we here
constituent with just getting a
driver's license or an ID issue
or cutting through the
innumerable amounts of red tape
error I think it would be
incumbent on that ethics
committee commission to actually
review of their their decision
not to revert reverse their
constructed so I I I just wanted
to give a little bit of
background on senator woods is a
a point of personal privilege so
I'm happy to be working along
don't believe it's an issue that
we should have had to visit in
the first place from what I
understand state government is
here to help people not hinder
say a few words about Senator
Woods situation which is really
all of our situation
Senator Baca said
All of us were shocked by this
we Senator Baca and I sent a
letter asking the ethics
commission to reconsider this
they met on Friday and they made
that they had taken our council
had had had an opinion on the
books that said this was fine
for us to write these letters
they weren't allowed to
participate in that hearing in
again like like Senator Woods
all of us really are in a
position now until this is
addressed in until a bill is
signed where we're kind of in a
is a huge part of why we're here
is to help folks navigate
through all the bureaucracy in
the figure out issues and it's
was interesting I I I was at a
town hall this weekend and I
know our former Legislative
Council director Politecnica in
the audience as a constituents
and when I mentioned that I
we're doing everything we can
and we will I think you'll see a
bill move pretty quickly to
address that issue and we're.
letter I might point out on
letter had to the ethics
commission about this.
and you know it is it is
issue of whether we're going
chairs that are not.
We'll see but it is given that
that is was was an informal
opinion that was given and that
rely upon the formal opinion of
the interim legislative ethics
committee
even though we're working to to
bring that opinion and the
ethics commission and harmony
us if the Catholics Commission
starts filing complaints we're
we're gonna look into this we
need to figure it out
and again I think that
this limbo and I think Senator
Baca has correctly instructed
members on his side as we have
done on our side just hold off
until we kind of navigate
through this and I would like
right centers of excellence
thank you very much and and and
again thank you to both Senator
Wirth and Senator Baca for
collaborating on this Senator
sure.
right now today that has not
talked.
To their constituents about
capital outlay about house bill
two about what things should be
in to to our house bill two
shared some.
And if Senator sure ask question
have to provide now violated the
ethics rule and I just in my in
my turning myself in right now
Mr president that's that's the
question because I certainly
arrest me here I am sure I given
my room number so that they can
find me as senator share.
Room for fifteen H. just in case
they want to send somebody after
mind would say that that
Senators.
Are not allowed to act as
Senators it's one thing if I ask
the cabinet secretary to do
something for me.
Nonsensical Mr president and I
hope they're listening and if
they're going to send the police
I'll be there for fifteen H..
Or in Senate finance.
finance is we're probably going
to go in maybe about two thirty
or three we got some members are
going to be in the capitol
meeting so I guess can be at the
call of the chair so as soon as
three member board someone to
members meat is considered a
quorum and so I think we're
drafting a bill to fix that
problem with the PRC and the new
commissioners I think the other
Your junior everybody got their
junior in.
Hopefully rules settled up in in
Center o'neill yell at me
anymore in the to make sure your
sure as we draft that bill that
your language is correct we can
do our very best to make sure
that everything goes through in
the language is correct and
you're getting your money where
o'neill thank you Mr chairman
members and thank yous chairman
minnows for doing such a great
job we love House Bill junior
whenever it's that we love it so
And we have several bills and
it's room three oh three in case
you have forgotten thank you.
Thank you senator nail Senator
on this.
an important lesson here for us
many of you all may remember I
didn't support the change in
part because when you go from an
appointed body to of what the
susceptible to criticisms of
being an ex partied communicate
communications with of those
individuals so in in some
respects of the the lesson I
think we should learn here is
an independent PRC and when you
take the politics out you really
just change the politician will
take it out you to change it
into a place where becomes will
maybe a little less of public
them where they have to make a
decision and as the judges are
gonna say they cannot be
contacted or communicated with
or met with because it will be
essentially a next party
districts statewide to making
them now a star chamber and we
should be concerned about that.
Senator on taste the PRC right
now was elected in because I
need to because I judicial as
the city council is my wife sits
in that capacity and you talk
frankly it's almost impossible
you represent a constituency
your quads I judicial you can't
talk to them so this I just want
under either scenario they
should not be talking to
constituents is the reality I
think what's Center money also
is bringing up is something
different which is can they
can't talk to each other and so
that's a good discussion that we
need to have you know on the
floor but this is an interesting
one and I just want to fly that
because I think there's nothing
remember that very well because
that was guess what clause I
judicial and at one point the
speaker of the house wanted to
come in and have a little
discussion and he had to be
and something we need to to work
on and and navigate I thank Mr
chair that is it for today again
reminder there's a joint session
tomorrow also for members there
head up the committee and with
that unanimous consent we're
able to Senator Woods thank you
we do have one more announcement
Senator Woods.
to him remember you can talk to
the PRC and now you can't talk
to him because he is also sits
in the judge's position and
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Woods yes they're
wearing different hats at
different times and that's
what's challenging with that Mr
president unanimous consent we
