Senator huh I'm here.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna present.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you for all the members to
please rise.
allegiance in Spanish to be led
by senator Byrd and the salute
to New Mexico flag to be led by
Senator quite a Hemphill.
A couple of times over the
session we've had.
A prayer led by the chaplain for
the I believe the Santa Fe
sheriff's department.
The almighty creator of god of
power in might some of the other
names by which we referred to
the deity.
Just don't but the US.
Trusting trust worthy
grandfather or father.
That really said something to me
so I'd like to start by asking
us to take just a few seconds.
Thank you just we will be very
busy this week.
We're rushing to finish what
We have fears envisions.
That often seem to be in
conflict.
We listen to many voices.
We need your wisdom.
Your understanding your
discernment.
Because without you we will
And to close I'd like to end
with a few verses of psalm
twenty five.
I wait for you all day long.
Remember lord your compassion
and your faithful love for they
have existed from antiquity.
Remember me because of your love
goodness lord.
Talk to the US this we pray in
the United States of America and
to the Republic for which it
stands one nation.
Indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
it's so good to be back with you
to start off today's session all
yield to senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president it is
Certainly we sent lots of good
prayers your way and I know you
were where you needed to be and
it's just such a good thing that
you're in a better place and
Video kind of describing what
he's going through talking about
the treatments and thanking.
the can't the stroke center down
Talking and telling us where he
was and it's we're all course
praying for his continued
recovery so lots of good news
just was a.
Beautiful way to weave that into
the song this morning you're
right we have lots of work here
to do in our final four and a
half days and.
the job done for the people in
New Mexico who sent us here.
before I go through what we're
gonna do today I'd yields of
Senator Lopez and other members
only no objection cameras are
only allowed on the floor
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president and then unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
they return to the chamber
hearing no objection so order
thank you Senator Lopez any
further announcements senators
we have senator how to meal
thank you Mr president of two
announcements first I would like
move New Mexico forward it was
nice for both senators to bring
us together for that
conversation and second of all
Mr president I want you to know
that Santiago I'll bet the and
that's Padilla native is the
in congratulating Santiago for
Representative New Mexico on the
global stage a man who went from
playing buddy action music in
the Edward Medina gymnasium had
Espanola valley high school to
Senator Hamblen etcetera but
the.
I thank you very much Mr
president you consent to
recognize one of the high
schools in my district no
objection proceed Senator thank
some time to recognize real good
on the high school for the
second year in a row Mr
president has received the gold
standard for the set up design
implementation and the
and I see Senator Lopez as well
we share this high school I
don't want to just I don't see
anything she wanted to add but
we we definitely both are very
proud of this high school real
good on the high school and that
I thank you Mr president and
senator I yes I go ravens right
and so nothing else to add
except are real good and the
all of our students and staff
thank you thank you senator
Senator Hamblen I'm sorry
Senator Padilla we finished
thank you very much relying the
thanks to the body thank you
thank you senator Senator have a
to introduce you to my wife Dr
sure almond she drove up from
Los crucis today she is a noted
scholar researcher author of
three textbooks that are used in
Thank you family thank you thank
you Senator Hamblen center
Moores so welcome see you my
on Monday and she informed me
last year you guys might
remember the pre game sign
language of the star spangled
banner by an artist name wa wa
and he's going to be part of the
really got the deaf community
really excited about that
Senator Rodriguez you might be
really interested in the the
halftime show with Snoop Dogg
and Dr dray and wall what's
you Senator and thank you Mr
president I just wanted to say
don't get offended if if you're
called madam president today you
know you've you've been gone a
while we really enjoyed having
same without you thank you.
Thank you Senator Pirtle any
further announcements and is
just Center pope.
Thank you Mr president just like
to make an announcement
New Mexico lost someone special
His name means Madam victory.
And wise protector.
Cologne was a retired licensed
may wonder was.
The only black faster adoption
worker here in the state.
And
of black people and all people
here in New Mexico.
He remained remained with that
mission until his death so I
would ask if the body here in
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to say that I'm a huge
rams fan and really rooting for
the lack of the rams this
My uncle Charles Caroline Hughes
to play with the Los Angeles
rams before they went to St
Louis when they were back in Los
Angeles and he was a graduate of
has passed and so it I always
always support the rams in his
memory thank you.
Thank you Senator office.
ones for as many of us still
always thought of and Butch
brown.
Kanji was the first of head of
foster care and adoption worker
and trainer.
And the governor's office
created the office of African
American affairs but the
get the legislative support and
at his own expense as the first
office director he set up an
office he drove the state he
American families living at all
so he spent time in Hobbs and in
Roswell and Carlsbad he visited
the Los crucis and Gallup he
the office the unifying force
for the African American
community in the state and the
his health was never great to
the the tribal head hit a
chapter that the war and it you
you may have seen in the
whenever there is a public event
Collines you ones would be there
his life and it was very sad
that he passed away just last
week
she had a great collection of
African art and he had been
thank senator pope for bringing
up his his passing to our
attention.
Thank you senator anticipate a
Senator mantas.
Thank you Mr president Mr
And with Senator we knows
chairman finance committee and
right now we have a the plan in
place for a joint meeting of
Senate finance and Senate
Judiciary tomorrow morning.
Senator Ivy Soto that he can
postpone the rules committee
tomorrow to allow for this to
happen certainly knows is here
right now our tentative plan is
for the two committees to meet
look at the combined crime
packages before the Senate and
its relationship to the budget
so that's the time to plan and I
I with the just yield passcode
to you have the the Senate
centerman of steel Mr Mr
president yes and you almost and
madam president.
in a day or two since we senior
hope everything's good omen
welcome back yep that is our
moves and all around dollars
around in the crime package and
we want both committees to hear
that at the same time that way
we can get that bills moving as
quickly as we can through the
for tomorrow morning will be
canceled will meet on Tuesday
morning all four at the call of
the chair.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto
Senator about this and this
president making as the floor
try and here a couple of bills
before we come to the floor
depending on the floor leaders
start time Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president what what time
is your joint meeting gonna
Senator what this Mr chairman I
I plan to be celebrating the
rams victory late today so at
nine o'clock sounds pretty good
will certainly have the
judiciary afternoon.
Plan to hear additional bills
and I'm trying to put together
an agenda for both right now
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
minute we're at that point where
certain bills are coming out
committee put reports get read
and will have supplemental
calendars and do those on the
floor and that could be
something with the crime bill
present with that so thank you
Mr leader so our plan will be to
probably need for couple hours
with fight with finance jointly
starting at nine o'clock in the
chambers and then a plan to to
try to get up to Judiciary by
judges will be coming late today
or early tomorrow so please
adjust your your schedules
accordingly.
And I have one other
announcements Mr president but I
think the Senate finance chair
gotta get out and just time and
and today and we'll get those
out and then come back to the
four one.
Senator about this thank you Mr
president and just one last as a
process and and pathway in
Germany together one of my
favorite things is to expose
myself in my own shortcomings
years ago when I moved Jennifer
bit of a culture shock.
And Jennifer continue her
education New Mexico state where
she majored in English she
wanted to get the master's
degree in English and you know
I'm I'm from an engineering
Jennifer is now a two time The
New York Times bestselling
author she has a seven novels
you'll have three more coming
out this year very successful as
shortcomings in my experience
thank you Mr president thank you
senator Montez and happy
anniversary.
Senator Moores thank you Mr
morning.
Please be on time good luck with
that good luck with that.
Senator so the agency president.
the chair or Tuesday morning.
Any further announcement
Senators.
Si no further announcements
and then we're gonna have a
couple supplemental calendars
Senate bill one forty is the
opportunity scholarship that
senators to fan X. that was
going to be read in
Move forward so with that Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business messages
from the house when that order
business message from the house
the reader to read the message
Mr president I'm directed to
one oh two as amended by the
house House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
forty five house bill one forty
eight house taxation and revenue
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
bill one forty four as amended
by the house House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty four as amended by the
house House Energy Environment
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
gentle reflect that both message
from the house have been
received.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twelve has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
as amended respectfully
motion and the General reflect
they were acted upon
individually no objections the
reader to read the call the
reports Senate bill sixty nine
do pass Senate bill eight as
amended do pass risk risks
correction House Bill Gates as
to death Committee for any
objection.
I see no objections the
committee port is been adopted
as journal show that they're
acted upon individually.
legislation for on that order
business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
House bill one four introduced
by Representative Dixon and
providing for investments in
certain New Mexico businesses
and private equity funds making
appropriation house bill one for
House Bill on the floor having
been read twice by title is
Maestas and act relating to
sports changing the focus of the
sports authority division of the
tourism department clarifying
duties adding members to
changing the name of the sports
Senate.
committee substitute for house
bill one thirty four an act
relating to sports reinstituting
the sports authority division of
the tourism department changing
development committee substitute
for house bill one thirty four.
four house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bills sixty
eight an act relating to public
safety creating the crime of
criminal threat clarifying
violent felon adding penalties
for aggravated fleeing a law
enforcement officer providing
for a sentencing enhancement
when a firearm is possessed or
offence may be seized house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill sixty eight.
House bill sixty eight having
been read twice by title is
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty four and act relating to
sites providing duties directing
the creation of a uranium mine
reclamation coordinator position
in the department of environment
directing the creation of a
uranium mine reclamation
coordinator position in the
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one sixty four
house bill one sixty four having
been read twice by excuse the
Hochman Vigil ile an act
relating to aviation amending
the rural air service
enhancement Act to broaden
eligibility for rural air
service enhancement requests
increasing the amount of
air service enhancement fund for
eligible applicants with new or
expanded air routes to be used
by aircraft with a capacity of
not more than nine persons
house bill seventy one Mr
president Senator Semenya's.
That's something that it it's
got appropriation on and it
changes the entire structure and
because I know that bill passed
last year now are amending it so
I don't what the additional
costs that are I know there's
money in house bill two for
rural air service I just want to
take a look at that Senator
Thanks sentiment yes thank you
senator Wirth the retreat house
bill forty three introduced by
Representative Garrett and act
relating to public schools
requiring notification to
requiring policies for loans
from the public project
revolving fund for the charter
facility Fund modifying the
terms applicable to requests
from the public school capital
imposition making appropriation
house bill forty three house
bill forty three having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Education
Committee that's house bill
election to pay and entity level
tax in lieu of withholding
exempting income subject to the
and it entity level tax from the
income tax act and the corporate
house bill one oh two house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one forty five an
act relating to families of
acting the child welfare
ombudsman act providing for the
providing for the establishment
of the chief child welfare
ombudsman selection committee
amending and acting sections of
the NMSA eight nineteen seventy
eight house Judiciary Committee
house bill one forty five house
bill one forty eight introduced
by Representative Dow and others
and act relating to business
extending the date applications
house bill one forty eight.
House bill one forty eight
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee that's house bill one
issuance and sale of capital
projects general obligation
bonds to make capital
expenditures for senior citizen
facility improvements
construction and acquisitions
for library acquisitions and for
for payment of principal of
interest on and certain costs
related to the bonds requiring
approval of the registered
voters at the twenty twenty two
House bill one fifty three
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
finance committee that's house
bill one fifty three house bill
one forty four introduced by
federal law amending repealing
and acting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill one forty four house bill
one forty four having been read
twice by title is referred to
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we got out our business
announcements and miscellaneous
run that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
suspended at the journal show
that those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
ordered Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so we're gonna go
to third reading and do item
scholarship and I want to make
sure that we have.
The some of and the FIR down so
if they're not down right away I
Senator Correa Hemphill item
number seven fourth trimester
Care day and item number four
with that Mr president Ms that
we got our business third
reading of legislation I yield
center store for item number one
on that order business third
reading legislation center
Stuart.
with my colleague so very happy
you've returned and their son is
on the mend.
This present ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Mr president this it does right.
Administrative six to our family
income index we put too many the
use the income for math reading
and other purposes we've taken
out the a third a third a third
because it was administrative
nightmare and that's all this
Thank you senator Senator we're
debating Senate bill two forty
three will have center sure did
you wish to debate.
Followed by Senator Brandt
Senator thank you Mr president
really try to to do the right
thing by saying a third of the
money's got to go various places
but some schools are don't need
the money there and they needed
Have a working knowledge of
fifty four thousand words.
And in this room we're probably
averaging a little over three
credit for this but I want to
make sure that everybody knows
that this is the guy.
And so this is the try you tale
of diminutive swine.
Some of the on my notice three
little in number three being of
age both entitled and inspired
to seek their fortunes did set
about to do socially.
When they travel to distance
home we show fair I fear well.
That's all been collectively
agreed but individually impelled
the diminutive swine said about
strong instead from sticks
meanwhile unique in its
imaginations pick number three
direct his domicile stalwart and
garish the structure made of
pig and sometimes red headed
children read to the children.
A wolf.
Carnivorous nature in full
season he called out to the
strong sconce flying saying.
belly pinched wolf and responded
immediately.
And did not find what or what's
good.
fourth wish I shall endeavor by
employing both means of puffing
and puffing to dismantle your
flex and fortress.
We're upon there issued forth
piglet and scattered both
quarters.
Expose now to the client saying
pit one made haste wolf in
pursuit to the state for
students thank them of peppery
my doorstep is nowhere among
those endeavors Amelio bowl or
congeal.
Also important squeal pick one.
The my email form of the walls
excel splattered second sworn
shack and shortened his
sanctimonious scolding
simultaneously.
for skewing the canine developer
moving and deadly proximity.
Strategy squealed one what is
renewable contemplate tactical
We we we we we we we.
Whether by their own fleet
footed confidence or the walls
windlass this attitude the
Upon the third store with urgent
poll they pounded calling out of
this insurance and with we
beseech thee.
The third pig held from America.
what.
So
wary the import on the verge of
hysteria lest we fall forth
we're.
so you'll just want to come in
one state that.
The sinister hiss of the wolf
once again could be heard
Ariel cove where four of the
most meager opportunities
I.
external opponent so.
The money's.
What.
House in occupants were again
engulfed.
the third pigs lodging on
daunted.
The casting dismayed to query to
three hello this.
How does again such with
responded.
It's murky.
Good bill much president thank
you senator share.
Senator Brandt.
with the sponsor of the bill
yield under strain for how to go
after that.
So if I'm understanding the bill
correctly the we had prescribed
at this money be spent a
specific way when we pass this
And all I had why had we decided
last year that it needed to be
spent in the specific way.
that out but it's just too
prescriptive you know if they
and in fact one school wanted to
buy a reading program that would
divided into thirds before they
spend it it just doesn't work so
it was my fault of the things
that they're doing I mean
trauma one of them put home take
home backpacks of for homework
and books and stuff math
things we don't need to tell
them how to do it.
So Mister president senator what
you're saying is we're taking
side of adding that in what
what's the reason reading that
in and what benefit does that
provide to our school districts.
Mr president you know I'm not as
want to use it for career
technical also especially at the
middle middle and high school.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator you know I'm a huge
that we can do in fact most of
my junior money I think all the
fifty thousand of the six
hundred thousand went to career
technical education programs
three hundred throughout the
state in two fifty in my
can make a huge difference in
our state and so I I do support
that I do support the bill but I
I just think it's important that
we take a step back and
to be too prescriptive and we
need to make sure that the local
governments who are elected by
their communities have the
control over the school
districts now some point we've
do a good job educating their
students they need to have the
control to spend that money as
they know what's best be spent
in their district and not be
to them thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Brandt see no
further debate Senator Stewart
closed.
Thank you Mr president I move
of hands Senator seeds please
we're voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six in the
Mr president.
Yes
Senator Stewart Mr president.
I'm not sure that I can actually
read that had a partaking of
anything besides coffee you
should take in the fifth Mr
press.
Senator Wirth.
We have sent supplemental
counter number one which is
Senate finance committee
substitute Senate bill one forty
the opportunity scholarship
gonna go to item number eleven
that Senator harm meal a Landel
contributions during pandemics
in human center how to meal
thank you Mr president I want to
Senate memorial twenty nine.
On final passage has been taken
and that it's now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
National Laboratory in response
to Corona virus through
significant investments in
pandemic mitigations and ongoing
research and development
important advancements to the
capabilities in the fields of
science technology and
engineering Mr president I want
to just tell you about a few
things that the laboratory did
and I'm proud that the
transmission rates and use
computing to forecast variance
those helps not only in the
state of New Mexico but
globally.
The formation of a special
urgent response the Los Alamos
National Laboratory now after
the Senate recognize the
significant contributions of
Lionel in response to Corona
Senator Durbin and senator moral
twenty nine in wishing debate.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president thank you Senator me I
national labs step up and be
available to assist kind of.
Really the front end but as as
that the lab does that's not
just in the in the weapons area
we had another bill in the tax
committee about all the economic
and so I really appreciate you
bringing this and recognizing a
lap.
Thank you senator Wirth any
further debate.
CNN center how to meal to close
but all members be shown the
voting in the affirmative.
Mr president Senate Bill.
We have all forty two senators
and lieutenant governor be shown
Fuhrman is here on the negative
sentiment oil twenty nine has
passed the Senate center how to
meal thank you Mr president and
thank you members of the body.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president great
you're back
not that we didn't mind having
the madam president but we're
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill one forty on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
governor Lujan Grisham has
worked hand in hand with us to
lay a strong foundation for
early childhood education and we
have maintained consistent
outcomes for all for all New
Mexicans.
The committee substitute for
Senate bill one forty the
opportunity scholarship act
finish this scholarship program
will benefit the students this
bill simplify state financial
aid and expands eligibility to a
multitude of New Mexicans.
university in our state a state
can work towards a training
certificate and associate's
degree or a bachelor's degree
additionally both part time and
The committee substitute before
you today removes the
legislative lottery scholarship
and re allows it to stand remain
as a stand alone.
college affordability grant into
a single combined fund.
Additionally the executive and
Allow students to enroll in the
fall spring and summer
semesters.
Students must enroll in a
minimum of six credit hours and
credit bearing certificate one
associates degree and one
bachelor's degree.
Credit bearing certificates must
Students can complete up to
ninety credit hours for an
associate's degree and up to a
hundred and sixty hours for a
bachelor's degree.
The scholarship cover summer
mitigating circumstances and a
clause for students with a
disability.
Investing in students today will
benefit our state as New
We made history in nineteen
ninety six by being the first
state to tell high school
students they could go to
college tuition free but there
are so many more New Mexicans of
program in the nineties in the
United States.
Letters of support.
More submitted to the committee
from the council of university
presidents.
speaker the Santa Clara pueblo
office of the governor the photo
St L. the font so office of the
governor.
Hello of Zuni office of the
governor Mescalero Apache tribe
Pojoaque E. office of the
governor follow payments office
of the governor the hickory
Apache nation office of the
president probable this letter
well women United the Navajo
prep School the Albuquerque
Hispanic chamber chamber of
commerce voices for children the
Mexico New Mexico can Rio Arriba
history program and the Davis
New Mexico scholarship.
Mr president the fund.
million of that would be
available the first year and I
stand for questions.
Senator debate in the Senate
finance committee substitute for
by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Centerville then Senator Padilla
center what's.
concentration known you so if
the sponsor would please yield
for a question or two.
Steel Mr president I will yield
no more than eighteen our credit
per semester why Mr president
and and senator did you put
in line again Senator Wirth yes
Sir Mr president
it is page two.
Line twenty four twenty I know
Senator the six credit hours per
semester is would be a full time
for part time students and the
no more than eighteen credit
In the first iterations of all.
We're going was their office was
going to determine the rules and
regulations for this program.
Senator Woods and Mr president
and senator you know I'm I can
admit to you I never took over
eighteen hours but I didn't know
upside to this is my question Mr
president and senator Senate
finance so Mr president I
believe I need to request or
request unanimous consent for
Adrian this law who is the final
of a financial analyst for
Senate finance committee hearing
no objection the sergeant R. as
Senator Woods since our expert
witness is a disincentive you
can restate the question for
expert witnesses Center words.
ours for semester and we talked
about a six our minimum eighteen
our credit maximum and my
question is madam secretary it
take any amount you know because
there are some very smart people
in this world that can take more
than eighteen hours and they can
they can actually clip some
courses and that the right word
thank you senator my experts
have told me that after eighteen
hours some of the colleges and
universities charge a premium
All right that should that's a
good enough reason I guess my
next question has to do.
And it it's kind of a vague
deal.
And I'm wondering if this is the
NMAA way you meant this to read.
When it said scholarships may be
Public post secondary
educational institution or
travel college then my question
on that is that makes it sound
It sounds like you could you
could be in college for a
considerable length of time
there so I was wondering.
student may not be may not take
more than a hundred and sixty
hours and be covered by this
opportunity scholarship.
I realize.
semester and they could take up
to a hundred and sixty.
Whatever IRES divide that but
three and that can be a lot of
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president Senator there is not a
limit on the number of years
there is a limit on the number
individuals who have some other
impediment to continue to take
classes.
Senator Wirth.
So this.
The state in thank you madam
president are Mister president
I'm sorry to call you madam
president I've I've just gotten
to to.
Then I will dig a hole thank you
Mr thank you senator with no no
offense taken an old habits are
hard right so.
yield to a couple of questions
Senator Stefanics do you Mr
president I do yield.
This is a great this is a great
step forward I want to thank you
That leads to different
scholarship programs how to the
two together what will who goes
under which.
Category.
Senator Stefanics.
graduates who are going directly
to college would go into the
lottery scholarship all other
students would go into the
opportunity scholarship.
Senator Stefanics.
Mister president senator yes
both programs still have the two
point five cumulative grade
point average.
Sgt no scholarship opportunity
for in either category for them.
Mr president and the opportunity
scholarship we do have a section
student would still qualify.
That's great thank you Mr
president one other issue on
page three
line thirteen do.
Coding boot camps.
Would they qualify for this as
long as the school of course is
certificate.
Center if you know so Mister
president to that would be up to
the institution to to determine
whether they would award credit
completion jobs in the sixty to
eighty thousand dollar range
starting salary for people with
that kind of training do is long
as the institution granted
that are colleges and
universities have to apply to
the higher learning commission
to have course work attached to
on this it it also sets a target
for C. and and and and us to
work toward figuring out how we
can make sure that there is
credit awarded for those a deep
Are you know they're the full
day their full day workshop so
they can have another job in
addition to it and so it it
means that that people who are.
opportunity but it's very
expensive and this would be a
big boost if we can figure out
some way to do this so thank you
very much Mr president thank you
senator.
Senator Stefanics what a great
day for New Mexico to bring this
forward and to get this done for
all of our people I just have a
couple questions if you'll
you'll for a moment sense of NXT
right before you presented your
bill this morning so can you
tell us what what does this mean
in terms of the separating the
lottery verses the opportunity
will be funded at a hundred and
thirty million for the next four
years and the opportunity
scholarship is funded at a
much Mr president and Senator
Stefanics I'm really happy to
hear that I think this really
lends itself to to making sure
that both of these are continue
to be successful and I just
wanted to ask I'm gonna work on
five line eight I think it might
have been just a.
Hi for an error.
I see four year public post
secondary educational
institution I think you wanted
prior covers the two year
institutions and that section
covers the four year
institutions thank you Mr
president is want to make sure
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield briefly testified
STO Mr president I do yield
Mr president Senator I don't
to for first off before clarify
one thing before I get into this
the nineteen hours question from
while ago.
Mr president Senator if I did
Senator Stefanics I thank you Mr
president Senator so the
opportunity scholarship would
my original thought first of how
many.
What percentage of our students
when they graduate high school
would be guests actually choose
college.
president senator our data right
now indicates that fifty percent
of our high school graduates of
will attend go on to attend New
other states as a the do we have
a rough idea what that might be
we are talking about sixty
seventy percent of the student
population when they graduate
high school might to.
Mister president senator we do
not have that information.
accept any idea on that.
Get a certificate or an
associate's or some completion
level.
twenty three thousand students
graduate from our colleges every
year.
Okay fair enough
We're I'm leading is.
Term and they choose other
careers what are we going to do
that would be fair to that other
half of the of the state
population that are not going to
credential that is not granted
by the state of New Mexico like
a CDL license or plumbers
journeyman certificate those
kind of things.
that if this person leaves high
school and wants to going to
certificate program they could
actually apply for opportunity
scholarship funds.
And I understand that Mr present
population that choose a path
that is not college related and
that's maybe maybe half the for
the actually
get a career going I don't know
what the number is but they
asking them to pick up the tab
for part of the cost of this as
their career advances in the
trucking industry or the
plumbing industry they're paying
part of the tab along with those
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
presence at the opportunity
scholarship would pay for
certificates and plumbing
welding CD L.
workforce solution could be
covered by the opportunity
scholarship for certificates.
Mister president senator I
understand that we offer a lot
get their training elsewhere to
you for example of and they're
going to be paying taxes and did
not get the benefit of the state
subsidy for their education or
these other the state of other
segment that is not going to go
to college or get a certificate
at San Juan college or.
New Mexico junior college or
president senator I believe that
that's a recommendation a
request that we could look at at
the future but that is not
included in this bill and I'm
sorry and fair enough I
it's great that we can do that
certainly wish to some of my
kids would have had some of
these benefits but that's that
wasn't available and it wasn't
available when I was in college
out that we might be leaving a
large segment of our youth no
covered by some part of this
this program thank you Mr
president.
stuff that senator bill which
was bringing up I think that is
something that the the community
colleges and even the first two
we're we're discussing here for
individuals who going to college
as we all have seen it is not
think that the the community
colleges mainly would
would be a great place for a lot
of these potential students who
Mr president have do have a two
to questions or show for the
sponsors so if the sponsor would
please yield Senate Spanish G.
L. Mr president I do yield
hours that a student is is
eligible to be paid for
reimbursed for however the
program works but if you're in a
Credit hours to be paid for and
for a four year degree you get a
hundred and sixty.
The first president Senator win
After I get in the legislature
there was a big push to reduce
that to a hundred and twenty
because it was divisible by
We're allowing under this
program students to take
substantially more credit hours
actually substantial number.
Of additional hours allowed in
this program.
they completed and decide to go
on for a bachelor's that it's in
a different field and they are
required to take extra courses
and I would like to give you the
extra courses in their
bachelor's degree course of
studies to get that bachelors of
nursing.
Senator.
presentation that our colleges
have the in the fact that.
Colleges coming from our kids
school and some of those don't
wind up transferring to that
school and and Mr president and
and etcetera I hope you're
important to our students in the
in the state of New Mexico that
when they take a class at they
take an English class.
At the New Mexico State
transfer to New Mexico state and
Mr president and and Center
sometimes it didn't happen and
it may in this particular class
but in in others it does not
The number of hours that a
student has that they can take
over and above what is required
it I believe if the numbers were
reduced and I'm not I'm not sure
we're going to get that today
but agency presentation I
believe that encourages
you know you needed additional
for classes well that's twelve
hours with thirty hours I mean
that's a that's a whole
fact that we believe that you
know that's a good thing show
agency presentation I appreciate
the bill I understand where
you're going I just think that
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
forty amendment sponsored by
Senator Padilla Senator they're
thank you Mr president give us a
topic I brought up a little
while ago worked with the
sponsor worked with the
department is now I want to make
sure that the.
Community colleges or eligible
this is a friendly amendment.
Senator we're debating senator
member number one is Senate
finance committees of
supercenter bill one forty
anyone wishing to debate.
amendment number one the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill one four zero
Senators inventor request for
unanimous consent to accept
senator member number one any
objection.
the bill we have center how to
meal followed by Senator Hickey
then Senator Gallegos David
Sierra and thank them how to
mail thank you Mr president I
rise in support of this bill and
young men and women interested
in the crafts teachers in the
trade and then has a deal with
Los Alamos National Laboratory
that after those students
receive their certificate in
added over ten thousand new jobs
with an average salary of over
ninety thousand dollars most of
these jobs Mr president requires
and workforce needs and we need
our students to stay in New
Mexico for college their careers
and to do that we need to invest
in our students so for that Mr
president I stand in support of
this bill and want to thank the
congratulate to and and the
really appreciate the Senator
for sponsoring and bring forward
this bill and I think it will go
a long way towards meeting the
certificate.
But I'm concerned
Mr president and if the senator
sponsoring senator would yield
to for a question.
experts can identify this is a a
credit bearing certificate is
that only a three credit block
certificate can it be a one
So thank you Mr president
senators so in order to get our
certificate there must be six
Thank you one other question Mr
president and senator is they
can only obtain one certificate
really well saw that they could
get into more sophisticated
accounting but didn't need to
get a full degree to do that
would they be able to get obtain
education after one credit
certificate the student could go
on to a degree but not on to
other certificates.
meeting and I'm glad to see this
the needs of the of employers in
the state and new areas I would
credit block or so a total of
six credits in less that somehow
affects the schools
accreditation thank you Senator
and thank you Mr president
Mister president I do you.
Thank you
I did not hear this in committee
and do not believe that I was
going to ask just a few
understand on the credit Asian
on the small certificates but if
someone took multiple let's say
for your scholarship
If they want for masters would
senator this opportunity
scholarship is only for credit
bearing certificates associate
degrees and bachelor's degrees
no master's degrees okay Mister
when I started in college I
didn't know what was going to
end up with the sausage and then
a bachelors but I'm just
wondering if this is open ended
enough that I could have stayed
question you would be eligible
for one bachelor's degree and
not multiple bachelor's degrees.
Senator yes thank you for that
multiple years to she got an MRS
degree she stayed till she found
someone to marry I just want to
make sure that we're actually
focusing on an education and not
degrees focused on in state
students staying in state and
regional asset this province and
Senator you talked in your
presentation but high need areas
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president Senator the
opportunity scholarship is for
students to go to a New Mexico
School and not out of state.
and leave the Texas.
Senator Stefanics I thank you Mr
president center for the
question the student is not
a lot of investment of taxpayers
investment into but without any
kind of obligation for them to
stay here so most people miss
hope Mr president center is up
I'm trying to understand
If they do not graduate let's
say a student goes through is
educational Christmas present.
So.
Senator Stefanics Mr president
center thank you for the
could apply to lay out and then
apply to come back in to finish
their degree.
Senator Mr president center
stay home mom would they not be
obligated to pay back if they
didn't have if it's just
personal choice Mister president
would they not have an
obligation State if we were not
scholarship there would not be a
requirement to pay back the
scholarship.
Mister president senator I will
We have further debate we have
Senator Tallman.
Thank thank you and.
Thanks to my horn and faded to
thousand eighteen I Sanchez
unsuccessfully sponsored a bill
to provide the.
years later they want to go back
to more mature they know what
they want to do but they didn't
qualify for this Larry
scholarship night bill would of
have provided for that you know
postpone buying houses.
the former presidency animated
incident observation forty fifty
years ago you could.
With a high school education you
College in order to
Leave a middle class lifestyle.
my question is that I'll be
brief I accept the short
answers.
question because I had some
background.
Is the Mr chairman and senator
is the.
Opportunity scholarship first
dollar.
other state aid Senator and then
this would fill the gap and this
is for tuition and fees.
Sierra.
This bill requires that the new
opportunities Koch be used after
all other state financial aid
has been applied what we're be
some examples of other financial
aid.
Thank you Mr presence if someone
were to receive an athletic
scholarship or an honor
scholarship or some other
scholarship that would be
applied first before the
Is it possible for a student to
have.
Literally all has expenses paid
tuition books room and board
travel and not.
Senator panics Mr president
Senator it is possible if they
were to line up enough of the
state support of I suppose that
would be possible.
and we do have Senator Kernan.
Photo by Senator Brandt then
Senator Ingle Senator Kernan
thank you very much Mr president
will the sponsor guild Senator
how the opportunity scholarship
funds are going to be
distributed to each of the
colleges and universities and if
Mr president Senator it will be
distributed to the colleges and
universities based upon
estimated enrollments thank you
those estimates so Mister
president senator if the
estimates come in with a pretty
high number in funding is only
at a particular level how will
Senator Stefanics Mr president
Senator if there were too many
prioritization but right now
they would have an estimate and
then there is a reimbursement
process at the end of the
semester.
the rule making how extensive
would that be in directing the
colleges and universities will
it tie their hands in any way I
about that if you can send more.
Senator Stefanics.
ninety six and it has never gone
wrong according to the
Department.
Thank you very much and and I do
appreciate Mister president
Senator there were some
significant changes made from
but I do appreciate more clarity
on on the different levels and
and what they'll pay for thank
you very much thank you Senator
Kernan Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president senator
so I have a few questions one is
on the
On page three we're we're
indicates the certificate is in
high demand who's going to make
that determination will there be
a list that's done every year
that shows our top ten needed
higher education will in fact
consult with the workforce
solutions department to identify
those
A workforce areas that are in
do they have a current list of
high needs is at the top ten
list and if it is then we'll see
if Senator Tolman would yield
for the top ten list.
roll around across the state of
New Mexico and does identify the
needs based upon payroll and the
Representative thank you Mr
president thank you senator for
that answer
Yeah I I hope that's going to be
actually data driven and not
just you know someone's path of
I've had and brought up before
they're talking about how
No you're only.
The requiring six credit hours
students completion rate
Can you address that just you
know how how are we going to
overcome that and how are we
The concern that you just asked
me about could you repeat that.
Center right so Mister president
on page four of the FY are in
disincentive by the timely
completion of college the issue
is that students who attend part
time are much less likely to
department of education.
At C. N. M..
Only nineteen percent part time
students graduate.
Within eight years.
And we're not just wasting a
hundred million dollars a year.
Senator Stefanics Mr president I
have been told by the and
Senator I've been told by the
secretary of higher education
High school students just going
from high school to college are
those returning students who
really desire a higher education
based upon their six
circumstances in life.
but it's very clearly says that
the those who attend full time
which I think would be the
lottery scholarship students are
talking about have a twenty four
percent graduation rate with
compared to fifty three percent
of their full time students
and so you know the the concern
that's addressed in the FIR
their degree as to full time
students so why are we wanting
this to be only six credit
hours.
individuals who want to return
to higher education or to get a
certificate associate's degree
or bachelor's degree so they are
self motivated this program does
department does believe that
they have put some constraints
upon the use of this money with
their requirements.
Senator Brandt.
constraints and then allowing
the you know a hundred and.
Sixty credit hours to to
continue to be funded for a
Or you'd start working on some
your master's degree work
without finishing your your
master's degree.
The other issue that the FIR
language in house bill two.
is says doesn't conform with
this bill.
analysts on in the actual bill.
The substitute bill not the FIR
page eight section be it
fund and they believe that
covers the concern that you're
racing.
Thank you madam president and
and you know it's it's one of
those issues that we're not
And the language in house bill
two makes it sound like it can't
be used for a bachelor's degree
so that that's the concern
they've rates in there so maybe
talks about the scholarships
being awarded.
the the basically I I can't
remember the term is.
still get the opportunity
scholarship.
Thank you Mr president center
and and actually sometimes
lottery doesn't completely cover
tuition correct and so with with
scholarship did not totally
cover the tuition they could ask
the opportunity scholarship to
cover the remainder of the
tuition and fees.
that I had had the flag in on
the bill I do appreciate you
know some of the changes between
the Education Committee meeting
finance committees
appreciate some of the things
being looked at I would vote for
the bill of all of it was tied
to economic development if if
but I would feel more more
comfortable if this was more of
an economic development.
Bill.
I do have concerns.
have many many scholarships for
people going to college.
My daughter.
Graduated from college.
With zero debt.
My son graduated from UNM.
With zero debt.
You do not have to go to debt if
you graduate from high school in
three percent of our students go
to college.
So.
We need to do more for the
opportunities we wouldn't be
left limiting this to one.
Certificate and honestly we
wouldn't be limiting it to
college credit bearing
Thank you Mr president the.
And I think you Senator
Stefanics for putting this bill
on I I remember in ninety six
I never dreamed really when we
did that it was just so good and
doing so much good things but
within four years we were out of
But I have been here long enough
to know how the system works
and.
Once we have this in in in a
fact.
And will be short of money
again.
But will have an obligation
there.
And this obligation is pretty
you for doing this but I am also
very worried.
About what the net result will
the whole mess because I have
been here in this legislature
Really doesn't work as well as
we hoped it would for those who
truly need it.
And universities will have a way
of using these funds.
In any manner of the funding
I'm not sure how I vote for this
right now because I am very
leery of what will happen to
this in just a few years that
the funds will continue to have
They can keep the tuition at the
same rate for a starting
student.
Twenty starch state and in the
fall of two thousand twenty two
it's that way for the next four
I hope I'm wrong but I don't
think it has just changed.
In the state of Texas Oklahoma
Missouri all of those.
But I do think we're going to
have to have a real hard look at
this once it's put in because I
think it's going to be a
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate finance committee
substitute to Senate bill one
forty as amended amendment
sponsored by Senator Pirtle
amended see no objections center
Pirtle explain with amendment as
and thank you Mr president this
this comes from a discussion
earlier you know the
certificates are are really
cheap to to
know the Lara auto mechanics
they're gonna get their auto
mechanic certificate but along
with that the need to get their
welding certificate so this
would just ensure that whenever
multiple certificates are needed
for a job they're able to get
amendment from the department.
Seven as we're debating Center
foreman number two.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president I I don't need the
Senator to yield and I'm just
very concerned that this is
considered unfriendly.
This is where we actually can
make the most difference in
people's lives and give people
the most opportunities is in the
certificates.
there's at least eight different
certificates.
This would allow for one.
And yet if you can go and get
certified in all eight of your
certificates.
was talking about these boot
camps.
No we can actually make a
difference.
thinks colleges the is the
golden apple it's not.
There are some jobs that need
college.
We're not gonna have any
plumbers left.
We'll start focusing on
certificates no one's will fix
your car.
one to be able to come fix your
air conditioning unit.
Because we don't have anyone
certified in that anymore.
This is where we need to be
putting our investment in.
one trade one certificate in one
trade.
It doesn't make any sense and
it's very disappointing.
We do have further debate on the
amendment etcetera to subpoena
over that what they saw as a
proliferation of certificates
awarded by some institutions
certificate for
the institutions and and that
shouldn't shouldn't create a
situation in the legislation
where to avoid that kind of game
senators pirtle and Brandt this
is to get an opportunity that's
what we call it opportunity
scholarship obviously too good
department would understand if
we if we overrule them on this
and say that maybe you don't
considered friendly but we
really do this is too important
for the students of New Mexico
support of the amendment as well
and you know I think it makes it
makes little sense to not
support the amendment but to
going to war the at an
associate's degree
while they're in in college
which is specially in the in the
Questions that applied toward
things show if you're taking
what in what amounts to an
additional course age.
something that we can readily
fix with this ammendment show
thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
as a state will pay for so many
credit hours for associate's
degrees or bachelor's degrees
And for fifteen hundred dollars
on average for a hundred eighty
three students we were able to
help them get life changing
certificates in welding
college but because they are
able to get high paying jobs in
are able to then better
themselves their children will
go to college so yes we may not
be able to make that leap from
exactly what this is about
allowing people to get good
paying jobs so that then there
the next generation can go to
college and that's what's most
realize you know I have this
nice truck driving job but if I
was a pipeline welder I could
even make more money so then we
would also help them then become
asked that the record show the
rules been called and all those
present voted the affirmative
except for those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
Senator seeds please we're
Senator Campos voting no Senator
Sedillo Lopez voting no.
Senator McKenna voting no
Senator Hickey voting no.
Etcetera but the ability now.
could Hemphill voting no Senator
Hamblen voting no Senator
Rodriguez voting no and senator
souls voting no.
Senator Tallman voting no.
affirmative fifteen the negative
sentiment number number two has
been added to Senate vote
finance committees of
supercenter bill one forty is
now twice amended we're back on
the bill.
sentiment us thank you Mr
president I just need to do to
look this direction I don't need
to sponsor yield but we all talk
about college debt and how much
college at the same time I think
this is a path to begin to to
relieve some of that so when
they graduate where they
graduate with a certificate in
the Feds of spend it twice the
payments we talk about student
debt across the US and and
people don't get done because it
that's too high in life happened
and things happen.
tuition on the students or other
costs because that's where
they'll they'll milk the system
and so as we move along we may
want to cap some of the the
college and universities but
education or did something a
little better but this is a way
to get rid of that college that
so thank you Mr president.
the Senate I appreciate the
questions the discussion and I
hope you will consider
supporting this effort to get
more New Mexicans into
of the Senate that the record
show the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands centers where voting
Senator voting no.
Senator Brandt voting no.
Senator Woods voting no Senator
Ingle voting no one of the.
By a vote.
Thank you Mr president for this
will take long because I was
here during the restoration
administration when we tried to
create a super board of regents
and that's what we've just done
asked at the time of voting I
apologize thank Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president Ms
consent we go about our business
committee reports find that
order business the reader to
consideration reports same with
recommendation that do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Joe's a serve on tests chair
Senators about this Mr president
I ask unanimous consent to re to
bill one fifty two do not pass
but that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one fifty to do pass Senate
Judy Senate joint resolution
do pass as amended respectfully
submitted judges around has
chair Senator about this move
adoption.
Centers is been a motion to
adopt the committee report any
objection.
president M. S. because that we
go about our business
introduction of legislation
we're on that order business
introduction legislation the
reader to read.
House bill one seventy one
air service enhancement requests
increasing the amount of
requests allowing the director
of the aviation division of the
department of transportation to
extend the time frame of
existing requests temporarily
of not more than nine persons
making an appropriation house
bill one seventy one house bill
one seventy one having been read
twice by title is referred to
good to have you back unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president so that is it for
Thursday so now the time for
other announcements and
committee chairs thank you
senator Senator Baca.
I thank you.
Thank you Mr president in the
working through the weekend I'm
not only the staff here but
those staff that had to come in
on the weekend of that work
within our offices that help us
day to day we really appreciate
Senator Gallegos.
Mr president appreciate the
opportunity to explain my vote
Of the the money that they send
to us I would love to have this
bill to have an obligation that
is they graduate they have an
obligation state in the state
tomorrow so we can call you that
way.
I have Senate bill one ninety
eight that I'd like to release
from Senate finance that some
swaps into the PRC there's a
Senator yes can you give us the
title that bill it's a long
title.
Relating to public service
company transferring
enforcement railroad safety and
equipment standards transferring
personnel function and money and
appropriations and other
property and obligations.
Thank you senator Senator and
announce that the Bengals are
gonna win thirty four to thirty
one I don't have a dog in the
hot but it will be thirty four
to thirty one thank you thank
you for that Senator Pirtle
Could you have murdered what
what was the request Semenya's
we go home.
I'm all for that request to
release Senate bill one ninety
going to be the title again you
have to look it up.
Thank you Mr president thank
you.
Seeing no objection.
Motion approved thank you sent
joint hearing on crime tomorrow
morning on the floor nine
o'clock our members will be here
and then right after that we'll
go up to Senate finance so it'll
be a kind of a long morning for
will Snoop Dogg smoke weed
during halftime.
Senator yes the.
over from the house please be on
time thank you.
All souls centers around this is
present a good senator from moon
yo's from a finance committee
news is we can host the Super
Bowl one of these years here in
New Mexico so totaled up if you
got a.
Thank you senator about this any
further announcements.
hearing no objections the Senate
to Senate races to one PM
tomorrow.
