Center Baca.
Senator Brandt.
The
Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzales present.
Senator Griggs.
Etcetera have an.
Center I'm your.
Senator Kernan.
Etcetera Lopes's.
Senator McKenna your.
Seneal.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Pirtle.
Center pulp.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
I'm sorry Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Etcetera so you.
Center by.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
we're lacking to members for a
quorum.
We now have a quorum.
You're in.
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be led today by
senator Neville souls the pledge
of allegiance in Spanish to be
led today by Senator Sedillo
Lopez and the solution Mexico
Reverend Care.
Please join me in prayer.
Almighty god the creator of the
universe the members of this
few days to legislate weeks to
legislative boards to ensure
that this state and your world
is a better place we pray to god
please be still your blessings
upon them and give them the
wisdom and inspiration to
ago and then re issue to Noah
and his sons the great flood.
After the great flood the
commandment to govern by just
laws at the dawn of civilization
you alone and not to serve idols
never to blaspheme the holy name
not to murder not to commit
adultery incest or any other
variation not to steal liar
cheat not to be cool to any
commandment bless them with good
health wisdom compassion doing
the session help them bring
justice peace goodness and
kindness to this beautiful state
that you created and the world
at large may be rewarded with
your preview profits as it has
envision a world where they'll
be beat swords into plowshares
with coming of messiah now to
further draw down your blessings
here I I I will fill one of your
the president's podium here as a
reminder of application to help
others who are less fortunate
more efforts and acts of
goodness and kindness tip the
scale towards all goes and
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
Los estados Unidos America E.
all other public that could
represent the within us you on
and if your house in the V. C.
Good morning would like to
welcome each of you back all the
Senators thank you for being
morning everyone and thank you
rabbi for being here for your
words it's good to see you and
we always again we do have a
list gushing yesterday about the
everyone a sense of what we're
we're going to go today is
eastern New Mexico university
day at the capitol and the poor
Tallas schools ballet folklorico
taken in the lounge next week
January twenty fourth and twenty
fifth are you should receive an
email with an order form
attach an event you want to
a look at that and if you've got
questions about that please call
Lee with in our office at
extension four seven two seven.
Also for all the members
the date it's too and they have
to be filed now electronically.
A couple of events the
governor's legislative reception
is at the governor's mansion
legislative reception at the
with a wine bar one thirty nine
west San Francisco street five
to seven by invitation only The
New Mexico counties are having
Presbyterian health care
services annual legislative
appreciation dinner at the Santa
Fe Hilton from six the six
receptions at six thirty dinner
it perhaps that's today I'll
double check on that let
everyone know what the backend
seven fifteen to eight thirty
that may have been today since
they're having their dance this
evening what we'll get back to
everyone has iPads here down on
the desk we're still working to
get those up loaded to have
scripts if you like to use the
the chamber basically they'll be
charged for us at night put back
in our desks and with that Mr
president ideal to Senator
Padilla and then once we're done
with announcements I'll let
no objections so ordered center
for the and thank you very much
Mr president a unanimous consent
to excuse enter Benny Shendo
until Monday eight January
Senator Ingle thank you Mr
president Mr president will
senator Wirth yield Senator
Wirth kneeled Mister president
happy to.
Well Mr president the you you
set the price there I guess on
eBay so.
I just wish I was just trying to
know making things start or
start well.
Thank you Senator Ingle any
further now senator Wirth Mr
president I don't take credit
for the idea because it actually
doing differently and I
certainly am going to.
She having this on my desk thank
you Mr president thank you
senator Wirth.
Any further announcement
Senators.
president so what we're gonna do
today
we've got a couple messages and
then basically about sixty bills
to introduce also we're not sure
come in get red in up to finance
whether we get that done today
or not or get that done tomorrow
to be determined but just stay
tuned will.
Kind of check in with them at
Where in that order of Business
messages from the governor the
reader to read.
We are bold Mimi Stewart
president pro tem and members of
committee the following
nominations for appointment Mr
Wayne Probst for appointment as
secretary of department of
finance and administration for a
term commencing January third
Veterans Services for a term
commencing January twelfth
twenty twenty three to serve at
the pleasure of the governor
these appointees shall serve and
have all duties responsibilities
Morales lieutenant governor.
The honorable Mimi Stewart
president pro tem.
Make sure that we said it is a
okay okay.
number twenty five the honorable
Mimi Stewart president pro tem
and members of the New Mexico
state Senate.
Dear president pro tem stored
and members of the Senate in
Mister James Frederick Ellis and
junior for appointment to the
public regulation commission for
a term commencing January tenth
twenty twenty three and
concluding on December thirty
January first twenty twenty
three income concluding on
December thirty first twenty
twenty six and Mr Patrick Joseph
December thirty first twenty
twenty eight these appointees
shall serve and have all duties
responsibilities and authority
for their offices during the
Senate executive letter number
twenty six the honorable Mimi
Stewart president pro tem and
members of the New Mexico state
Senate.
In accordance with article four
regent to western New Mexico
university board of regents for
term commencing January first
twenty twenty three and
concluding on December thirty
first twenty twenty four the
respectfully submitted how we
move on this lieutenant
governor.
Senate executive letter number
twenty seven the honorable Mimi
nineteen seventy eight sixty
dash one eight dash three I
hereby submit to the Senate
rules committee the following
nomination for reappointment
twenty eight this appointee
shall serve and have all duties
responsibilities and authority
of her office during the time
prior to the final action by the
The journal show that the
message from the governor has
been received.
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
The honorable Mimi Stewart
president pro tem of the New
Mexico state Senate dear
president pro tem and members of
the Senate pursuant to the
bioscience Authority to serve
effective upon confirmation the
remainder of the term expiring
on June eighteenth twenty twenty
Mexico state Senate and members
of the Senate pursuant to
section six dash eight dance to
NMSA nineteen seventy eight the
confirmation the remainder of
the term expiring on March
thirty first twenty twenty seven
since still the roll E.
business announcements and
miscellaneous ideal Center souls
or on that order business
Senator souls thank you Mr
president it's my pleasure to
introduce a guess that I have
New Mexico this is the first
time she's been to Santa Fe been
to the capital very interested
in knowing and understanding how
the process works but also is up
my guest today and shadow.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator dole senator Wirth.
volume down because staff has to
hear which committees those
piece of legislation are going
to so we could just keep the
volume down the reader to read.
solemnization of the marriage.
He performed by a notary public
or the toria officer Senate bill
thirty nine Senate bill thirty
Senate bill forty introduced by
Senator by the and act relating
to domestic affairs amending and
enacting sections of chapter
result of active duty as a
member of the Armed Services
Senate bill forty Senate bill
forty having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
amending sections of the New
Mexico telecommunications act
requiring that incumbent local
exchange carries carriers that
effective competition exists in
a wire centers serving area when
voice services are provided to
the area by two or more
alternate providers providing
amending and repealing sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight Senate bill forty one
Senate bill forty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Senate bill forty two introduced
by senators worse than Duhigg
and act relating to campaign
finance amending the campaign
reporting act requiring
amending certain reporting
requirements prohibiting using
campaign funds to repay the
loans made by the candidates
that are subject to a rate of
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee.
Thence Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill forty two
Senate bill forty three
employees and agents of the
secretary of state county clerks
and municipal clerks Senate bill
forty three.
Senate bill forty four and act
relating to elections
prohibiting the carrying of a
firearm within one hundred feet
of a polling place during an
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate rules
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate bill forty
four.
Cup ground coupled heat pump tax
credits pursuant to the income
tax act in the corporate income
and franchise tax act increasing
pump for the credit pursuant to
the corporate income and
franchise tax act Senate bill
forty five Senate bill forty
five having been read twice by
Senate bill forty six introduced
by Senator Duhigg.
And act relating to financial
institutions and acting the
wrongful foreclosure protection
bill forty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate transportation business
and tax committee vents Senate
licenses changing the penalties
for the suspension of a driver's
license Senate bill forty seven
Senate bill forty seven having
been read twice by title is
introduced by senator Wirth and
Representative suspense game and
act relating to motor motor
vehicles and acting a new
section of the motor vehicle
for vehicle noise or safety
maintenance amending section
sixty six dash three dash seven
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
mandatory vehicle inspection for
vehicle noise or safety
maintenance as grounds for
refusing suspending or revoking
vehicle registration issuance of
Senate bill forty eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate transportation business
and tax committee thence Senate
making appropriation to the
early childhood education and
care department to reduce rate
rates of adverse childhood
experiences Senate bill forty
Senate bill fifty one introduced
by senator Stefanics and
representative Thompson for the
Legislative Health and it in
drug costs coverage Senate bill
fifty one Senate bill fifty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to Senate health public affairs
committee then Senator chance
the amount of the child income
tax credit.
Senate bill fifty two Senate
bill fifty two having been read
twice by title is printed and
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and act relating to radioactive
waste amending the radioactive
and hazardous materials act
prohibiting the storage and
the creation of the disposal
facility prohibiting the
issuance or certification of a
permit for the construction
operation of a disposal facility
Ending the death definition of
disposal facility amending the
duties and composition of the
radioactive waste consultation
committee thence Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
fifty three.
Senate bill fifty four
introduced by senator Byrd and
act relating to taxation
bill fifty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate transportation business
and tax committee Vance Senate
finance committee that Senate
transit Fund.
Allowing money in the fund to
provide up to fifty percent of
matching funds for public
transit agencies making an
appropriation Senate bill fifty
Senate finance committee that
Senate bill fifty five.
Senate bill fifty six.
Introduced by senator souls and
act relating to renewable energy
twenty percent of the hosts
average annual in the
electricity consumption Senate
bill fifty six Senate bill fifty
six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
You can't see me you still knew
it was me that's fantastic.
Mr present can you read the
title of that again I just
caught a little bit of it
absolutely Senator an act
the host average annual
electricity consumption.
Thank you Mr president thanks
ensure that Senate bill fifty
six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
introduced by senator Wirth and
act making it transfer to the
water trust fund Senate bill
fifty seven Senate bill fifty
seven.
Senate bill fifty eight
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to water changing
membership of the Interstate
Stream Commission providing
the Senate rules committee Vance
Senate conservation committee
Senate bill fifty eight.
Senate bill fifty nine
introduced by Senator souls and
Mexico Senate bill fifty nine
Senate bill fifty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate transportation
business tax committee events
requiring photovoltaic systems
in new public schools changing
the definition of building
system in the public school
capital outlay act Senate bill
Senate bill sixty one introduced
by senator Tom in an act
relating to taxation
distributing a portion of the
liquor excise tax to the
tax to eight percent per serving
bases.
Authorizing all counties to
impose a local liquor excise
tax.
Senate bill sixty one.
finance committee Senate bill
sixty one.
Senate bill sixty two introduced
by senator by the up and act
relating to economic development
Capital infusion fund requiring
reports making appropriations
Senate bill sixty two.
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate transportation
business in tax committee event
Senate finance committee Senate
bill sixty two.
Senate bill sixty three
appointive executive positions
providing an exemption to the
angst inspection of the public
records act Senate bill sixty
three.
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
sixty three Senate bill sixty
four introduced by
Representative Senator said the
Lopez and Representative Chasey
Senate bill sixty four Senate
bill sixty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill sixty
four.
amending the public health
emergency response act enacting
a new section of the public
health act providing an
automatic termination of a
public health emergency order or
emergency order or a public
health order by the legislature
or by particular legislative
leaders in certain circumstances
declaring an emergency Senate
Committee Senate bill sixty five
Senate bill sixty six introduced
by Senator Woods and act
relating to state owned property
creating a distribution of the
bill sixty six Senate bill sixty
six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
transportation business tax
committee thence Senate finance
licensure compact providing for
the appointment of New Mexico
compact commissioners requiring
the filing of interstate
commission bylaws and rules with
the state records administrator
the Senate health of public
affairs committee that's Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
sixty seven Senate bill sixty
eight introduced by senator
notice ation Senate bill sixty
eight.
Senate bill sixty eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Lopez and act relating to
transportation amending the
child helmet safety act defining
electric assisted bicycle
providing standards for the
Senate bill six and I'm having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate transportation
business tax committee then
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for the
southwestern Mexico regional
Planning Commission to provide
water project for spoke proposal
project assistance from the New
Mexico unit fund pursuant to
section seventy two dash
fourteen dash forty five NMSA
Senate bill seventy having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate conservation committee
then Senate finance committee
gifts prohibiting discrimination
against anatomical gift
recipients based solely on
physical or mental disability
prohibiting insurance coverage
discrimination against persons
one Senate bill seventy one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee events Senator
transportation business the tax
committee Senate bill seventy
Act to create the wildlife
corridors Fund requiring annual
reporting making an
appropriation Senate bill
seventy two Senate bill seventy
two having been read twice by
introduced by senators o'neill
and Correa Hemphill and
Representative Hochman Vigil and
act relating to primary
elections allowing voters who
choosing to affiliate with a
major political party
participating in a primary by
requesting the party's ballot
making conforming changes Senate
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill seventy three.
Senate bill seventy four
introduced by Senator souls and
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee.
Then Senator transportation
business and tax committee
Senate bill seventy four.
seventy five Senate bill seventy
five having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
Vance Senate tax business
committee and act relating to
procurement adding in amending
definitions of the procurement
code revising the advertising
exemption eliminating the
determinations limiting the term
of sole source an emergency
procurement to one year
providing additional
requirements for the procurement
under existing contracts
section thirteen dash one point
ninety eight NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen ninety eight chapter
tax committee Vance Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
seventy six.
Senate bill seventy seven
introduced by Senator souls and
charging electric vehicles
Senate bill seventy seven.
Senate bill seventy seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered print and referred to
the Senate conservation
introduced by Senator souls and
act making appropriation to the
board of regents of New Mexico
State University to establish
the Center for dryland
resilience as a collaborative
network developed computer
modeling and artificial
intelligence solutions to
diagnose and predict
vulnerabilities and dryland
Senate Education Committee then
set Senate finance committee
Senate bill seventy eight.
Senate bill seventy nine
introduced by Senator souls and
State University The New Mexico
instead of mining and technology
and the federal research
laboratories within the state to
develop curricula faculty and
quantum materials technologies
Senate bill seventy nine Senate
bill seventy nine having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
relating to nursing providing
for an independent role for
certified registered nurse
anesthetist a nest the cysts
Senate bill eighty.
Senate bill eighty one
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to immunization
allowing physician assistants or
Senate bill eighty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered print referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
limitations for commencing a
prosecution for criminal sexual
penetration of a minor and
criminal sexual contact of a
minor providing a fifteen year
Senate bill eighty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
then Senate finance committee
Senate bill eighty two.
terrifying the divot definition
of cramming Senate bill eighty
three.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business and
transportation committee sent to
limited incarceration for
technical violations of
probation and parole alphabetize
zing definitions Senate bill
eighty four.
Senate bill eighty five
introduced by Senator Schmedes
and act relating to taxation
adjust adjusting income tax
transportation committee thanks
to the Senate finance committee
Senate bill eighty five Senate
bill eighty six introduced by
senator Correa Hemphill and act
appropriation Senate bill eighty
six.
Senate bill eighty six having
been read twice by title
disorder printed and referred to
the.
introduced by senator how to
meal and act making
appropriation the department of
environment for removing solid
waste liquid waste and hazardous
Senate bill eighty seven having
and read twice by title disorder
printed and referred to the.
Senate Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee fence to
Senate finance committee.
making appropriation to the
board of regents of the
university of New Mexico for a
program that prepares medical
students to practice in
committee Senate bill eighty
eight.
Senate bill eighty nine
introduced by senator Correa
Hemphill and act relating to
health and acting the supported
liability creating reporting
requirements creating a
supported decision making
program within the office of
guardianship in the development
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee thanks to
Senate Judiciary Committee sense
to Senate finance committee
Senate bill eighty nine.
must not be greater than the
state's gross receipts tax rate
and local option gross receipts
tax rates to be credited against
gross receipts tax do pursuant
Senate bill ninety seven min
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee sends
to Senate finance Senate bill
ninety.
policy of the state regarding
conduct of current and former
legislators and public officers
and employees adding the
exchange of official acts for
governmental con conduct act
prescribing and increasing
penalties Senate bill ninety
one.
Senate bill ninety one have been
read twice by title Sir printed
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act relating to
professional licensure amending
and enacting sections of the
pharmacy act to expand
Senate health and public affairs
committee sense to Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
ninety two.
Senate bill ninety three
introduced by Senator Campos and
security entry doors district
wide Senate bill ninety three.
Senate bill ninety three have
been read twice by title Sir
printed and referred to the
and diamond and act relating to
outdoor recreation transferring
administration of the Rio Grande
trail commission and the Rio
Grande trail Fund from the
development department to
complete the Rio Grande trail
making appropriation Senate bill
ninety four.
Senate bill ninety four and then
introduced by senator would you
all just and act making
appropriation to the public
education department for school
safety statewide Senate bill
ninety five.
to Senate finance Senate bill
ninety five Senate bill ninety
six introduced by senator Munoz
and act relating to pensions
increasing the a maximum amount
earn pursuant to the public
employees retirement act Senate
bill ninety six.
Senate bill ninety six have been
read twice by title is ordered
introduced by senator by video
and act relating to state
properties amending section
nineteen dash seven dash fifty
seven NMSA nineteen seventy
easements across state lands for
infrastructure used for
broadband internet services
amending sections sixty seven
transportation commission to
prescribed conditions for the
installation of broadband
internet infrastructure placed
along across over and under
broadband internet services to
unserved or underserved
locations as defined in the cut
connect New Mexico act Senate
to Senate Judiciary Senate bill
ninety seven.
Senate bill ninety eight
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act relating to public
contracts requiring the public
wage increases or increased
costs as mandated by law Senate
bill ninety eight.
Senate bill ninety eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Senate bill ninety nine inch
introduced by Senator Lopez and
Representative Roybal Caballero.
An act repealing the prohibition
Senate bill ninety nine have
been read twice by title sort of
printed and referred to Senate
health and public affairs
committee thanks to Senate
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
if there's no objection it is so
ordered or announcements
in the house what we're gonna do
is recess subject to the call of
the chair so we will be back
later this afternoon just to
or this afternoon I will do it
tomorrow I just if we don't do
that then we have to read and
have the hearing tomorrow mid
day I want given that's Thursday
that's all we'll do so we just
have a quorum down here to be
able to read in house bill one
refer about the Senate finance
and that will be it for the day
one announcement madam president
that I wasn't clear on the New
Mexico counties legislative
breakfast is tomorrow Santa Fe
community convention center
seven fifteen to eight thirty AM
by invitation only so that's
where we are the plan just I'll
say this again when we come back
other members for announcements.
Senator Munoz thank you madam
president Senate finance we're
gonna going about one o'clock
then read the committee report
out tomorrow morning would come
back to the floor so Senate
finance members Senator
Steinborn we may be on your toes
of so if we got to go in and out
will not meet today although
it's one second see the smile on
your face yes man present I know
you're disappointed participant
you let you down but we'll take
today off and then we won't be
here of course in the chamber on
The other not Senator Duhigg.
Thank you madam president I just
I the rules committee will also
president I am so sorry ma'am
the Senate Education Committee
will have its organizational
meeting on Monday and we have
childhood education care
department to all give very
brief presentations that day as
well just in case anybody is not
around tomorrow to hear that
announcement again but that's
president and the quicken
Management that on Monday the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will meet after the
floor session in room three
eleven and we'll have a brief
after the floor session.
Thank you senator Senator
Hamblen thank you madam
president the tax business and
transportation committee will
meet on Tuesday at one thirty in
Senator Stefanics then president
the Senate conservation
committee will have its
organizational meeting Tuesday
at nine AM and we will hear
thank you Senator Woods thank
you madam chair just a minute to
to notify you and the.
About.
To carry.
goodies to you guys this is a
statement from our part of the
world active culture of the
goodness of our hearts and the
reasonable size block instead of
the ten pounder that we
sometimes get thank you for that
Senator Ingle thank you thank
you madam president madam
eight by ten glossy and two can
carry thing of picture of you
and money is missing I was
wondering maybe if I could get
one this year.
Almost present I have a film
company in my district and
develop almost anything so when
you get those taken you bring
them to me and we'll get him
developed.
I do understand that you've got
from anyone Senator Wirth.
I thank you madam president so
we just got word that house bill
one is on the floor right now so
again I think the plan is good
will read it in and then we'll
hear tomorrow so with that madam
president unanimous consent the
Senate send recessed subs the
calls here.
Seeing no objection we will be
