State senator and I'm his state
Representative sept we we
totally overlap as it turns at
thank you very much
So H. B. thirty four is and
investment in preventive health
care particularly for those with
diabetes and those with vascular
problems.
Podiatrist are one of the key
health care providers for people
with these conditions.
Patients covered by private
insurance are often prevented
from seeing podiatrist for
preventive care because the
insurance company sets the
copays.
and often there will range
between eighty five dollars two
hundred and twenty five dollars
for an office visit.
under age we thirty four copays.
Charge by private insurers for
office visits are limited to no
more than what the insured would
pay for a primary care visit
which is generally going to be
in the range of twenty dollars
to twenty five dollars so what
this bill does is increase the
accessibility of critical health
care.
by making it more affordable to
a large number of New Mexicans
we have the highest number of
diabetics in the in the in the
country and with me today is Dr
Janet Simon who is a podiatrist
and of also robin.
Rosh who is also a podiatrist Dr
Simon okay and so if if it's
alright with the committee I I
will turn this over to doctor
Simon for a few comments.
Okay.
That Janet Simon on board.
Are you available I here I am
here.
Okay.
Go ahead secretary.
Great I thank you Mr vice chair
and committee members.
let me start with just a few
brief comments relating to podia
Ettrick Medicine.
DPM are defined as physicians
along with M. dis and Diallo's
under Medicare.
We're similar to Andy's and deos
completing four years of medical
education after undergraduate
college and then completing
three years of residency
training and then potentially
fellowship additional training.
Do PM's our team members
providing what often can be
considered.
Primary type care for patients.
R. as part of this team we see
majority of our patients with
chronic diseases such as
diabetes peripheral vascular
disease and are through today's.
We treat conditions such as foot
sores and alterations fractures.
That often need monitoring on a
regular basis our diabetic
ulcers that are clearly very
high risk for amputations often
have to be seen on a weekly
basis especially if there are
not support systems family
members who can help out at home
or access to health care
services.
As Representative Matthews
indicated we live in a very high
rate of diabetes in New Mexico.
some of the estimates that have
been given is that approximately
fourteen percent of our
population
has diabetes but don't even know
they have it and it is the sixth
leading cause of death in New
Mexico.
And with the pre diabetics which
again is an area potential for
good education and prevention
all three out of ten all of our
citizens don't know that they
are pre diabetic sh so for New
Mexico estimates are that it's
costing us approximately two
billion dollars a year off for
diabetes and pre diabetes I can
say in my own practice to break
down is that I have probably
approximately sixty percent of
my patients being diabetic and
perhaps fifteen percent being
pre diabetic of these ten
percent are being seen for
regular diabetic ulcer care and
the rest being seen for what we
consider preventative care
services on a regular basis so
why are we pursuing are built.
We've been seeing this
escalation and co pay costs over
the last several years and with
COVID it has definitely impacted
our patients and what we hear
from our patience is that.
When we request that they make
an appointment to come back to
see us they often will tell us I
can't afford to do so.
Can you push it out for another
month until I get my social
security check and potentially
come in.
Get that.
So it's not going to change how
we treat our patients it doesn't
change how we bill.
And this again is Dr I as
Representative Matthews said is
specific for the evaluation and
management codes it is not.
Being apply to surgical services
and
one of the known costs that are
associated with
Foot problems is that.
One admission with a
application and on the average
cost forty five thousand
dollars.
So the cost estimates that I
know have been brought up as to
the impact of this bill are
clearly much lower than that and
we know that saving a foot is
critical for keeping our
patients being able to be
independent and obviously
Healthier lives.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Simon has
Dr Robyn Roscoe okay Spokane
here no I have not okay it's
your turn the.
Thank you through the chair
thank you and the rest of
committee for this opportunity
to speak on behalf of the bill
it's in short.
Unless this bill is passed you
both maintain a barrier to
access to care.
Majority of the patients are
lower income you do not have the
resources to pay for their
business so they will either
cancel.
Or they will try to strip
stretching is Dr Simon had
mentioned.
That does not help with their
health care.
To not pass this bill to not
supported be a drain on the New
Mexican economy.
It would be a drain socially to
the patients and their families
when their problems escalate and
then using a lot of.
I have done enough amputations
in five lifetimes I do not need
to do anymore because of this
barrier to access to care.
There's also a drain financial
work.
When a person loses a limb it
cannot work.
They then require welfare.
And they cannot work for
society.
This.
To pass this bill would be for
site for the future.
There is some speak later on
that will claim they are opposed
because this bill will open a
floodgate of more similar bills.
But in that case.
Proved that something is wrong
and that something needs to be
fixed to make it right.
You don't stop fixing something
because you're afraid something
else may occur.
I urge the committee.
To pass this bill on behalf of
my patients your constituents
thank you.
Senator you are muted.
Thank you Mr Russ we've gone to
the public for any opposition to
this bill.
At now Mr chairman okay well
then and got somebody signed up
to speak against the bill and
that's more of a show zoom
BlueCross BlueShield.
Is more years.
Mr Chairman yes Mr chairman.
The committee thank you models
shows registered lobbyist with
the costly shield.
We recognize the importance of
putting actually care and
services fund members and we
really appreciate the work that
I need done on several amendment
thank you thank not change
however are one fundamental
content which was created
earlier that it will
potentially.
President for all special key to
request copays at the same level
as primary care providers this
practice we believe will
ultimately right you for basic
primary care provider services
thank you.
For you to get out so we just
asked how do you how do you
respond to the to the issue
raised by doctors Ross and Simon
that people can't right copays
illness treatments and that'll
ultimately lead to higher costs
down the line well what you want
to actually be paying out more
for and creation say later on.
If people New Mexico basin
Salinas treatments.
We are
the the concerns expressed but
we do believe that continuity of
care
thank you that the the services
are being provided and it is
that the copays are
differentiated for reason.
And it is a specialty so it is
not primary care did not the
overall
holistic look at.
The primary care doctor we do
do very much appreciate and need
the only active services but we
believe that that that is part
of the cost with the specialty
care and it starts to unravel
our ability to contract and and
maintain premium at a steady
rate.
Thanks I'm.
We let's go to the audience for
anybody else wants to speak in
support and opposition first.
I I didn't have any of the names
but if there is anybody in the
room once suspicion of position
please raise your hand and we'll
hear from you.
I was in support of this bill.
Raise your hand.
Seeing no one will go to the
committee now we are still just
remind you Representative
Matthews we're still in the
subcommittee so we're.
Saying musical chairs this
afternoon.
Are we all the other members
representing hills in other
committees.
So we were kind of waiting for
Senators Coleman.
Finishes presentations in.
Financer rejoins as well as by
members and for.
So.
But in children's discussion
from the subcommittee and
senators in the oval office
we'll start with you.
You thank you thank you Mr chair
I I appreciate that I
I don't know maybe this I just
have an excellent doctor but
every time I go in for my annual
the very carefully check check
my feet
if for this very reason and I
was just wondering.
Of whether that's the standard
of care.
Mr chair.
Representative Matthews you are
responding one have one here
experts.
That Mr Chairman at
Representative I'm sorry center
city of hope as
I'll respond just briefly and
then defer to my experts but
when I go in I don't think
they've ever.
Look at my feet it.
So it may just be that you have
a much better primary care.
Person and I do and I may have
to get that name from you.
And that add out defer to at
thank you Simon and or doctor
Ross.
Through the chair I would
certainly say it's very able.
There are doesn't net.
Groups that encourage.
Taking off your socks when you
are in your primary care doctors
office and.
Even if that is happening
there are often are let's say
more comprehensive for more
detailed
valuations that that and might
need to be performed especially
on our higher risk patients.
So are I think that's probably
the best answer is that
unfortunately it is very able
and many of the higher risk
patients.
May not be taking their socks
off enough and their primary
care that doctor's office.
Read more.
Through the rust thank you I'd
like to add after signing.
I it is an excellent question
that was that.
And if you pick up the key word
there is with the annual visit
so we a month two months later
someone could have trauma you
could err take their foot and a
little bit athlete's foot
conditions school budget if you
have diabetes poor vascular
status.
And are recovering alcoholics
people have heart conditions
lung conditions all of these
problems can exacerbate but the
lower extremity remember what we
from hard it has the weakest
let's find any part on so you're
not getting that nutrition from
the blood down to your feet
that's where you need the expert
and that's where you need to
take care of the problem.
In the correct manner and that's
all we're asking is allow that
patient have the access to care
as property inside our treat
will change
change if the law allowing the
patient the field.
Thank you thank you for us
chair Mister chairman I'd add
one thing it it is certainly
possible that a primary care
doctor and physician or
healthcare provider would notice
that there was an issue and then
suggested they go see the
podiatrist.
Then there.
And assuming that there is an
issue what we're really talking
about are those sequence of
visits where you have to
continue to monitor and and so
it's not just.
Do you do you see it in a in an
annual exam but once you do see
it is it affordable to be able
to go in and keep the condition
monitored so that it doesn't
become worse.
The lotus notes Mr chair that is
an excellent point because it is
the co payments are with with
really the follow up not
although the screening is
mentioned here but the follow up
is is you want to make sure
follow up and this is just
another opportunity for me to
say if we had.
Universal.
Universal healthcare and not a
profit based system we wouldn't
have this problem
but I I support the bill I think
it would be can save I
understand what this
what the insurance company is
saying about this may raise
costs however I think it is very
likely to save money in the long
run because amputations and the
costs of of those treatments are
much more expensive than the
initial screening if we could
prevent that we would really
help with quality of life so I I
do support the bill
but I have those those questions
in another opportunity to talk
about Medicare for all.
Only there was someone in
Connor's fight for Medicare for
all if only there's only
Senators strategies your.
When you're ready for motion I'd
make one.
What I have a question for so on
my own Representative Matthews
those amendments to report on in
the house floor.
those gonna manage you can't
afford them.
At.
Mr Chairman
of
the yes any in fact we realized
based on our hearings in the
house that there was some
confusion about exactly what we
were asking and so we we
initiated those amendments
because we thought it was
important that the bill be very
clear as to what it covered and
So we're very we we wrote those
and we initiated them and they
were adopted and I I think they
make the bill.
Stronger because it's more clear
as to what we were trying to
focus on.
Okay.
Trainings will recognize you for
a motion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
to do pass.
Mr chair do we have a quorum.
Or you know what will take the
motion can be wasted little.
I'll second the motion Mr chair.
We have a motion the second.
will we'll just have to wait
until we have Senator Tallman
back or we're one of the
Republicans joins us.
Then we'll have a correlation
voted Representative and and
I don't think senator Tom is
gonna be very long and they're
very you never know in the
finance committee.
It's always an adventure.
Mr Chairman.
Do you want us to stay had and
you want to do this I'm not you
you're absolutely welcome to do
until we actually take a vote so
you know for sure how it comes
out.
But I would read the committee
right now and say they're
leaning your way.
Okay.
Of.
Mr chairman then I I I think
with that I'll.
And our our experts go back to.
Doing what they do and thank
them for for coming and I would
check back with the committee at
a later time on that that the
final ODI hopefuls it.
Does is Bose sport Mr chair
looks like Senator McKenna has a
question.
Before you go there there is a
question Senator magenta
Senator.
I thank you chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward I cannot readily
find it I'm I'm just want to get
a sense of what is the
difference between.
The specialty charge and the
primary care group charge.
You Mr chairman at Senator
McKenna in general the primary
care charge is typically going
to be twenty to twenty five
dollars a visit.
For an office visit and in this
the the copays for a office
visit to a podiatrist can run
anywhere from about eighty five
dollars two hundred and twenty
five dollars yes it is a
substantial difference.
Thank you very much chairman
thank you Representative that
that is substantial especially
when we have.
Eleven percent of our New
Mexicans.
Who don't qualify for a product
on ACA and
make too much for Medicaid so
thank you I think this is really
timely and needed and I concur
with.
My colleagues
the chairman and.
Senator Sedillo Lopez that we
need single payer universal
health care.
Thank you.
Thank you senator so we'll go
then to the next item on the
agenda.
Representative Sarinana.
Yes military justice.
Military justice code sex crimes
definitions our house bill
thirty one is amended
Representative welcome good
afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee so I'm
representative Debbie staring
out on here to present house
bill thirty one is amended and I
have to expert witnesses Elena
Rubin failed and lieutenant
colonel Raymond Cheung.
Thank you Mr chairman this bill
is to modernize the current New
Mexico statute chapter twenty
military affairs articles
welcome Terry justice section
fifty one right and cardinal
knowledge the statute is
currently made up of three
paragraphs and I like to read
you just the first paragraph so
you so you can see why we need
to change this so the first
paragraph of the three says any
person subject to chapter twenty
NMSA nineteen seventy eight who
commits an act of sexual
intercourse with the female not
as wide I forced or without our
consent is guilty of raping
shall be punished by death or
other punishment as a court
martial made direct so that's
just one of three paragraphs
that are currently in in in
statute
and as you can see the statute
is outdated and needs to be
modernized so Mister chairman if
we go to the bill.
First thing we change in the
bill is the name it got its
change to rape and other sex
crimes and is broken down into
sections the first section one
eight is physically for right
it's pretty detailed what B. is
sexual assault.
I'm C. is aggravated sexual
contact.
These abusive sexual contact.
Yes Representative.
His defense and this is where
specifically says marriage is
not a defense for any conduct at
issue in any persecution under
this section.
G. is for consent.
And then we have a list of
definitions so we've gone from
three paragraphs to a
substantial bill that
It is needed at this current
time
Mr chairman this bill modernizes
in detailed New Mexico military
co twenty dash twelve dash fifty
one so that that it aligns with
the federal code or do you see
M. J. intended to send a strong
signal that the New Mexico
National Guard does not tolerate
sexual selves.
Twenty three these changes would
apply to all members of the New
Mexico National Guard would not
in federal service and to be a
federal services when the
president calls them to active
duty.
Major General novel the adjutant
general of the New Mexico
National Guard is in full
support of this bill and this
bill was endorsed by the New
Mexico military Veterans Affairs
interim committee with that Mr
chairman I would like to defer
to my expert witnesses of Elena
we went out and the tenant
colonel strong.
Thank you Mr.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Elena ribbon falls and I am
the legal director for the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs the coalition
leads the state's efforts to
reduce sexual abuse and sexual
violence through training and
technical assistance to service
providers throughout our state
the coalition also collects and
analyzes state sexual assault
and domestic violence data and
produces annual reports on our
findings through this work we
intentioned that all New
Mexicans survivors can access
the services justice and healing
that they want and need.
I'm here today to express the
coalition strong support for H.
B. thirty one as advocates for
sexual assault survivors we know
that this bill will help ensure
that all survivors New Mexico
have a road to justice and
healing The New Mexico military
co excuse me kind of military
justice contains outdated
languages representative
Sarinana said and that language
prevents some of some who commit
rape and sexual assault from
being prosecuted and in turn
limits survivors access to
justice more specifically the
code currently states that
whites cannot be raped or
sexually assaulted by their
husbands and it currently refers
to survivors as females and the
coalition knows as I'm sure all
of you know that anyone can be
rates regardless of their
marital status sex or gender
identity it's time for us to
modernize this language
as representatives having Anna
said house bill thirty one
updates our state's military
code so that it aligns with our
federal military code it also
eliminates the spousal rape
exception which states that
whites cannot be raped or
sexually assaulted and
eliminates language referring to
survivors this females ensuring
that anyone of any gender or sex
can insure that they have access
to justice house bill thirty one
also elaborates on the
definitions of rape other sex
crimes and related terms so that
they are detailed clean and very
clear excuse me and very modern.
The and finally HB thirty one
guarantees that all survivors
can access justice.
As as all those who commit rape
and sexual assault excuse me and
all those who commit rape and
sexual assault can be legally
held accountable for their
actions on behalf of the
coalition Mister chair members
of the committee I would ask you
to please vote yes for this bill
as doing so would help to
support survivors in our state
in accessing the justice and
healing that they deserve thank
you so much for your time thank
you Mr.
Then we'll go to page and
current.
Yes chair members of the
committee good afternoon and
Senator and Sean deputy staff
judge advocate for the New
Mexico National Guard can you
hear me yes.
You're you're right.
X. so we're in support of this
bill because it aligned hands
The New Mexico military justice
with the uniform code of
military justice and one of our
biggest practice points in the
military is to essentially train
how you fight.
And so are posed.
Came up through very the.
A very old process and what the
in about nineteen eighty four is
the legislature decided to adopt
a whole the nineteen eighty four
manual of courts martial in the
current uniform code of military
justice at the time the adopted
by reference section twenty Nash
told us to and the problem is
the co it's gone through some
substantial changes
we've been overhauling the
military justice system respect
sexual assault sex crimes from
last decade.
So when you go back and see this
language it it's pretty
embarrassing to see how long
it's taken us to realize that
it's really time to modernize
the code and it's not like we're
looking to do a whole lot of
court marshals but we have to go
with the standard system or.
Can't align that with our
current practice need to play
I'm gonna be prepared to enforce
military justice as we should so
we asked the committee to
support this weird full support
it and look forward to your
questions.
Let me just ask you a couple
quick questions does this will
bring the New Mexico military
code into line with the language
in the in the U. S. U. S.
military code.
Absolutely it's basically a
complete transfer of the current
article one twenty which the
punitive article in the C. N. J.
for right as sexual assault and
it takes all of those
definitions there are
incorporated into that Peter
particle make some part of our.
Without.
We're not going to really be
able to access and.
One final question before we go
to the audience
New Mexico national guardsmen
are are governed by the New
Mexico military codes presenting
case of their the exploitative
Services sent overseas are
creating an active more.
That's a great point so when we
are in title thirty two status
so we're helping out of
vaccination centers are doing
what we do here to help out of
national national disasters the
are functioning under our state
code of military justice and
that's what's in our current
chapter twenty and that's what
we're trying to change when we
deploy and we go to the CENTCOM
AOR horn Africa have you the U.
C. N. J. of the active component
applies to us and so we are
under the federal standard at
the time and we're under the
uniform code of military justice
when we deploy and so that's
already taken care of by
Congress it's just right now
there's a there's a disconnect
between current code and the
federal standard and our state
under title thirty two U. S..
Thank you thank you.
We have
one person saying evidence to
speak on this bill.
And that is Juliett echo.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think everything's
been said that I would say so I
just stand in support on behalf
the coalition of sexual assault
programs.
Thank you jury and we didn't
have anyone sign up in advance
to oppose the bill but is there
anyone here who wants to speak
in opposition to and just raise
your hands.
Seeing none
is there any way you want to
speak on in favor of the bill
with you signed up in advance or
not.
Okay members of the committee on
Charlotte there is so many.
Sure.
Read the rest here name of Lana.
It.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Charlotte but when
you and I work with Julie on the
coop I'm here on behalf of the
southwest women's Law Center and
we ask you to stand with us in
the Sanchez in support of house
bill thirty one thank you thank
you very much Mr and.
Anybody else.
Then we'll go to the committee
in the service center and when
it says you Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair
I I think this is a fantastic
bill and congratulations on
bringing it this is just
excellent I had just a couple of
of questions out of curiosity
what services are provided
in the New Mexico
The New Mexico National Guard
with regard to both survivors
services and prevention
services.
We have a special so response
coordinator and then and.
Her job is to coordinate all the
services and support with
respect to survivors or
reporters of unrestricted or
restricted Reports so the way
sexual assault works in the
military's you have an option as
a survivor you can go through
restricted channels to protect
your identity if you don't want
to move forward and your price
of whatever.
And when you're engaging in rate
in restricted.
Communications only certain
people are allowed to take your
information and the cat you
can't tell anyone else in their
job essentially is to make sure
that you're getting the support
you need you have access to
services and to encourage you to
unrestricted or once you go to
unrestricted reporting the chain
of command is advised and we
have a lot more power services
within the chain of command in
the unit to ensure that
survivors are protected and that
the so transferred to another
unit or if the they they don't
feel comfortable where they're
at the the require extra help to
behavioral health services that
they get they get that we also
have special victims counsel
through the National Guard
bureau these are attorneys judge
at kids who are assigned to be
the personal legal assistance
services turned for the survivor
if they so desire and they
essentially Representative this
either as an attorney throughout
the process and in addition to
those services we also we also
coordinate through our chain
command with our deputy general
who heads the case management
group K. master job is to ensure
that we are fully engage with
law enforcement and that we are
tracking the case as it moves
along should law enforcement
decline to prosecute or move
forward with the sexual assault
where we have the ability to
reach out to National Guard
bureau office complex
investigations through the
adjutant general to request of
the secretary team from national
Barbuda COVID into an
administrative station and so
all these resources are provided
for service members in the
National Guard and for the
active component through
National Guard bureau the
department of sense and we have
a team whose sole job is to make
sure that these these services
are offered to take place the
constant gauge.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative seven yeah but
what about Saddam down.
You know I signed on the on the
It thank you for that but also
whether preventive services what
it what do you do in regard to
preventive services Mr chair and
representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator I'd like to defer to my
next witness thank you.
Yes Mr chairman members
committee so for preventive
services it's mostly education
training we have mandatory
required annual training to all
the units validated through our
sexual assault response
coordinator she offer sentences
as well as other people work for
her and the point of the trees
to make sure that service
members are aware that the army
command policy is very very
basic and unequivocal all
members all persons treated with
dignity and respect that is part
of standards.
It has been that standard for a
long time now and so through the
National Guard bureau and and
through the department yes we
have different types of
briefings interactive.
Trainings that were required to
attend annual.
And that's that's the main
preventive measure with respect
to.
Trying to prevent this as far as
a mostly it you know that's the
arms answer their reasoning.
Representative this is training
yes we we try to train to be
ready and to ensure that we're
constantly reviewing our
processes and procedures to
improve and that's what we do to
the case management small.
Thank you Mr chair because as we
know and then through this
excellent bill there will be
when the training happens
there's a lot more guidance in
this bill with regard to what is
appropriate and what is not so I
also think that this bill will
help with training Mr chair this
is an also an opportunity to
recognize that a former member
of this body Senator Lisa to
Rocco was my law students and
when she was a law student she
was responsible for amending are
outdated state law which by
taking the words out not his
wife so that right to take out
of the marital exemption for
right can I was very proud of
her work during that time and I
it's interesting I was not aware
of that we still have this
exemption in in the.
In the code of military justice
and I commend Representative
seven young up for bringing this
this excellent let that piece of
legislation.
Thank you senator anybody else
on the committee.
What's the will of the committee
we know it's all Canadians right
as we then rejoin where vice
chairman.
Yes seconded by Senator McKenna
let's imagine.
And any other discussion record
will call the roll.
Senator Ingle.
Both the excuse center McKenna
yes.
There's meetings excuse.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
Home yes Sir can you know yes.
Legislations Representative
Sarinana you have a do task
thank you chairman and and risk
of the committee thank you thank
you expiration this is for for
helping our.
Members before you go to the
next realistic a vote on our
previous bill house bill thirty
four we have entered a motion
for a do pass there was seconded
and the secretary will call the
roll.
Yes.
All.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes Sir.
Yes so we have a due process
motion adopted.
And we'll go notices let me
first say this anybody is in the
room for did you already make
the innocence of
but Sherman Coleman about the
Senate bill three sixteen.
Where we were going to do three
sixty on Sunday are we a very.
Hi Mr chair yes we're gonna hear
three sixteen on Sunday yes
operational under today in the
and then three seventeen is also
offer calendar today will be
heard on Monday.
Okay so so that's a little three
sixteen and twenty seventeen
will not be here today Senator
three sixty and seventy three
seventy on Monday.
Okay so then for this next show
of the Senator Tallman can you
share the committee as I told
Senator representative Armstrong
I would put this bill on for
her.
Sure.
Yes we need module penny so.
Okay which one are we on this
will be this bill sixty seven.
This week we should have a an
expert witness or two from the
Human Services department on
this bill.
And I.
Senator Scrase is going to be
carrying the ball for the most
part.
Lockers and some members.
Herning interference as well.
Mr chair and secretary stresses
on his way but caught up so I'll
be presenting with you for now.
Thank you so.
Go ahead senator for.
House bill sixty seven.
We thank you thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee this this bill would
establish an underpaid primary
chair council we would advise
state government.
Particularly the Human Services
Department.
And finding ways to increase New
Mexicans access to health care.
Improving their health.
Following the cost of health
care the famous struggles will.
Bill.
The bill would establish an
account so we can system members
from the department health Human
Services and the office of the
superintendent of insurance.
We would also bring in.
Organizations representing the
federally qualified health
centers.
And then I members representing
statewide primary care provider
organizations are the thirteen
dies three non voting members
and they would.
The ideas they would spend the
year.
Working on how we might improve.
Primary care in New Mexico and
moving.
During access in lowering costs
and improving the outcomes so I
I will at this point Mr Chairman
turn it over to.
First to make sure this is
Nicole Comeaux from human from
the Medicaid program.
Thank you Mr chair Senator TV
now at and members of the
committee I thank you for and
allowing us the opportunity to
speak with you all today
certainly wait to pick and
choose to bill here for
secretary Scrase and that
representative I'm sure but I
Senator Ortiz he noted a great
job at giving you the high level
I'll give a few more details and
then we do have another expert
that'd like to I'll defer to
hear what we Dr Matt and should
be on as well their hands great
okay I'm so this legislation
actually began with an effort
that started in the house and
twenty nineteen you were going
to graduate medical education
council and there's been a lot
of great work happening there to
create positions for additional
physicians across New Mexico the
work should result in the
addition of forty six more
primary care physicians by the
year twenty twenty five and a
physicians to take care of
additional hundred thousand New
Mexicans
if we can convince them to stay
in the rural areas where they
train which they're much likely
more likely to do if they do
train in those areas as a result
of that work it became clear to
representative Armstrong and
others but there was a lot of
potential to expand primary care
in the state not just for
physicians and nurse
practitioners and physicians'
assistants as well as other
practitioners which resulted in
this bill.
You may ask why the bill is
being driven through the
department of
Human Services and as you've
likely heard in the session the
Medicaid program now provides
coverage to nine hundred eleven
thousand New Mexicans which is
forty three percent of all the
New Mexicans
and fifty eight percent of all
the children in our state and as
the largest purchaser of health
care we feel a great
responsibility to improve health
care statewide and to be a
leader in doing so.
Access to health care is
certainly our number one
priority in the program that we
need practitioners of every type
so the focus here is not at the
exclusion of other specialties
but instead the best place for
us to begin this work based on
some analysis that we've done in
the past two years this will
give us the ability to convene
other state agencies and
professional groups across the
state to work to expand health
care services and and this is
already been said Dr early and
event innovation interventions
decrease expenditures and most
importantly improve outcomes and
and with that I think I'll go
ahead and turn to drive a
commanding.
These are.
Thank you.
Chair Mister chair and but I I'm
grateful to be here appreciate
the time to present this to very
important bill this particular
bill HB sixty seven came from a
gathering of primary care
clinicians all of them
practicing including family
physicians physician's
assistants and nurse
practitioners and others with an
interest in how we provide
primary care to New Mexicans one
one of those clinicians my name
is Rick Madden and I've been
practicing and continue to
practice family medicine for
well over three decades in the
land.
I see now primary care benefits
my patients every day.
We help our patients with
prevention.
We treat and monitor their acute
and chronic illnesses including
diabetes including diabetic foot
care.
We help them with COVID nineteen
illnesses help them recover at
home and see care when needed
and answer their questions about
the disease spread vaccination
and all the other things we do
for adults and children.
So a strong primary care
basically been shown worldwide
to be associated with high value
improved access to care and
equity.
Through decreased two per
emergency department use
decreased inpatient hospital use
and better use therefore of
hospital resources.
Increase patient satisfaction
increase use of preventive
services better referrals to
specialists that is more
appropriate referrals.
Prevention of chronic diseases
and better manage of management
of those diseases.
I know we can improve primary
care New Mexico to help our
patients and communities and our
health care systems.
We need more information to do
that and we need to put our
heads together to come up with
solutions.
The primary council will help.
Yes do that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
We have
go ahead.
Thank you doctor
now we and that on my list
includes a.
Dr David describes the see
avail.
He's on his way he's on his way
Mr chairman here so now.
right I don't showing anyone the
in C..
Support or anyone in that
position to this up house bill
sixty seven.
Hearing none do we have anyone
who is the.
All.
The list of people Mr chairman
of forgetting image here yeah I
do okay I'm not showing up on
showing is expert witness is no
No list of people wishing to
speak for or against.
Legislation handed over when I
Mr chair so it starts with the
sherry Johnson well run this
listings here.
Mr chairman I go ahead.
Sure yes please do thank you.
sherry that's in please go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name mystery
Dodson and I'm a volunteer
advocate for a a RP New Mexico
would like to thank
Representative Armstrong and
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for
bringing this bill forward as a
retired registered nurse I ask
my own primary care provider
about this bill she supports it
but she asked me to relay her
concerns about the low
reimbursement rates which make
it difficult to have a private
practice in New Mexico this
disproportionately affects our
rural areas even more which may
have only one provider available
even working eighty hours a week
my primary care provider
recently closed her own private
practice and joined a group
family practice in order to
continue the career that she
loves A. A. R. P. New Mexico
again supports HB sixty seven
and I thank you very much Mr
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr attacks in the next
the.
We have a Steve the Cerro
representing the New Mexico
Academy of Family physicians go
ahead Liz
State staff is the Cerro.
Is Dr Lewis Senator available.
Hi it's not we will now move on
to lily Irvin Vitela
representing New Mexico First.
Is.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first and while
this initiative has been under
way for many years in that
beautiful way that New Mexicans
come together the thinking in
wisdom behind this legislation
is also very much aligned with
the town hall recommendations
that we had from this summer
around health body mind and
spirit.
New Mexicans from all across the
state can together both through
community conversations in the
town hall and now implementation
teams and some great alliance in
terms of our recommendations
around increasing access and
affordability and quality and so
for those reasons we stand in
strong support in order to pass.
Thank you thank you.
Mr in the tele.
Thank you for your.
Presentation next on the list is
so Linda Siegel representing the
New Mexico nurse practitioners
also.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee and a single
Representative a nurse
practitioners and nurse midwives
we are standing strong support
of this bill we've been part of
the group working on it right
now nurse practitioners there's
about a thousand of them that
are that are practicing in some
manner that live in practice in
New Mexico and we know that are
at least half of those are in
some form of primary care and
since so many New Mexicans also
go and see nurse practitioners
as their primary care provider
we want to to make sure that
we're making it accessible and
we're increasing the amount of
primary care so that all of our
citizens and people who aren't
citizens and have acted we have
access to good healthcare.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comments and
next we will turn to Helen good
Representative Mexico primary
care association.
Afternoon
thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee I am I am
in good and I'm the CEO of New
Mexico primary care association
we represent the federally
qualified health centers and
lookalikes and some other safety
net providers in our state our
member organizations serve over
three hundred eighty thousand
New Mexicans in thirty two or
thirty three counties and they
provide comprehensive primary
care in over two hundred
delivery sites primary care is
provided by our member
organizations primarily in rural
and underserved communities and
we would like to join the
primary care providers who are
working collaboratively to
support house bill sixty seven
the primary care council we
believe the strategic way to
identify and strategically
address issues faced by primary
care as well as to work together
to improve the delivery of
primary care to all New Mexicans
I would like to voice my strong
support for this bill and I want
to think Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
for bringing it to this
committee committee and
representative Armstrong for
introducing the bill thank you
very much thank you for your
comments and potentially return
to Lawrence Sandler
Representative in New Mexico
pediatric society.
Mr chairman and committee
members I'm wary sheller.
Primary care pediatrician in
Santa Fe.
Representative Mexico pediatric
society the state chapter of the
American academy of pediatrics.
We strongly support in the sixty
seven.
Been sent by my peers just for
me but just to emphasize that
I've been to teaching and
training on family doctors and
pediatricians in Santa Fe for
over two decades.
Been successful in getting them
to remain here and a great
number but we need to
strengthen.
Care network.
And so a huge committee to make
it do passed house bill sixty
seven thank you hello thank you
doctor Sandler for your comments
next up we have Susan Wilson
representing the New Mexico
coalition for health care value
miss Wilson.
Thank you Mr chair the
opportunity to speak in support
of house bill sixty seven I mean
Susan Wilson as you said I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico coalition for health care
value the coalition is an
employer led multi stakeholder
nonprofit focused on improving
the value of health care in New
Mexico.
Employers know that quality
primary care reduces
inappropriate referrals reduces
waste in health care spending
and produces help your employees
and their dependents on the New
Mexico coalition believes that
this puts in place foundational
measures that will help us
address issues that exist in the
current primary care system as
well as address new issues as
they emerge we stand in support
of this thank you.
Thank you this will secure
comments next up we have Kerry
robin under representing New
Mexico Medical Society.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee Kerry
robin grounder I we do support
this legislation on behalf of
the New Mexico Medical Society
we believe that quality access
to primary care is one of the
integral components of our
integrated health care system
and we urge its passage thank
you so much Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you for comments
and the last person that blue is
Nicholas could over.
Representative New Mexico Center
on Law property.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas Cordoba and I'm here
representing the New Mexico
Center along poverty we at the
center stand in support of HB
sixty seven primary care is a
group critical component of our
health care system and through
the relationships built on the
preventive care provided primary
care helps our community stay
healthy is particularly cost
effective in doing so.
Especially during the pandemic
Mexico needs leaders who are
laser focused on making sure
primary care in our state most
affecting effectively serves the
patients who need it most thank
you and I hope you support HB
sixty seven.
Okay I think everyone who spoke
in favor of state house bill
sixty seven.
next we will turn to comments
from the.
Members of the committee anyone
wishing to speak I don't see any
hands up am I missing.
Okay we have Senator a.
Sedillo Lopez go ahead Senator.
Thank you Mr chair I am I
attended one or two meetings
this summer from the New Mexico
first and I was so impressed
with their work there were so
many hundreds of people that
were involved in these
conversations and I'm really
looking forward to I I see this
is one of the one of the many
concrete things that will come
out of that and it has was
expressed the wisdom of many
people coming together to solve
the problem was was readily
apparent and when you're ready
for a motion Mr chair the happy
to make it thank you senator
anyone else any other member
wishing to speak.
With regard to us house bill
sixty seven.
Hearing none we have a.
I move a motion that we have a
second.
How how's how second.
Please call the roll.
Just a moment Sir Tom who made
the motion please Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
I seconded.
Yes and then penny can I have
time after for COVID.
Yes
there is next yes.
Yes to see Pino yes
Representative McKenna for
comment Mr chair any can I.
Mr chair.
I'm in and out on driving but
I'd like to vote when I can if
you'd let me.
Yeah most.
You know Senator what is your
vote please yes that.
Yes ma'am yes thank you.
The truth do you wish to what
well yes.
And you're voting yes yes that's
correct thank you.
Your hand yet give a penny.
The vote seven two one excuse.
Mr Mr chairman I would say that
Dr Scrase just joined us just in
time to hear the final vote
count ready I wonder if you want
to add anything to what's been
said already.
You had a rule for your Mr
secretary
anything it can only go against
me right if I say anything so I
just want to thank everybody on
this committee for all your
support we're this bill is here
as I'm sure you heard because of
your support for graduate
medical education that.
Critical success of that program
and one in the same really not
only just reducing train new
physicians but keep the more
recruits a more and find
everything else we need to do to
make New Mexico dot place the
physicians want to come to care
for our population thank you
very much thank you Dr Scrase
and we have a due pass
congratulations Senator have a
due pass.
Thank you senator.
Okay
we'll just we'll just move to
the next item on the agenda.
Any Trevor somebody led to
Senator well he is the center
of your to Senator.
Mr.
Representative Warner here
called event of the year.
Well there you are you are I am
trying.
We can do committees all right
well let's go ahead and hear
your bill one million house bill
one nineteen as amended on
traffic ticket payments thank
you of Mister chair Mister chair
members of the committee this is
a bill that the Senator a might
be discovered for many years and
hopefully we'll get it done this
time basically house bill one
nineteen changes a graphic site
days to process but have we non
traffic citations filed with the
court instead of dividing site
basis between the courts and
motor vehicle Division.
This makes it a lot easier for
the people getting a citation to
bill how to handle it and how to
take care of things I have with
me Mr speaker Mr speaker Mr
Chairman us to the budget but
from the administrative office
of the courts and I believe the
judge that the silos would also
like to testify on my behalf.
Mr chair could you want to
start.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is going to
have to check our work for the
administrative office of the
courts I thank my sponsor for
for doing a great introduction I
just want to add that this is
part of the judiciary's unified
budget those of you who serve on
the courts corrections and
justice committee or the
criminal justice reform
subcommittee are familiar with
this we've been talking about
getting this bill right for
years and then just to let the
committee know that if this bill
becomes law for the driver
nothing changes right now the
driver received a citation has a
choice here go to court it will
still have those same choices
but what the game is the ability
to make a decision after
consideration and what we all
gain is improved efficiency
thank you so much.
Let's go then to judge those.
Chairman can you hear me yes
chairman and members of the
committee I am judge pack
asada's that the Los Alamos
magistrate court and the
president of the magistrate
judge's Association thank you
for letting me speak at this
hearing.
House bill one nineteen will
help drivers who find themselves
regretting a hasty decision
that's made on the road side.
Even in my small court every
week we have people show up our
call wanting to pay their
citation or change their please
we have to explain that there is
no changing of the plea if
they've committed to paying we
also have to explain that their
payment has to be mailed to the
DMV this bill would allow a
change of plea our payment at
the court citations would be
explained and what a more
informed decision can be made no
suspension of license for
failure to pay the penalty
assessment to deem the would be
out there would be no bench
warrants filed for the person
who was sent to court by the
ticket but rate DMV many times
they just go ahead and pay they
think that that's takes care of
it and they don't come to court
by easing the confusion we the
courts Sir the drivers of New
Mexico efficiently and
effectively and this is one of
the main goals of the New Mexico
Judiciary is to be more
efficient and not please passed
house bill one nineteen thank
you for your time.
Thank you very thank you judge
your sons
we also have Bill Jordan signed
up did you want to say anything
bill.
Right.
Maybe he'll during on so let's
see then we'll go to the did you
want to say anything else
Representative to wrap up Mr
chair yet more ready to go to
the committee.
Right now let's see if there's
any public comment services or
anyone we don't have anybody
signed up in advance is there
anyone who wants to.
St either in favor or against
this bill.
Yeah.
And I don't see anybody from the
M. D. on so I think we can
assume they're not opposed we'll
go to the committee.
Members of the committee so
Jason collect
chasing Water Street to
administrative office of the
courts yes thank you Mr chair
members of the committee Justin
clack on the director of core
operations for the
administrative office of the
courts I just wanted to voice my
support for this bill as well
the current bifurcated system
that we have splitting the
citations between the courts and
motor vehicle causes significant
confusion and it doesn't allow
people to change their minds
once they have committed to
making that payment on the side
of the road they're not allowed
to then change our mind and have
their day in court if they feel
like they do want to challenge
the citations
so this bill would eliminate
that confusion having all the
citations process district
courts I also ask that you
please to pass this bill thank
you thank you Mr Clark.
Anybody else we'll go to the
committee then and we send data
Senator David gray assessors.
Mr chairman and Representative I
was gonna argue this point but I
love your a list of people in
sports so.
When you're ready Mr chairman
I'd move to pass.
Ready Senator.
I
I get a second.
A second thank you the common
Senator Senator Tallman seconds
any other discussion we have a
Senator Sedillo Lopez was from
discussed until.
I have Mister Mister chair I
just have one question
in and of it's on the on the FY
arts is H. B. and one nineteen
in SB seven conflict because
they both make amendments to
section sixty six dash five dash
three I I support the concept of
support this bill I was just a
little confused by that
Commented in the in FY are the
duplicate bills or what is going
on there.
Mr chair I'll let you answer
that federal but the other bill
is to okay.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez I I don't think they do
conflict they they do the same
thing to that section of law
they're they're different bills
but they do the same thing in
that particular section.
Both remove.
The ability of motor vehicle to
suspended driver's license for
failure to pay.
Okay.
SB seven was a bill we we argue
to J. R. we we just out today
Senator Wirth bill and driver's
license.
Yes
initially somebody to lose our
drive it ends practice of.
Taking away your driver's
license if you if you can't pay
a fine.
Yes thank you Mr chair and and
thank you for that explanation I
remember discussing this during
the the intercession and so I
was kind of confused about
having to to somewhat different
bills but I'm sure we'll we're
resolved that I do support the
bill thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez
Senator Gallegos do you have
anything else to say.
Those are all removed by.
Okay.
Seeing the discussion the
secretary will call the roll.
Yes that.
So we can.
Senator she's doing she may have
stepped away.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
One yes.
Yes.
Sorry about that yes.
Senator mission of those yes yes
I have that okay.
Thank you committee for your
time.
Thank you Mr chair because thank
you Representative you are new
here the bill right away yes Sir
have a.
You have some strong medical
care from senator bill Byrd
she's here to support you.
Thank you thank you senator
Byrd.
Mr chairman again us in our
house bill one lady is pretty
basically a follow up of what we
did last year with house bill
thirty and it provides for a fee
waivers and expedited licensing
and certification for certain
occupations and professions
school personnel and
construction industry licenses
and certificates of
qualifications for military
service members.
This follows the children and
veterans.
I have.
Witnesses.
Back me up.
So I would say have a Mr
Chairman
All of okay yes Greg Myers will
cover just about everything I
can not do.
So I think you go to Mr Cassidy
first the Mr Chairman.
Mr Cassidy yes thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative all calling for
bringing this bill and senator
Byrd for all your support over
the years with regarding similar
issues
this bill house bill one twenty
expands the good work from the
two thousand twenty regular
session in making it possible
for military spouses or
dependents and all veterans to
be provided expedited licensure
within thirty days of arrival in
the state of New Mexico and it
also includes a fee waiver for
three years that while they're
in our state for three years.
The military sector certainly
one of the largest sectors in
our economy really second only
to the oil and gas sector and
it's our desire everyone's
desire to preserve protect and
to grow on the basis here in New
Mexico and their missions while
also providing quality of life
for all the folks that come into
the state to our state to search
and this is a quality of my will
for our our military folks here
first now scores all states were
there for spaces
Education and for the
availability of expedited
licensure and ease of getting
licensed but this few obstacles
as possible they they run to
scale of green yellow and red
they did a report card for the
first time at the end of last
year we became aware of of their
scoring system in detail after.
House bill thirty
was actually on its way to the
governor so we have a best
practices guide in this bill
just builds on that and it is
our desire to move for
reciprocity.
From what we think is a yellow
score now it it should bring us
into full green territory.
All of these things help when
missions are being considered
such as the recent economic.
They did look at some score
I don't want to move the needle
on our our opinion but it will
be one of those contributing
factors when we when we need it
the other sectors education and
they they look at a number of
different factors on education
this does not address education
this bill but I know we're all
focused trying to improve
education.
All the work of the state
legislature does to to do that
they will also help us and
scoring on the education for.
I'm so I just want to point out
that the bill in particular
provides for a thirty day
licensure turnaround across all
occupations addressed yes Kluge
prime a facie language which
will allow folks coming into our
state to not have to present
every piece of documented
evidence of their capability to
operate in various occupations.
We we rely basically on where
the states where they came from
but there will be opportunities
for them to obviously get
background checks make sure that
their orders are in order for
them to be here and
on identity documents as well.
Is also a reporting mechanism to
the New Mexico military please
Planning Commission so that we
can monitor how this is working
how many occupations are
actually taking advantage of and
try to continue to improve nine
areas were covered in the
scoring and on number those nine
areas were covered with house
bill thirty.
As Cheryl COVID said but we
there were some missing and
we're gonna and in those other
missing professions and we we
would like like to think the
superintendent of regulation and
licensing in our staff
terrifically cooperatives and
building trades folks who will
provide us to work very closely
with us to to get this in proper
form in all stop and happy happy
to address any questions.
Thank you Mr president and
Representative what was your
other expert witness.
Of all Islamist terror is
required.
colonel Myers from the he's the
director of the New Mexico
military base Planning
Commission has been very
supportive of this I'm also a
commission member of that
organization I have not heard
from him he may have had a
another obligation
Representative no I'm I'm here
all there is is here.
Once you go ahead and we'll hear
from senator Byrd up here.
Well thank you Mr chair and
Representative alcune in Center
bird for your your support in
this important legislation so my
name is Greg Myers and I'm the
director of the office military
base planning support also at
the twenty five year Air Force
veteran.
I want to find a little bit
context and background Paul gave
a great overview of what the
bill does but the reason this is
so important is.
Spouses of military members
suffer very high unemployment
rate typically averages around
twenty five percent even at the
highest rate of the national
average unemployment over the
comment period is still ten
points higher than that.
In the recent data suggests that
military families also suffered
under the the last year the
COVID restrictions.
But in addition to their high
unemployment rate.
They also
Have.
And under employment challenge
so fifteen thirty five percent
are also under employee meeting
or not
involved in their chosen
professions and they're not
advancing the the impact of the
military families assessed to be
about a hundred eighty thousand
dollars a year over the course
of a twenty year career.
So overall military spouses are
highly educated and skilled
workforce there you find great
support and service to military
communities and the forty
percent also have higher
education degrees so this bill
goes a long way in helping them
avoid all the obstructions and
barriers
The prevent them over having to
move every two to three years
from being able to serve in
their profession and also served
their communities for all of the
advance in their careers.
So I'm very much in support of
this bill and would be happy to
the system Representative
all come to answer any questions
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Morris.
Okay then Senator Byrd what
would you like to say what I
thank you Mr chairman I won't I
won't belabor the point this is
a critical.
Piece of legislation to support
specifically the Air Force but
all the do in the state of New
Mexico.
as Mr Darcy mentioned.
At in the airforce IDOT grace
every state depending on what
amenities they have to
accommodate their personnel as
they come into the state when
they're signed to column in
Camden Kerr one or white sands
and and this is a a yellow it's
a caution for us but if we can
get this bill passed and the
governor would sign off on it it
gives us a green light there are
so many additional benefits this
one of the benefits out of state
in the research and we found
back to twenty thirteen when
Rudy Martinez and I did the
first original reciprocity bill
the what happens is this process
comes into the state and the
state's first doing it for the
spouses dependents of military
personnel and it helps these
different apartments process is
come up to speed they haven't
changed their processes for a
long long time and what they see
as they can improve and and
speed up the process is so it in
the long run it not only helps
the the Stallis of the military
personnel but anyone else who
comes into the state to bring a
license in the state so that the
state can grow contractors
the cosmetologist whatever the
case may be so it has a lot of
residual benefits as well and so
I don't I why can talk a long
time but I won't because I know
we need to move along Mr
chairman and and.
And gentleman a cone thank you
for allowing me to have a few
words to say.
This is a great deal for the
state New Mexico and that will
help not just the military in
this state in the the dependence
but eventually will help all
people coming straight New
Mexico which will help
streamline processes so we can
all benefit thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator now we do have
it is a number of people who
signed up to speak in support of
the bill we don't have anybody
signed up to speak against it
we'll start with the Wilkinson.
Yes senator chairman good
afternoon and thank you thank
you to the rest of the committee
my name is Dick Wilkinson a
retired army officer and I'm
here on behalf of the Democratic
Party of New Mexico's military
caucus and specifically our
committee for veteran advocacy I
am here to speak in support of
this bill
my spouse is part of the medical
and healthcare community and our
own family have had to make
considerations around our
assignments and the stress
associated with transferring
licenses when you have a
professional career you know
often times military members do
not have a lot of choice in the
state for the location where
they're gonna end up in their
career they're reassigned often
in their family just comes along
for the ride managing your
professional career around that
those constant news is the other
expert witnesses provided you
can see very stressful and of
course the added benefit to all
of this is that someone like my
my own spouse healthcare
provider comes to the state is
able to get to work right away
and of course we always have a
need for more health care
providers so I would like to ask
this committee to pass this bill
and I'd strongly support thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr Wilkinson
next is Sarah fitz Gerald with
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee hi my
name is Sarah fitz Gerald I'm
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce the chamber stands in
strong support of this bill for
all the reasons you heard the
expert witnesses speak to
earlier we want our state's
policies to be is military
friendly as possible so the
federal government is confident
in choosing New Mexico for more
missions and we also want to
help military families and
veterans get settled The New
Mexico can be a great home to
them for as long as they're here
this bill accomplishes that and
we urge your support thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and then
finally the last person who
signed up in advance to speak in
support is Gerry Williams A. R.
P. welcome here.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee as
stated my name is Gary Williams
I'm a veteran of the U. S. Air
Force and also a member of the
R. P. New Mexico I want to thank
you all for the opportunity to
speak today in support of strong
support I should say forced
house bill one twenty also want
to thank chairman I'll call on
for his excellent work on all
the veterans issues that he's
brought forward in the past as
well as just that just leave
session A. R. P. support all of
our veterans military and is
well their family members we
urge you all as committee
members to pass this bill and I
thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak today thank
you.
Thank you very and your
background in your chair tenure
here make a wonderfully
patriotic sure I have to say
thank you Mr chairman.
Anybody else want to speak in
support of our agents is still.
Seeing none will go to the
committee.
Well we're right here with the
Lutheran office advocacy
administrative.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
actually speaking waiting to
speak on behalf but another bill
but this bill piqued my interest
having been a military spouse
for ten years and working for
the IT department army in our P.
and the family services and
working with the state of Texas
to do this very same work I just
felt as a former military spouse
I need to speak in favor of this
bill into certainly affirm the
the challenges of military
spouses face their expenditure
springs the unemployment and
underemployment and the fact
that this bill will make great
strides in easing that
transition into our state so
that's what I wanted to say Mr
chairman I appreciate doctors
speak.
The secret.
Okay members of the committee.
Senator.
Mr chair are you ready for a
motion.
Yes sure I would move to pass of
house bill one twenty as
amended.
I'll second that Senator Tallman
state consent I do have one
question for you Representative
those on we've we've added a
number of different professions
to the.
Initial list that we left
anybody out of there or there's
still some more to come.
I hope we get everybody thank.
Of the.
That are covered by the.
J. somebody's been left out
we'll find out next year with
another militant and and this
when I notice those include chat
to are just so you know we're
we're well on our way to a
complete inventory of all
professions
Cultural.
What is here.
We must we must unless he's
driving so.
You probably are stronger.
Yes.
Yes.
There is.
Sedillo Lopez said refuse.
Judiciary right now.
X. yes Sir.
Yes there are to see Pino yes.
Graduations Representative
you're betting one thousand from
today.
Thank you Sir thank you
everybody on the committee I'm
back to the floor.
Thank you senators.
Thank you.
Okay I will we'll go to Senator
Tallman Bill.
Senate bill three seventy.
This is one that we have on our
right.
Which means we we we.
This is an appropriation bill we
we do a rather.
Thanks in review talk discuss
quickly.
Thank you Mr chair
Very pleased to present to
Senate bill three seventy.
This is a former member of the
program.
Thank the former board member of
the Roadrunner Food Bank you
very familiar with the.
The food insecurity problem
Mexico this bill appropriates
five million dollars to the
Human Services Department to be
a.
Appropriate.
I regional of food banks
throughout the state of New
Mexico New Mexico ranks fifth in
the nation for food insecurity.
And this bill duplicates house
bill one thirty two.
And the thank you Mr.
Sure this bill is prompted by
the fact.
At the.
The federal government decreased
the.
One of the requests from twenty
five million to twenty million
the US five million dollar gap
in the.
In the.
A grant from the.
Emergency food assistance
program so I conclude my remarks
in the.
This open up to a.
Questions.
He is signed up to.
Your number of people signed up
on this we'll start with the.
Is there really anything in the
room.
I don't see your name.
Earlier in the show is rejoice
speakers.
Thank you so much Senator and
and thank you
co chair for your sponsorship of
this so my name is lily Irvin
Vitela and I'm the president and
executive director of New Mexico
first and we've been organizing
a coalition of folks have been
working together for eighteen
months on food and hunger issues
and act resilience issues and so
every week we come together and
we hearing me learn about the
impacts of hunger across New
Mexico and we're to problem
solve and many policy makers
including Senator McKenna have
been participating in those
meetings and I'm.
I think you know when we think
about what our overall hunger
rates are that's concerning when
we think about having the
highest child hunger rates in
the nation it's.
Devastating and we can do better
and I appreciate your
contribution to doing better and
I urge everyone to stand up for
kids and stand up for hungry
folks
and but with the two passed
thank you.
Thank you very.
I don't see any of these other
folks in the room but online
reader names because they had
signed up in advance to support
the bill.
Reggie Nichols.
Reach out to us.
so reserve code test from you
in.
This Jones.
Chairman lord and I hadn't seen
her in there before but she's
probably running as many of us
are back and forth between
committees.
So is there anyone else who
wants to speak on this bill Mr
Reiter please.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is director and I'm now actually
speaking officially on behalf of
but with your average and it
seems to New Mexico in New
Mexico conference of churches
I'm here also just of the state
are strong support for SB three
seventy and I'd certainly like
to think Senator Tallman for
keeping is desperate the
desperate hunger needs of so
many thousands New Mexicans
before the legislature I think
that.
I leave the tele urban certainly
it summed up the best and so
I'll could correct what she said
and just ask you to continue to
do whatever you can to to
support our food banks in the
state thanks for the option to
speak.
Thank you.
We have Senator Cervantes.
How Mr chairman thank the
sponsor this is an issue near
and dear to my heart is hunger
and poverty in our state and
with the virus the unemployment
going on is even needed more and
I thank you very much Mr
chairman and when you're ready
I'll be happy to make a motion.
I don't see any other hands
raised by the committee so I
think we're ready for that I
would move again passed on
Senate bill three seventy.
I'll second.
Right the sponsor seconds.
Is there any other discussion.
I just want to throw in
something.
We've we've been focused so just
simply years on the.
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit.
Why New Mexico can't seem to
close the learning gap where
scores in educational testing so
low.
And then three is actually no
secrets all question of poverty
every study that's ever been
done of the loan shows.
This is an enormous Senator of
educational attainment.
If this does something even.
You know minimally to improve
our our level of for economic
security it'll have an impact on
of his students school.
Until we really have serious
about fighting poverty in the
state.
We can expect our great scores
in this in.
Can be surprise are low ranking
among the states for
educational.
Attainment.
So my selection let's secretary
call the roll.
On Senate bill three seven.
Yes.
So.
Thank.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez I don't believe she's the.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
Thirteen you know yes.
Thank you senator gentleman here
you pass thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee.
You
go to Senator Steinborn what
this for issues can you get in
touch with Senator Steinborn.
For Senator Hamblen no no no
hand literacy work until Senator
Steinborn use your listing deal
with Senator Schmedes zoning
changes the state will.
Senate bill three twenty two.
Thank you Mr chairman I will say
on that
I did receive a text from her
brand that he was requesting to
roll this bill.
Really okay.
Thank you.
Okay are you are you ready Mr
chair.
Building changes for the state
law thank you thank you members
of the committee I I brought
this bill it moved through the
local government committee lasts
a.
Long session the house
And that this is a constituent
bill me tell you the situation.
and if this is an issue that
that is one of my soapbox is
what one of the things I want to
see our legislature do is help
help empower families to.
It take care of an aging
relative
you know have you know grandma
either you know move then or or
someone's you know father in law
helping helping do his care
taking and things like that that
is a lot of of good a policy
changes we could make to help
empower families of course is
not to be biological family but
but this is one of those bills
that that addresses this this
issue.
A constituent of mine
came to me a few years back.
When I was in the house and and
she was trying to work out a way
to take care of her aging
mother.
Who had some early signs of
dementia and the the long story
short is that they were trying
to add on to their house they
couldn't add on and they had to
build a separate dwelling and
they wanted to put a little
kitchenette there in there for
for for her mother.
And they were not allowed to do
so I've had a lot of the of
discussions with Alzheimer's
association and A. R. P. and
some other groups and
I'm not
I I haven't made any changes
from the prior version but but
this bill.
Basically would say that that
counties need to need to find
some sort of conditional use
permit yes if a family is trying
to take care of of
they're you know they're aging
relative essentially in the
drafting we we decided to keep
it very very broad for now and
we decide to say you know
someone with a with a this
penalty we didn't want to just.
You know it could because
initially the situation as well
these are going to be many
people that are gonna be and
I'll probably over sixty five
and and having a disability of
some kind but we're leaving a
very broad but I'm I'm very and
I'm open to suggestions on the
wanted for sure and I and I hope
everyone's clear on what that
what the problem is.
and so certainly that's what
we're trying to do with this
bill.
Thank you senator.
I don't have anybody's I don't
have anybody signed up on this
hill speak for yes it does so
we'll go to the committee and I
see it before we do this I just
want to say then Senator guided
was just texted me.
He was trying to vote on that
last bill I'm trying to move yes
but his connection was one of.
I want to do any lost connection
so can we add anything we and
senator I this is a yes vote.
In terms.
I'm here now.
Thank.
Listen is voting yes on Senators
almonds no is actually on the
set Representative all call
detail but I didn't hear the
calls.
Representative Alcon still
straining to read your hand.
Yes yes I will do the.
Thank you senator.
Okay Senator Tallman you're
Madam FOR Senator committees on
his bill.
The.
Yes thank you Mr chair thank
you.
Center for brain is for this.
So this would of.
Be a statewide zoning change.
It would apply to every
sensibility.
Yes it would apply to every
every municipality but it it it
doesn't you know we we tried to
leave it brought we're we're not
telling them exactly what to do
we're just saying you have to
accommodate when when you want
to say bill you know build some
sort of dwelling to accommodate
some with a disability but we're
leaving it kind of leading up to
them on you know the square
footage issues in those those
sorts of things so but they
would just have to make that
accommodation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sorry I was going to ask if
there was any limit on the
square footage but you said it's
going to be a.
Left up to the individual mensa
penalties.
Mr chair Senator yes that's
correct.
As intriguing idea put the.
It says here
shoot.
Mr Rowley intended to provide
comfortable housing for varying
numbers of people according to
size so they Miss World League.
Take a formal
The position on this.
Mr chair and and etcetera that's
a good question they did not
take a position this year and
they did not take a position
last year I did speak with them
Larry R. two years ago I did
speak to them to years ago and
when I was crafting this
language because I I told him
look I don't want to I want to
force any zoning authority to do
something that doesn't make
sense and so they did review the
language outside it didn't seem
to be a problem seem to be
reasonable
and so because because really
what what you're doing is in a
in a tighter urban area you're
you're not going to really need
to know as need a detached
dwelling you're you're you're
going to just you know if maybe
someone just has the room in
their house or if they need to
kinda you know just add on to
their house
the the problem in in my
district was that people have in
general that they have some
space
and however there's a lot of
these you know there there's no
is the single family thank but
they may be on a one acre lot or
a two acre lottery for even
bigger and and they have plenty
of of room to to do this but
some of these zoning authorities
are are set up in kind of a
rigid way and I just don't want
there to be any kind of you know
esoteric barriers when we're
trying to accommodate that and
an aging in on aging family
member so I I feel like this
Elise my intention is to strike
the right balance of
flexibility but also giving some
directive sizzling authorities
to start thinking about this we
have an aging and we are aging
population and sums only forces
may not be think about it I'm I
I would think and hope they be
very supportive of this idea but
this would you know put in
statute this release get them
going where they don't have to
tell someone knows who is in a
bind and in the gonna have to
just move or or whatever to
accommodate their their needs
and so that that's kind of what
I was hoping for this one
thank you.
Yeah I want to support this I
like of the general intention
what you're trying to do so.
Correct me if I'm wrong but get
this would be kind of a broad
brush.
I'm.
Enabling legislation with the
with the municipalities.
The.
Enacting the details is that
correct.
Mr chair and senator Tom yes
that's correct.
Yeah this would be good because
this enable my children maybe
a put in addition to take me and
when I.
So.
So yeah I like what you're
trying to do here so I
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you for bringing
this forward Senator thank you
sense thank you senator Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator
I like to read we go over this
again about local authority
this sounds to me.
Having been a county
commissioner and spending a lot
of time.
On the zoning and a land use
plan that was a couple thousand
pages.
This sounds to me like it is.
Going around with cities and
counties have in place.
Mister chairman Senator.
Well I I guess I'm I'm not clear
on would you would you mind.
Terrifying or I guess I'm not
quite sure.
I I I I guess are you worried
that we're
Conflicting with some local
zoning issues or.
Yes Mr chair Senator
County commissioners are elected
to do a specific job and their
job includes land use within
their county and all zoning
ordinances the state does not do
downing organises for.
Counties they can do it on state
land.
but they can't do it for.
County properties.
So.
This what I'm trying to get at
is are you not making some
decisions for the county here.
Well Mr chairman and senator
that's that's that's what we've
really tried to strike a good
balance.
Miss Mister chairman and Center
that's that's what we were
trying to do with the language
and that was my initial you know
concern with the municipal
league and and folks that I've
put this together with is is you
don't want to just go in and
tell account a or just a
specific zoning authority you
know what what to do however we
we do want to have them be
proactive to be aware of an
issue and so really the the
conundrum is this is when you
have a zoning authority that has
not thought of this and prepared
for this you can have someone
who is in a pretty tight spotter
needs to move pretty quickly and
yes they can go to their
individual County and say Hey
can you take care of this but
then it's going to take you know
who knows how long to to get
that done and so I this is once
again we're not telling them at
all what they have to do they're
saying you need to go ahead and
agree your own County go ahead
and come up with this
conditional use permit process
in order to accommodate these
folks so you're ready if if this
situation comes up and so I'm
trying to to strike that balance
and not not not tie at a local
authorities hands whatsoever.
Okay so I'm.
Mr chair Senator I understand
that and I appreciate the
sentiment we have just here in
Santa Fe County for example we
do have conditional use permits.
And if somebody was
Terminally ill for example and
in law a parent.
How many could bring.
Them into the household and
exceed the number.
People allowed for sewage septic
and water.
They could put on the property
temporary housing a whole
variety of things but.
Because it's temporary it then
has to go at the end.
So if somebody who's terminally
ill dies the unfortunate
situation is that the county has
to go in and enforce.
the removal of temporary housing
and the expense that goes with
this.
And it's not always taken well
but that usually within.
Good morning and that can
conditional permits.
So I'm not opposed to.
Two conditional permits for.
Disability in of chronic medical
conditions and terminal
illnesses it's just how we might
in French upon counties Ortiz.
So
Mr chair if this moves on I'd be
more comfortable with the no
Representative.
But I wait to hear listen to
other people thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
guidance you're next.
Senator Gallegos.
Can you hear me now yeah we can
hear you.
Like cartoons here we got here.
This gentleman in center I'm
like this bill tell you why.
Currently in the process of
remodeling a house for my mom
it's moving in the reason of
going home.
Next week's this I am her care
giver.
But in a few years back we have
to property
I was asked to build a home for
one of our.
Family members.
We got the two story home.
And here's graft alter decided
they wanted.
Because limitations in Lake
County
and I look at look at a
different Senate rates but
you've got a lot of little areas
house next ask next out because
originally they didn't have a
master plan but what's happened
is why we've got it set up now I
had to get our we have five acre
parcel.
In the older one in the same
house Representative.
I ended up after bills totally
separate house but to do that I
have to buy the property reply
at give me your Albuquerque come
down and laid out.
We draw up plans bills the
second house and lit up read
drill water wells.
He could have to help solve
water one water well and that
just that portion costs are
twenty five thousand dollars so
what what you're doing here now
as someone plans.
One of their grandparents are
all court after some of the
Scott the this is the chance
that the county should already
be looking at that same here's
how we're going to deal with
that it might five years maybe
eight years back if they have
done this that we could have
saved me a lot of money extra
cost because whether we put it
in chasing after dishing out I
would reply recept part that
prop because it's all one
property now we just have to
house that two different lacked
the I just want to
renovate houses for the last
three sessions and it's really
hard all right.
The cashier give you leeway to
do what you need and want this
year Mr chair Senator is it
specifically for my mother
Care last year sure why it it's
difficult so I just want to put
that out there I appreciate what
you're doing I think it's really
good chance.
At least at the counties to look
at what is going to take our
aged population without you
thank you Mr thank you senator
Senator Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator and doctors
committee along the lines that
has Senator Stefanics expressed
chairman and senator doctors
metes.
How this affect those
organizations that have
covenants and some of them as
we're all aware of here in New
Mexico and across the US are are
very strict.
Yes in the miss Mr chair and and
etcetera McKenna not a question
that that that came up in the
you know a couple years ago when
this through through the local
government Committee
and I my my I did ask that
question Municipal it might my
best answer for now I don't have
a zoning expert with me but
is is that this is someone that
that the the zoning authority
has to address I don't want to
change how they interact with a
community that has you know
covenants and restrictions at
all in we're not trying to
change that at all and so that
that that that's once again just
trying to strike the balance to
right to craft the language
where it's general enough where
we don't we don't change how
they
how they interact with with CC
in ours.
Very good chairman and senator
Dr Schmidt is.
Yeah I I really like the spirit
of what of what's intended here
my pause is working with.
The gated communities I'm even
there's communities and proceed
to us in my district that have
very strict.
Covenants and it even depends
upon the neighborhood in Placita
us.
I I I think of maybe one or two
right now that wouldn't allow
her presently they do not allow
activity such as this so.
I I too am and leaning towards
no record but for for its.
For further committee for
another committee pardon me to
help with the language to
address this.
Thank you Mr chairman center
McKenna yeah and I you know like
I said the last time I spoke
with the minutes fully gate they
said it was reasonable but I I
think what I'll do is and I'm
I'm I'm I'm jotting these things
down and I'm very happy to
revisit the language with them
as well as maybe association
counties in just just see if
there's any other qualifiers
because like I said this is
written very very broadly now
and I'm very happy to kind of
narrow it down because what you
know what once again this this I
don't think it's going to be
used that much in a in a tighter
setting where we have small lots
it's it's is just like you know
my constituents just like center
guy goes is a situation and it's
those situations that I think
are going most realistic for
making this happen where where
people are really saying Hey
I've got some space and let's
let's take in you know our our
father Lawlor or mother loss or
whatever maybe so I'm I'm happy
to narrow narrow the scope of
the bill some if if we you know
if if if
those folks a have have those
ongoing concern for their
conditional use permits.
Anything else Senator.
No thank you chairman.
Senator Gallegos for the second
time this gentleman on that
point well we did our five acre.
The we did have to get the Cup
integrated changed from the area
they they call their work
together in the portal gave the
stipulations on what we need to.
Two water wells to septic tanks
they gave us their guidelines
that they did not have prior but
I know that once depending on I
have never worked with the gated
community bank in Albuquerque
but this is all along all point
very very restrictive their
point make the determination
before we can go forward to the
county so that's a very good
question because there are
by laws that are specifically
for those areas in our case we
just about.
Explain what we're doing thank
all those thank you to separate
properties separate water will
separate services and so we just
divided by their and then we
built under the act.
After we complete second house
but I just thought that that out
there.
It happens anyway it without
this bill you still have that
but it remains and therefore.
Thank you Mr.
Thanks.
Anybody else.
Another common I'm sorry what
is.
So
Senator says this goes forward.
the additional I'm I'm looking
closer at your bill the
additional detached dwelling if
Matt.
Something like the locals owning
ordinances eight you know and as
senator McCain and the kid
there's an issue with the
homeowners associations but.
Sample we also have.
Some rules and.
The state engineers office.
For how many wells.
Can be on one piece of property
and how many people can be
served by the number one by one
well I mean there it's it's a
little more complicated and I I
think the sentiment is really
great here.
So I just would encourage you to
look a little bit more at the
language to.
We know exclude
Appropriations against.
political subdivisions.
standard to regulations that are
already in place that's all that
was my last comment thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Sarah specs out and that's very
very helpful I I had that had
not come up.
Four years ago of the well issue
that that's a very well taken
point I will address that thank
you.
Thank you senator.
ET on Senate bill three twenty
two I would no rack I do pass
with the no recommendation all
of us I'll second that.
A motion and a second.
No no REC any other discussion.
Was it go next additionally.
Okay yes that's correct.
Following business.
Your business.
Thoughts Judiciary.
You actually might get a hearing
Jackson Business congradulations
sensible.
Okay
Secretary will call the roll.
On Senate bill three two to go
without a recommendation
survivalist yes.
Yes.
Yes.
First the parents yes our
common.
Yes
there are two panel.
Yes and then I'll explain my
vote.
Just in case Senator Schmedes it
doesn't get it through this
year.
Once we need to have a.
The task force.
That there would take a look at
it in during the interim we work
on the details bring in the New
Mexico counties ring in the
municipally.
Yes some of the senior groups
working on it and try to promote
the some language that wouldn't
necessarily infringe on.
Local municipalities ability is
no.
When you try to raise some.
See options for them to
consider.
Very well Mr chair thank you
very much.
Thank you for working on the
Senator.
Okay members with the Senator
Steinborn still.
Child sex crime statute of
limitations Senate bill creates
and.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee and Mr chairman I just
want to make sure my.
Royal expert witness Sarinana
Morales is on is not on you know
she's on superstar expert
witness Mr chairman I have to
admit it caught me a little by
surprise being on the agenda and
we jumped on and there's just so
much going on and I was in
another committee but your
dutiful assistant notified me so
we're going to we're gonna
explain it it's a fairly simple
bill but criminal laws anything
but simple so
we're all will will cover the
concepts and if we get hung up
then what will certainly deal
with it Mr chairman committee.
Senate bill three ten is a bill
that actually the committee
heard before several years ago
in past
different committee and I was on
at the time but it does two
things number one it raises the
statute of limitations on second
degree criminal sexual
penetration of a child which is
child under excuse me from the
ages of thirteen eighteen which
is right of a child under that
Under the age of thirteen it's
first degree which has a
lifetime statute of limitations
twenty ages of thirteen and
eighteen we have a six year
statue on patients from the time
you turn eighteen which means
twenty four which is kind of one
of the shallow statue
limitations in the country
not that's a reason to do
anything but it's interesting
perspective
the second piece of this bill
raises the statute of
limitations for criminal sexual
contact.
Of a child which is which is
molestation it's
It's touch and so and that
raises it to the age of thirty.
The first one raised it to the
age of thirty five.
And before when I brought the
bill to the committee several
years ago which we passed away
that you pass it got changed and
then the governor had vetoed the
bill because there was a
technical error we accidentally
remove the tolling provision.
Included all sex crimes against
kids and I think I. Rhianna we
had no statute of limitations we
said it was for life and then
ultimately it got whittled down
to all sex crimes to the age of
thirty five and ultimately it at
the very and it was it was just
criminal sexual penetration I
think that we feel like and I
certainly have constituents who
who are dealing with.
Not a severe crimes is criminal
sexual penetration.
I'm a special contract with that
the current statute is not long
enough so I felt like maybe we
need to bifurcate the approach
and go a little stronger on
criminal sexual penetration of
thirty five which is where we
ended up before well through
most of the process until the
night before the session and
then bump up criminal sexual
contact to the age of thirty and
with that I I apologize up
beyond I literally just
Representative Duran but that
the ana is is the advocate who
approached me in Los crucis
several years ago about up in
the change the launch is really
on to something and I'd like to
ask for the state were to Mr
Chairman committee.
So for W. thank you Mr chairman
committee sorry to be here and
be testifying on the sea of
years later I think that Senator
Steinborn brings up all the
points that I want to touch on
and as advocate as a survivor of
child sexual abuse I think that
it's true that our
specializations in New Mexico is
All the limited compared to that
the nation sample the national
average and I think that making
the steps to existential
educations is not only a good
move in terms of certain victims
but also turned and could move
in terms of code Justice Reform
that would support tenders being
able to be prosecuted leader
after you this actually the
patient has been expired already
allowing for you know redress
those crimes for both victims
and also for the rehabilitation
and prevention of crimes in the
future if that makes sense
Honestly I think that the
current socialization is not
sufficient for victims in terms
of being able to heal and come
to terms with the abuse of the
New York before coming forward
and I think that making this
amendment make its amendment to
the current
law is I think I'm sorry.
And we're really to talk about
why white cover so that's all I
have to say thank you.
And with that Mr Chairman we
will stand for questions.
Yes.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I
just wanted to clarify it is
that we have to work for an
agency or organization.
I do have the and nonprofit
called sexual assault you
support network but I am coming
here as advocate on my own
volition if that makes sense.
Thank you.
So I don't have anybody signed
other is there anyone wants to
speak on this bill you for or
against in the in the room.
Seeing none will go to the
committee.
Then we have Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair I guess on a
Friday evening we you know it.
Doing other stuff but
no Senator.
First of all Sam I'm certainly
very pleased to be able to to
support this bill
I didn't catch the reason that
the technical error that was
what I.
What I was want to ask Miss.
What what was going on with that
because I do remember this bill
through last time.
Yeah I'm it we were accidentally
removed a tolling provision that
I guess is is DNA evidence
essentially that if in law if if
they provide evidence like that
and then there is a lifetime
unlimited statute of limitations
and inadvertently and and all
the amendments and changes.
Some crucial language in law got
taken out it's deceptively
difficult statute to once you
start trying to change it
amended and so I accidentally
there was a drafting error of
the State literally late at
night like the night before the
session ended it took out the
section line didn't they didn't
put it back in and we couldn't
obviously have that so the bill
had to be to.
Okay Mr chair Senator thank you
that that makes perfect sense
appreciate your.
What is.
I made a motion.
But I'm waiting for other
people.
Make a motion Senator
legislation I'm going to pass.
Is there a second Senator
McKenna stations and.
Any other discussion of this
non.
Basically you you clean whatever
was a problem in the governor's
veto last time we have
essentially the same bill.
We are the ones who are trying
to get into again.
Yes Mr chairman that's basically
that they tested slightly
altered but because we've
narrowed it down to two crimes
whereas when we started in this
several years ago we were in a
whole set of crimes with a much
higher statutes limitations
unlimited.
Yes secretary will call the
roll.
On Senate bill three ten Sir guy
across yes Representative.
Some.
Yes Sir.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Sierra.
Yes.
The panel.
Yes.
Thank you Senator Steinborn we
have a due pass thank you
committee and thank you Sharon.
No no let me let me just explain
to everybody who's here that all
the other bills and then rolled
over except for my medical
marijuana changes bill Senator
brand requested is three eighty
to be rolled over.
Senator eighteen and and sign
your rules well here there's on
Monday.
Senator Hamblen.
has asked her gender and
orientation data collection be
heard on Sunday.
So that leaves us only with
Senate bill three forty and
Senator Tallman future the
meeting well I resent Senator
reporting.
Okay thank you.
You Mr chair we will now hear a.
Presentation of from missed
their chair on Senate bill.
Three forty go ahead Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I have
a couple of expert witnesses
here as well but in a nutshell
what we're doing with Senate
bill three forty.
The stranger clarify for the
third time now.
At least I'm sure in the last
two.
The term reciprocal participants
in the medical marijuana program
there's been litigation over
this.
The courts have ruled that we
need to make it clear and so
here we are we've made it clear
we think this is one of medical
marijuana.
Cardholder from another state.
Comes into New Mexico and wants
to participate in our medical
marijuana program this is
interpreting making clear.
That that that there are certain
ground rules and they have to
follow and I'll turn it over to
Dominique's low and then Arian
showers to speak about this or
maybe it's the other order which
order should be going down.
I'll go ahead and start Senator
at Mr chair and senator members
of very many.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to be able to speak
on this bill my name is Dr
Dominic Sir hello and I am the
division director for the
medical cannabis program at the
New Mexico department of health
and as senator Ortiz you know
pointed out this is really the
clarify the language around the
definition of a reciprocal
participant in the medical
cannabis program these are
individuals and the intent of it
was that the individuals would
be up participants are patients
in medical cannabis programs in
other jurisdictions such as in
Indiana Washington Oregon and
California were coming to visit
or staying in New Mexico
unfortunately when we started to
implement the program an
unintended consequence was
discovered where individuals who
lived in certain jurisdictions
could go online and for very
small fee which ranges anywhere
from fifteen to forty dollars in
a letter of from California
physician or medical provider
stating that they should be in
the California medical program
however it's not an actual
authorization from the
California state program and so
individuals have been utilizing
that loophole for that I
mentioned intended consequence.
To avoid going through the
regular enrollment process for
the Lynn and Erin compassionate
use act and for the medical
cannabis program we had just
under a thousand individuals who
reside in the state of New
Mexico go through and utilized
that that method to enroll in
the program and we've also had
approximately seventy five
hundred individuals outside the
state utilize that methodology
and out of all of those
individuals and rolling as a
reciprocal participate at over
five thousand of them have done
this through this type of
activity in California but only
four hundred and forty nine of
those individuals actually have
hello for your cards and are
enrolled in authorized directly
through the California medical
cannabis program and so the idea
behind this is to help close up
that loophole and that
unintended consequence because
we want to ensure that
individuals were participating
in the medical cannabis programs
are doing so under the
advisement of a medical
practitioner so they can monitor
and see whether or not like with
any other medication they are
experiencing harmful
consequences and to also ensure
that as they participate in the
program they do receive
beneficial effects from
utilizing their medication.
Thank you very much I appreciate
it and that thank you very much
Mr chair members of the
committees thank you thank you
doctor
Erin shall receive you want to
say something.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think Dominic really
covered the entire basis of our
bill very adequately I think we
can stand for questions thank
you.
Thank you.
The Mr Chairman administered by
saying we build really boils
down to pay seven section W..
This bill is about if you're
gonna be a reciprocal
participate you can't be in New
Mexico resident who is in you
just need expected to enroll in
New Mexico for over.
And if you are from out of
state.
You have to have a license more
medical marijuana licensors will
be enrolled in a in a
governmentally authorized
program no one that.
Somebody with the mail order
certificates is willing to
dispense for thirteen dollars.
Member center Russians.
Mr chair.
Yeah go ahead the.
Senator.
Senator a thanks please go ahead
thank you
Mister chair Mister chair I
regret to let you know that I am
opposed to this bill.
Leave that some of our.
The states that do not have
merit medical marijuana.
and I know we've debated this on
and off for a few years.
But I believe that they are
being hurt by their own
governments and they can't help
it.
And
I think that this is about being
compassionate.
Thank you very much.
I would say in response Mr
chairman is no there is in New
Mexico we don't have an
unlimited supply of medical
cannabis and the extent that
people come in from.
Arkansas or Louisiana or some
other place and and and use
these.
The documents to by our generous
that means there's less
available for New Mexicans who
played by the rules so I think
it you know I I certainly agree
with you that their government
should be.
More a humane.
Responsibility and take care of
the the victims of governmental
in humanity from around the
country.
Mr chair a we didn't give the
public an opportunity to speak
for yes.
I have one person who just
signed up to speak in support
nobody at against however is the
it is time I'll ask the public
is anybody in opposition to this
Senate bill three forty a police
service.
Raise your hand will recognize
you.
saying no one is adjacent
Parker.
In the.
It here wishing to speak in
support of this of us Senate
bill three forty.
Well I.
Okay I guess Mr chair I guess we
don't have anyone wishing to
speak for again so now will open
it up to questions from the
committee.
I don't see a.
No Senator a you can go ahead.
Thank you chairman and thank you
senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I it I just love my position
ever every single day I learn
something new I'm but but after
reviewing the legislation
chairman and senator.
Areas.
If we if New Mexico.
Approves recreational cannabis.
How is this legislation
affected.
By recreational cannabis.
in New Mexico and and I'm I'm
one let me know if that question
is not clear.
Mr chairman and and and senator
magenta well hazard answer and
then I.
Dr
Dominates elections are listed
to to.
Give you the right answer.
What version of the of the
cannabis legalization only fast
I think all of them though tend
to hold for medical cannabis
program or the integrity to
retain the integrity of our.
I I need to start by saying that
under this.
The department of health the
the.
Mexico medical cannabis phone is
probably one of the most.
Currently run and responsible
programs in the state in the
country.
We want to retain that over a
hundred thousand people get get
medical cannabis program and and
we are not really this service
here we have an additive serious
abuses of the chairman had major
problems in some complaints
of our limited supply all rural
legalization.
Bills.
To deal with that by requiring
anybody who gets of recreational
license to maintain an adequate
supply of medical cannabis in
the distinction between the two.
Some people think there's really
no difference that there is
there's a difference in in the
in the level of THC in the level
of CVD and some of these
products.
In the recreational is they're
probably going for more THC.
In the.
The.
medical programs I mean in the
in the yeah and the medical
program thirty different
varieties in different there are
ways of using it I I don't think
recreational users will will be
likely to want to use
suppositories for example but
for many people can smoke more
they're doing cancer treatment
against smokers or even taking
any other for the suppository is
a rarity and you don't want to
take that away training
everything over to to the
recreational well it Dr as a
loan state with the real answer
is.
What Mr chair I'm Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
McKenna.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino you
actually.
Expressed it very well this
really is about ensuring that
the medical supply remains for
medical patients and that other
individuals who might be
utilizing this other method of
signing up as a reciprocal
participant when they really
should not be an are utilizing
it in order to be to use
recreationally would actually
then have access from a
recreational standpoint and
individuals who are enrolled in
a medical program in another
state or jurisdiction would
still be able to access the
medical cannabis that they need
when they're visiting New
Mexico.
One of the other aspects to keep
in mind as well is depending on
which of the legalization bills
continues to move forward it
also is possible that this would
potentially influence the tax
revenue because the medical side
in most of the bills at least
would be exempt from the state
excise tax and some of the other
taxes where as somebody who
would be coming from another
state using recreationally is
not.
Thank you very much.
That given the other.
Question Senator McKenna.
No thank you chairman and thank
you.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I I just
It came to my mind after hearing
senators to phonics concern.
about state of.
A patient Texas patients.
I'm who gets a great deal of
help from medical marijuana
cannabis.
wants to fulfill his or her
prescription.
Eight.
Let's see what does happen in
that situation at a Texas cancer
patient.
It suggested here she consider
medical cannabis for the
elements.
Are they able to come to the
state of New Mexico and get a
prescription.
Thank.
Mister chairman Senator emission
at.
Person.
Who does not have authority from
another state governments this
bill passes.
Do not community encourages
stated our medical marijuana
program.
But if we legalize they could
come in with or without a card
with the roll out of
prescription in violation of
this year for their own
consumption and conceivably
there any some varieties of
cannabis some messages using
journalists they would be able
to use and and get some relief
for their condition whatever it
is.
On the right track their donors.
Mr chair Senator test in the if
I may add just one other piece
to this because it's very
important is that if an
individual lives in another
state comes across the border
purchases cannabis medical
cannabis for their use and then
crosses back over that state
border to their home that is
illegal federally and
potentially put them at risk for
prosecution or citation and so
that's one of the other things
that we want to ensure does not
happen and that we are not
potentially putting patients
especially individuals who may
be medically fragile into.
Situation.
And so they would be able to
purchase and be able to use here
in New Mexico so long as they
were registered in a program as
a reciprocal participant.
Very good that that really helps
There's much to consider but I
thank you for helping me
understand.
Okay thank you senator any other
members of the committee wishing
to speak.
you Mr
Mr.
Senator a.
Grados.
Senator entries okay okay.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chairman at the
center to the piano I thought
this is going to be a super
quick one and I've I've been
really fascinated I I just I
can't say how much I love
serving on this committee have
been fascinated with some of the
debate on this bill I do
remember a different version of
the bill that come through in
the past the house looking at
this issue and I remember
speaking specifically about
crossing state lines
And you know I guess we have to
consider is we don't want to put
people in a dangerous situation
even though the feds are really
not you know in enforcing that
sort of thing but you never know
never know if somebody could get
pulled over for another reason I
don't know I don't want to get
into that to to much but I I do
want to say have a constituent
who is a a physician who
specialize in medical cannabis
and it's got a lot of really
good discussion you this is very
just is very this is a very very
good doctor.
And
Yes explain to me that a lot of
these patients are you know
there's this very complex say
they have a lot of medical
problems and really it goes back
to the point that the sponsor
made about the different levels
of THC and so I I think I want
to reiterate maybe yeah that
different words that what I want
to protect is I want to protect
that person that and I yeah
maybe if you're super super
second you're not be traveling
here from New York if you're
really that sick but the
reciprocal patients who is very
delicately managed.
And I thought it was a great
point by Sierra about asking
what what could happen.
If we legalize recreational
marijuana in in New Mexico and
what I would want to happen is
someone kind of is a reciprocal
patients but they start to kind
of self medicate B. B. because
we have a research program and
it just is what the THC level
and experience something that
they you know that that set you
know sets them off of their
usual course of using a medical
products if they if if they can
I have an issue and I for me
this bill kind of clarifies for
the D. O. H. what who is a
reciprocal patients who is not
who is under the care of a
physician
coordinating this care in the
context of their chronic
comorbidities and so I like that
part of the bill
and I just would say about all
this is gonna be too much of the
weeds that I find it interesting
that I at least my understanding
I think Oklahoma has a very very
loose medical program in in
Texas Texas does have a medical
program I understand it but it's
very very restrictive so it's
interesting that we share a
border with those states that
have very different medical
cannabis programs and but we I
think it's I think it's very
wise to consider how that could
affect those people
Even though we don't you know
regulate that us they're not
Mexico residents but but I I
think Senator Ortiz you know I I
I I am in support of this bill
because I I think it clarifies
what the reciprocal patient is
and I think we need some I think
needed to provide that for the
for the UHF for folks that are
providing medical care so we
don't kind of mix up our
recreational drugs at potential
recreational drugs and medical
products and I think this gives
some clarity so just wanted to
kind of throw that out there for
the committee thank you Mr.
Okay thank you Senator and
any other committee members
wishing to speak.
Hearing none I entertain a
motion.
I have a two passed
Motion from Senator McKenna yeah
do passed please.
Okay to pass it and.
At a second from us Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino okay please call
the roll.
I'm bill three forty center guy
it goes yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Now.
Yes thirty two Pino yes.
Thank you.
Because you have a do pass
recommendation locations and now
a.
Mr chair Sierra with some
closing remarks.
Thank you thank you to senator
Solomon Olamilekan sergeant of
the day.
We will meet again on Sunday.
One thirty we can do that from
the comfort of your own home
but we have we have a couple of
those uncertainty so it's not
gonna be also I mean games and
we'll try to not take up the
entire have you have you unmuted
we want to catch up as much as
we can with our backlog number
House Bills and in some centers
built to.
Senator a Saturday if you're
you're you're in one of the
reasons meeting tomorrow the
lower.
That is I'm sorry we do have a
meeting on Senate I.
Democratic caucus why didn't I
die in receded soaks okay so
then we have a.
More two standard close to our
day at five o'clock.
Senator you're not welcome to
the democratic focus Senator I
am back again because there is
to do in the house hi so but
that was my question I just
wondering if you'd ever found a
point four by Senator for a
wait.
We're we're we're getting there
you know we're taking these
things and number eight point
we're hearing house bill so
that.
So.
Yeah let me let me make that
clear which we're hearing
hospitals because this late in
the session at least a house
built of already cleared one
house and there's a chance that
you can get through and so we're
trying to do as many Senate
bills as we can but
Canadian after.
All all yield but I just like to
keep that on your right yes
thank you.
Is I'm certainly getting a lot
of email around.
Okay.
Yeah so because you see it is
just a Senate caucus it I said
senators should Bennett said I I
under the those that move our
meeting to six o'clock or seven
no no we need a one thirty and
seven.
Well I thought it was.
If I.
there was gonna be a floor
session and five o'clock on
Saturday.
That's been canceled to our
meeting Sunday is a one o'clock.
One.
One thank you I I well I wrote
down I thank you thank you for
verification.
That is correct thank you
Senator Stefanics and chairman
you have five to seven caucus
meeting this Sunday.
You are you providing generous
at the caucus chairman.
I am providing pictures of
dinner.
Other goes by relaxing Sunday
yeah.
Thank you all and you can turn
the webcast on please okay that
everybody.
Thank you areas thank you
doctors are loan everybody.
Thank you really for joining us.
