Explain how this consent
calendar for duplicate bills
that we already heard in the
Senate health of public affairs
committee will work very.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee actually I think
you I have just explained it
we've used it for many years
this is the first time this year
are that we have a bill coming
over from the house
and in its current fashion as
it's come over
it's identical.
To a Senate bill that we heard
about two weeks ago a little
less than that and we passed
unanimously so it's the same
bill but with a different
as Senate bill or house bill one
so on this created what we do is
we list the house bill and the
sponsor Representative Matthews
is here with us and then we just
sort of do a simple explanation
it duplicate Senate bill two oh
one by Senator Padilla which
passed unanimously on February
fifteenth and just be two oh one
is awaiting a hearing in
Judiciary we always give a sense
of where that bill is right now.
Then we just do a very brief
explanation of what the bill
does in this case it was a very
straightforward bill
to allow for full practice
authority of of siRNAs we have
to refer testimony as soon they
did on the house side as well
merry very well organized
constituency
and the board of nursing just
directly involved I was very
supportive of this expansion and
then on the right we show what
the journey has been for that
bill and where it needs to go
next
so in past we then.
Ask any questions if any of the
committee members is concerned
about this they can be taken off
and had the right to as need be
but just to expedite things this
is how we proceeded in the past
with these how to duplicate
bills.
Good explanation thanks very.
I would like to give the
Representative Matthews a chance
to say anything she'd like to
about the bill.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
at I would I would note that the
bill passed the house the house
floor unanimously it's
Concerning the certified
registered nurse and this is
just which is a.
Are some group of men and women
who find in the rural areas of
the state something like seventy
percent of the embassies here
and the CCM of services.
And are vital to rural New
Mexico and this is basically and
cleanup
and just to be sure that the
statute is consistent with the
their practice and with that I
would.
I guess I don't move I'm.
Yeah that's fine with.
blows and turn it over to the
committee then is there anybody
in the committee was any
questions about this is the
staff is thoroughly vetted and
make sure that it is identical
to the bill we passed two weeks
ago.
Chair Senators.
Are you ready for it motion yeah
let's go ahead I know they do
pass on house bill thirty five.
A second it seconded by Senator
Sedillo Lopez any any discussion
or questions at all from the
representative.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
I'm not sure that you have a
quorum Senator.
We did.
Senator Schmedes he was but I
don't see in that account again.
Well.
When we can take a mode lets the
Senators committee I can see
interim thing here.
We're going to she down the
cover I think we.
Thanks.
No I don't see she's anymore.
Representative will what we'll
do is we'll we'll treat this as
a sub committee action we'll
wait until we have a quorum and
then we'll take a vote
immediately upon a quorum being
established.
And Mr Chairman do you want me
to stay you're welcome to
because you don't need to I
thank you you know as soon as we
have one more person will take a
vote.
At Mr chairman thank you and if
for any reason you the Meggin if
they could just text me or
whatever I will be on the house
floor thank you very much.
Thank you Representative.
To move into a house bill four.
Quorum being present because two
crucial military.
To take on until we have enough
members present let's see you do
we have what else do we have on
the agenda today can you get all
those part that on.
Please try that would be good.
We Sierra will have a quorum.
Correct.
What we need is one more person.
Texted most of I think it's
difficult Mr chair because of
the capital outlay being do at
three and that may be.
I'll just but I'll definitely
text.
Do we have the Sanchez for any
other bills here with this
Senator Baca.
Senator more here Senator Pirtle
or Senator pope here.
Mr chair we we do have what we
could well also my my bill that
we took off the table.
We we can vote at any is the
it'll be what we deal with this
is we have a quorum the.
This is wait in place here's
your chance to reconfigure your
capital outlay.
On your.
Emails for your tax.
Pope is I'm.
Or.
Senator.
Would we deal with your.
Senate Bill.
Two sixty eight millimeter alert
you to the fact that we are
operating as a cell committee.
And but we anticipate the
Senator Tallman will join us and
maybe some of the other senators
so Senator Schmedes actually was
here for a moment.
Mention to the these are.
And so we have lost touch with
him Mr chair Tom is on
we have a quorum.
The state of motion first before
we get you Senator Paypen take a
vote on house bill.
Who is a member.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Those.
There Ingle center McKenna.
Yes.
Lopez yes.
Thanks yes Sir Tom.
Yes.
You know yes so.
From three excuse Senator thank
you senator mistakes thank you
penny so now we'll move to
Senator pokes Bill and.
Yes Senator I just wanted to
remind you that you had said
last time that we would take on
SB two seventy four we removed
it from the table yeah we have
that on the on the calendar I
just I'm a little hesitant to do
that was a single Republican
here.
Just because it is intentionally
could lead them to.
Raise some questions about how
we're doing this but as soon
Senator Ingle is here so let's
move then to Senate bill two
seventy four.
And you want to say a few words
wrapping up you comments on the
bill Senator well it has as I
explained last time that we we
did a substitute bill
to take care of some of the
ambiguities that were addressed
in the FIR I am still working
with this with the state of
police and with the attorney
general's office to move forward
on the bill we brought in of the
governor's office to to talk
about this issue these issues
The whole purpose of this bill
is to increase public confidence
in the investigation and the
prosecution of police actions
that result in great bodily harm
or death and the the everybody
understands that if we do not
increased put public confidence
in these two very important
institutions it is really bad
for our state so that's why
there's so much interest in it I
am very
I think that the changes that
the FIR suggested that we
accepted we're going to the
committee substitute I think
addresses that and it is going
to Judiciary.
Okay well members just to
refresh your memory this is a
bill that we we we put on the
table because we had a time to
is four four we couldn't budget.
And so now at our last meeting
it was moves come off the table.
And to reschedule for today for
reconsideration we won't be
taking any new testimony but we
will for a vote now if we have a
motion and a second to do so.
I believe sent Senator McKenna
last week are on when we already
have a motion and a second well
Senator McKenna said that we
try to do it on Wednesday but
then you said that we need for
today yeah I want to remind you.
You want to make a motion.
Pardon me chairman I had just
stepped out of the room I
believe the the motion was to
move us Senator Sedillo Lopez is
off the table right now we are.
It's it's it's a more well now
that it's off the table I can
make the motion.
Okay I'm sorry I'm sorry I was I
was remembering of getting off
the table so I move that that I
do not pass on as B. two seventy
four and a do pass on committee
substitute SB two seventy four.
I second.
Mr chair.
Yes
we are I just want to be clear
so this is a a substitute bill
is that correct yes it was it
was it was tabled I just knew we
don't have a renewable since we
table the old one this was able
to okay so it's identical okay
great I I just I had some
connectivity issues and I just
want to be clear on that okay
thank you I mean if you need me
to go over the issues but
they're basically addressing the
FIR if you no no no no Mr
chairman center I you know if
it's if it's the same.
With funds yet so I'm sorry it's
so confusing I know it's
confusing for the public because
I got many calls Mr chair it
would be really good if we could
put the committee substitutes
on.
Online was just as an example I
got a call from the sheriff
Department implicit County about
a provision in the bill that is
no longer there.
And it's because it's not on the
website so everybody's looking
at the old bill.
Yeah.
Go ahead Mr chair this is Tom.
Tell me just second we have a
Senator did you have a question
on the bill yes.
Okay Senator is handled for
Senator of come back to you
next.
Mr I'm just going to follow up
Senator Sedillo Lopez brought it
up there's a lot of confusion a
lot of people wanting to speak
on this and that's why I
wondered why we're not going to
public testimony and or at least
okay everything that's been
changed I and I know we've heard
before but I just know there's a
lot of
from public I've been getting
emails yesterday and today on
this bill.
No we already had we had.
When we did Senator we already
had a full debate on it we had
public comment we to the pros
and the and the opponents and
then we we didn't have the
lowest either way four four tie
every attempt so now we're going
to.
Another shot at it and keep in
mind you can remind the public
the.
We're not passing the bill we're
we're sending it on to the next
committee will have an
opportunity to have their input
in the next committee as well
so.
They're just like and we're
trying to do something slide a
hand and I just want to give
them yeah but I'll let them know
it's going to the next meeting
you are the chairman of the
committee thanks Sir.
Senator Sedillo is meeting in
Pointe is the if the substitute
have been posted people wouldn't
wouldn't have the same sense.
Senator Tallman you're next.
Thank you Mr chair.
Could the sponsor please review
the changes.
Yes you so let me go through.
I.
The FIR pointed out that we use
the term in custody deaths not
consistently so we change to
that
The FIR said that
The reporting requirements of
with the abrupt so we added a
sentence in the bill that says
nothing in this subsection shall
be construed to limit the
exceptions to disclosure for
improper.
And then
The FIR stated that it was
unclear if you recall how the
relevant prosecuting authorities
determined and so we change this
to say that the dust would have
original jurisdiction pursuant
to the statute but when but then
the AG would come in immediately
afterwards
So that there are just so that
the issue was whether the the
local the prosecutor would just
be waiting for the DA or or what
and we wanted to ensure there is
not a gap and then the FIR
stated of.
The issues
Again the same thing we a
concurrent
We that it is all about the the
changing the definition of we
change the definition of great
bodily harm you'll recall that
the FIR said that
That great bodily harm should
match the definition that we had
in statute so we matched it to
section twenty dash one twelve.
and I thought that that change
was good it made it clear.
And then I did want to mention
that the FY I heard stated that
that that the bill would apply
to federal officers which is
just absolutely dead wrong we
don't have any authority over
Marshall's or federal officers
and how they do their job that
goes back to cases back for the
eighteen nineties it's just I
don't know why they said that
and then.
These concerns rescued.
Those are the major changes that
we're just changes to clarify
the bill
The FIR also one of the issues
we're dealing with with the
state police and with the
Attorney General was some of the
the costs that were described
and one issue that we are
working on very carefully is to
there is a provision in the bill
that says that the content is
that if the local police
department save money by having
the state police handle that the
independent state police handled
the investigation that that
money which is not not be
reverted or or that it would go
to the agency that did the work
whether that was the the
prosecutor's office but the
Attorney General taking over the
work from the prosecutor or
whether it was the independent
of the department of public
safety the state police taking
over the work from the local
agency and if you recall that
language was unclear and we're
still working on it and we
decided not to change it now
because we are consulting with
DFA and others about how best to
do this one idea was to not have
the transfer occur for at least
a couple years and have the
departments bill the local
agencies so we could just get an
idea of the costs and then make
a reallocation later and the
thing about billing is there is
no mechanism for enforcing the
building so that if it is just a
of.
A mechanism of identifying the
costs not really transferring
the cost for the couple years so
that's another idea but we're
working on all of those things
and it's very important that
this bill continue because it is
one of the most important
reforms that I believe it can
happen in restoring confidence
in the police departments that
have these unfortunate incidents
because as long as the police
departments investigate
themselves and the prosecutors
without without getting another
department involved
Do not
Do not.
Get another agency involved do
not make it a report and do not
Be transparent and timely about
handling these prosecutions are
are
Our agencies are going to
continue to suffer from a lack
of confidence in these police
agencies and this bill will go a
long way toward restoring public
confidence.
Thank you the center for that at
the work this bill going to
Judiciary yes it is going to
finance.
No no it is not going to finance
the Attorney General and the
state police have put in their
budgets money to cover this
which is the normal process for
for doing that.
You know there's no financial
impact to the state.
Well is the original version of
this is that it would your
somebody's going to have to do
this work whether it's the local
departments or whether it's the.
It's the state in in this bill
that would be the state police
taking over those investigations
so at some point the state's
going to pay for it and that's
the just the the challenge with
this bill is figuring out
whether that will cost is going
to be borne by the agency
whether it's a
police department or sheriff's
department or whether the cost
is going to be borne by the
train general's office if the
attorney general's office has
their funding to do this and if
the state police departments the
department public safety has the
funding to do this then there
won't be any transfer because
then the the local agencies will
just continue with that budget
and so that.
So there would be any financial
impact in that way if they don't
get their money there is a
mechanism in the bill to have
reimbursement to them of some of
the cost and so will be a
transfer but the bottom line is
the state is going to be
responsible for investigating
and prosecuting these cases
whether it's the attorney
general's office or whether it's
the district attorney's office
that conducts these
investigations so it's not
additional cost.
Well.
Seems to be a.
Senator number one answered
questions regarding the
financial and that's a problem
with the sixty days sessions we
rushes things throughout fully.
Flushing everything out and I
don't know I'll probably vote
for them.
He has a tentative vote for.
With so many unanswered
questions but
Since senator Neville was
presented in the interim
committee it was also presented
to the racial
of racial justice a commission
that the governor I'm sorry I
know it's not their technical
name it's a longer name but it
was also presented to the racial
justice committee the the
attorney general's office is
looked at the budgetary
implications has have the the
the police and if you look at
the FY are that there's a lot of
discussion about about budget
but the bottom line is these
these investigations are going
to have to be paid for if my
bill if this bill doesn't go
anywhere there is still will be
those costs because if an
officer is shot I mean if an
officer engages in right brought
in.
The section the result in great
bodily harm or
Or death they're still going to
be an investigation.
And there is still going to be a
prosecution this bill doesn't
change that.
It just changes the procedures
so that there won't be just.
There is so that police officers
units whether it's a sheriff's
department or a police
department will not be
investigating itself when there
is this kind of shooting and if
it changes it so the prosecutor
is not put in the conflict of
interest position with just
Having to prosecute somebody
that they work with every day
the attorney general's office
will come in and and Mr Mr chair
Senator that's what happens now
in a lot of cases but however
with the current why the
attorney general's office is so
interested in this bill is what
happens now is that the cases
are already tainted they they
become tainted by the police
investigating themselves painted
in that there is a lack of
confidence in the investigation
and then if the prosecution
delays and and there's problems
with the evidence then finally
four as an example in in a
leisurely Serra's K. it's now
been eighteen months.
since twenty one bullets were
pumped into her four foot eleven
body and finally it's now in the
AG's office and this is after
eighteen months
there has not been any kind of
public reports on whether this
was a justified shooting or not
and there's not been any
accountability that kind of case
undermines public confidence
what would have happened under
this bill is a would have been
immediately reporting and every
three months there would have
been a report so now eighteen
months that would have been six
reports on what's going on with
that K. I also believe because
there were it would have been
six reports on what's going on
with that case of.
That
They probably would have been
either a prosecution or a report
on why they declined to
prosecute because every time you
have to write a report saying we
haven't done anything it is
going to be reported by the
media and will you know will
cause public pressure to do
something so I think this bill
is just an excellent bill and it
was carefully designed to not
create a different commission to
investigate public shootings and
create a whole new
infrastructure but to build on
the excellent infrastructure
that we have.
Okay thank you senator events of
my question.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair you're on mute the
muted.
Thank you senator Tom the second
time Senator.
This one a clarification I'm
gonna apologize chair and to
grow center M. Lopez.
We can get you the.
Is
a problem with my Hotmail
account.
Before for some of your really.
Mr chairman you might want me
to.
He did music.
When out in the last batch it
for the last hearing.
Okay.
Just sort of trying to figure
out is because I still have some
of the questions that came to me
is just on problem cost the any
of that change your story why is
Considering here in Lee County
and one of the questions that I
had is it
if there are shooting here in
Lee County of the cash you would
have to pay for the shooting or
for the
investigation of Hobbs PD
officers that correct.
Thank you thank you for that
question Senator Gallegos that's
precisely what the language that
we're trying to work on trying
to I need to kind of do some
outreach to the DFA that it is
it is a problem that we need to
work on with the bill because
obviously that would not make
sense for the county to be
working for the police it that
the concept and this came for
the trip from the attorney
general's office the concept is
that if there are savings to the
Lee County sheriff's office for
example because they did not
handle the investigation the
state police did any such
savings that they had budgeted
for that case would be
transferred to the state police
however it looks like that's
that's not actually a mechanism
that is in our system to have
those transfers so we're trying
to figure that out it may be
that what will happen is that
the police to the state police
will handle the investigation at
least for the initial stages of
this they will handle the
investigation and then send a
bill to the agency that they
took the just the the
investigation.
Of they took the work away okay
that is no longer done and so
any savings would go to the the
police department the current
bill does not describe that well
because it turns out there is
not such a process
and so we're trying to figure
that out but it is not the
intent that the county would be
paying for the police
departments bills I and I
appreciate that that was also
clarified that was brought to
our attention by the by Senator
county commissioners Senator
county commissioners and also I
spoke at length with the sheriff
of Atlantic county yesterday
to to let her know that we are
working on language but that I
would not be able to have the
language ready by today's
meeting but it would certainly
be fixed by Judiciary.
And I appreciate that because
that's from it with the palm
probable cause hearing depending
on who's doing the work that
money should transfer to them
not because someone else I do
wish we would have to look at it
and if it's a problem it's it's
a problem that we're working on
I we don't have the correct
language yet but I expect to buy
Judiciary.
But that brings me to another
question then the Mr chairman
and senator the language to
determine the relevant question
should turn
towards legislation prosecutor
is that we work on to because I
did not have clarity on how that
is so determined
they Attorney General would make
that determination.
Okay so that last from the AG's
office.
With the DA have to request a
need to take over the the matter
do they are meant to be a
partner the default the default
would be the Attorney General
that's what it says in the bill
the the reason it right now at
any time the district attorney
can seek the AG to take over the
prosecution and what happens
unfortunately is usually that's
what the prosecution has been
lingering like in the recently
Cerrillos Casey with lingering
for about a year before the
local district attorney asked
the attorney general's office to
take over the prosecution which
is a problem.
and this bill would make the
AG's office.
come in very early and make a
determination about whether they
were going to.
Work with the local DA or take
it over.
Okay.
Western center the reason why I
hope last question is so we're
talking about the funding
following whoever's doing the
work did we ever clarified for
the funding coming from is that
in their budgets already I
didn't remember seeing anything
I had a very good discussion
about this with the with the
chair for the Leinster county
because of.
Every county of course budget
has their budgets but they don't
know what's going to happen
whether they're going to have a
police shooting at all.
And so if if they have an extra
cost because they have a police
shooting and it's very expensive
they may have to ask for an
increase increase in the budget
for the county commission and
since county commissions meet
unlike us they meet regularly
they could get that increase to
cover those extra costs of
course the attorney general's
office and the department of
public safety have a year budget
that is approved by us once a
year so they can't make those
adjustments my understanding is
each of them have put forth
budget proposals that were
adopted in the governor's budget
each for increase in what this
what the estimate an estimate
because we don't know course
nobody knows how many police
shootings I hope that there
would be zero but an estimate
for the increased cost of this
and it was not in the LFC so
that's being worked out
that's one of the reasons why
this transfer is so important.
Okay
So.
Yes for my and and talking
listings Sir Tom and Mister
chairman Senator no there's
still quite a few questions
Hardenne with zero mechanism to
fix the money and your resource
need for that the station's not
totally understand we have money
in the budget but we aren't.
Expecting of officer shooting
and I understand it's totally
different in UNI's first
Albuquerque you guys have a
every day all the time that I
said early on this to me would
be in Albuquerque bill not the
state build up I'm just still
having a really hard time
Trying to grab him.
My mind around
if this were to happen.
How the I look funded mandate
how the meanest full of.
Or in the county let's say that
pandemic level if they have to
investigate this in the mount
time takes to do that even if
the AG's partner in it there's
gonna be some cost that we are
prepared for even though you
know as you say we have an
overall budget but I don't think
this line item is considered
General Fund DPS is
ever ask for increase in their
in their base budget for this.
Has anyone talk to them about
what it would cost them just for
the.
Yes Senator yes Senator they put
it in the in the FIR I believe
what they estimated was half of
the half a million dollars I
believe in the of our I'm sorry
I don't have the FY are in front
of me but I think it's four
hundred and ninety something but
half a million dollars is is
what they put in the FY are
estimating that they would that
estimating of by taking a look
around at how many shootings
there are around the state and
Senator I'm really glad that
this doesn't happen in Eunice it
recently happened in other rural
communities and that's
especially a problem in rural
communities was having the rural
of police departments because
they're still small in the
community is are so small where
everybody knows each other it's
particularly hard when those
invest it and undermines public
confidence when those
investigations are not
independent and in some cases
the department of public safety
already comes in early and in
some cases they don't and again
it would be good for all
communities big or small to have
more confidence in the quality
this is about the quality of the
investigation and the
independence of the prosecution
it would be good for all come
in maybe ever happened units I
hope it never does but should it
this bill would help people have
confidence in the quality of the
investigation and in the quality
of the prosecution.
Thank you for that and and.
Mr chairman and senator I guess
one of my last questions I keep
saying my last question but it
keeps coming to mind in the.
Executive recommendation was our
request or in the LFC budget was
a request to shore shore up some
of these funds in the my
understanding is and I haven't
looked at this and I'm in a bit
so if if I'm off I apologize my
understanding is that the
governor's proposed budget did
include credit increases that
would have sufficient funds to
to cover these expenses
from the state side.
Which would save money.
To the to the local departments
because there would be a would
have extra money.
That they wouldn't have to
expand because they would not be
spending that money.
That money was not in the LFC
recommendations so they're
working out those differences
and.
And we'll find out the problem
is we can't wait on this bill to
see whether there's money we
have to proceed one idea that
was thrown out and we I don't
I'm not making.
I'm not making any suggestions
about whether this is actually
gonna happen but when idea that
was thrown out is doing this as
a pilot project in a few
judicial districts.
And then coming back and
tweaking it
because it is very very
important that we increase
public confidence in the
prosecution and so that was one
idea but I think that would only
happen if there was not
sufficient money in the various
budgets to to increase the
quality of the prosecution's and
the quality of the
investigations.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and that she that.
bring me to the idea if we did
this in Albuquerque per the
pilot project begin and go back
to the executive budget I
remember that and and that the
point time that I heard that I
thought that I heard that the
department had not budget for
the department public safety now
if it's in the Jack in the
budget I understand that it's
there's a possibility that it
could be there but that's the
other thing that the bottle then
if we go through all of this we
get it then you are restricted
just how many.
Department she did and and what
areas so with that I yield I
just want to touch base with you
on that because I still have
some real harbor to this stage
just moral verses on
Albuquerque or corridor but I
will listen to any more
questions director and yes we'll
take a look at thank you Mr
Senator your rural community
must be different from my rural
community that group and because
small town I think that I
believe that in small towns you
need more independence because
everybody knows each other in
every is related.
And I understand that but we
also shouldn't have lunch with
the and so you build those
relationships and that's where I
think the trust comes in because
we see that might I'm not just
in uniform but it the ball games
when we have baseball games and
other activities so they truly
become friends and and you want
clarity want openness in
government but I just don't know
that fixing Eunice.
Is relevant when you're trying
to solve the problem in
Albuquerque so with that you'll
get thank you Mr chair of Mr
Senator I hope you never have to
deal with this new agency.
Thank you.
From the committee.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
Bill two seventy four very us
substitute bill center guy it
goes.
Explain my vote thank all.
No.
Yes.
No to explain please.
Thursday okay yes.
Thanks yes.
One.
Yes.
Yes Senator Gallegos to explain
his phone.
Thank you and and up I know
there's some rationale for what
we're doing but I would rather
have these issues vetted and and
fixed in this committee so as we
go forward and be a clean bill
I'd really filters to changes so
one additional for I can
actually vote on this with
confidence of what we're doing
to our officers statewide thank
you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator
Schmedes to explain his phone
thank you very much and thank
you to the bill sponsor I I do
like those corrections so I
think it's better bill but just
to the point of I think this
goes down to culture you know
cultural differences
We have you know if you look at
a map of New Mexico
it's a it's it's a lot of red.
in those rural areas and then
you have the heavily populated
blue areas in the center
guidance is point I mean might
my constituents trust law
enforcement overall and so they
want to go in a different
direction then what what this
does and and I I like the
accountability piece to it but
because of our unique cultural
divide in New Mexico we're gonna
take areas where people raise
their kids differently where
they've you on differently where
they viewed differently where
everything so differently and
then we can centralize that
control to someone that's going
to have a different type of
world view and and so that's
what I I I have a concern for I
I wish we could set up a little
more regionally or or somehow
have some of this third party
oversight in someone that's
going to be more aware of that
state culture down in and center
Gallegos district so that's what
it comes down to me as is is
just my constituents have a
different you know they they do
have that that trust and and
they would just like to go a
little bit different direction
but I I certainly see and and I
border of Senator Lopez a
district a little bit.
I definitely get get that
different field in the in
different parts of the of the
bigger cities so thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chair your mute.
Thank you very much Senator
she says Senator the all of us
the thank you to pass and go now
to the
To the
House Bill for.
Which is.
Representative Lewis an speaker
egolf.
And
Here's what I propose on this
bill I just wanna let everybody
know.
After the the presenters in the
expert witnesses for the bill
have spoken.
I'm gonna give the association
of counties an opportunity to to
explain their concerns.
I'm gonna turn to the public and
we're going to accept.
For twenty minutes the
opposition comments in New
Mexico and opposition to the
bill Senator twenty minutes
comments in support of the bill.
And at that point and will
return to the committee for
committee debate on the nation.
So Mr speaker will will will
start with you and
Representative Lewis I'm not
sure who who presents first to
come to the Senate Public
Affairs Committee.
Mr chairman and good afternoon
committee members thank you or
allowing us to present on house
bill four today it is the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act and this
bill has been a long time in the
making if you recall of last
year the
legislature set up the New
Mexico Civil Rights Commission
and they met through the inner
that to really listen to the
concerns of the various
stakeholders throughout the
state to come up with a
recommended proposed so with
this bill it was first
introduced in the house and in
response to several
stakeholders to make some
changes we dead amend the bill
and the house Judiciary and
Representative speaker in this
going to talk about that but
really I just want to say that
this is such an important bill
to New Mexico there's already of
federal civil rights act that is
allowed for people to seek
recourse in federal court what
we're doing here is we are also
allowing them to seek recourse
and state court and it's
actually limited much more than
what's allowed in the federal
court including damages that are
limited to two million including
attorney's fees and
other issues that will probably
speak upon later but I'd like to
defer to Mister speaker to talk
about some of those items that
were made as a result of input
and those are the changes that
we made in the house Judiciary
Committee some.
Mr speaker thank you
Representative the the blue will
go to Mr speaker that.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senators
we bring the bill as a way to
give more every day New Mexicans
an opportunity to access
justice.
In their communities as we know
the federal Civil Rights Act is
every.
Opportunity federal civil rights
claim against every government
employee every state actor and
every state agency of political
subdivisions of the country for
for in state and
this bill will allow those
claims instead to be brought in
state court under the New Mexico
bill of rights I'm I'm happy to
go through several of the
changes that we made in the
house Judiciary Committee to
address quite a few the.
Comments and concerns that have
been expressed regarding.
And why it all give a brief
explanation of why we made each
of these changes.
We heard loud and clear concerns
members of law enforcement and
other state employees about
being a defendant's name
individually in a state Civil
Rights Act claim.
Course the federal Civil Rights
Act
what.
Lamest me only to an individual
you cannot bring that federal
civil rights claim against an
issue government only gets the
individual that is because the
eleventh amendment is not allow
individuals to sue states in
federal court this where you
have to suit individual
government actor that is not
necessary in New Mexico there's
no eleventh amendment
constraints New Mexico citizens
and residents from filing a
claim against state against the
state government so we.
Issue syrup pages two to three
hundred twenty four to twenty
five a page two lines one
through four page three we've
made it explicit that the Civil
Rights Act may be used to bring
claims only against a public
body.
So we we will not have lawsuits
against individuals.
Any state agency or any
political subdivision of the
state.
That that's the first big change
that we second is that we
limited the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act to the rights
enshrined in New Mexico's bill
of rights.
There are rights in the bill of
rights that are analogous and
surprised.
Similar to the federal bill of
rights this kind of a case law
hi this is developed course
around civil rights claims under
the federal adult rights federal
constitution so we limited to
the bill of rights.
There are some that are included
there that are not found in the
federal constitution one being
on equal rights amendment
another building to treat the
right security guaranteed by the
treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
that's part of our bill of
rights never been enforceable
before and if this were to
become law then individual
Mexicans can bring claims to
enforce those rights as well as
New Mexico's our free speech
because freedom of religion
costs and all the rest it's our
New Mexico for its.
we caps damages there's a two
million dollar cap on damages
inclusive attorney's fees
we heard throughout the process
that cap of two million dollars
is.
This is a level that will allow.
Government should be able to.
Maintain insurance.
And will not likely disrupt
their ability to have
predictability of claims under
the act you're gonna hear some
criticism.
that this is a claimed on a per
occurrence limit that is correct
we have said this is a per claim
limit of two million dollars
because to do otherwise would be
unfair in which and I justice to
those whose rights are denied to
the actions of a person acting
under color of state law
it's also a comma the per
occurrence first per claim
concept is something that comes
in negligence law and it really
doesn't have a place in civil
rights litigation.
Under the tort claims act if
there is a single state employee
driving a single vehicle it
strikes a vehicle with three
other occupants of the tort
claim that would be brought
under that case would be to have
a per occurrence limit up to one
million fifty thousand dollars.
It would not be one million
dollar cap for each person
injured in a car accident.
That is a common.
Notion in insurance law.
And the association counties has
asked for us to do a per
occurrence limit here.
To do so as I said would be
incredibly objects because when
you have state action that is
denying fundamental civil rights
and civil liberties to an
individual the injuries are
personal to the person deprived
of rights and liberties and
their their claim should not be
locked together.
It.
Especially if you can imagine a
situation where there might be
a massive a mask on lawful
arrest of protesters or other
actions that deprive many
individuals of their rights hi
you want each image you'll to
have their individual rights
vindicated that's the whole
point of the bill of rights is
that.
The rights or personal to the
individual they should be
indicated not and not want to
gather to provide an unfair
she yield to the individual is
trampling on those rights.
I should note also that there is
an attempt by critics of the
bill to conflate the tort claims
act with the New Mexico Civil
Rights.
I was also an attempt to try to
shoehorn civil law concepts of
negligence into the Civil Rights
Act I appears mention on this
point because.
The idea that the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act is going to
convert to our claims in the
civil rights claims is a fallacy
it is a red herring argument I
just like to make one you know
one.
Point illustrate that.
When you bring it to our claims
against the state of New Mexico
pursuant to tort claims act you
have to show that a state actor
reach the duty of care to an
individual and that region duty
costs and injury.
When you bring a civil rights
claim ideas that are in the law
and negligence breach of the
standard of care causing damages
that is not what happens in the
civil rights.
We reserve the rights claim
state for cruel and unusual
punishment the not the the
standard that a plaintiff has to
has to meet is not a
preponderance of the evidence
that the person inflicting cruel
and unusual punishment acted
unreasonably or preach to
standard of care that is not the
standard.
If you have a cruel and unusual
punishment claim the standard is
that the plaintiff has to show
actual malice on the part of the
person is selecting an issue
this alleged to be cruel and
unusual that is a much much much
higher standard in this we have
the evidence for some negligence
research and seizure quite again
if there is a member of law
enforcement who is affecting and
I'm off for a constitutional
search and seizure.
Additional rights law you do not
show by a preponderance of the
evidence in the act that that
police officer with a person
affecting our warrant acted
unreasonably no the standard is
not show that the action of the
conduct was objected the action
of the individual was
objectively unreasonable for law
enforcement person.
Enforcement officials in those
same circumstance much are
standard and support because of
those higher standards we think
is fair and appropriate after
the review per claim limit not
occur
the current.
The
What's changed to aid the
substitute yeah we went further
on the house floor just to make
it clear that the Civil Rights
Act is not abrogate common law
immunities judicial immunity
legislative immunity hi and
other established statutory were
come on unity's the only
immunity this law eliminates is
qualified immunity.
I believe Mr Baker and Justice
Boston we'll touch more
qualified immunity that emitted.
The fifth major change that we
made is to make it clear that
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
enacted will not be available as
a vehicle to bring employment
costs I.
Public employees against a
public employer we already have
multiple avenues for increased
employee to of the public body
to bring a claim against that
public body whistleblower
protection act title seventeen
United States code.
Fair pay for women act.
The actions available under the
Human Rights Act there's plenty
of opportunities for increased
public employee to bring an
actually gets to public where we
did not want to see any
possibility of COVID employment
claims converted.
In the civil rights claims so
we've made it clear so on page
three eight five three the civil
rights act is not to be years is
an available to be used for.
Madam twenty clients.
Finally we have limited the
statue limitations I just three
years from the date that the
claim could have been brought
that mirrors the federal Civil
Rights Act and that was a change
that we made in the house
Judiciary Committee substitute.
So I'll wrap up this chairman
Senator is insurance not
questions on public comment I
would just like to committee if
I made to ask for the committee
to reflect on
the events of the last year in
to see how so many of our
fundamental rights are under
challenge with your New Mexico
and around the country there is
something that we can do to try
to contribute to the effort to.
Provide access to justice to New
Mexicans who have their rights
deprived by.
Government misconduct and the
civil rights act an act will
give eight powerful new vehicle
for the New Mexico those rights
to be enforced for the first
time ever thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker you have
several other expert witnesses a
list going Justice Boston next.
And then we'll hear from.
Maybe.
Dorsey.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I guess you can hear me yes.
Thank you.
I want to thank the speaker for
sponsoring this bill and all the
hard work he's put in on it
thank you Mr chairman and
members of this committee.
The governor's office to be on
the Civil Rights Commission.
I accepted because I considered
it an honor.
Do anything that would help all
over our New Mexicans.
No law is more fundamental
in our constitution and its bill
of rights.
Nothing is more important than
the right of citizens was
constitutional rights are
violated.
We have a legal means for
redress of that role.
Looting compensation where
appropriate.
I've spent my entire legal
career the believe that the law
thank you to the accessibility
to everyone not just the rich
and powerful is what separates
America for most of the rest of
the world.
The civil rights commission was
formed as a result of House Bill
five from the.
Of special session in the
spring.
For those of you don't know all
just summarize it ever so
briefly
nine members of the commission
three appointed by the governor
three by the.
Speaker three by the present pro
tem of the Senate we had our
first organizational meeting in
mid August and we had our first
substantive meeting where we
heard testimony the very first
of September we were told that
we had a report
recently by the middle of
November so we worked hard.
And heard had numerous meetings
for testimony from just about
everybody who had a point of
view
The prospect of a civil rights
bill house bill I just is a
number of questions to answer in
our report with we did submit
once we have a civil rights bill
what should look like should
contain damages to the contain
notification for
or public employees or zoom and
so forth and so on should have
more qualified immunity what
might the fiscal costly and so
forth.
After the so many meetings
discussion in detail we took
votes and ultimately they have
the votes were split on the most
part we had a major report and a
minority report both of which
are contained in the report are
at the Legislative Council
Service.
And so we recommended of the
bill well that pretty much that
you have four the subject to the
members of the speaker just
described.
By the bill you have before it
is the commission's best effort
to kind of find those aspirin
aspirations that animate the New
Mexico constitution.
It's not perfect but it's pretty
good.
Deserves to be passed into law
by this legislature
representatives of very people
for whom the constitution was
written.
Some will say that this is.
Not that important.
Other priorities come first.
Really I just don't get that way
of thinking because what could
be more important in securing
the constitutional rights of our
citizens.
We just don't need it.
The law is good enough federal
Civil Rights Act.
Really I say no for three
reasons first our state bill of
rights.
Has provisions in it that are
simply absent from federal law
we're stated more expressively
and federal the state provisions
deserve their own avenues for
redress.
Second constitutional rights
like due process and equal
protection of the laws be
restricted to federal law and
federal courts.
Reports are only located in our
most populous counties.
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
pretty much.
Which requires citizens from
smaller communities I told
Gallup Silvercity Carlsbad and
many others.
The travel hours just to get to
court in federal court.
We would hope for the federal
state court.
It is not sophisticated enough
for your.
Will so rights cases
simply smacks of elitist
thinking it is unacceptable in
my judgment.
Third federal all regrettably is
encumbered by judgment doctrines
like qualified immunity that
someone to import into our law.
These are federal concepts but
not state concepts I want to
reiterate someone to import into
our wall where they do not
presently exist don't let that
happen.
Well unity as originally
conceived that's right now it
has devolved into something I
can only describe as an
aberration and sometimes no
competition.
Precludes on fairly a citizen
from even getting to trial was
here she can show another prior
case almost directly on point.
Which rarely happens.
It is clear that constitutional
rights were violated the victim
is unable to proceed without
that prior case that's why I
called qualified immunity an
aberration I know of no other
little which the plaintiff the
party suing must prove not only
that he Here she deserves to win
what also has a prior case one
point.
In my judgment and the judgment
of many many others have written
about this does not protect the
innocent state actor protects
the kids.
Testimony before the commission
was compelling on this point
they've qualified immunity to
the federal courts not
contaminate our New Mexico will
thank you Mexico courts develop
our own doctors and legal
principles that we believe to be
fair.
Closing this committee and and
the legislature has an
opportunity here to not only
make law all but to make
history.
We need to embrace the
opportunity not to let it pass
by thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you yes.
Are you Sir Senator other expert
witnesses and I've been told
there available to answer
questions.
I would like to give it either
Maureen centers or.
mark Baker an opportunity say
anything if they want to
otherwise we'll go to the some
opponents of the of the measure.
Mr chair this is Maureen Sanders
I think state here just for
questions today thank you thank
you Marie Mr chair Senator.
Okay thank you Mr speaker then
then at this point I would like
you to go to grace Phillips.
With the association of counties
to make some remarks in
opposition to this measure.
Thank you Mr chair this is grace
Phillips from the New Mexico
counties and I very much
appreciate the opportunity to
address this committee regarding
very important bill and I know
time is short so I'm going to
limit my comments to the three
most significant concerns that
we have with this legislation
You you've heard about the
importance of civil rights in
the state and I know when this
goes to public comment you're
going to hear very passionate
voices talking about the
importance of of civil rights
and the importance of people in
our community being able to
vindicate their rights report
and I'm I I need you to know
that counties share that belief
in the importance of civil
rights we share the outrage
that that people will voice
about any violation of the
public trust by public officials
but I am here to say that there
is a vast cavern between what
people think and say this bill
will do and what it will
actually do
section forty one for twelve of
our state New Mexico tort claims
act already allows plaintiffs to
sue and collect money damages
for violations of the state
constitution in state court and
there is no defense of qualified
immunity to those claims and I
noticed that it was conflating
toward and constitutional law so
I'm just need to you from that
that section of statute it lists
all the ways in which the state
is waiving immunity and it
includes quoted deprivation of
any rights privileges or
immunities secured by the
constitution and laws of the
United States or New Mexico that
that is our current law and
again that is a mechanism
through which people can obtain
money damages against law
enforcement now who is law
enforcement well the legislature
this legislature change just
last year the definition of law
enforcement it isn't just police
officers and people who work in
prisons and jails it includes
any quota public officer or
employee vested by law with the
power to me.
Maintain order.
I'm not sure everybody who's
included in that definition it's
new law you passed it last year
but we do know that it is
broader in scope than the law
that we had before it so what
would house bill four due to
these claims that can already be
brought well it would make the
more expensive by increasing the
amount of damages that can be
order and more importantly by
requiring attorney fees to be
awarded on top of any judgment
that is obtained by by someone
who is suing the government and
this is important because
attorney's fees drive litigation
they are if and when when
lawyers know that they'll get
paid for their their time put in
that dis incentivizes resolution
of claims even when it's really
clear an impact especially when
it's really clear that liability
exists the way this law is
drafted the award of attorney's
fees is mandatory it shall be
paid by the defendant on top of
any judgment and regardless of
the size of that judgment a
judgment of one dollar I'm in
favor of the plaintiff the
nominal award could result in
tens or hundreds of thousands of
dollars in attorney's fees and I
say that because when plaintiffs
petition for their fees the
rates are two hundred three
hundred four hundred and fifty
dollars an hour that is the you
know the going rate in federal
court and so advocates for that
the provision will say lawyers
can already collect in federal
court what's the difference but
federal and state courts are are
different they have different
resources they have different
rigor they had different rules
in federal court the she can be
awarded to the prevailing party
that's a big difference because
the prevailing party is many
times the governmental entity
that demonstrates that there
should be no liability and and.
Federal court government can
seek to collect their fees they
can petition for fees against
the person who brought frivolous
claims federal court also has a
rule that that allows
defendants to offered judgment
and pay a settlement after we
played it doesn't do better no
fees or costs can be accrued and
then the last thing I'll say
about the attorney fee issue is
under the American role each
side pays their own way they
they cover the cost and on what
that means often from the
plaintiff's side is either it's
an hourly rate or three
contingency if you see the
billboards on I. forty I twenty
five they're saying we won't
charge you unless we recover and
that is that is the American
rule that is the standard the
exception allowing for attorney
fees should be limited to just
those circumstances where the
fee is necessary to incentivize
an attorney to take a case they
wouldn't already Kate and we
don't need to incentivize people
to see government we we have a
very robust practice of
litigation against government in
New Mexico and so we don't think
there should be a key provision
but if there is we would ask
that you know incorporate the
the elements that I just
discussed.
My second point has to do with
caps and and I think speaker
Egolf did a really good job of
describing the cap situation we
appreciate the insertion of a
cap but without a meaningful cap
what you have is a situation
where depending on the number of
defendants depending on the
number of plaintiffs that cap
and multiply a class action cap
could be tens hundreds of
millions of dollars and why is
that important well how we will
lose our as written we will lose
our reinsurance and so that
means if you're in Bernalillo
county or Santa Fe County were
currently there is a ten million
and in funds to respond to a
claim that is brought by
somebody who's been hurt
that would immediately be
reduced to our self insured
retention which is currently two
million dollars that is not good
from the perspective of
responding to a serious
deprivation and it's not good
from the perspective of counties
and I'm probably cities as well
who in the absence of actor at
adequate coverage we have to
find the money in their budgets
or would have to as law allows
assessed property tax payers to
come up with that we think any
cap should be a per occurrence
cap.
Now the last point is also one
that speaker Egolf talked about
which is are concerned with the
language in the bill currently
which refers to on page two
lines eighteen nineteen due to
actor attention actual mission
is something you do or something
you don't do what speaker it got
described as federal standard
but we have a new law here that
that that would effectively and
I'll just give one example under
our bill of rights like the
federal one deprivation of
property without due process is
a is a a constitutional
violation you you match that
with the actual mission language
and suddenly any car accident
any property damage is now a
constitutional claim with the
right to collect fees the
requirement that fees be awarded
and I can tell you we get
hundreds of property cases a
year seventy percent of them are
adjusters resolved they they
find out what the damages are
and it was all the claims having
that level of claim elevated to
a constitutional case will just
encourage lawyers to file claims
reliability is clear and
nobody's contesting it in order
to collect their fees from the
taxpayer.
I'm speaker says that that this
is a fallacy that were wrong on
what this bill would do my
response to that is that it
would be a very simple amendment
to change the language remove
the act or omission raised and
and resolve the issue once and
for all.
I'm.
New Mexico is right of poverty
in the country.
We ranked number one nationally
for reliance on Medicaid impact
I'm the Albuquerque journal just
reported that forty three
percent of our population is
enrolled in Medicaid.
We have more food insecure
children than all but two other
states we've been found by
district judge to be failing to
educate our at risk students and
we have been in the midst of a
prolonged and desperate
substance abuse and mental
health crisis four years.
In fact some of the most tragic
events that have resulted in
litigation involving law
enforcement in detention R.
involve people who have a mental
illness who are in crisis and
and the law enforcement option
is called upon to respond to
that
we should be investing in the
health of our communities we
should be investing in the root
causes that result in the need
for law enforcement to be called
to the situations we should not
be using our jails as defacto
mental health hospitals and and
addressing those things does
need does need money.
When speaker Egolf talks about
equity and justice I want to say
we want equity and justice for
our community as a whole not
just you know a handful of
people and their their their
lawyers we're asking that you
give this bill a do not pass
absent that we would strongly
urge you to make amendments to
address I I know people other
people be mentioning other
things but at least at least
these three very critical issues
and and we also strongly
recommend that a bill with the
kind of fiscal impact that this
bill has would be would be
reviewed by by the Senate
finance committee and and Mr
chair with that I just thank you
for allowing me the time.
Thank you Mr before we go to a
public comment I would like to
give the speaker or
Representative Lewis a an
opportunity to to respond to
those points raised by the
county school counties.
Thank you chairman I I can make
a few brief responses
okay given reverse order so that
I go to the one is freshest and
in these my mind that is
this ideas that the change in
the tort claims act can be used
to rating.
Constitutional law claims
against anyone they could be
considered a law enforcement
officer.
I think is one of the committee
to note that while governments
are coming to the legislature to
say Hey we this Civil Rights Act
because we can use these new
provisions in the tort claims
act they're telling us that what
we're hearing committee.
Literally right now the city of
Los crucis is arguing in the
District Court case that the
changes we made to the tort
claims act last year cannot be
used to raise a constitutional
claim
Through the tort claims act why
well because the for many many
years the case law has
established that in order to use
the tort claims act there must
be underlying claim they say
that the tort claims act is
merely a waiver of New Mexico's
sovereign immunity.
The waves at sovereign immunity
allowing individuals to bring a
claim against the state.
In the claims up to this point
have been claims for common law
negligence with the other claims
that existed before the tort
claims act the tort claims act
opens the door against the state
and then you can bring a claim
through that door right now the
city of Los crucis is arguing
that in attempts to use that to
a claims act waiver in every
constitutional claim against the
city of Los crucis under the law
that Krystal let's just mention
this city Los crucis or you
cannot do that because there is
no underlying claim to enforce
New Mexico.
In other words the local
government.
With that in New Mexico Civil
Rights Act the changes we made
to the tort claims act are
useless and unavailable for any
redress Representative
misconduct.
So we're getting completely
contradictory messages from
local governments and things
where the committee understand
that miss Phillips arguments are
all of that they'll make the
argument hearing committee
however when it's time to go to
court don't slip on a dime and
try to years of the lack of the
Civil Rights Act again simple
instruments to justice for
deprivation of the rights to
liberty security to us by the
New Mexico.
Mr let's mention this at this
idea double recovery the law is
well established
in New Mexico there can be no
double recovery in New Mexico
you can bring a lawsuit you can
we
different claims between them in
the alternative but when the
case finally resolves you're
only allowed to recover damages
for your injuries are under
whatever statute or whatever
because actions use.
Your recovery is limited by the
damages that you suffer.
As you can if you have a hundred
thousand dollars of
medical bills when you bring a
claim lawsuits to claims in the
alternative.
At the end you can only recover
hundred thousand dollars free
medical bills you can recover
hundred thousand dollars into
the tort claims act hundred
thousand dollars in a medical
malpractice stacked on the US
dollars Anderson statute no your
limited and it is as blackletter
settled law as there is there is
no double recovery full stop.
We know that and this Phillips
claims of uninsured bility are
false how do we know this well
this county of Daniela is
insured today they're insured
because there is a federal civil
rights claim those brought.
My an individual who was in for
to give you I. thrown into
solitary confinement and forgot
about for a year you brought a
claim in that case was settled
in excess of fifteen million
dollars.
Dona Ana still has insurance so
the idea that a large claims
gonna render County in eligible
for insurance in the future
stocks and we have evidence from
that right now in southern New
Mexico we also have multiple
claims that have been settled
out of court by Albuquerque
Bernalillo county in excess of
six million dollars.
And of course those governments
have insurance.
This idea that multiple claims
with aggregate into large
amounts that would cause
difficulty for these local
governments also it's hard to
understand hard to fathom that
that will be costs.
Yes remember if we're talking
about a judgment for money
damages.
You have to have a jury
convinced that the person
bringing that claim actually
suffer damages.
We did
the Civil Rights Act the Civil
Rights Commission look at the
number of claims that were made
for civil rights violations
between the years.
Twenty fifteen to twenty twenty.
The largest settlement or
judgment over that five year
period was just over two million
dollars there is one and that
one and a half million dollar
range and all the rest well
under a million dollars over
five year period this federal
case.
That shows the jury's comprised
of the people of Mexico are fair
and that they don't award
damages in excess of what was
actually suffered by a person.
last week this idea that the
Civil Rights Act is going to
turn every case.
Negligence into civil rights
claim also that's another point
raised by Mister Phillips which
is way off base how do we know
this well right now under
section nineteen eighty three of
the federal Civil Rights Act
every government in New Mexico
is subject to a lawsuit for
deprivation of civil rights with
no cap on damages the
availability of punitive damages
and unlimited attorney's fees
all features that could local
governments in the state for
more risk in federal court I'm
in state court a case like that
simple car crash with
liabilities uncontested would
not receive protection of
qualified immunity in federal
court.
So one of those cases brought
they could be brought today
according miss Phillips whether
or not brought because those are
not civil rights violations as I
mentioned in my introductory
comments Mr chairman civil
rights claims are put to much
much much higher standards.
So you you don't see civil
rights claims brought for garden
variety car crash because that's
not still a civil rights
violation in any attempt to
convince the committee otherwise
is is is destined to be
unsuccessful because the history
of United States since eighteen
seventy one.
When the Civil Rights Act of
nineteen seventy one was passed
the time is called the Ku Klux
Klan Law use Congress's effort
to fight the clan in the year
their efforts to murder in which
African Americans in the south
that that law is going to
celebrate its one hundred
fiftieth anniversary this year
and in that time we've not seen.
And it
tenth let alone success in
converting these common garden
variety car crashes it is still
rights cases good reason because
they are thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
now we'll go to public comment
and.
You'll notice we have a clock in
the middle of our screen there
this will allow twenty minutes
for the opponents and then
twenty minutes for the
supporters of this bill.
And I have a list of the
opponents and proponents I'm
just going to go down the list
I'm starting with Marty just
give them.
Thank you Mr chairman.
It is a.
General counsel for the public
school ensure New Mexico Public
School Insurance Authority I'm
an attorney whose defended over
twenty five school districts the
last fifteen to twenty years and
a former APS school board member
I'd like to consideration of two
points I know my time is
limited.
One we believe that there should
be an objective initial analysis
of of the impact areas public
entities that this is going to
affect
I don't think there's any
question that this is going to
expose schools and public
entities to significantly more
claims and higher damage awards
which will increase the cost of
settlements especially if you
consider the attorney's fees
provision in this so I I know
that is not assigned to House
Appropriations or Senate finance
I believe because of the
financial impact it should have
of that time calluses I
understand.
I understand the work don't
believe it will have a financial
impact those opposition do but
to have a more rigorous analysis
is important and the other
factors that are staying ways
that point Mr Chairman the fact.
Legislative declaration that's
what claims act generally it
balances the need to compensate
victims who who've been
has something happened to him
with the fact that state
governments recognize the tort
claims act recognizing.
The government has to take on
all risks might all kinds of
services and that the state
coffers are somewhat are limited
in terms of what it can find so
the balance is provided to the
tort claims act should also
probably apply here and I think
the only way you can do that is
to
it is to to do the financial
analysis on the impact of this
bill that really hasn't been
that.
speaking to the act the the
disagreement over the negligence
and civil rights claim I have
litigated claims that alleged
negligence to be a civil rights
claim speakers right is not
going to be every single
negligence claim is going to be
a civil rights claim the morning
serious negligence claim can
blur the lines into a civil
rights claims in and I I
normally a time here but the key
difference between the federal
Civil Rights Act nineteen
section nineteen eighty three
and this law is the inclusion of
the words acts or omissions and
that language I think is
responsible for potentially
blurring the lines of this what
this would look like in in
litigation so I would ask for
that type of financial analysis
considering that this is going
to increase claims and
settlements and also ask the the
committee to to to be mindful of
the balancing act towards impact
calls for.
Similar to what this out just
got a call for thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr S. Q. L. next we'll
go to Clinton harden.
Counties.
Thank you Mr chairman in my and
needed you you're fine Senator
going thank you good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee
my name is Martin as as this
gentleman mentioned I'm a
registered lobbyist for you in
quite County as well as a
citizen quite then to compare
I want to say first of all that
with sincere respect for the
bill Sanchez on behalf of these
entities I'm asking this
committee to vote now on house
bill four as I have it.
Mr chairman as you know from our
relationship I'm really not
equipped with the skill set to
argue the legal merit.
Of this bill however as I've
watched program progress and
just proposed legislation
through the house and now in
this committee I think it should
be noted
I thirty three counties in New
Mexico the county commissions
have indicated that they oppose
this bill in fact they have even
drafted propositions explaining
their position and have
forwarded those on to their
elected leaders it appears Mr
chairman that the desires of the
local government the government
that's closest to the people are
not being heard during the House
Bill endorsed presentation or at
least district tonight and I'm
advocating the members of this
this committee to vote now in
response to the counties and
municipalities around the state
Mr chairman thank you for your
time and committee members thank
you for listening thank you
senator Orrin we'll go next to
AJ forty of the New Mexico
municipal league followed by the
by Steve Hadley.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
And again we respectfully oppose
the bill.
This is one of those bills where
we.
We understand victims are
absolutely created every day in
our state in our country and our
world.
We have the tools on the front
end we want the tools on the
front end for better
accountability better training.
We want to make sure that we.
We created a system where we
find it correctly on the front
end and given the requirements
in training for de escalation
your intervention reality based
training banning chokeholds
right let's do everything we can
on the front end in statute to
eliminate the victims on the
back and giving us a unit of
measures on the back and rate
the financial.
Guilty on the back end is not
going to solve the problem our
our.
Purchase public insurers in the
state spend well over a hundred
million annually it hasn't
changed behavior.
So adding another financial
burden on the back in is all
it's going to do is divert
resources.
Better training in making sure
we hold our officers and our
employees accountable on the
front it's very difficult for
us.
Knowing the L. E. A. currently
has a hundred thirty officers in
the queue.
That's a hundred thirty officers
it maybe should be on the job
right now.
The worst liability we have is
about officer we can't get
Representative.
Let's make sure that we design
an alley Aid that works.
Did we a man the public employee
bargaining Act to make sure it's
fair for law enforcement but
also the employer if something
bad happens we can move them
along.
We ask this committee.
To give us the tools on the
front.
In these punitive measures on
the back and will not change
behavior because a hundred
million that goes out the door
every year it's taxpayer dollars
we are the insurer we are also
the reinsurer.
Every reinsurance policy we by
or the fact it within self
insurance fund we are the
reinsurer.
Hundred percent funded by
taxpayers so every additional
claim is always going to come
from our taxpayers and that's
why we much rather put the
resources.
In the laws on the front end.
To changed behavior thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr Ford Steve Hadley
followed by Gregory Shaver.
Thank you Mr chairman my name's
Steve IBM always cheap and
farming I've been here for seven
years I've been in law
enforcement for over thirty
years I've testified in several
times on this bill and listen to
a lot of the testimony what I
will tell you just just a quick
summation is I am not for one
single chief or sheriff
testified in favor of this bill
and I have not heard one single
plaintiff attorney testified
against.
And almost tells you everything
you know from the start.
All I began as an effort at
police reform from this summer
and this is this bill then
broadened if we could just do
that to the police officers we
actually can do this to everyone
in government we can greatly
broaden the number of people
that we could wind up so we and
that that's why you do see
things like the Albuquerque
journal that came out strongly
opposing this bill.
What what I'm asking you is that
we interested these that we know
are going to make government and
police in particular better
better.
Better policies available for
everyone better accountability
on the back and greater
investment here in New Mexico in
mental health care this this
past month we have an office
wall shooting unfortunately it
was triggered from Aug gentleman
whose office medication has
significant health problems that
we've known about for years he
winds up throwing Molotov
cocktails lit with candle
gasoline at our officers in the
course of that it's.
It already this week I testified
in another shooting incident
that happened back in October in
this case our officers didn't
excellent job we didn't wind up
in the street there's another
gentleman office medications he
was firing on page he was fired
rounds are all.
And and we were able to finally
successfully get him talk down
thank you into custody those are
the kinds of things that every
one of you has a chance today so
I agree with the judge I hope
this bill the chance for you to
do something faster we can
historically invest in our
communities you're not doing
enough health care the final
thing I'm gonna say is there
there is a degree of democracy
with this bill the one of the
changes that will create is that
legislators and judges are are
not only allowed it.
They they are not eligible to be
sued under this bill and why is
that one listen to the testimony
was judge from Los crucis and
you talked about the chilling
effect that it would have on him
and his decision making if you
would really be so kind of a
lawsuit and so what I'm gonna do
would that's the judge's order
forties fifties and sixties but
practicing for decades they have
months to make a decision before
they before they make a ruling
and he believes it would be a
chilling effect on him and his
and his cohorts what does that
look like to a twenty four
twenty five year old police
officer with two or three years
who has to make split second
decisions sometimes make some
all but we can continue to suit
but will write out all the
legislators and will write out
all the judges folks this is
just not a fair bill it is not
good for New Mexico it is not
good on I ask you to oppose it
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Greg Shaffer of Santa Fe County
phone by amber Hamilton of
Roosevelt County.
I thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Greg
Shaffer and the Santa Fe county
attorney I'm here to use adopted
board of county commissioners
and resolution number twenty
twenty one sixteen.
As frontline policymakers Santa
Fe county commissioners are
keenly aware of more not less
resources to meet our
communities critical needs that
is why the commissioners urges
house bill four to be amended to
replicate the balance struck in
the tort claims act between
compensating those injured by
governmental action and the need
for government to provide
essential services for all it is
also why the border design
legislature to invest more in
critical areas necessary to
improve law enforcement outcomes
I'm not gonna repeat those
things that others have
addressed but I did want to
touch upon two aspects of house
bill four that differ in
material ways from the tort
claims act first is the lack of
a notice provision.
Unlike the tort claims act house
bill four does not require a
potential claims to be given a
notice of potential claims to be
given within ninety days of an
occurrence.
I noticed provision is
important.
It allows government investigate
the occurrence to see if
remedial efforts are necessary
to avoid future harm to others
it also ensures that relevant
evidence is preserved most
significantly audio and video
recordings of police encounters
with citizens as well as infants
in county jails the statute of
limitations the tort claims act
has a two year statute of
limitations house bill four
proposes a three years one three
year one.
In our view two years is ample
time for a claim to be brought
on the other side of the ledger
adding a year to the statute of
limitations only increases the
risks that governments must
excuse me that governments and
self insurance pools must carry
on their books for this new
untested cause of action.
Finally house bill four in the
view of the board of county
commissioners does not address
the root causes of many claims
against government for that
reason the board of county
commissioners urged the
legislature to dedicate adequate
resources to one improving the
operations of the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy to provide
both better training and more
robust oversight of law
enforcement officers and to
behavioral health prevention and
treatment this would minimize
interactions between law
enforcement and those with
substance abuse and mental
health disorders as well as help
keep victims of those illnesses
out of county jails thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee for your time and
consideration of these important
issues.
Thank you Mr chair for amber
handle Roosevelt County to be
followed by Sean will of the of
the Albuquerque police officers
association.
Afternoon members Mr chair and
members of the committee thank
you so much for your time this
afternoon I am the result county
manager and also chair of the
managers affiliate Roosevelt
County Board of commissioners
has unanimously passed a
resolution opposing house bill
four in its current form admit
it the commission has also
passed a resolution supporting
meaningful public speaking
reform lack that is introduced
in Senate bill three seventy
five our small rural county
employees eighty four total
public servants of which forty
five are within the sheriff's
office and the detention center
our budget is approximately
fifteen million a year we are
again are very small and very
little we take our role very
seriously and we have chose to a
credit to receive accreditation
and achieve that in our
detention facility not because
it was mandated because we chose
that we are dedicated public
servants our resources are
limited and struggle to find the
essential services currently
required within our communities
this legislation usually easily
result in our tax payers being
required to pay these bills and
this law will not result in one
plane necessarily for anyone
County rather more we thank you
for your time and we
respectfully ask your
consideration to vote now
against this legislation as
proposed thank you.
Thank you ms shun will be only a
few excellent all involuntary
call of the Albuquerque chamber.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
thank you for the opportunity I
want to thank the upper thanks
for the opportunity of being
allowed to speak in this debate.
There's a fundamental
disappointment of what's going
on at the legislature this year
you're inundated with attempts
to reform and hold police
accountable but they're just
unfunded mandates that become
unfunded liabilities for law
enforcement agencies all over
the state of New Mexico this
particular bill takes away our
ability this is basically a tax
increase we are taxing the
public all over the state of New
Mexico hurting budgets that can
be used for training on the
mental health can be used for
resources and social programs
and in the poorest state in the
nation it is alarming to me that
during the COVID during the most
unprecedented time in in modern
history that anybody can
remember where businesses are
closing we've been on lockdowns
people are out of work and
report the poorest state becomes
poorer we choose now to attack
the budgets of every single
municipality and county to
include the state of New Mexico
who are going to be inundated
with frivolous lawsuits I can
appreciate the fact that rights
are something that I hold dear
and so does every single new
Mexican the rights that were
talked about by speaker Egolf or
something that we need to value
and take a portent I think it's
very important especially now
that the public walk downs have
really tangibly taken rights
that I've taken for granted away
for a long period of time this
does nothing for accountability
this does nothing for meaningful
reform reform is something you
do with your law enforcement
agencies not to.
September twenty twenty journal
poor article surveyed
scientifically the state of New
Mexico seventy four percent of
residents support their law
enforcement communities here in
Albuquerque where we know a
thing or two about
accountability and reform eighty
four percent of those surveyed
responded that they were more
interested in crime fighting
then they were into DOJ reform
compliance what this is going to
do is take away our budgets and
our ability to provide training
and increase reform for
equipment it's going to take
away money from already
struggling budgets in it
unprecedented time we're our
state budget we're praying and
hoping that the federal
government comes through with
the stimulus package to pay our
own bills well we're going to
expect counties municipalities
to pay the bills of frivolous
lawsuits everywhere thank you so
much and I appreciate the
opportunity.
Thank you Mr will be Terry Cole
followed by our two orders to
lift our.
All right the local greater out
for your arms yes Senator
concern for the first.
Well Civil Rights nine four yes
why is this for you all
agencies.
Wired Walbridge more for your
student loans all Morton said.
One one four six one one one one
eight one four four eight
services.
What.
We are.
White Plains there was nothing
more
that.
One one three what what response
what what what lawsuits.
We'll do what we will.
More to recoup.
We appreciate one.
To.
Wilds.
Thank you.
Thank you for your call the next
we have are going to let of the
New Mexico land grant council.
It's on community members what
we're concerned about Mr
chairman is the impact that this
could have on small units a
governments like land grants we
have annual budgets that for
most Committee Land Grant in the
second that is well below ten
thousand dollars
so even the cost of potentially
are litigating even a frivolous
lawsuit could have detrimental
impacts on our budgets you know
if you if you look at a simple
cost of a simple calculation of
two hundred dollars an hour to
for to get a lawsuit dismissed
that has no merit in an average
of ten twenty hours to do that
are you talking about two
thousand to four thousand
dollars many that's just a guess
have budgets that are below
five.
Thousand dollars two thousand
dollars on the budget this
would.
Did affect their entire annual
budget and we have had cases in
the Mr Chairman I work for a
second have been sued in for
civil rights violations for
someone seeking access for their
water right in federal court in
because the second does not have
the ability to do things that
they've been forced to settle
even though the case me does not
mean I have merit so Mister
chairman we we are hopeful that
the committee would consider
some amendments that would
protect small units of
government perhaps place a cap
on the sliding scale it is more
portion to what these entities
could pay or an exemption under
certain tiered levels of units
of government based on the
financial reporting requirements
are the state audit act in
addition that Mr chairman we
would ask that.
The legislature consider fund
creating a fund I risk
management division that can
help local Land Grant
communities offset and small
unity government offset their
costs I'm right now I want to
the tort claims act insurance
coverage for land grants and
donor is a year Mr chairman so
again if you're annual budget is
is four thousand thousand
dollars to cover get that
coverage isn't something that
they can currently afford on so
with that Mr Chairman we're
hopeful that you guys will
understand sort of the the
issues that that we face the
limited resources and take that
into consideration when
considering this bill thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
I'm told Wayne Johnson is not in
the room so we'll go to the
final comment from nature Rhodri
just.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Victor Rodriguez and I it was
the member appointed to the so
we'll Rights Commission and like
the of Justice Boston I also was
very excited to be on the Civil
Rights Commission.
but
because I really thought that it
was going to involve the reform
of law enforcement because
that's what why the Civil Rights
Commission was created and
throughout the.
Do a test is that the committees
that I have attended I continues
to be here that this was not
about law enforcement but yet
speaker Egolf own words when the
Civil Rights Commission was
created and I pulled stated our
communities are marching to
demand that.
Changes that rethink policing
there's no mention from the
speaker that he wanted to make
sure The New Mexicans have the
right to seek remedies for
deprivation of rights under the
state constitution this was
about law enforcement and this
bill H. before does nothing to
address law enforcement of good
officers want bad police
officers to be held accountable
of this through you can go back
to the history of the New Mexico
tort claims act it has always
required law enforcement
officers or public entities to
pick up the bill for law
enforcement officers and still
there has never been any change
I can speak Greek Office spoken
about how much we face liability
under the federal rights
nineteen eighty three and we
always have these liability but
there still has been no change
so new cause of action will do
nothing that's nothing more than
wishful thinking the last thing
I'd like to just tell to you Mr
chairman and the committee is
that the descent the dissenters
foremost descended out of the
line commissioners for various
reasons I would encourage each
of you to please read the
dissenting report I would
encourage each of you to please
see that unanimously the entire
commission voted on law
enforcement reforms that will
address the issues that we are
talking about today but yet as
of this date we I have not seen
any meaning for law enforcement
reform that will address issues
that involve police training and
misconduct accountability thank
you very much Sir.
Thank you Mr.
We used twenty minutes allotted
for the opponents and we'll go
now to the twenty million it's a
lot and for the supporters.
And the keep in mind to this is
a total of twenty minutes so if
you go too long you're cutting
into other peoples
time so we'll start with my
aging clarity of the Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter.
Thank you afternoon Mister chair
and members of the committee
making fire TV with this year
because we're going to chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand members we support each
before this bill is about giving
members of the public their day
in state court when their civil
rights have been violated
passage of H. before is an
investment in our communities to
address known abuses of
authority and will incentivize
public bodies to adopt better
policies and procedures this
bill is about justice and equal
treatment under the law and is a
step forward for ensuring that
government misconduct is not
going to dressed and insurance
companies it's and concern
should not dictate this thank
you for the opportunity to speak
and we thank the sponsors for
the spell.
Thank you very much and the run
coming to be followed or keen to
be followed by Michael Avery.
Mr Kean in.
Okay Michael Avery to be
followed by the parish columns.
Collins to be followed by a real
Nissen.
Earlier this to be followed by
Deborah modest Baca.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee our M. drive our rural
listened and I live in Los
crucis are today I'm speaking to
you as a member of moms demand
action and we highly support the
Civil Rights Act.
And we are senses already passed
the house we are asking that
today you give those bills are
you do bass thank you.
Thank you Mr Mrs Deborah modest
Baca fallen by Angelique cell
gado.
Thank you thank you chairman
Ortiz and members of the
committee my name is Deborah
Baca and I live in Albuquerque
I'm a volunteer with and
representative New Mexico once
demand action I'm here today to
support passage of house bill
for the New Mexico Civil Rights
Act New Mexico needs to have and
qualified immunity moms demand
action is against gun violence
in all its.
You including police violence we
acknowledge that police violence
and brutality is
disproportionately directed at
black indigenous and people of
color police violence damages
community trust and harms public
safety house bill four will
allow New Mexico's citizens and
people to sue when their
constitutional and civil rights
are violated qualified immunity
protects the guilty there must
be consequences for police
violence and misconduct and I
asked the committee to vote yes
on house bill four thank you so
much.
Thank you very much we'll go
next to Angelique so gullible
invaded we're.
Okay in Rio.
Followed by yes indeed we
followed by Maryland back.
So so
yes hello I'm David where and go
but we'll we're not.
Mexico I am a criminologist who
audits correctional facilities
around the nation around the
nation and also in New Mexico.
I think I share the frustration
with everyone of what every time
I hear a new story where a
police agency has.
repeated behavior they've had in
the past and I think when we
have this kind of qualified
immunity this increases the
polarization of society
It's not that the police the law
enforcement are ignoring the
problems.
And the racism within their
ranks it's that day.
Are actually trying to follow
the law and when the law allows
for this kind of qualified
immunity their policies and
procedures are based on that and
their training I heard several
of the opponents say that they
want better training well the it
removing this qualified immunity
will provide better training.
Because the training been will
reflect that you can't just
shoot somebody because you're
afraid of them and that will
have the ripple effect that will
make communities safer it's not
going to trigger a bunch of
lawsuits because I mean just
consider the problem with high
speed chases we used to have
once once law enforcement
agencies decided that they would
not participate in a high speed
chase.
Whenever it was not justified
whenever that person that we're
chasing was just.
Writing a hot check or just that
you know when they can when they
can.
solve the problem without that
kind of force within you know if
they're not doing a high speed
chase and they're not gonna get
sued for it so I think it's very
important that we get read of
this idea that if your friend is
somebody you can use lethal
force and we have to consider
the culture.
Whenever somebody gets training
even if the training is
wonderful and I would I used to
be active in New Mexico counties
and I took training from grace
Phillips she's an excellent
trainer but no matter how did
the training is or how often
it's taken if you go back to
your department and your child
has never mind the training this
is how we do it here in the
training is not going to tech so
in order to do systemic
structural change we must start
with this kind of legislation
that allows for a broad change
in culture and attitude I mean
we are actually truly dealing
with over four hundred years of
people being able to kill blacks
and indigenous people because
they were afraid up and this is
actual history history so we do
have to consider the culture I
agree I I it was music to my
ears to hear the desire for
better training but the training
has to coincide with the that
cultural change the large
systemic changes.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Stewart Maryland.
And she'll be followed by
Fernando Trujillo those of you
who aren't on this list I'll get
to you as soon as I finish the
list.
So that will be the ones that
were raised their hands.
Thank you Mr go ahead Maryland
Mr chairman my name is Marilyn
back and I'm a former foster
care in the state of New Mexico
in my time as a foster parent
next year ranging from newborn
to seventeen and a half years
old one of my very first
eighteen month old toddler home
for five and a half months in
that time CYFD in her case who
is not a licensed social.
Only visited my home once as a
new foster parent I did not know
that that was only thank you Mr
I from the child at least each
county once per month after an
investigation where I was
accused of lying it came to
light that in fact not only did
the case worker not visit my
home but that she had knowingly
and intentionally falsified
three separate home visits Missy
white the internal system as
facts I submitted the general's
office and to the state I am
unaware she was reprimanded.
The story of it is reminiscent
of and he said but added just
the eleven month old who died in
care in point repair after
similar situation on I'm touched
for twelve hours and that CYFD
cop backdating records.
Departments and again knowingly
committing fraud to cover at
that they had never done a month
require checks on that baby
today I stand before you as the
founder of New Mexico our
network a nonprofit dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care and empowering
those who serve them we are
proud to endorse this bill this
bill is to dress the bad apples
the most egregious cases of
violations of civil rights and
we believe that this bill just
just that thank you.
Thank you for not Trujillo to be
followed by a Barron Jones.
Barron Jones to be followed by
Susie Schmidt.
Yes
Good afternoon Mister chair
members you my name's Barron
Jones senior policy public
policy strategist ACLU Mexico we
strongly support agencies or for
the reasons already stated thank
you appreciate responses for
bringing this important comments
as well we were As before
because we see it as a bill for
all Mexicans and girl regardless
of one's race of social economic
status aligns well stockholder
medications the council's
teacher ratcheting in law
enforcement called culturing
documented uses that Negley
negatively negatively impacted
members of the state's black
business and people of color
communities and places members
of the law enforcement community
and other government employees
about the public base are this
proposed piece of legislation
provides access to justice and
it's good start toward achieving
that type of government
accountability needed to restore
public trust because they will
answer by governments that
better policies and practices as
American male left House callous
incidence of government abuse
of misconduct that this bill is
designed to address and as the
ACLU of New Mexico senior public
policy strategist representing
it really is more three thousand
members thank you lord you all
not to let insurance providers
they paid just for New Mexico as
part of this piece of smart as.
Thank you thank you very Susie
she meant to me following by
Tania Maestas.
I could afternoon my name is
Susie strap and I'm here to to
support HB for my son rex went
to jail because he missed of
compliance maybe for seven days
I don't support he was alive
walkie talkie and very healthy
with you being in jail I never I
knew something was wrong but I
never got any information
talking to booking talking to
the medical everybody just kept
telling me we are sure your son
is fine well within five days he
was taken to the hospital to a
point where they could not save
them.
When I still called the three
days Sunday Monday Tuesday they
kept telling me like if he was
still there that addition assure
me that need additional fine but
yet he was in the hospital
by the time with all my calls
because nobody from the jail
nobody from the hospital ever
called to give me any
information of his condition.
I found out he was in the
hospital and they said well yeah
you can come and see him use an
ICO.
I go in my son's entities
called.
How does a person
go to jail for seven days and be
dead within five.
You know the word and finally
calls me at that time I'm asking
why no one ever contacted me
they have policies and
procedures in place to do this
for love ones that never called
me never called me you know I'm
a native here sixty two years I
have my son there and they
complied any information to
notify me I would love to see
him alive so I could tell
you by itself.
So wide service.
What it calls you know know what
what what what the.
And that is not yes problem
because he goes against his
policies and procedures of.
Really each individual is held
accountable.
No change you guys just keep
talking about money it's not
about.
This is about money.
No.
You don't.
What you're.
He
because he is no longer here he
suffered the ultimate test might
be was thirty four years old.
So rather I could stop I need
justice and it's not about money
people need to be held
accountable golden rule is you
treat people the way you want to
be treated what was right.
People are held accountable what
is going to go out the door
because they don't understand
that.
It will never change things.
Please please pass this is one
step because I'm not going to
stop I will continue to fight
for justice for whites that.
What happens to anyone of you no
one will understand.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Yes followed by Marshall
Martinez.
Thank you.
For the opportunity to speak.
Go ahead Sir.
Yes your honor.
Okay well of my daughter's name
is Camilla departments.
she was arrested for missing of
appropriations for missing a
probation violation.
And she ended up in Santa Fe
County at the detention center
for probation violations here
you.
She was arrested in September
nineteen seventeen.
On September nineteenth she told
the Garcia she was sick.
She died on November nine.
One of the so the rest of the
month of September and the month
of October she complete.
She told the doctors that she
was very sick.
She called me twice.
And told me that.
They're going to need.
I.
To contact the warden.
I think
everybody.
They don't give a damn.
My daughter was for June.
For a month.
April recent revolution.
Is this the.
Where.
The county commissioners hired.
A person to run the jails that
has been fired from another J.
O. in which he was involved with
prison gangs.
Do as of and and giving drugs
into jail.
When they hire you know we that.
And they put you in that
situation yes what.
The people of Santa Fe County
want to pay millions of dollars
for stupid people and stupid
county commissioners to hire
people that they know have been
involved in that kind of stuff
you know what I have any
sentiment because dollars will
never bring my daughter back the
only thing that's going to make
any changes not only in the
police and and and and and and
the corrections department is
for the citizens to decide that
they do not want to be paid all
these multi multi millions of
dollars for the wrong do we of
police officers and guards and
administrators.
My brother was a police officer
I know what they go through I
know what those officers go
through I know what the guard to
go through but they signed up
for it.
And if they have any humanity in
them.
They do not have to sit there
and watch a person die.
You know what.
If you find a person on the side
of the road that's dying and
going and and you don't render
eight.
You're you're responsible for
that
will this phone on the side of
the road.
It's that kind of a treatment
where they just didn't really
believe we don't care.
The cruel do the cruelty is I'm
is mind blowing.
How Guard watch a person without
blood and not referring to
medical
doctor at the medical placed.
Not at least do a blood test.
Yes if if Dr Lee Vargas at the
Santa Fe county adult detention
center had given my daughter a
lot of us simple blood test.
My daughter would be alive.
Some of the.
It's going to be more expensive
to that detention center and to
the county of Santa Fe that it
would have cost for a simple but
this and if if if the only thing
that that that these are
counties cities and states and
and introduce is the only thing
they understand is money.
They pay up.
And change your procedures train
these people right at least.
Given some psychological
evaluations to see if they're
getting desensitized to the
humanity of the people there
caring for.
Those people have problems in
their lives but they're still
humans.
There's still.
They're still humans I can't
bring my daughter back.
But I will make Santa Fe County
accountable and IVU that money
is not the measure thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr.
A Marshall Martinez to be
followed by a team increased on
a little.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
Marshall Martinez and the
intermix active directory
quality New Mexico the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights organization
mothers we did you people in
this country have had a decades
long fight to achieve basic
civil rights recognized
constitutional rights and we're
not quite done.
Well we have great friends in
the New Mexico state legislature
and have done good work to
achieve some basic policy
protections are projections of
always hinged on the fact that
our government would step in to
protect us if we've learned
anything over the years
especially the last four it is
that we cannot simply rely on
the goodness and inherent
fairness of government's
national or local to protect us
from basic violations of our
hard earned Civil Rights clear
entrance New Mexicans across the
state have stories about our
basic civil rights being
violated by law enforcement
officials and local government
entities and a myriad of ways
and let us be clear we know both
what we are asking for and what
this legislation would do we
reject any notion that are
passionate pleas are made about
a general ideology our please
are made with respect to this
exact legislation and its impact
on our actual lives the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act if
passed would be one step closer
to dismantling systemic
homophobia transphobia and
racism allowing us to continue
our journey toward full
liberation as LGBTQ New Mexicans
they giving us access to simply
to our day in court we approach
this legislation not from a
place of hostility but one of
harm reduction we have long been
stuck in a David versus Goliath
situation when it comes to the
power of those acting on behalf
of our government all we're
asking for is to be given an
opportunity to fight for basic
civil rights all we want is our
day in court thank you.
Thank you Marshall.
Christodoulou followed by India
and make ash.
Thank you chair or Ortiz Pino
first and Sanchez thank you so
much not only for your service
but for looking out for the
people of New Mexico like our
civil servants and legislation
going.
My name's Dana Christodoulou and
I'm the political director for
idle grant Hawkins and I applaud
your efforts.
I wasn't going to ask.
I had to add and remember one
thing attitudes are yes.
I have lived in for.
This is the only state in which
to me a white woman nice done a
white man and my slightly darker
has ever encountered
questionable.
Questionable actions done by our
public servants the police so
I'm very appreciative of what
you're doing here.
And I know that as real senators
and representatives of and for
the people not corporations that
you will pass eight speaker
system will Rights Act thank
you.
Thank you.
Diane my phone while in Maestas.
good afternoon.
Right at the counter
accountability afforded by HB
four is a red flag that
something fundamentally on this
when someone is seriously harmed
the entity that cost or allow
that harm should be held
accountable who should bear the
cost of harm someone pays those
cost to the victim and her
family supper all the emotional
physical and financial cost on
their own or should we just do
you allow the hard bear the
financial portion of the cost we
should be concerned with the
behaviors and culture of those
working with our citizens might
act with disregard for civil
rights I believe the Civil
Rights Act could help make
constitutional behavior priority
at all defter endeavors
fortunately the thread of
monetary cost maybe the best
tool we have to ensure our New
Mexico civil rights are
protected please vote yes thank
you.
Thank you.
Elaine my S. us to be followed
by ana Maria something or other
I can read the rest of your name
on a Maria but Elaine Maestas.
I am here to urge the importance
of house bill four to each of
you
I was reeling anymore.
Being more worried about the
insurance side of this sense
phantom costs rather than the
actual violations that this bill
is aimed towards addressing to
me is absolutely absurd right
now with the current standards
that we have we are sending the
message to New Mexican citizens
and to our children.
That the outrageous and at times
for invest by elation to their
rights as acceptable we are
saying that these violations are
acceptable when we stand behind
qualified immunity which has
been approved and show the
protection to hide about the
hiring for government officials
each of you have the power to
give a voice to a child who has
been harmed by those who should
have been there to protect them
rather than arm them she meant
to be a voice to the many lies
that have been lost in the hands
of those who are there to
protect and serve them not harm
them you have the power to say
to New Mexicans that we hear you
and we are doing something about
it.
As a curtain stern New Mexican I
am pleading that each of you see
the importance of this bill and
you hear the stories behind the
spill and have compassion as if
it was your son and daughters
right to had been violated sh if
your son or daughter rights had
been violated and they came to
you which you telling you are
more worried about the possible
cost of insurance and and being
that it's just the fandom cost
you don't even know what the
cost is why would you send that
message to New Mexican citizens.
New Mexico the New Mexico.
Civil Rights Act is honestly
about fairness justice and equal
treatment under the law
regardless of class or
background I am asking each of
you for two passed thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Regret that is all the time we
have we used to our twenty
minutes for supporters and we'll
go well first we'll we'll let.
Mr Sanchez Representative Lewis
and speaker you all say a few
words if they want to in summary
before we go to the committee.
Thank you committee members I
think I appreciate all the
public that was provided to pay
I think you know a lot.
I think especially one of the
things that we need to
highlighting keep in mind that
if no one civil rights are
violated and the cost is zero.
The cost is zero if no one's
rights civil rights are violated
you know since we first
introduced this bill in the very
first House committee we've had
the the sky is falling scenarios
and really I think
The commission had asked for an
objective analysis that was
requested earlier since August
of twenty twenty and nothing had
been provided and when you think
about.
Especially the the powerful
stories that we just heard now
people do bill like this is a
David and Goliath situation and
when we're putting that money
Higher than protecting people
that is something that we really
need to consider whether or not
that is some the right message
that we want to send to New
Mexicans you know doing the
right thing isn't always right
but we do need to ensure that
people civil rights are
protected and that everyone is
held equal under the law and so
I I have more to say but but I
do think that you know we've
been doing our best to address
these concerns I just need to
care center our message to all
of New Mexico that we are.
Doing what's right to protect
people and again if no one civil
rights are violated the cost is
zero thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Lewis
Mr speaker hello.
Thank you chairman I would echo
what my co sponsors that we hear
from the opposition I'm.
All we hear about is dollars and
cents we don't hear.
Much about the people who.
Suffer real harm to their
liberties to their freedoms and
to
you Senator great injustice at
the hands of government
misconduct I think that we don't
hear.
The association counties talk
about that because there really
isn't.
Not much of a defense to the
obvious and clear need for
everyday new Mexicans to be able
to have their voices heard and
have access to justice in New
Mexico court.
And with that Mr Chairman I'm
happy to.
I stand with my co sponsor for
any questions.
Thank you Mr speaker okay let
millions here are questions and
comments we'll start with
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr speaker Representative Lewis.
I like to thank all of the
opponents of the proponents for
being with us today.
First of all
the
In chair for the land grants I
have great concern about
including all political
subdivisions when we look at
small entities such as the land
grants in the state kia's
it really does make sense
because most of the work is
volunteer could you respond to
that.
Chairman and Senator Stefano X.
so I think one of the gentleman
from the acequia dead talk about
the risk management is a
division and currently grant
land grants are eligible for
coverage through the risk
management division I don't know
if mark Baker would like to
speak on that Mr chairman and
senator well before he does I'd
like to let you know that as a
former director of the state
risk management division.
It discretionary
Whether to invite cities
counties jails land grants the
state yes.
Anticipate.
The thank you have been asking
and politics here of the thank
you so ciation did contact me.
Us to be covered and they are
getting.
Response so with one.
Entities are not like in
counties.
Counties are not all equal we
have a very small town homes
with sixteen hundred people and
we have a very large cities with
a million people are couple
hundred thousand people but we
have some disparity in.
The entities that are being
covered number one that's one of
my issue the second issue is
that in our analysis.
We have several entities I am
not diminishing the seriousness
of the claims.
General Services Department the
department of finance
administration the county
Insurance Authority that
administrative office of the
courts and the meanest league
all have serious concerns about
reinsurance and the rising cost
not every time and I'm gonna
make an and quality.
Every time we want to make a
change to your B. R. P. E. R.
A..
I usually object and less we're
going to put appropriate funding
into our state budget for it.
And often we don't.
So I am very concerned that if
this bill goes forward small
entities are going to be part
and that will never fully fund
our governmental agencies that
are in place.
And I don't think you can assure
that I think that's too the
house appropriations and the
Senate finance committee and
they won't percent to a senior.
Okay I'm interested in your
comments and and I don't have
issue.
With the goals of the bill.
I have issues for some of the
details.
Mister chairman Senator I can
take a crack at it that is in
the updated F. I. R. the notes
that the it affects of the state
is.
Rejected to be minimal this not
the general fund yeah it is you
know for managing risk
management Mister chairman
Senator fed ex it to separate
from.
Yes not a general fund affecting
situation the other thing is and
you we heard it repeatedly
counties and cities have
expressed concern about cost.
But they have been asked since
August to substantiate their
claims in some way I personally
spoken to the leadership at the
association counties in the
municipality to show me
something.
To substantiate their worries
and I have gotten exactly
nothing.
We know that every county in the
state right now faces on limited
liability for civil rights
claims in federal court.
Unlimited punitive damages
liability in federal court and
unlimited attorney's fees on
ability in federal court.
Right now.
And there has been however these
one Senator damage award against
in New Mexico government I was
the last item eight eighteen
months from million dollars were
jury of New Mexicans decided
that the conduct was so
egregious that the government
had to be punished so punitive
damage awards are leveled
against New Mexico governmental
entities.
All of that is capped in the
civil rights act released its
catch the fees and
damages and there's no punitive
is available to the Civil
Rights.
So when we say that the
evidentiary standards are going
to be elevated to the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act is in our
federal court it doesn't make
logical sense to me that
creating a new cause of action
in state court is going to
result in the huge reports.
If you have a case where there
is potential where there is huge
damages.
In the future that case is not
going to be brought under the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act
because the damages are capped
those claims are going to be
brought in federal court.
All this is doing is saying for
the rights that don't exist the
federal law they do exist in our
state constitution let's give
folks inability to enforce them
let's give folks the ability to
enforce the equal rights
amendment let's give folks the
ability to enforce the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Let's let them do it in their
own community with the judge
elected by the community with a
jury selected from that
community nonfederal court
which you know if you live up in
red tone you get from the
federal lawsuit directed
assigned to judge in Los crucis.
It's not access to justice.
So I I do these claims in the
counties and the cities with a
very very skeptical.
Because because monsters and one
in less there is agree just
conduct there will be large
awards into there's been an
absolute failure to substantiate
any of the claims that the sky
is falling with regard to the
finances research.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
speaker for that but I'm going
back to the very small into is
what can we do to
Sure that they could have
appropriate coverage under his
management.
I don't know Mr chairman and and
Senator Stefanics but I do know
to address the stages
in a land grants all you need to
parse this answer I'll be very
brief one.
Mr chair Senator Stefanics we.
I did quite a bit of research
I'm happy to provide it to you
to show that property owned by
slate requests comment there the
that the common lands within
land grants the property owned
by seeking as whether it's
taking at in some instances me
on the main deck chair for the
water works any land or property
this owned by land grants to the
states yes cannot be hi taken
and used to satisfy Jr that is
clear under New Mexico law
there's a section in the school
CJ asked the corpus juris
secundum that's a compilation of
established legal principles the
volume on judgments are states
that unless there's a specific
statutory provision.
The property of the sovereign in
the political subdivisions
cannot be taken to satisfy
judgments even if there were a
judgment against Land Grant were
to stick here all of the common
man's all of the property of the
state via is immune for
execution of the judgment so
that's that that I think that
makes the worry.
Very very small because.
Or in essence judgment proof.
There's no way to collect on the
judgment that might be leveled
against one of those small
political subdivisions.
It's the second I understand
that there is the concern.
I also understand it is very
difficult for me to see how a
and the sick yet could violate
someone's civil rights in a way
that would cause monetary
damages.
You know so that I do it because
because they don't operate law
enforcement they don't engage in
this in the types of
governmental activities that.
Because our new people however
I am open to actually understand
the chairman of this committee
has an amendment to redefine
public body in the statute to
exempt miss years land grants
the mutual domestics maybe so on
water conservation districts are
I think that would be a friendly
amendment Mister chairman
Senator thanks I don't want to
jump out of order for the
chairman's prerogative on call
you members of the committee but
I I don't think that my co
sponsor and I would.
Be opposed to making it clear
that these local governments are
not subject action under the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act just to
make it completely clear that
we're not they were not looking
into them for.
Yeah large damage awards.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I'm gonna listen to the rest of
the conversation but thank you
very much for being here today.
Senator if you if you're
interested in the in that
amendment thanks to introduce in
now at this point.
Certainly.
That would take away one of my
concerns okay the penny you have
that amendment that was
delivered today my amendment on
land grants the sages and
mystics it was sent out in the
packet how we can put in.
It's a short amendment.
Sure sure so if you don't mind
running it up on the screen
right now.
There we are.
Okay and the so I would move to
the Senate health and Public
Affairs Committee amendment
number one.
To House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill for.
I think it.
Was taken down now
Sure if any.
Any discussion of the element is
that hello to that end and Mr
speaker and and Representative
Lewis are unicorns would be
considered a friendly amendment.
Yes chairman that's a from the
amendment.
Thank you.
Any discussion at this
particular moment Senator
Schmidt is that are you having a
discussion on.
Yes please please.
Thank you I'm.
I really appreciate the
discussion so far Mr chairman
and Representative is by the way
good to see all.
And
Yes.
We're not the quality and we are
centered our discussion is
centered upon a victim whose
rights is constitutional rights
were violated.
And.
Well I appreciate the.
Pragmatism.
Of this amendment it actually
goes.
The the opposite direction that
I'd like to go and I think it
sends the wrong message to
everyone that spoke in support
of this bill.
This amendment has nothing to do
with a victim whose rights were
violated has everything to do
with saying well this part of
government is more special than
this other part of government.
And this amendment like I said I
have nothing to do in if your
constitutional rights were
violated they were violated it
doesn't matter if it was a you
know as a land grant or or
waters Association or anybody
else.
And so well we can pontificate
that well you know this might
not happen with one of these
political subdivisions it
doesn't matter if it could or
not the the fact is we need our
focus on the victims who were
violated and it it does not
matter Mr chair and
representative as it does not
matter which branch of
government it was your your
rights were either violent or
not and if this is about I mean
this about a quality I think we
should treat everybody equal I
think the costs of the victims
should be treated equally and I
think the government
subdivisions should be treated
equally and we should not be
trying to you know pull people
out or put certain people in I'm
and and so so for that reason
because this I believe is not
centered on the victims I I I
respectfully would vote no on
this man Mr chair.
Thank you senator Senator
anybody else Senator Sedillo was
on the amendment.
And thank you Mr chair I speak
in favor of them the amendment
because the doctrine of
sovereign immunity which is is
what this is an exception to the
whole purpose of it is to
protect government coffers and
when you have state agencies
that literally are not covered
by risk management is Senator
Stefanics pointed out this is
exactly where you don't right
waves sovereign immunity and so
for these tiny
Subdivisions of government that
are mostly volunteers are they
aren't even paid staff there who
get no continuing appropriations
from the government and do not
have property but it just merely
trying to in general don't have
of acids would admit it we we
don't have assets but are merely
in general trying to continue
the traditions and and the the
communities that have been in
place for for.
For centuries I think it is very
important for this ammendment
until their status changes I am
very happy that you brought this
ammendment
and it's one of the issues I
crossed off.
Of if if this amendment passes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator guy is.
Mr chair and representative
thank you bye.
We used Dr Schmidt whose idea of
the thank you balanced when I
look through the bill I did not
find for the legislature or the
governor was ever including the
liability piece Mr chair would
you considering your amendment
to to give Dr Schmidt is a
little bit of of less heartburn
is to add it to include us as
legislators and government
having the same kind of.
Compatibility because I think as
we go forward if civil rights
are really so pourtant I think
we should be part of keeping
that think they are just so
that's what I I just want to
throw that out there because I
was actually in bring that up on
to the bill I just wanted to
this amendment could include
adding legislators and the
governor's office and.
Thank you senator my take on
that is it would be a different
amendment you wanted to yes that
one but I'd like to hear the
speaker and and Representative
Lewis is response to to your
issue of why the governor and
the Legislature were not
included.
Mr Chairman restaurants in the
question we say why the
legislature and governor Lujan
included.
Yes.
Mr Chairman no in in the bill in
the mail.
Why why why why actions can be
brought against us for civil
rights violations in the bill so
Mr Chairman it is less
Representative Lewis like is the
question I can answer a question
on the judicial immunity so
the governor is included I'm not
sure why Mr Chairman.
Senator Gallegos things
otherwise.
legislative immunity is a narrow
immunity.
It means that legislators under
the constitution
may not be called to account for
a vote that they take we were
For statement that they make in
debates bill so legislative
immunity is very narrow Mr
chairman that's in this bill
saying that in the bill is not
saying that legislators are noon
restorers claimed with the bill
is saying is that the Civil
Rights Act is not abrogate
legislative immunity.
So it's a different thing so
because the bill Mister chairman
Senator Gallegos talks about
qualified immunity some of the
house Judiciary Committee
analysts were concerned it could
be construed as a policy other
immunities so we made it clear
the bill Mister chairman Senator
guy goes to this does not seek
to abrogate any community other
than qualified immunity and it
explicitly states it preserves
judicial and legislative
immunity but those are limited
and very narrow immunities are
as I said judicial immunity
means if you judge makes the
decision you don't want to the
judge.
Where you're you're remedy that
situation under judicial
immunity is not a lost cause the
judge is an appeal of the
judge's decision.
So so it's not it's not correct
Mr chairman Senator that the
legislature's excluded or or
mute from civil rights claims.
Thank you Mr speaker Senator
guys.
Mr chairman and speaker can you
tell me in page the number one I
look through this certainly and
I could not find were included
us I understand where you're
talking about a fine line of the
legislature which I think you
will we make of that vote on the
floor we should be held
accountable because we do things
to our constituents for
constituents but can you tell me
your bill on the
Committee so we're I would find
governor's portion that.
Mr speaker.
Mr Chairman representative.
It would be a claim against the
so what we have done I I see Mr
page line Mr senator Senator.
Mister chairman Senator
Gallegos.
I assume that when you're
talking about the governor you
are referring to the office of
the governor correct okay.
So.
It's chairman Senator the office
of the governor we should look
at the definition public body
needs any states.
Government.
Thank you for commission an
agency or entity created by the
constitution of New Mexico or
any branch of government it
receives public funding that is
the governor's office chairman.
Senator Gallegos admitted stated
that.
Who is your question chairman.
Senator.
Mr chairman and speaker I.
And that I I guess my thing is I
was thinking when you corrected
me the more I expected that to
work governor's office so all
you with that I I understand
it's hidden in the bill I was
actually wanting to actually see
it in writing so with that don't
yield on this thank you thank
you senator Senator Schmedes for
the second time.
Still in the remember yes I'll
be on the amendment is just one
one quick question
I I really didn't have a second
question but he called me and I
kind of what will your hand was.
Well I just have one I want to
make sure Mr chair that this
ammendment is is is
constitutional and this that's
not our job that that's the
judicial branch but you know in
the provided under article for
the constitution it says that we
are not supposed to pass local
or special laws and so I I would
appreciate your thoughts or or
someone else's thoughts on that.
Could this amendments because we
are dealing with a a broad
immunity that the that is
applied to
you know once again there's that
word equal it's it's applied
equally across political
subdivisions but we're actually.
You know exempting some folks
out with this potentially
qualify as a local or special
law under article four section
twenty four of the The New
Mexico constitution.
Mr speaker you have a response
for Senator missionaries
chairman Senator no.
Yeah my my response is I I don't
think I mean somebody might want
to contest and later on Senator
committees but I think you know
basically what we're doing is is
making sure that these small
local governmental entities
which we've created or or the
last two years we made land
grants.
Our local government we made a
sage is part of local government
yes the usual domestics.
I'm not sure we do that by
action but they're also
considered local government so
the water conservation districts
consider local government but
none of them actually.
Budgets are insurance policies
to cover their liability for for
things like this and and so to
me this ammendment simply.
Make sure.
We're making these small
entities
more comfortable with the
concept of this bill in that
it's not really.
First of all I don't think it
would have a major impact on you
as a speaker mention their lands
can be confiscated in judgment
or anything they don't have any
budget to to to to okay I mean
this is this is the this is the
quintessential shallow pockets
person will never use it because
they have nothing to gain
there's no reason to sue them
and nothing.
From suing them and so this just
makes.
Them feel better if we were
doing this amendment of bill and
I think it it makes clear what
we're talking about is not
somehow driving them out of
existence.
Thank you Mr chair that that is
my question I just think once
again if this is based on the
victims what I hear from the
victims today as they say it's
not about the money the money
will never ever bring you know
my son back but it's also about
the the validation that yes our
our court system has recognizes
that you were violated so I
think that that's still recourse
it still means something so
that's a once again a reason I I
would propose a settlement but
thank you for answer my
question.
Thank you.
On the amendment.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the roll.
On the amendment to house bill
four.
guideposts no one I'd like to
explain my vote and all.
It's on the amendment.
On the.
Well yeah all of.
Yes.
So.
No.
Hello because yes.
Thanks yes or Tallman.
Thank.
to see panel yes and senator
gave us to explain is so.
Also Mr chairman I appreciate
that I actually the bill
recently as part of a second
and I appreciate everything Land
Grant does but in just hearing
the discussion no where cation
on no different government
entities and then the.
Part of the constitutionality of
those concerns that I have with
the amendment but I'll listen
the rest of debate on respite
thank you Sir.
Thank you senator any
consolation or help you feel
better about it all your seo
noted to me and it and Texas the
the tort claims act carved out
of state because so there is
some precedent for this.
And so will return to debate on
the bill themselves as amended
and we have anybody Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you
thank you Mr chair I think that
I really want to commend the
sponsors because it's built like
this to change government
behavior and as as you we need
you know of from the discussion
of a SB seven as the for about.
Changing the process for.
And ability for police officers
I'm all about changing
processes and and and passing
bills that have the the
potential for for changing
behavior and so
and and this bill would bring
transparency I've had so many
victims tell me you know if I
would have just gotten an
apology and an acknowledgement
about what happened I wouldn't
have felt the need to bring this
lawsuit but they they were just
so rude about it and they
attacked my mic relative and and
it's it's just.
It's so hard when you when you
have these kinds of cases and I
think that this will also serve
the purpose that I think is very
very important and that is
raising confidence in our
institutions if they can if they
act without any kind of a.
Any kind of that kind kind of
accountability that undermines
public confidence so I I really
commend them there a couple of a
little questions that I have
about the bill I I support the
bill but I want some
clarification on a few issues
Mr speaker or Mr chair and Mr
speaker
Use you said something about
that this would help enforce
that the treaty of Guadalupe and
in reading the bill I didn't I
didn't see how so if you could
walk me through that I'd
appreciate that because that
brings you even even more
protections that I wasn't I
hadn't even thought about with
this bill but I I didn't see it.
Mr chairman and senator good
it's a great question I have to
admit I did I know this until Mr
working on a bill the rights
guaranteed by the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo are contained
within the New Mexico bill of
rights so when we make this a
true for the bill of rights
includes the the treaty
provisions.
Twenty four of the bill of
rights.
Okay that's that's it does
that's good to know that's
definitely something I didn't
know article twenty section
twenty one of the New Mexico
constitution.
I don't know if you're familiar
with it but it basically makes
of it says that the that
legislation to protect the
environment our air our land our
water is of fundamental
importance in the state of New
Mexico and it goes on to explain
it was known in nineteen seventy
one when it was passed has the
anti pollution amendment however
they did not put it in the bill
of rights so what is your take
on article twenty section twenty
one and and whether it would be
included in.
In your bills it's something
that.
It's giving people of all right.
So that so.
Chairman and senator I don't
know if.
My co sponsor Representative
Lewis would like to take the
first crack at that.
but I I I do know that
I'm yeah we're working on
adoption of the green amendment.
The session I think that is.
Jim medium of the shortest
distance between where we are
today and having enforceable
protections for clean air clean
water is passed agreed amendment
and then they come back in the
next session with enabling
legislation specifically
targeted at that
the degree the amendment we have
now is not in the bill of rights
I will be limited the Civil
Rights Act to the the to the New
Mexico bill of rights it left
out you provisions that are in
the bill of rights so
unfortunately that the bill is
not an enforcement mechanism for
anything that's outside of the
bill creates.
Thank you for that clarification
Mr Mr chair.
the on three D. of the bills on
the point Senator I'm not sure
if you're trying to drum up
support for the bill of rights
or if you're driving away
support with with that line of
questioning of.
For your.
And then no I'm I'm just
highlighting the fact being
amendment doesn't have any kind
of of.
Any kind of power that certainly
I think that there are
Putting in the bill of rights
will raise it up it's a separate
question has a speaker points
out about whether money damages
would be appropriate or
disincentive relief.
Thank you Mr chair of for that
for that clarification but I I
want I I believe in transparency
and I think it's really
important that people understand
the relationship between the
two.
So thank you and the the last
question I have is on three D.
Exclusion for if and they will
I'm interpreting it has an
exclusion for employment by the
state
or maybe I should just ask could
you explain section three days.
We're trying to interpret it for
you yes certainly chairman
Senator with this in.
And so we did have a number of
conversations between myself and
the leadership the New Mexico
counties.
One of the concerns that they
expressed was
That is every day employment
claims with trump you feed
people try to shoehorn them into
the Civil Rights Act and you
know I looked this legislature
several years ago have the state
passed the fair pay for women
act now we have a New Mexico
Human Rights Act there is the
whistleblower protection act
fraud against taxpayers act
those are for state laws they
get lots of rights and remedies
to public employees against a
public employers and courses
also title seven under federal
law I and all of the
investigative powers Ortiz of
the.
Opportunities commission.
So.
Suggested I thought is a good
suggestion that we Dr a clear
line of distinction between the
Civil Rights Act to make sure
that it stayed focused on true
civil rights claims yeah it on
one side of the line this on the
line all of the rights and then
these are available under
existing employment.
There are different standards
approved different it's right
requirements different ways of
evaluating pretext for a
termination for example there's
a well established body of law
in the in the clinic context
this well established body of on
the Civil Rights context they
don't really overlap much so it
seems like a fair way to keep
them separate and say the Civil
Rights Act is for still rights
violations not for.
That that clarifies that
question for me I didn't I
didn't understand the source of
that exclusion again I want to
commend the sponsors
Representative Lewis and and
speaker Egolf for bringing
something that will show that
our guarantee of the bill of
rights our our constitutional
rights is just not all of
guarantee but that there is some
teeth behind it so thank you
very much Mr chair.
Thank you senator we'll go now
to Senators ladies.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative is I had just a
short list of a couple questions
but before I started that
there's something that was said
in the previous discussion I
want to ask you guys about and
in the presentation of the bill.
the this the speaker said and I
just want clarification on this
that that that you couldn't you
know have remedy is under
you know malpractice act in in
that for clan Act and into civil
rights I was just in in in my
reading of the bill section
three
He yes says the remedies are not
exclusive in the so that and
they shall be in addition to any
other remedies so would you mind
explaining that to me real
quick.
Chairman Senator so the law New
Mexico is
This is the you can't have a
double recovery whatever your
damages are are your damages if
you file an action and and
recover damages under for
example the tort claims act you
can't recover damages for the
same injury under a different
statute so you the law allows
you to read multiple.
Cause of action in a complaint
there played in the alternative
I can offer you file complaint
you don't know all of the facts
and you have and all the work so
as the case progresses hi claims
will fall off of the case
sometimes clients will be added.
But you start saying you here
the facts.
I claim this happy of I'm these
this statute or in the
alternative will plead a case
under this statute.
But as you get to the end you
got it which are you gonna take
to the jury which you are you
going to see our generate the
images and the amount that you
could recover in money damages
any case is limited to your
actual so once you've chosen the
path to recover money damages
you get to the end of that path
you can start over again and
going on a second half to get
the same if you the recovery for
the senior.
So Mister chairman Mr speaker
that then what why is this
section needed what what are we
actually doing here when we we
say we're gonna give remedies in
the Civil Rights Act we're also
going to allow additional
remedies as in other parts of
Law.
Why do we need that this if
we're going to allow it in
addition.
So what section are used are you
referring to section three
paragraph the.
This is the remedies provided
for in in the Civil Rights Act
are not exclusive and shall be
in addition to other remedies in
other areas of the law.
Right so she.
Chairman and senator this is
what allows you to lead.
Different claims in a lawsuit in
the alternative so we have this
language in here chairman
senators to make it clear that
if you file a civil rights claim
any put in the facts of an
occurrence you're not limited in
that complaint only to the
process and procedure under the
civil.
Sir the words the remedies are
not exclusive also with that can
mean as you might okay non
monetary relief you might obtain
an injunction against further
violations of her constitutional
right you just you into the
civil rights act enjoined the
government from continued
violations of your civil rights
are then there might be some
other statute.
that would provide some other
type of relief but if we're
talking about money damages
there is it is indisputable
black letter law you don't get a
job recovery.
Thank you Mr released okay Mr
Chairman and Mr speaker know
that that is my question that
last point there it's I guess
monetary versus non should so so
we can staff is remedies on top
of other stature remedies in
that that that that clears that
up I just had a couple of
cinereus wondering by the I'm
just curious you know I have a
problem with Mr chair and and Mr
speaker of a problem with the
way we do primary elections in
our state you know these are
publicly funded and and we're
we're we box out certain public
and so when I'm reading the bill
of rights into the election.
And see where it is free and
open elections here to section
eight of the bill of rights is
all actions shall be free and
open so this law if this act
were to be signed into law could
in independence come and say Hey
this I'm gonna sue the
government because all it says
all elections shall be free and
open and and and this this
primary election is not free and
open to me.
Mr speaker.
Chairman I I have a very on form
so I don't really practice in
this area I don't know if my co
sponsors Mr Baker.
Would have a more complete
response
I don't I don't practice
election law all I can say
chairman Senator is are you
could probably bring a claim but
I don't know what would be
required to bring a successful
claim.
And I'm.
Very very very confident state
it would not be a claim that
would involve any kind of money
damages
right because you're not
suffering monetary loss
are from you know you can
challenge your primary election
so there's no it would be money
work I don't know.
Share with blue chair Mister
Baker do you have anything to
add to that answer.
Chair Mister speaker Senator
Schmidt is our.
I would add to that that this
doesn't affect that lawsuit The
lawsuits already could be
brought if there was actually a
state constitutional violation
involving the structure of the
primaries in fact I believe
there was and a challenge that
was heard by the New Mexico
Supreme Court a couple years ago
for a ruling that something was
unconstitutional this would be
if there were somehow damages
that were brought as a result of
that and I have a hard time like
the speaker imagining what your
monetary loss that would then be
the subject of compensatory
damages would be self I don't
think this changes the law as it
exists related to the claim
you're imagining.
Yes No and Mister Mister chair
Mister speaker and and Mr Baker
no let me at no I I'm I'm not
asking about monetary really
yeah that that wouldn't really
make sense we were some out in
joining the the you know the
ability of the government to
continue to to do something and
so it is that injunctive relief
that I'm curious about could
someone could could not cleared
person sue now he them this is
giving further for the cause of
action now you know we're we're
actually going to change the law
so I understand the prior case
law but
you know we can we can now say
that the I don't know who would
be SB a local local government
that's you know conducting this
or the secretary of state or
somebody but to actually
enjoying or maybe even hold up
an election or or part of the
election
you know and I'm I'm not seeing
one to predict what a judge is
going to say I'm just trying to
figure out what this bill is
actually going to do and and so
I'm just wondering because it
might my plain reading of this
bill of rights it's just says
all actions shall be free and
open.
Yeah and the gentleman it's in
the very short answer is yes you
could bring a claim under the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act I
don't know for sure I guess is
the defendant we secretary state
you can bring a claim under the
Civil Rights Act for a violation
of I think you said it section
eight yes section eight article
two section eight you could
claim that a close primary
violates article two section
eight of the New Mexico has
Jushin and that would be a claim
properly brought under the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act okay
great thank you and then just a
couple other specifics there Mr
chairman and and Representative
is so we have.
Let's you know we we talk a lot
about law enforcement.
And just a.
You know peace officer were to
you know let's let's just use
the extreme exam now they they
they should someone they die.
with the claim be the section
for the you know all people born
equally free they have the right
to
You know enjoy life I mean is
that is that kind of you took my
family you took the life the
right to life away that they're
dead now so what would that be a
claim okay it should chairman
Senator and again
I we have Mister Baker on the
line he's a former federal
prosecutor but also young now
private practice I believe that
those claims are for deprivation
of due deprivation of life
without due process that it so
when it when there's a killing
I believe in please sure we
Louis your Mr right you're
correct me if I'm mistaken but I
believe those claims with the
broader federal law are brought
under the Fourteenth Amendment
deprivation of life without due
process.
Mister maker here.
Commenter response.
Mister chair Mister speaker so
we are
yes I mean there in the law
enforcement contacts they're
considered an unlawful seizure
through the use of excessive
force
and so they're you know they're
there because they fall under
the fourth and Fourteenth
Amendment
and regularly litigated that way
So I this area it would be just
a matter of that you know that
now where state constitution is
meaningless in that area it
provides a meaningful role in
vindicating rights and unlike
being sued in Albuquerque Santa
Fe Los crucis the local person
who was harms could bring a
local court action or a local
judge and jury would determine
whether the local government
violated their rights.
A jury Center B. section ten of
the bill of rights Mexico.
Session so not not section for.
I think there's a Mr Chairman
think there's a Mr Baker was
saying that it least as well and
this is actually every so if we
want to have Mr chairman and
senator like eight have a law
school
moment you know I see Senator
Sedillo Lopez you know one of my
professors and I was Law School
this is kind of one of the
things that makes lawyers who
practice in constitutional law
C..
Things are very very interesting
because under the federal
constitution as Mister Baker
saying.
Excessive use of force cases are
brought as a search and seizure
case it may be that our courts
when you look at our bill of
rights which she would treat
those cases under section four.
With that right to life and
you're not deprive that right
without due process we don't
know yet because we haven't of
course
hi on it is that we submitted if
this becomes law we will come to
learn okay thank you Mr chairman
and Mr speaker I'm not once
again trying to not not ask you
to just predict what a judge is
going to say so so don't please
don't misunderstand what I'm
trying to do just to get terms
I'm not very good at it.
well as Mr Chairman
representative is Mr speaker
just a couple more points I'm
I'm I'm wondering how this would
work at that state for a medical
doctor you H.
you know it and that's kind of
us in this deprivation of life
you know because we have these
wrongful death suits and
malpractice but what this is far
as our our our physicians or
nurses or health care people at
at a at a public hospital.
can then someone say well you
you deprive you know their their
life under under this act.
Chairman Senator I believe not
I believe that if you have a
medical negligence case than the
standard is is.
Abridging the standard of care
but Mr chairman and senator your
permission I think we'd like to
ask Marie Sanders he's on the
line to give a more fulsome
answer to the Senator sorry.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman speaker
so Senator communities I think
that I think when I look at two
things one is most claims
against doctors or you want to
make hospital for example of the
local as a governmental hospital
is a matter of bringing a
negligence claim for medical
malpractice and usually met you
know medical on the negligence
is not the same as a constant
the constitutional right
violation so they would not be
allowed to be brought under the
Civil Rights Act and there I am
predicting what a judge might
say but like speaker Egolf I'm
not always great with
predictions are but I will make
a decision if for example a
medical doctor decided that
they would treat African
American women differently in
their medical treatment then
they are treating non African
American women and that might be
something that the doctor or you
NMAG would in fact be held
allow liable under the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act.
Okay thank you.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that answer I just I I
do still have a concern since we
can't predict the judges I still
a concern how this could
potentially affect a death that
occurs in a in a hospital or
healthcare setting or even with
a home health nurse you know so
I'll move on from I just have
one more point I know other
people want to talk so I don't
want to take a second to much
time but I've been just once
again to reiterate kind of my
concern about that amendments I
I just feel like we are we are
providing you know certain
immunities with with certain
types of of a government
entities and I I just still have
have some concerns but I I I I
certainly look forward to listen
to the rest of the day and I
appreciate it's it's it's it's
pretty up
rewarding to really learn more
about our law and I I appreciate
the the answers.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you everyone on both sides
of the issue is work so hard to
bring this up go forward.
Consider this of course the and
then unfunded mandate for local
governments you earlier it was
the speaker of the speakers.
Characterize this is a David and
Goliath situation well.
Local governments feel like
David with the state government
building Goliath forcing
something up on them I'm a
former city manager county
manager.
Huge advocate for local
government.
The local government is
adamantly against this have to
really support my friends and
colleagues and local government.
Also point number three
Was it with senator Russell
finex said she cannot supports
the goal here but the bill needs
fixing I certainly agree with
that here we are.
Again trying to force through a
major piece of legislation and
one session understand it's the
first time this issue has been
brought up what oftentimes major
pieces of legislation take two
three four sometimes even ten
years I'm not suggesting this
would take ten years I think you
really needs.
W. R..
Need to be more effective.
Thank.
Point number four Mr chair of.
You can make an argument a good
argument to dis of Bill.
Extends.
my ability it doesn't
necessarily extending civil
rights.
So Mister chair there for Mister
chair I would move a do pass
within wreck.
Is there a second to that
motion.
Questions yeah I know we have a
motion so will will will will
consider your questions in light
of whatever happens on this
motion debate on this motion.
I.
Senator think seconded it.
Okay Senator was.
Mr.
Senator Smith
Mr chairman.
Speaker and Representative Lewis
I just have a few questions and
one of the questions that I had
yes I was looking at the bill
and.
Could you tell me how do we
already have qualified immunity
New Mexico law.
Chairman and senator I goes it's
it's sort of complicated
question because it on one hand
yes
on the one hand.
The state actors.
Acting under color New Mexico
law do raise.
The defense in federal court.
When actions that they take to
deprive New Mexicans in their
rights are brought under section
nineteen eighty three this or
Rights Act of eighteen seventy
one so in that way yes.
There has not ever been an
opportunity in New Mexico courts
for qualified immunity to be
raised were used because civil
rights claims have never been
brought.
In New Mexico courts under the
New Mexico constitution so it's
a question of I would say not
yet.
And if we don't prohibit the
development of the drive
qualified immunity in New Mexico
law but create New Mexico Civil
Rights Act the likelihood that
a.
I qualified immunity would
develop is quite high under the
interstitial doctrine of
constitutional law interactions
between state and federal
constitutions.
State courts typically will look
at federal courts.
Federal decisions on matters
that are similar between state
federal law state federal
constitutions and so if we don't
prohibit qualified immunity at
the outset there is a
significant possibility that New
Mexico courts could adopt
qualified immunity in the event
the Civil Rights Act is enacted.
In our state.
Mr speaker and and
Representative Lewis I
appreciate that actually Google
and couldn't find it definitive
point on that so I appreciate
that
answer my next question was and
and looking at the bill it talks
about
The just one of the cats there
automatic and the only go one
way they they do not ever
decreased from cost living goes
down is there a reason for that.
Chairman and senator we did that
because that is the way CPI
inflators are done.
Everywhere else were aware of
the New Mexico law and we
thought we need to consistency.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
Mr speaker I just figured with
our volatile economic conditions
in New Mexico I agree
interesting to watch and track
it but the next question.
Chairman and Mr speaker and
Representative Lewis is
You do you believe that this
your legislation would make our
county jails and sheriff's
uninsurable with all the
concerns it'll be brought up and
in legislation.
Chairman and senator I I do not
believe that this will make any
entity in government especially
with the amendment was adopted
earlier I don't think this will
make them.
At risk of being uninsurable and
I mention that solitary
confinement K. my opening
comments as an example of the
local government that is
been subject to a substantial
settlement in excess of fifty
million dollars.
For single case and they're
still insured.
Mr Mr chairman Mr speaker
Representative Lewis and I
appreciate that the the
amendment had to do with more of
the assessors are messing about
counties but I know that there
part of New Mexico can assurance
Authority pull and I just
wondered because as that pool
gets it with more more of
lawsuits it would would be an
issue important my next question
is actually the discussion on
the.
It comes up to the public body
pieces it's it's actually not
against individual public
employee and it's on page five
lines nineteen through twenty
three does this actually get in
and we had I think what made to
talk about
Some way of stopping unemployed
from you know doing something
wrong because I see that we're
penalizing the department's.
This calls for you to stop.
Something wrong it's are
violating that how would the.
Hello your legislation because
in to correct their actions.
Mister chairman Senator were you
with this provision trying to
strike an appropriate balance.
Between the concerns that we
heard from individual state
employees and members of law
enforcement who want to.
You know they're able to do
their jobs and to do their jobs
without worry being brought into
court with that one tool in the
toolbox accountability you would
so we're not offering Miss
Mister chairman Senator as a.
Cleat solution to all of the
issues that arise in government
misconduct that deprives people
of their the breeze in their
rights this is one piece of it.
It provides accountability on
the back end and if there are
results that how the employer
accountable for the conduct of
the employee there are in the
long multiple opportunities for
please.
To be disciplined to be
terminated employees.
To face other consequences for
misconduct and this bill doesn't
remove any of those other
opportunities.
Mr Chairman
the speaker all morning why
those opportunity for misconduct
have been used to if you look at
just the Albuquerque area that
was all shootings and playing
you rarely hear of anything long
term changing and and I think
it's more rural a personal
approach than statewide approach
but only that there might my
last question Mr Senator or
maybe COVID Mr speaker is I'd
gotten a a letter to the email
from.
Part of the state to have a
question with this because and
I'm not I'm turning it actually
states that the senator for
times but and I know we have
some Senate bit as June
Representative Lewis Sir Terry's
it's so asking if this would be
an ethics violation because they
they look at it is we the
legislators will be able
profiting this bill have you had
and I know there's not bad on it
but if you had director call
well.
Discussions with why that
wouldn't be the case with you
guys being attorneys.
Mister chairman Senator hi issue
comment on this already this is
not a conflict and when asked
about this I said I don't need
to offer my opinion on the
matter because the law is clear
on its own this is this is not a
conflict.
And that's all I have to.
Mr Chairman Mr speaker I I sent
them a note back to I would be
hopeful because you guys are
pretty adamant on getting this
bill out to you with work pro
bono from here on out on these
claims with that you thank you.
Senator Ingle.
Thank you.
Yes okay thank you I don't have
any questions for the Sanchez
but I have been here a long time
and there's not as many bills as
you think that mystified me as
to as to really their source and
our really why they're being
done because this is going to
open up thing on every community
and every part of New Mexico
like we've never seen before
we're gonna have an increase in
population of well primarily
attorneys.
Fine but the thing about is what
really bothered me Mr chairman
of the number of billboards are
going to be put on our highways
suggestion we call all your.
I think it's going to be really
damaging to the environment
because we won't be able to say
anything.
I really do I I I I know I'm I'm
making you laugh and that's
that's what it's supposed to do
but the thing about this this
bill hasn't changed danger to it
that we don't have any idea on
there hasn't been any clear
answers to where we're going
with this it's all
constitutional.
Comments and things like that
about how these things will be
done in our court system in New
Mexico there's never been
anything but a source of
surprises to me on how they
interpret things but I visualize
this is something that's going
to be unbelievably damage
damaging to the outlook of New
Mexico and when we try to
recruit businesses and things to
come in here when we crash
things like this it sends a very
very your message Mr Stewart New
Mexico is headed thank you.
Thank you senator any other
comments or questions on the
motion and we just senator
Thomas motion for a.
Of the they do has no
recommendation.
Mr chairman I'd like to take a
motion.
Tabling motion is not debatable.
What we're voting on this is a
motion to table.
S. is is jails will go back to
senator Thomas motion if it
passes the this bill will be
tabled here.
Secretary will call the roll.
Yes ma'am.
And all yes.
No.
Yes there is a Lopez.
No.
Now.
There are Thoman hello.
Well no.
So the motion fails and we'll go
now to Senator Commons motion
for no REC.
I'm.
For.
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am.
I don't know.
Yes.
No.
Yes yes
thanks.
Yes explain my vote are Tom and.
Yes.
There are to see Pino.
Yes I'll explain my vote as well
Senator thanks to explain your
vote.
I'm.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsors
this I feel like to have a
healthy discussion in Judiciary
with if there is in the meeting
on it.
But I will reserve my decision
about how I will vote on the
floor because there are I do.
I don't I'm comfortable with the
bill.
And
Want to see justice.
Retribution.
No.
Been heard but I do think we
should take this step by step
thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Stefanics and
just to explain my motive I and
toyed with the idea you know the
the.
New Mexico counties.
Spent a lot of time talking to
me about their fears about this
bill and I enjoyed the idea of
us as in the Sanchez would be
amenable to us some kind of a
sunset clause would let us try
this out for a few years.
This is the kind of disaster
that the state counties think
it's going to be here then
Senator Ingle thanks is going to
be.
Which is why but then the more I
thought about it the more I
realize we we don't need a
sunset clause is this bill
started causing problems for
local governments.
State government for that matter
in a manner that we have an
anticipated.
We have another shot and we can
always come back and and and and
remember amended.
Reduce eliminate whatever so I I
think it's certainly worth the
discussion is certainly worth
moving on to Judiciary and so I
want to thank the sponsors thank
all the people who came and and
and spoke today for.
Estimating debate and and and
also the committee members for
for hanging in there and and
really digging into this issue
thank you so much and thank you
and we'll move then to the next
item on the agenda and we're
gonna take Senator pope's three
mills.
Do you want to say anything to
give you a chance to say
something Representative Lewis
or or speaker you all.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee members.
Appreciate that we're gonna be
able to have the discussion in
judiciary I think that's going
to be very informative and I I
thank you for your time and Mr
speaker I don't know if you have
anything to add.
Thank you very much I very much
appreciate your amendment Mr
chairman hopefully that will
just waits some concerns and we
will keep working on it and
Senator Stefanics and I'll give
you a call actually amended
judiciary receiver on the floor
and Senator AUMENT Mr chairman
thank you so much.
Thank you thank you very much.
Okay you'll later.
Five minutes right before we
start off the Center posts three
mills I would appreciate that
opportunity just to stretch and
Mueller so's refreshed a little
bit before we take a five
minutes thank you.
Five minutes.
Senator.
Welcome.
So we'll start with your
Missy was my agenda.
What was your sixty eight.
Two sixty eight change the audit
reporting requirements.
Great thank you Mr chair
committee members.
I want to acknowledge so my
experts that help me with this
bill where the honorable state
auditor Brian line we have a
very and this would be surprised
if.
And Matt Baca.
CPA Clifton Larson and.
Senate bill two sixty eight is
important for the office of the
state auditor and the profession
of public accounts in New Mexico
this legislation is vital in
order to avoid further conflict
with the existing laws rules and
professional standards because
the alignment in the apple story
is in the public interest this
bill will enable the office of
the state are to be to better
accomplish its statutory duties
ultimately improve governmental
accountability and the in New
Mexico.
The proposed changes to the
audit related reporting
requirements.
Audit documentation which should
not be considered public records
of the state because the doctor.
I've been told.
On a document the file.
Property of the.
Control as an audit trust is
governed by the pairing
Authority based on the type of
engagement and procedures and
protected by existing laws rules
and professional standards the
lack of clarity on the non
public majority of audit
documentation any audit act
creates a conflict with the
broad definition of public
records in the upper.
Reports are.
Intended are the intended public
record and the audit act is
already clear as to when reports
become public record so the
proposed changes will provide
clarity with regard to audit
documentation that is already
applied and required to remain
confidential in the context of
authority govern governing the
office of the state auditor and
the profession of public
accountancy.
Maintaining the confidentiality
of audit documentation already
required by laws rules and
professional standards also
prevents the spread of
incomplete and inaccurate
information the audit act was
can be consistent with the
public accounts the act the
audit rule that it promulgated
to carry out the statutory
duties of the office of the
state auditor ensure audits are
conducted in accordance with
generally accepted auditing
standards and the apple going
professional standards that very
by engagement.
Without the alignment in
authority proposed by this
legislation certified public
accountants are at risk which
could have rippling consequences
for the profession a public
account C. in New Mexico.
This legislation is critical to
the office of the state officer
once again and the profession of
public accountancy in New Mexico
as are many firms performing the
audits of public agencies that
this legislation affects without
the necessary alignment in
authority set forth in this bill
firms may be prevented from
performing governmental audits
and many members of the public
would likely be hesitant to
submit their allegations of
waste fraud and abuse.
The audit that should allow the
office of the state auditor to
achieve its duties as a
constitutional executive branch
office because auditing is
highly regulated we are seeking
alignment and relevant authority
so the state auditor and staff
were able to accomplish their
purpose of providing valuable
financial oversight for the
state of New Mexico.
With that Mr chairman committee
members I would just want to
give an opportunity for the
state auditor or leader and or
Mr bone an opportunity if they
wanted to add anything to the
opening statement.
Thank you very much Senator the.
Mr uninsured Cologne would you
like to say something.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you senator pope
and I want to thank the New
Mexico CPA's for standing with
us in this legislation and I
want to thank the team at the
office of the state auditor for
their great work today is the
seven hundred and eighty eight
they have awesome at the office
of state auditor I'm honored to
be serving and I would just want
Mr chairman members is committed
no this is the first piece of
legislation that we are
advancing during my term of
office and it is supremely
important and critical to our
mission SB six to sixty eight
enables our office to better
accomplished our purpose is a
constitutional independent
executive branch agency with
financial oversight for New
Mexico agencies of local public
bodies in any given year Mr
chairman members the committee
we can drive oversee approximate
eight hundred to one thousand
audits annually USA is in the
practice of public accountancy
under New Mexico law and under
our audit at the audit act must
be revised to accurately reflect
the laws regulations and most
importantly Mr chairman members
of the committee public and
professional standards for
accounts.
Let me just say that the
potential or actual conflict
with existing laws rules and
professional standards is the
key reason for the statutory
changes that issue under Senate
bill two sixty eight there is a
strong need as senator pope is
indicated for alignment between
all applicable of thorns that's
public accountancy standards
regulations and rules and our
audit act and all statutory
authority this audit act must be
consistent State with the public
accountancy Act.
The order rule and our office is
required to annually promulgate
an update and carry out the rule
and our statutory duties of the
office we have to make sure that
audits are all conducted in
accordance with general accepted
accounting and auditing
standards those standards
include items that are impacted
by the competent confidential
nature of work product and work
papers were accounts.
Other proposed changes are
reflected in this legislation of
really technological advances in
which our reports are made
public and available on the
office of the state auditor's
website which upon release
they're instantly made available
to a hundred percent of the
public and anybody the request
and for our office we're always
happy to facilitate our copy
forms now let me be clear just
in terms of accountancy and
auditing ownership of audit
documentation these are work
papers what we call work papers
in the audit profession it's a
critical concept very similar to
attorney work product.
Privilege and confidentiality
that we know the good senator
and Senate City of local about
what we're papers are non public
because their private controlled
and are protected under work
papers are not public and under
the public accountancy Act audit
documentation including those
work papers by the property of
the responsible certificate
holder in this case what we're
referring to our certified
public accountants who have to
maintain those standards much
like the expertise that we bring
to the table in the private
sector Mr mat bone from one of
our most distinguished and hard
working firms in the state of
New Mexico to be clear let me
just say that those eight
hundred to one thousand audits
and agreed upon procedures are
done annually on the budget
allocations that you make Mr
chairman members of this
committee the vast majority of
those are done by the private
sector.
Right so we need to understand
that on an annual basis our
office certifies and allows
approximately seventy to eighty
independent public accountants
like Matt bone in Clifton Larson
Allen to conduct those audits
which we oversee and ultimately
released to the public.
One of the public accountancy
Act audit documentation those
are all under the responsibility
of those private entities and
they're not government property.
Actual or potential conflicts in
law if confidence audit
documentation is considered
public record.
That would not be in the
public's interest we will not be
able to get CPA's to sign off on
audits if they know that their
work papers are not protected.
In that case we're in crisis
mode and we will not be able to
carry out our mandate a
constitutional obligations and
duties me just say the OSA
promotes enhances accountability
and transparency through our
reports which are one hundred
percent public and but those
reports are based completed
test work and procedures with
thorough review from our office
because ninety nine percent of
those audits are done by IPA's
as I mention considering audit
documentation public records is
not only a threat to a state but
also to the independent public
accountants the professional
public accounts in New Mexico as
well as the public USA is
required to uphold and protect
the confidentiality of audit
documentation and IPA's as a
matter of law and professional
responsibility the audit act as
we are amending it it should fit
the Aussies obligations within
the practice of public
accountancy.
It's also important as a matter
the confidential audit
documentation not be considered
public record of the state to
prevent the spread of it being
incomplete and inaccurate
information.
Your state is required to uphold
the ownership and
confidentiality that
documentation anytime it's
challenged of course there's
always available to the public
in individuals subpoena process
through the courts this does not
affect that let me be very clear
on that point.
So we want to make sure that
this legislation allows us to be
in compliance with all
applicable laws rules and most
importantly professional
standards it's in the public's
interest for this authority to
be alignment with all other
applicable standards and
obligations.
Ascalon no certified public
accountant Republic.
Account is permitted to disclose
the information conducting in
the conduct of an exam audit or
investigation made in their
public and professional
capacity.
Together with the public
accountancy Act these laws exist
for good reasons and our audit
act thanks to senator pope is
going to come in alignment with
that.
Let me be clear this legislation
is not enacted it will have a
detrimental impact on our
ability to do our work it places
CPA license holders employed by
OSA at risk by actively forcing
OSA staff an independent public
accountants performing public
engagement engagement to be in
conflict order violate
applicable laws or professional
standards and in some cases
both.
Our deputy state auditor Natalie
Cordova CPA is on in this
hearing today Mr chairman
members of the committee and if
she were to be able to sign off
on all our releases her license
could be in jeopardy for
violating the standards of our
profession and under her CPA
license.
You Senate bill two sixty eight
does not become law there's also
a chilling effect on complaints
made for waste fraud abuse in
our office yeah I tease working
on behalf of the public in the
state in our capacity to achieve
our obligations and purpose
would be.
Very hindered and marginalized
at least USA must uphold the
confidentiality of audit
documentation for all
stakeholders most especially the
independent public accountants
we work with on an annual basis.
It is to serve the public and
the request of the New Mexico
audit act be amended to reflect
the applicable authority as it
is presented to you today Mr
chairman and members of the
committee we urge you to pass
this bill for the benefit of all
New Mexicans and with respect to
the independent public
accountants and all the CPA's
that allow us to do our
constitutional duty and be the
state's public accountancy for
at the office of the state
auditor thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr.
Senator anybody else on your
list of expert witnesses.
Your muted Senator.
My apologies.
I believe that will be it for
The presentation I will open it
up for Mister brown bear Mr bone
I don't know if you wanted to
wait for questioning.
Do you want to say anything Mr
bonus.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Senator program your Cologne did
excellent job of laying out the
the need to offline the art Act
with the professional standards
I stand with the their position
and agree with with what they
said and I I am for.
Sibylla to sixty eight be more
happy to stand for any questions
that to any of the.
It committee members may have.
Senator will go to the public
for committee is there anybody
in the in the room and other
ones to make comments for or
against this measure.
Leisure and
use that icon in the bottom of
the screen it says reactions and
you can.
A little handle will recognize
you Tania Maestas Justin that
and we're recognized senior
please.
You're on mute yourself first.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for this
opportunity on behalf of the New
Mexico attorney general's office
we are in full support of this
bill as not only the agency that
represents the public
County Board and is this with
the licensing of the profession
we are also the entity
responsible for enforcement of
action sent over as referrals in
a criminal matter from the
office of the state auditor so
we completely agreed with these
changes are necessary for the
office of the Attorney General
to fill both to the student.
Thank you Mr this anyone else.
Anyone else.
Seeing none will go to the
committee members of the
committee what is your what is
your what are your comments or
questions or what is your will.
Regarding this bill Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman and and thank
you senator pope for this
legislation on it's my
understanding the the state
auditor's office staff has
really worked in full artist
with this legislation and I want
to publicly acknowledge them for
that.
So so way to go and thank you
thank you auditor for your
service to New Mexico and really
appreciate your staff.
Thank you senator.
Senator Cervantes followed by
Senator is the a little bit.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator just just couple quick
question
I guess I just didn't quite
understand why this is kind of
an urgent crisis that what what
was it that that changed.
Or is just in some of that was
recently found out.
Mr chair Senator Schmedes.
To yield and give that
yes.
Mr chairman ranking senators
maintenance thank you for the
question it's a right on point I
will just say that as we have
continued to do everything we
can to embrace accountability
transparency and excellence in
government the conversation
continues and while there are
opportunities for folks to get
productive and more office and
as we continue to make ourselves
more available to the public the
public continues to.
Find important and sometimes
creative requests and so we have
found that we just want to make
it clear that we're protecting
the profession we're protecting
and making sure that all of
the standards and statutes are
in alignment and we we realized
having reviewed this that it
would be helpful to have more
clarity and so we just want to
make sure that we narrowly set
this out we narrowly defined
what is not public record and
this way it's clear to the
public and it's clear our office
and the public.
The practice in accountancy that
we are protecting and looking
out for their professional
standards and obligations to
their clients excellent question
thank you Mr chairman and
ranking member senator smitteez.
Okay great great Mr Mr chair
and.
It's gone yeah that that that
answer my questions come in the
process of doing your work and
then you know interface with the
public so that just one last
question.
In in process in in process
audit ET you know that is
ongoing is that you think needs
to be included in this bill or.
Mr.
Senator.
You'll to the state auditor get.
Mr chairman ranking member
senator smitteez thank you for
the question I I'm not exactly
sure the scenario that you are
envisioning but we make sure
that all our entities fully
comply with the request of our
independent public accounts or
if we're conducting the audit in
the house under our licensed
CPA's then we make sure that
that they make themselves
available for those meetings I'm
not quite sure if you mean that
those meetings would not be open
to the public we have not
encountered any kind of
situation like that or any
requests
exit conferences it's very clear
that those are not open to the
public the stakeholders who are
permitted to be present are
invited and included
I think those maybe the two
scenarios that you might be
speaking of Mr chairman ranking
member Senator Schmedes if if
not please re direct me
now Mr chairman.
State are long in on all that
that answers my question I just
I just want to make sure we
didn't need to just go ahead and
add that on if if someone was
going to make that request of
the other process meeting but
now that that makes sense thank
you.
Thank you.
Senator the the lotus.
Yes thank you Mr chair and it's
always great to see you
Mr auditor honorable auditor and
thank you thank you for bringing
this I think a minute she and
maybe maybe not but I think I'm
gonna channel Judiciary a little
bit.
What is I was looking at your
brother.
And
This is relates to two senators
meetings COVID it seems to me
that it that you have a very
strong argument that there are
there are ready of not covered
by it press so.
So what is it precisely I guess
I'm more I understand better and
and and I I'm not well
internally with attorney client
privilege I'm not familiar with
With CPA privilege or or auditor
privileged I I I guess I just
want to know a little bit more
why this is necessary because
looking at it I think is a very
strong argument that it is not.
It is not subject to disclosure
by a brick at the present time.
So Mister.
Once again yield to the state
are.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez excellent
that
deeper dive into thank you
members PED's kind of thought
process there and I agree I
agree a hundred percent in in my
mind in our profession there is
no question that that that that
we have that protection and it
is addressed in a manner that
allows us to not have to produce
these work paper.
These working papers these work
papers.
But I will just say that.
As was stated while I listen to
the three hours preceding this
particular bill being heard.
Courts are somewhat
unpredictable and it's extremely
important that we do everything
we can to protect our public
accounts that work with our
office as stakeholders and there
are pending questions as to
whether or not those were papers
are are covered and we just
really wanted to make sure we
have the because we have this
audit act on the books if you
were silent one might make the
argument that if they were to be
protected it would be in the
audit act.
And and so we just want to have
that maybe it's it's just Mr
from when it but maybe not where
some people in the public says.
I'm thank you Mr chair I am I do
believe it's a little bit
redundant but at far be it from
me to say that there are no
redundancies the law so I
appreciate your bringing it and
and thank you very much Mr
chair.
Thank you senator we have no
other questions from the
committee so what's the will of
the committee.
I'm of the past Senator Sedillo
Lopez moves into past seconded
by the chairman any other debate
or discussion.
Seeing the secretary will call
the roll.
Senate bill two Sixtyeight
center guy and ghosts yes
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes thanks yes
Thoman.
Yes thirteen no yes.
One down Senator to go and thank
you Mr archer thing good to see
you again.
So Senator your next bill is two
seventy two as amended a
military family relief school
enrollment.
What is it about.
One second I'm sorry Mr chair.
Here we go.
All right Mister chair from
committee members.
Amended is a military family.
Employment.
There are.
Your children thank you schools
annually did a permanent change
of station move the challenger
transferring records state
differences in education and
graduation requirements
enrollment barriers in sports
electives in extracurricular
activities can be daunting if
your child is on an individual
education program even add
another layer of concern you
know the DOD has been looking at
this for a long time and they
did work on the
I'm sorry lost my place working
with the national center the
interstate compacts establish
the interstate compact on
educational opportunities for
military children in two
thousand eight this covers
common policies for records
transfer enrollment placement
and graduation requirements
these reforms were great but
it's still left families deal
with the issues once they
arrived at a new duty station
the DOT has been working with
states to make the task of
transferring to a new school
easier by giving military
parents a temporary waiver to
the residence requirement this
will enable them to pre enroll
their children in the school
district before they arrived at
a PCS destination initiative is
called advanced enrollment and
this is now policy in nineteen
states are Vermont is working on
this right now so we would
either be the twentieth of the
twenty first state to do this
now this policy of advanced
enrollment of allowing a
military member to go ahead and
register their child for classes
already happens in some of our
schools and summer school
districts but we want to ensure
that this happens statewide
because you have situations
where this would also cover our
National Guard and reserves that
deploy and relocate plus you
have situations where you might
have someone who is a person in
the military they might be
recruiter might be in a remote
location even here in New Mexico
where they're not near a
military base and have kids.
What advanced in Rome it does in
the budget is it gives the
opportunity.
For military kids to participate
in random lotteries for charter
magnet schools the chance to
enroll in specialized academic
programs an opportunity to begin
coordinating an IEP or I will
for plan and the ability to
register for courses and plan
for the course of study.
The comfort of knowing which
school they will attend before
arriving you know it is just it
means so much you have to
remember with some of these
military kids some of them are
moving six to nine times if
their family makes a military
career so it's a lot of moves in
a lot of adjustments.
how this process will work is
once I'm at the the military
member of the family gets their
orders they're actually able to
communicate with that screen
show the orders and actually
register their child for courses
and extracurricular activities
once they arrive in a location
they will actually confirm their
residents to attend either that
charter school or that school
and that specific school
district.
Like I said before we would be
the twentieth and twenty first
state to do this this is some of
the other similar to some of the
other legislation that I brought
this session really looking out
for military families and our
dependence and I think this is
just really important it's
something that's like I said
it's not and there's not
appropriation needed and it's
just something we need to do
here in New Mexico with that
being said Mr chair and
committee members I'm open to
any public comment can any
questions thank you.
Your arm you Mr chair.
Thank you senator let's see if
there is any public comment is
there anyone in the audience who
wants to speak yes Eric this
year please.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is surface Gerald I'm senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chambers in strong support
of this bill and we applaud
Senator pope for bringing it.
Currently when military families
relocate their children might
end up kind of stuck with
whatever courses are still
available which leaves them with
classes that may not suit their
credit needs or their elected
interests or they've Mr charters
lottery they have to resign
themselves to a wait list or
another option is to win
rolling.
So by enabling military families
to enroll their children in a
traditional public school or to
enter charter schools lottery
for the actually established
residence in the state this bill
creates a more supportive and
welcoming environment for
military families as we move to
the area so we are the committee
to prove it to help boost their
children's success through a
challenging transition to a new
home thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else money to me Madam
either for or against this bill.
Seeing the committee wants the
committees will on this bill.
I move the do pass we have a
motion for a new pass from
Senator Sedillo Lopez almond
second.
Thomas industries question
Senator Schmedes.
Yes Mr chair thank got real
quick on this one this a great
bill force I supported just want
to make sure we're we're we're
not having any technical issues
on the back the on the end of
the bill we we parse out the
public for the charter school
I'm on page three.
And the the added language it
says or will it not some online
Levin.
It says or will be residing
within the school.
Well if if we're talking about a
charter school you know we have
to talk to charge what one's
gonna be charter through the
actual school districts so I
think you include that but what
about a what about our charter
school that's chartered through
the P. E. D. do we need to do
need to change the language
there to to accommodate those
those students.
Senator.
Senator Mr chair Senator
committees
I would be willing to look at
that and confirm that that's
that that bridge is not in
conflict with the drafter and to
top folks but right now I can
give you a firm answer if it
covers because it sounds like
your question is what will the
way we wrote it in cover public
charter schools that sounds like
you might be want to make sure
that we're including charter
schools is that correct.
Yes Mr chairman and senator I I
just want to make sure we
because I I had written a bill
that.
Didn't have to do with this
particular subject but when in
in in discussing with the the
other drafter Donnelly does a
lot of the you know the
education drafting.
She did a great job explain to
me how this works and and I and
I may be wrong maybe maybe it is
inclusive of of what you're
trying to do I I just I just
want to make sure I get the
specific question is are clearly
that language you are including
the the public charter schools
that are chartered through their
own district but I'm just
wondering if you are still
including the charter schools
that are chartered through the
PED directly and so it just made
you know may need to change it I
may not but but yeah it's if you
want to just check on that I I
think that's your intent is just
to do all public schools all
charter schools everywhere but I
just want to make sure we're
not.
we unintentionally excluding the
charter schools that are charter
through PED directly that that's
all.
Mr chairman I mean Senator
Schmedes I would point out that
the
The bills already been heard by
the Education Committee so.
I assume they wouldn't tease
that out at that point.
Shares Mr chair Senator Schmedes
that was the intent is for
public and charter schools and
if you look at the analysis and
even mentions District Court
rules so that's my intent but I
I will I have no problem
following up to confirm that
this language does not conflict
from the into.
Thank you thank you Mr chair on
that point.
Senator Sedillo.
You see if you had wanted to the
way that the statutory it the
construction goes if you want to
exclude have to be specific so
they would have had to.
District charter school district
Charter schools as opposed to
PED charter schools if they want
if they intended to limit it.
Language is broad I I would I
think that there's not a problem
I I agree Senator you know
Senator pope is is generous to
to want to excluded but I think
it's I think it's clear myself
but.
but my the.
Is.
All thank you Mr chairman yeah
and and once again I have no
concern with with the bill I
just I just want to make sure it
was it was clear and and I I
think it's fine to I just I just
thought since I had it gone
through this and have gone
through multiple iterations of a
of a bill that I had a little
while back for at drafted
I just want to make sure that
because those charter schools
don't really have a district in
the district is the state of New
Mexico I guess so anyway I'm
like I said no no concern just
want to make sure it's it's
clear and I'm I'm sure Center
opal will will verify that so
I'm I'm good.
Actually the state charter.
Charters are considering we
districts under themselves so
basically anybody.
Who.
Good access charter schools
charter by PED Williams
opportunity.
And that was my understand Mr
chair Senator is Senator Sedillo
Lopez that was my understanding
the fact that we just charters
it was inclusive to all charters
because we weren't excluding but
once again I will confirm
because that is the intent.
No no I think that's it I just
you know page three doesn't
doesn't say charter that it
that's why I had asked the
question on the on the end of
the bill it says you know public
school or charter and yeah and
and page three doesn't actually
have the word charter the new
language so so that's that's why
I was a little confused there
image.
Any other discussion of this do
we have a motion I was trying
to redo Senator.
Okay.
This call will.
I'm bill two seven chair Senator
Gallegos yes Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez.
Yes explain.
There's the FedEx yes Sir
Thomas.
Yes.
Share or to see Pino yes to
explain her role in senators so
the lotus I I just wanted to say
I have a lot of the a lot of
these military families in my
district and and I'm so glad for
this bill because there is there
are some inconsistencies in how
these families are treated so
this is great news the great
bill thank you.
Thank you senator and finally
Senator pope your your last
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm glad I
was able to practice missile C.
will get this there one the same
one.
The images during the day we
will see what happens.
So
to seventy five the Veterans
Services departments
responsibility for a homeless
veterans.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members two seventy five this
authorized services department
to assess veterans who are
experience are at risk of
experiencing homelessness.
Department's role would be to
provide access to services and
provide assistance organizations
offering services to to those
veterans right now the
department of health is
conducting.
Much of this role and while they
do a great job serving our
homeless community the
department of Veterans Services
be able to understand better
engage and help our hope
homeless veteran community on
the zoom today I have Bobby
Ehrig who is the CEO Veterans
integration center and I want to
give him a little time this from
his experiences and why why
what.
Department will take on this
role from allowed to do that Mr
chair.
Yes please see you again.
Thank you Mr chair
Members of the committee and my
name is Bobby Ehrig that and the
CEO of the neck animation
previous Sam also an army
veteran of seventeen years I
wanted to I think today and
thank you very much center
opening is still up at the
explain you how Senate bill two
seventy five would impact of
that trend of New Mexico
if passed immediately would be
to think.
First it would enable the
department Veterans Services to
specifically help address the
growing issue of better
homelessness throughout our
state and no going problem that
cannot be solved by the
community alone.
Mexicana Mexican damnation The
New Mexico cares about is that
your family and it's not
forgotten that discover that
homeless veterans station
recovery and and to the homeless
cycle that does affect over
three thousand veterans and
their families in Mexico each
year.
What I love to like to do is
that provide some clarification
to the policy issues which are
listed on your fiscal impact
report.
I think it's important to
understand the statistics what
we're actually talking about the
bill because you have you must
understand how significant of an
impact it is that the state
department that and actually be
able to assist in our work in
any naturalist and thank you in
twenty nineteen there was an
estimated two hundred fifty
seven after County what is known
as the annual homeless point in
time count unfortunately this is
only a brief moment in time and
promote it.
Hi this evening.
They did challenge you can
imagine living on the streets
would want payments that are
never seen by most of society
but understand who they are and
where they are found at that
time also there are an estimated
three thousand letters in New
Mexico that are literally
homeless or at risk and how is
this what will it is that we
call them cabs sectors and
homeless business those staying
with friends or family those who
could potentially be immediately
homeless in back of a street any
time if we're not for the
generosity of others.
In addition I also do appreciate
the national numbers and
statistics with me here what I
like to do is give you an
understanding of some of our New
Mexico statistics because as we
all know a lot of the national
standards that people follow you
not directly apply to New Mexico
as a community.
I for example and these are
based on the big services are
provided in twenty twenty so our
general population is
approximately seventy eight
percent white seventeen percent
Hispanic three percent black
thank you percent what we
categorize as other
we also have yet at current and
much like the national average
about ninety percent of the
population nine percent females
one percent transfer that
actually requesting receive
services from that.
I think really is drastically
different the actual age of the
veterans that were standing in
the homeless population in New
Mexico.
On average fifty two percent of
the veterans we serve last year
with fifty five and older I can
also say that the oldest
connection that we had last year
was actually eighty three.
So it is a large disparity from
the national average as far as
the ones that were Senator in
addition
I I I like to point this out
because I think it's relevant
thirty eight percent of the
veterans that we said last year
suffer from mental illness now
this doesn't mean serious mental
illness you know just get
different things on that does
include it but a lot of abuse
suffer from PTSD a lot of them
are non combat related PTSD
because homelessness is a
problem only about fourteen
percent of those we serve last
year ask our drug dependency
issues that we were simple
another twenty eight percent of
them potentially have chronic
health conditions that have
deteriorated over time and if
you think about that with the
agent investing in makes sense.
And I what what the reason that
I wanted to point it out it's
because they add a Senate bill
two seventy five is is not a
very significant to the ability
of New Mexico to show that we
can solve the veteran homeless
crisis you know there are not a
lot of organizations that
specifically addresses we do
have a lot of communities in a
lot of groups and a lot of
organizations and city trying to
get the general homeless problem
but when you talk about veteran
homelessness the needs of the
population and the struggles
that they deal with are
something that we can stop and
we can show that this state and
the nation that we can actually
address effectively and be able
to reduce that number the last
four years we've seen this
number go up exponentially and I
hope said that you will pass
this bill as a first step for us
to get past this and actually
reduce the number of homeless
veterans in the state I'm happy
taking your question.
Thank you Mr.
Senator called.
That is all Mr chair we're ready
for public comment or any
questions okay was there is
anyone here wants to speak
either for or against this bill.
Do you.
three actions brought the screen
and then raise your hand.
What is the committees of the
committee's questions or
comments or motions.
I had one question as senator
Neville the other by our as Mr
every loose to it.
It does say the Veterans
Services Department was.
I want to say less is yes the
service problems because they
don't have any additional
questions.
How are we losing to handle that
situation.
Mr chair covers your correct
mean bringing this bill forward
we do not have an appropriations
we do realize this.
At requirements to the
Department
I I will say that and I have
sent over some junior money to
the apartment I'm not saying it
has to be Townsend for that but
my hope is is that.
Find a way to to fund this and
then appropriation.
That that's what I think.
The Senate Mr are there any
federal monies that having this
is part of the nation's
department would open access to.
Mr chair I'd like.
Mr.
Mr chairman and committee
now.
The federal dollars which can be
allocated
the states have access to the
there are also a lot of a
private foundation grants that
specifically address veteran
homelessness as the larger issue
I that would be in on several
other states across the nation
building programs as well as our
funding department there also
are some opportunity to learn
from other state and have as far
as have they embraced on I think
for a other than the staffing
for the first year I think the
largest component would allow
the I. B. B. S. with the an
example of NXT actually examine
this issue and then determine
what at the state level they can
specifically assist with that
family always need funds by much
like Senate bill two oh seven
and I testified for previously
is trying to allocate some funds
for that reason I think it's
something that we and the state
can immediately addressing get
started on without having always
worry about the fiscal impact
and what it's going to cost
there are a lot of opportunities
to draw them in also as an
example of the deck as any
individual entity are bring in
one point four million dollars
in federal funding specifically
for the homeless veteran issue
so there there are a lot of
opportunities out there.
Thank you thank you Mr as
somebody here in the department
of Veterans Services did you
want to comment on that on this
on this bill.
Service is here to answer any
questions or technical issues
chairman.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
And in the past.
Also.
Second.
Yes Sir thank you Sir.
Any other
questions you may.
This call the roll.
Senate bill two seven five
Senator guy it goes yes
Representative.
And.
Yes.
Yes thank you.
Hello.
Yes.
Thanks.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Well you have another.
Clean slate to Senator Pirtle
three three and that one
negative vote.
Hello my next bill sometimes no
problem thank you Mr chair
committee members are I don't
think this will ever happen
again I appreciate it but I
think it just goes to show that
take care of our.
And is really a on partisan
issue right this is something
that we can all get behind so.
Thank you.
That was valid but somehow I
just couldn't get through
Senator yes.
Now we have
tried to do Senate bill six to
sixty one Senator Williams
Senator mission is to handle it.
And this is presumption for
firefighters so Senator
mentioned you want to present a
bill.
Yes thank you chairman and I
think Senator manuals for
bringing this legislation
forward I do want to advise you
chairman and my colleagues that
I do have to go to a six PM of
then that was a prior obligation
so I want to briefly talk about
the bill for sentiment analysis
introduced the subject matter
experts all leave shortly
thereafter he chairman.
Register chair.
Yes I'm on.
Okay.
Will you Senator when you just
willing to do it and said
Senator McKenna has to leave
changes little in.
I think I had a prior off
publication of six also small.
You know you can leave Senator
we have to keep you here
Senator.
Thank you.
The minutes.
Senator Williams thank you Mr
chairman Senate bill two sixty
one add to list of conditions
are caused by employment
firefighters virus or disease is
been in declared by the
president during the pandemic.
And so the World Health
Organization and and the centers
for disease control included the
call from the virus as a as a
list of present conditions
Senate bill two sixty one adds
that to this to this and I have
to expert witnesses with me they
and they they know a lot more
than I do and that's Dr Doro and
I and pressed mine is all that
document or Medora go first
stand for questions.
Thank you welcome doctor there
Good evening thank you very much
good evening Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Dr
Maduro I unit are emergency
medicine physician I hold a dual
board certification of both
emergency medicine and emergency
medical services
also the vice president of the
New Mexico EMS check chapter of
the NAACP MSP which is the
national association of EMS was
oceans we are an organization
that works for the better
development promotion of the EMS
and practice and science and
technology we also serve as a
resource as advocates advocates
of you must related decisions in
partnership with multiple
organizations and federal
agencies and prior to my career
as a physician I did you mask
for about ten years on it was
also a firefighter paramedic
with the city of Rio Rancho from
two thousand one to two thousand
four today I am here as an
advocate for the to the
amendment changes for Senate
bill two sixty one.
you know in emergency medicine
is very unique area of medicine
and sees people out the quite
frankly the most vulnerable
moments firefighters and EMTs
experience some of the most
dangerous and intense situations
and are exposed to violence
disease and environmental
percentages are often not
immediately known on that first
evaluation and treatment of
those patients as we know in
this last year we have all
experienced you know dealing
with COVID and the two twenty
twenty pandemic that it's been.
I have been intimately involved
in my local area as medical
director within the Albuquerque
Bernalillo county area and part
of the medical direction
committee there on the basically
the operations of how we have
built and developed all of our
practices and protocols for how
we deal with infectious disease
and initial evaluation of
patients also had to take care
of many of them myself in the
emergency department
what's interesting and so it
just creates a very uncertain
environment that when you are a
frontline worker on that you
have a very high risk of
infection there's actually some
recent data that came out in
particularly in New York City I
understand that is not here but
for up but it just demonstrates
how quickly are what a high risk
that exposure is and that in
particular like in New York City
during the initial
During that initial
We that they were fifteen times
more likely to be infected
during that first wave of COVID
nineteen compared to the general
public
so we have seen that there's now
related sure that very much
supports that frontline
healthcare providers including
pre hospital which also is our
firefighters firefighters all
across New Mexico that that they
have a much higher risk of this
you know we really can't we
don't need to belabor all of the
complications but clearly we
know that there is a high
infectivity rate with us and
while the mortality rate is
certainly not as high as other
diseases given its infectivity
rate that is why we have to be
careful with this and we know
that there's multiple
complications with this
including
worsening cardiac disease
thrombotic events including
pulmonary embolism a blood clot
long's stroke
your logic I'm sorry altered
mental status students up a lot
but the from this we see a heart
dysfunction as a result of it
and then there are a lot of long
term supply as a result of this
is well we're we're seeing these
Mexico long periods of time of
people who have a long
experience with hypoxia
shortness of breath sleep
difficulties fatigue and post
post intensive care disorders as
well where people require very
extensive rehabilitation so we
know that this is a significant
impact in our cities we address
those immediate needs.
Well but I believe that this
amendment to the bill will help
further provide that support.
On in addition I believe there
is also a an amendment to the
bill that I think is also
incredibly important that is
discussing the advanced
advancement of the monitoring
for breast cancer I don't
believe that was initially
mentioned in this but as I
understand that is also part of
the changing are part of this as
well and this is an incredibly
important a critically important
in that.
You know women and firefighting
while they have represented a
relatively smaller overall
percentage of the population
firefighters is rapidly
expanding as they become more
more part of our firefighter up
of workforce across the country
and with that comes a high
exposure to carcinogens I
remember when I became a
firefighter one of the things
they told us is no we don't see
as many fires as we used to what
what we do see is fires that
burned for more intense that are
more dangerous than ever before
on and as a result of that also
have a high amount of
carcinogens with that as well
what that has led to in
particular like in one group I
don't know yes what we're going
to we need to move on a little
bit quickly because we know that
some people believe that the
force okay so I'll go ahead and
stop there but also that it is
important that we continue to
expand that surveillance for
breast cancer and and for
providers as well thank you for
thank you.
You say you have an amendment to
the bill.
No we do not have an amendment
for the bill I I believe the
bills drafted I'm looking at
right now with that currently.
Senator.
This is.
Senator yes chair Mister
chairman this brand we want I
have breast cancer is currently
in the bill well we what we
added in this bill is we change
the the age cap there's an age
cap of age of forty four was
that coverage is protected we've
increased at age cap to the age
of fifty five.
So.
We don't have it at any moment
to take action on.
Mr Chairman no you don't it is
currently in the bill.
Okay.
Okay so these are amendments to
the.
Workers compensation program
this bill amends so that that's
fine USA anymore Mr of pres.
Mr chairman no Sir I think
doctor major or if we're on a
time crunch Gerald I'll go ahead
and stand for any questions if
there are any.
Okay is there anyone in the in
the public to us to comment on
this bill is for against.
Mr Chairman yes.
Mr Chairman has brought more I
have the testimony in
opposition.
Okay wanted to start right here
in in opposition.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Roy
Moore I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American property
casualty insurance association
and we respectfully stand in
opposition to the bill are why
we do it now is that
firefighters are for critical
role in society and we
appreciate all the hard work
that they do we have some
concerns about the bill and I
will state them as quickly as I
possibly can.
In the new exemption that you
were looking at this number
fourteen it list a virus or
disease it is not limited to
COVID nineteen and that is a
very broad exemption they could
apply to any virus or disease
and so I you're opening it up to
the the world of different
viruses and diseases that are
out there if it were just an
exemption about COVID nineteen
that would be one thing but it
is any virus or disease the
other thing that I would know is
that it is real any virus or
disease that is declared by four
different entities this could be
the present in the United States
this could be the governor of
New Mexico this could be a
declaration by who give me a
declaration by the CDC that's
pretty broad that's much broader
than just COVID nineteen and so
you have the potential that any
of one of these viruses or
diseases could be subject to a
declaration it's very broad and
it opens up quite a significant.
Exemption or presumption
stature.
Junction in the statute the last
thing that I would say is that
this presumption is not
necessary firefighters can make
claims and what we've heard from
work comp insurers in the state
of New Mexico is that claims are
being made in claims are being
paid for frontline workers who
have.
Been exposed to COVID nineteen
and made claims based upon we
believe the existing structure
works well and we think that
that should stay in place once
again actually acknowledge that
firefighters healthcare workers
are essential to our society and
we appreciate the work they're
doing we don't think that the
exemption needs to be there and
it doesn't need to be there with
such broad language really
appreciate your diligence Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Is there anyone else was in
opposition to this bill.
Okay let's go to those who want
to speak in support of it and
Gloria Ann sars something
rather.
Sars.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Lauren a
sergeant I've been and I have
the honor to serve my community
is a career firefighter in the.
Last twenty years last year many
of us had our lives turned
upside down with the impact of
COVID nineteen well in addition
to that I was also given a
diagnosis of breast cancer on
January twenty fourth of twenty
twenty since that diagnosis I
have had surgery sixteen rounds
of chemotherapy twenty one
radiation treatments.
Sorry.
And numerous physical therapy
visits which is still
continuing.
Some of you may know from your
own experience for those that
you have close to that have gone
through cancer treatment but the
battle is not in the treatment.
There's a long road to
recovery from treatment since it
affects our bodies to the
cellular level not to mention
the mental and emotional aspect
of it which apparently is coming
along right now.
And unfortunately the financial
aspect initially I thought I was
covered by presumptive because
law in place since it does
include breast cancer and I met
the requirements except for the
age requirement of forty years
or younger in the beginning of
my career I knew there were many
dangers I would be exposed to
stressors of the job but never
considered cancer to be one of
them.
Right now it's hard enough to
recruit and hire capable men and
women for this job.
And there is less incentive if
the dangers we face are not
considered important enough to
be covered by this law at a
realistic age I love my job all
the challenges and successes it
is brought me it's been my honor
to serve in this capacity.
Because of this I'm here to ask
that the age limit in this lobby
changed from forty to fifty five
for anyone that may be diagnosed
with breast cancer after me
serving in the bar service in
the state of New Mexico thank
you for your time consideration.
Thank you very much for the
sergeant the counselor loans
welcome good to see you again.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee also thank you to
our many firefighters have been
patiently waiting
to find that the I'm again my
name is lands on them I am
mostly known as a city
councillor in Albuquerque but
this committee may not need that
as I come before you previously
as a cancer patient healthcare
advocate the capacity I'll be
speaking before you today.
No because it's being diagnosed
with cancer I certainly know
that many of the men and women
who have briefly Committee state
firefighters seventy now however
when the occupation itself of
the dangers and rest up exposure
to carcinogens the doctor a
previously mentioned that they
should be receiving their full
support if the firefighters are
diagnosed with cancer the
accused sixty one closer to
continuing to support for our
brave firefighters have been or
may be diagnosed with cancer it
also further supports our
firefighters they have gone
above and beyond during the
COVID pandemic even when we did
not know the extent of the virus
just last year the governor saw
the potential risk that our
first responders were posed with
machine thank the executive
order instructing presumption
with COVID April of last year
Albuquerque codified that
workers compensation and
relation to COVID rest for our
firefighters
and I think benefit should be
extended to all of our
firefighters with us you're
supporting us all to the people
thank you
Thank you.
Senator Representative a
reading.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Serra Randy I'm a twenty year
veteran.
A firefighter member of the
local I. F. at two forty four I
also serve Representative as a
representative on the workers
comp Advisory Council I'd like
the committee to know that the
workers comp Advisory Council
met earlier this week and
unanimously passed us support
for this bill
I hope all members listen very
carefully to worry on a
sergeant's story we'd like to.
Change the future for any of for
for those who came down with
breast cancer in terms of COVID
please understand that although
many firefighters have in New
Mexico gotten COVID very few
have been hospitalized I
understand that at this point
there may be one fate Telavi
down in central southern New
Mexico the incidence is very low
our numbers are low there two
thousand or so of us in the
state.
I support for this bill thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
Justin Chang.
Mr chair Senator J. A. president
of the Albuquerque very fat
firefighters represent
approximately nine hundred
firefighters the first thing I'd
like to say it is why we felt
the need to have the president
the governor the World Health
Organization to declare the
pandemic we feel like those are
the leaders.
All of us and they will
represent us so if it's not
throughout the whole country
maybe it's your New Mexico we
have a pandemic here and that's
why we chose those folks to
declare those emergencies so
that's why we felt it was
important but passing Senator
two sixty one will give our
firefighters and it's that if
they get deal while performing
their duties that they will be
taken care of we continue to ask
for firefighters to step up and
help out wherever they are
needed and they do just that I'm
asking for your support for to
sixty months our firefighters
are protected on top of that I
just want to think up my sister
Laurie on a sergeant who has
been a friend of mine for for
over twenty years and her role
wake efforts that she has done
to to beat cancer to get back on
the job she still performs her
duties every day so I want to
thank her for testifying today
and I want to urge your support
Mr chairman Senators thank you
all I appreciate everything you
guys do.
Thank you Mr.
Robert such as CEO this issue
Senator thank you don't just be
real quick I just want to
clarify will I'm I'm
representative of the New Mexico
professional firefighters or two
thousand fibers New Mexico I
just want to clarify that it's
not every day that disease or
virus but only ones deemed
pandemic and I just wanted to
clarify that real quick say no
we're we're closed at a time so
thank you very much.
Go to the committee members
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair a thank you
senator Munoz
the lower my virtual hand there
there we go.
I I had questions.
is this is this retro act
meaning.
The firefighter was you know
proved to be positive for
comment you know back nine
months ago what would happen how
this will affect them more or
would affect.
Mister chairman Senator this
bill is not retroactive we we
can't grandfather though that in
in legislation so from the date
of signing for it if it does
pass it would become active.
Okay okay.
Mr.
Mr chair and senator I as you
know I'm I'm a physician I look
at these health care bills with
with with great thought how is
on make sure their evidence
based on real tight and I I do a
couple spots I mean I I like the
general idea one is
The the the idea of the pandemic
and and having the the the W. H.
O. the World Health Organization
included in this bill I can
certainly see a scenario where
the W. H. O. declares a pandemic
in the clear pandemic with H.
one in one in two thousand nine
and of course and I says was
affected by age twenty one
and so I I like I think
president is good I think C. C.
is good I thank governor is good
because all those are gonna
relate to New Mexico but I can
certainly envision a pandemic
that is declared by the W. H. O.
that that has either you know no
effects or or or marginal sex on
New Mexico
because that to meet the
definition of pandemic as half
involved in Mexico for the WHL
so I just you know I know I'm a
little technical here but I I
would I just feel like it's more
appropriate to exclude World
Health Organization I don't
think we need to I don't want to
belabor the point in and have
your respondents one respond
that's fine but I was just be my
preference in just kind of being
a stickler about these issues
and then I
once again we with just being
evidence based I and I I hear I
heard from the position I guess
there's some data out of New
York that if you're a
firefighter you are at high risk
the general population for COVID
I haven't seen that data I I'd
like to see it if you would mind
sending it to me but this is an
evolving issue this is a a new
disease you know it's been out
for here and I don't I don't
know if we really have the the
the the the full evidence to
really prove yes a a firefighter
is going to be at higher risk
than the general population
which are are conditions that I
think belong in the list of of
presumptions if we do
presumption it needs to be
because a firefighter has high
risk so I don't think the the.
Data is there yet lease that I
haven't seen although I'm very
happy to look at it but even if
there is some preliminary data
or one study I I think you know
it's before we jump the gun I
would I'd really like to see a
definitive data and you know you
know grow across the nation and
then finally and I do have just
this is one question I would
like to us and would appreciate
an eighty eight a response is
influenza certainly Mr chair
Senator certainly there's going
to be another influenza pandemic
that's going to be declared by
the WHL and is there any prior
evidence that.
If as a firefighter is going to
be at higher risk of contracting
influenza than the general
population.
Doctor you want to answer that
question.
I don't have the technical
expertise to keep up with the
two right fair enough and you
know we certainly see I mean the
last time we had that
significant of a of a pandemic
was quite a quite a few years
ago I don't know I I don't think
you can say that there's any
definite benefits at this point
in particular with influenza
that they would have that higher
risk with this that it at this
point would be speculation in
that regards and yet the data
right now on a lot of this is
still very early on I think he
speaks very eloquently to that
point that this is something
that is emerging and we're
learning from the data that came
out for you know for this for
the firefighters and in city of
New York is data does only come
out within the last couple of
months but with a fairly large
population size to be able to
look at that with so again I am
I and I can more than happy to
pass on what I got from that as
well I think what really what
this is the essence of what
we're trying to say is that if
this is developing and again
especially early on when that
data and when things are coming
out of early about how we're
protecting ourselves what is the
best way to do it you know drop
with verses airborne precautions
which are the best ones with it
and just and and early in these
events that it's really hard to
know a hundred percent with it
as myself as an emergency
medicine physician hearing the
different versions and what we
were getting from our infectious
disease teams and our population
and safety health teams about it
so our wallet is emerging data
with it I think the the bottom
of the numbers that they had of
the state of New York is is
fairly substantial.
Okay well I'm I think that's a I
will certainly look at it I I
think the COVID nineteen piece
is gonna probably make sense for
me
and I think there's a lot of
reading out that there's
arguments I could make with
myself on either side for
example on the side of creating
a presumption I can say Hey we
we didn't really know which
equipment the firefighters could
use to reduce the risk even
greater you know and that data
comes out later and then you
have firefighters serving and
going into burning buildings and
they didn't use that equipment
when we just didn't have the
information so that would lead
me towards supporting a
presumption
but but I get on the other hand
I I think you know we need to
look at all the data so I I I
probably I don't believe the
point I I think I'm I'm just
going to vote
I'm actually in a vote against
the bill today but I would
certainly I I promise the
sponsor cinnamon knows who I
just have so much respect for I
I will I'm gonna look at the
data and but I just don't like
you know as this is not just I
want to make sure I.
This is always evidence based
including clean cut as possible
it doesn't mean I'm not
supportive of the philosophical
goal of the intent of the bill I
just wanna make sure it's tight
and then of course I want to
look at some influenza data if
if possible but I I certainly
support the overall intent of
the bill of course support the
the the the then on page up page
two so thank you Mr chair.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I I don't
really have questions although I
do want to make the point about
how much I respect firefighters
and then the incredible work
they do I just Google the study
that was mentioned and there are
several reasons why of for a
potential a reason to make a lot
of common sense they were
actually working during the
COVID during that.
Dimmick and then the other thing
is smoke inhalation enhances the
legality of the of the of.
And then they they're also March
you'll always be hand washing
and they have different
equipment that they that they
have to wear and put on and off
and that affects the mask
wearing so the the suggestions
for why this might be that they
were fifteen times more likely
to get COVID and to have legal
of results than the general
population makes a lot of common
sense to me and so to me I would
supported just because of the
nature of the work that they do
and the fact that they they do
such incredible work in the
community and are out in the
community interacting with
people who may or may not wear
masks so I I think that this is
a good bill I also think that
it's important these
presumptions are important
because I just I'm such a strong
believer and early treatment for
things and so when you have an
insurance company do an initial
denial
it's just it's very difficult it
is specially if that and you
have to go to work because you
don't have workers comp covering
your
that you don't have PTA I mean
there's so many reasons that
early early treatment and having
of the presumption be that this
this is cost and so that you
don't get an initial denial in
the insurance.
In the workers comp process I
think is very important and for
all of those reasons I support
this bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Sedillo the senator
because it is the need to sing
Senator.
Yes Sir medic Mr chair I was
just.
Wait for the vote to all
explained melt.
Mr and and Sir.
I guess my my concern is in the
bill when someone refers to
pandemic and there are multiple
payday which could be put out
there are they following CDC
guidelines I'm just afraid Mr
and Senator that are you know.
Our current governor the next
governor if there's now break
here of.
Let's say ratchet something that
they should be as
serious COVID nineteen that it
might be considered pandemic in
that old so we're trying to open
up a Pandora's box that we can't
get let back on.
Are are you guys going to follow
the CDC guidelines as far as
what determine which is the
pandemic Mr Senator.
Senator Munoz Dr Missouri to
talk about that.
Chair Dr want to answer that
question force.
I do you know yes I can
certainly try I think it would
be a little bit of speculation
on my part but it's my
understanding with how our
system works we are working with
our local CDC working with local
health and human resources are
US secretary of health and human
resources with our governor that
these types of decisions will be
made based specifically on what
those definitions are already
set forth point nationally by
the CDC are and yes granted
there can be outbreaks within
local areas right like we see
this.
We certain infectious disease
processes that occur in Africa
and then when the who would you
know make that
second declaration as well so
there are guidelines that
already pre determined how that
would be done and it would be
yeah and and and again I don't
work for them I can't speak for
them per se but you know we we
are going to the that the
practice is to follow those
evidence based guidelines and
then to appropriately declare
asked her what those guidelines
are already pre a predetermined
set forth to do so.
Thank you.
I would just add on to that
Senator David.
The nation of the pandemic is
is to something that's worldwide
not not
doing it in the mirror in the
southwest the pandemic assuming
the whole globe so basically the
World Health Organization is the
one that declares pandemics many
local CDC or local authority
thanks on that when they see
evidence this research there.
Thank you for that Mr Cerner
when those are you know I've got
the.
A family the fire department and
went to cancer with breast
cancer with my mom so I I have a
lot of compassion for what
they've done and what they're
doing I'm just afraid that we
may open it goes back to only at
opposition that if we open this
up to brought to wide of that we
make can't just come in years to
come so all aware of the
decision committee thanks Sir
thank you senator will of the
committee.
So.
So move.
S. centers the lowest.
Many of the discussion.
So call the roll.
No matter.
There McKenna.
Thank you.
So.
Yes.
Thanks.
Yes.
Sir Tom yes so now yes.
Julie's you do yes and members
of the committee I just want to
say something about next week.
In light of there were rolling
over one or two bills I know a
lot of them today maybe one or
two.
But in light of the of the
number of bills that are
reaching us from the house we're
gonna have to talk about the the
session next weekend and a lot
of committees are planning a
meeting on Saturday.
I wanted to run the idea by you
and give it some thought will
will make a final decision on
Monday when we meet.
With the whole committee there
but how about next Sunday we
from we from the the seventy
try to schedule a meeting I
don't think any of the
committees meet on Sundays so we
can try to get.
Do not think that's right you
will need meet next week Center
meeting tomorrow.
And that's a Saturday meeting.
You.
I know it does and we'll see I
mean we could where we can try
to set a new meeting of nobody
else is meeting on Saturday.
On Senate conservation I have
standards to delay Lopez Senator
Gallegos Senator committee yeah.
Four of us on this committee are
yes yeah absolutely we can meet
if you're gonna need.
But but either and so would you
rather be a study that's another
possibility would Sonny is
impossible to work meet a Sunday
afternoon from say one I enjoyed
your another eight or ten bills
I also agree that if you hear
all my bills.
Well putting an extra roll on
into that I think yes.
Yeah I know so much.
Senator.
Yeah I agree to setting.
If needed.
Finalization on this on Monday
when we meet on money we have
the full committee there Senator
Ingle and senator committees but
leading in that direction let's
say.
Although it's Saturday open up
that would be a lot more
convenient for most of the so
let's let's take a look at that
Senator McKenna we voted while
you were out.
The
to
do that we have to pass the bill
you presented from
Senator Tallman and seconded by
Senator the.
State
is.
There's Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Yes to sixty one.
Our record your vote thank you.
Would you please turn the
webcast now I think we've
conclude our work for the day.
Okay.
Thank.
See you.
