I'll just go down the line in
the order that people asked to
to to to speak.
Now in the case of the
opponents.
There are several organizations
the farm and livestock bureau.
Lesion close twenty two.
Representative national rifle
association.
Council leaders in guidance.
We'll start with those
organizations The New Mexico
shooting sports association.
Rio Grande foundation we'll
start with those organizations
and then if there's still time
within the fifteen minutes for
others will just start with the
individuals.
The theory being that by getting
somebody who represents an
organization will cover a lot
more ground.
I would urge you is wrong and.
Give you one or two minutes to
speak trying not to repeat
something you you heard from the
other.
People on the same side of this
issue is you are trying to try
to find some new angle to.
To to use the time the most
wisely.
And I will.
Could often fifteen minutes
reside.
So we were on the webcast.
Yes.
The.
February nineteenth meeting of
the Senate health and public
affairs committee with the start
of the.
And we don't have a quorum yet
raise we soon will so we'll
start with senator Antoinette
Sedillo this is Senate bill two
twenty four.
Thank you Mr chair.
My father taught me to shoot
when I was a child because I
grew up in a hunting family and
my father was all also and I
just shared with the county so I
grew up around guns I took a gun
safety course when I was about
sixteen back then you could not
take a gun safety course until
you turn sixteen.
Out of the training center that
we had and bland I learned in
that course about the importance
of securing your weapon when it
is not in your direct control.
Mr chair I had a high school
friend committed suicide with an
unsecured gun.
My mum's neighbor in most Chavis
was shot by her husband again
with an unsecured weapon.
New Mexico is a ten more states
for gun yes fourteen point six
gun deaths for every one
thousand people in the state in
the state forty percent higher
than the national average of ten
point three got desperate
everyone one hundred thousand
people.
From two thousand one or two
thousand ten two thousand nine
hundred thirty two New Mexicans
were killed by guns.
That is seventy percent more
than the number of people who
died in New Mexico New Mexicans
who died in US combat in
Afghanistan more gas Afghanistan
what Afghanistan war.
Children aged zero to nineteen
are killed by guns that almost
sixty percent higher than the
national average and murdered by
guns at forty percent over the
national average.
Or forty percent of the national
average I'm sorry.
In two thousand eighteen there
were four hundred and thirty
eight gun yes the last
information we have and thirty
three AM where children and
teens.
This bill Mr chair is like many
such bills around the country
six states the district of
Columbia have built similar to
this fourteen states have child
access prevention laws and for
states have storage laws aimed
at preventing individuals were
legally prohibited from having
guns this bill attempts to do
both it prevents child access
and access access it also
prevents access or attempt to
present access by those who are
prohibited such as felons bilo
abusers.
We I've gotten a lot of emails
and comments and at first I
thought it was a
misinterpretation of the bill
saying that it implies teaching
children to shoot and my first
thought is that's not right
if they're if they're all.
Child's just sure they are in
control of their weapons so I I
what and then I realized Mr
chair that there's a problem
with subsection on page two of
the bill and so I have an
amendment to that we strike that
entirely.
May I present the amendment why
don't you.
I don't have a copy of it
because it's well I on the
computer and director can bring
so I.
Yes please.
Share the screen so we can all
see.
This is a very simple amendment
on pages two and three strikes
subsection F. in its entirety.
The letters the succeeding
subsections accordingly.
With me
Wanted to move the amendment
okay and then we'll
then we'll have an amended bill
Trujillo with.
Okay okay that's perfect I move
the amendment.
Those are seconded to swing
going here you can take the the
amendment down for.
Thank you.
So is there any discussion on
the amendment basically you're
you're just striking the
limitation on on said you had to
be twelve in order to be able to
learn to should.
That's correct.
Committees year question on the
amendment.
Yes yes just a one question Mr
chair.
You can you hear me yes great
okay
thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
you had mentioned that there is
a problem with section you're
just going to strike it
it is your intention to
Just just do this to remove it
or is your intention to replace
this at a later date with
different language no Sir Mr
chair knows or Mr chair
Senator shady's no it and just
writing it okay thank you
senator and thank you Mr chair.
Any other discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
Seeing.
Will consider the bills in
amended when we moved out here
expert witness Senator.
Thank you my expert witnesses
court waspi who is the deputy
director Everytown for gun
safety.
Thank you.
Yes please yes thank you senator
and thank you Mr chairman
Today again and across the I'm
the deputy director of state
policy at Everytown for gun
safety every town is the
nation's largest gun violence
prevention organization we're
happy to speak on behalf of this
bill and in support of it and I
will take up too much of the
time because I know we have a
long agenda but I just wanna
make a couple quick points and
the first is that access
security guys are a major source
of gun violence in New Mexico
and in the country as a whole
this is particularly true for
children as many as four point
six million children live in a
home with at least one unsecured
unlocked loaded gun
hundreds of children access that
guns every year and use it to
unintentionally injure
themselves or someone out.
Guns taken from the home or the
home of family or friends are
also the largest source of guns
that are ultimately used in
school shooting.
I'm New Mexico guns are actually
the leading cause of death for
children and teens and this bill
would be a significant step to
help prevent unauthorized access
by children and it would make an
immediate impact against gun
violence in New Mexico it would
also have a tremendous impact in
the fight against gun suicide
rates of gun suicide in this
country and in New Mexico have
been rising I think in New
Mexico it's risen by twenty nine
percent over the last ten years
and this bill would be a
critical tool and research tells
us would be a critical tool to
help fight that academic.
I'm enclosing I'll just say that
this bill will put New Mexico is
a good company Senator already
mentioned that twenty states in
total have some form of a secure
storage law this bill will help
promote secure storage practice.
Encouraging and I again and have
a meaningful impact in New
Mexico so without here for
questions and I yield back.
Thank you.
The other testimony Senator
Sedillo who should we go to the
public.
no Mr chair of the part that we
should go to the public.
Okay so as I said we're gonna
get fifteen minutes to the
opponents of this bill keep in
mind is just an amendment.
So your comments were directed
to the age.
Issue if you order.
Senator year olds should be you
should be able to learn to issue
that issue's been taking care of
so you can save the time for
somebody else.
So what will start running at
four oh eight and the first
person I have done is pull
Brenner of the Rio Grande
foundation.
You'll be followed by Thomas
other.
Mexico shooting sports
association.
So Mister renter you.
Yes Mr chairman
two minutes.
You know.
To which you have to do is thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Patrick
Brenner I read that
Representative the Rio Grande
foundation we are New Mexico's
free market constitutional think
tank research institute and
public policy organization on
behalf of New Mexicans.
I urge opposition to Senate bill
two twenty four in its entirety.
I do not believe that this is a
proper.
Bill it seeks to mandate how an
individual might otherwise store
their own private property and I
think it is beyond the role of
government to mandate how an
individual take care of their
own private property.
That being said I urge the
committee to oppose passage of
Senate bill two twenty four.
In its entirety with or without
the amendment.
Thank you Mr Werner next we have
Thomas other of the New Mexico
shooting sports association to
be followed by Valerie where the
farm and livestock bureau.
Hello can you hear me yes thank
you my name is Thomas Salter
there's let's say hello to you
chairman and committee members I
am the legislative affairs
officer for the New Mexico
shooting sports association
which is been representing
Mexico gun owners and shooters
since nineteen thirty five.
We propose just be too twenty
four creating the crime of
failure to secure a firearm in
its entirety.
The storage part of the law
violates district of Columbia
versus Heller back in two
thousand eight which struck down
both Washington DC's long
standing ban on handgun
possession and the stays safe
storage law.
To quote from the majority
opinion the requirement that any
lawful firearms in the home the
disassembled or bound by a
trigger lock makes it impossible
for citizens to use arms for the
court lawful purpose of self
defense in his hands
unconstitutional.
Thank you for deleting paragraph
after the bill that is an
improvement to the bill.
Parents are most often the
teachers on safe use our arms to
their children just as my father
taught me and I taught my
children.
If the legislature is truly
interested in child safety for
those that encounter firearms in
their homes and their friends
homes they should provide for
the enquiries AT eagle gun safe
program to be implemented in the
schools the Eddie eagle program
teaches these important steps to
take if they find a gun stop
don't touch leave the area tell
the dealt this is an effective
program that I use with my three
daughters well they were very
young again we oppose SB two
twenty four and ask you to vote
against this bill thank you
thank you Mr so.
The next is Valerie rector to be
followed by Nathan dial the
American Legion post twenty two.
Miller was important in life so
if you're going to.
Mr chair members of the
committee Valerie worth a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
thank you for having me this
evening New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau strongly
opposes this bill the bills
definitions are too broad in the
to much for individual
interpretation as to what
constitutes and exhibited
behavior and who is classified
as a reasonable person we are
also concerned about the
proposed mandates and how a fire
arm user is to store their fire
armament on private property
many of our members live in
rural areas and fire arms are
necessary for protection keeping
fire arms locked and secured
would not be feasible in an
attempt of self defense.
Furthermore the bill states a
fire arm shall be secured in any
premises many of our ranchers
utilize their fire arms to
protect their cattle in keeping
their firearm secured and locked
would defeat this purpose we
thank the sponsor for her
amendment but still ask you to
respectfully oppose this piece
of legislation.
Thank you Mr.
So then we have Nathan dial with
the mega legion post twenty two
well it may.
Tell me we have with the
national rifle association.
Okay well then let's go to meet
our.
Should be followed by.
The council there is an
guidance.
Mr Chairman this is terra
mention with the national rifle
association.
Terry Mitchell okay thank you.
I thank you for letting me
testify against the bill to to
for on behalf of interim members
in New Mexico
the author compared this
proposed bill to a DC law that
requires firearms in the home to
be rendered
inoperable at all times and as
Mr Southard mentioned that law
has been struck down as
unconstitutional the law lacks a
definition for premises so gun
owners are gonna be left
wondering where and when they
must lock up their guns are in
FY are
Yes indicated that they didn't
know what was considered a
locked container so not only are
governors not to be sure where
and when they have to lock up
their guns they're not even
going to be sure how they must
store their firearms under the
bill
I realize that sex subsection F.
is being taken out of the bill.
But the bill still makes it a
crime if a minor gains access to
your firearm and you fail to
store it according to the bill's
requirements which as we read it
requires the owner to keep the
gun within arms Lente while the
minors in possession of it.
The department of game and fish
website you can see a picture of
you taking part in a game and
fish program we're clearly
they're being supervised by an
adult by eight I constantly the
controller of the firearm but
the person is not within an
arm's length of the activity
taking place in the minor
possessing the fire so.
It's an attempt to address a lot
of concerns about the bill but
it doesn't fix the bill it's
still going to have a chilling
effect on youth hunter education
programs for rates and any other
competitive shooting that a
minor
Is involved a so for those
reasons we urge you to oppose
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you very much miss.
Sherri Romero of the council of
opportunities in guidance and
then I'm going to start going to
some individuals and those of
the organizations and we'll go
next after that carry Romero
will go to cut a Santa.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Kerry **** Romero
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico council about traders
and guides our primary
opposition to this bill dealt
with the provision that
prevented a twelve year old from
utilizing a firearm for hunting
purposes and we appreciate that
Senator Sedillo Lopez did go
ahead and amend that I just
briefly looked back at the
legislation to make sure that we
would be okay with that and I
noticed that up subsection B.
also refers to a minor and I
think that's kind of what Tara
was referring to and her Madam
at just now so I think that that
could also be problematic it
also seems strange that the
department again officials not
approach to to complete an
agency report for the FIR in
this bill a substantial amount
of license revenue for the state
agency is generated by the youth
and so it seems like that would
have been useful discussion we
remain opposed until I get the
opportunity to read the the bill
a little bit closer as amended
thank you Mr chairman thank you
we just.
All the departments of state
government have an.
The.
The opportunity to requests to
comment on legislation that
affects them so.
Representative.
Thank you Sir yes Sir.
These funds funds ability to
look at those reports to the
department to do that.
So next we'll go to the Santa to
be followed by a red dusty.
C..
Right we have to move along here
Well
here is Mr Buckner on.
I think a lot of people signed
up for
When he's hearing you weren't
able to get back on today.
Well let's just.
Michael this is Michael Gaydos
on.
Randall Miller is.
The name I see on the on the
screen may as he.
Yes I'm here Mister okay.
Thank you Mr chairman my
gratitude to committee as well
for the opportunity to speak to
that opposition to this bill is
a private citizen.
You'd subsection G. point four
or farms defined to include the
receiver or frame of any firearm
this bill would actually create
the most intrusive farm stores
long country surpassing those
found in New York California and
Massachusetts.
So intrusive that would apply
to.
Not only to what would commonly
be thought of a storage but also
the simple and normal firearms
handling in many cases do this
provision.
As of may similar laws across
the country this bill would
disproportionately affect our
most vulnerable communities
creating yet another barrier to
entry among many to lawful
firearms ownership for people in
or from historically
marginalized communities this
bill will directly contribute to
the ongoing and widespread
deprivation of people in those
communities of their natural
rights.
This bill would criminalize
anyone who in their home breaks
a farm down for cleaning leave
the parts unassembled and non
functional on a table and steps
way momentarily to get a drink
answer the door or to grab the
television remote.
I would submit this bill as
written is over reaching overly
restrictive excessively
intrusive into everyday life by
criminalizing normal harms
behavior overall be likely to
produce a chilling effect on the
lawful ownership and use of
firearms by New Mexicans for
ordinary in state purposes.
Thank you for the opportunity
all of you back you Mr.
Thank you Mr S..
And then the next week James
writing and then I would say
anybody else who wants to speak
in opposition.
There's a raise your hand
feature.
On the reactions part of the.
Screen at the bottom there.
You know
when your reactions you can
raise your hand and we'll we'll
take as many of you as we can
until four twenty three so
Mister rising.
Yes thank you Sir my name's
James Reid like building a farm
in wake county and I appreciate
the opportunity to testify
I feel like it's the like
everybody else that it's
basically a Bloomberg show good
bill but I grew up in round guns
and we told we learned at early
age delay those guns as well we
use the member that Hey.
Our had the reach of New because
we have on the farm.
And also that my uncle was
invaded home invaded back in the
two years back and he was big
who would still be open the is
gun safe and that that was not a
good thing
the restaurants the need that
the so the.
Thank you know this bill.
I appreciate it thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Sir my name is prince
for augmented.
New Mexico but I'm coming to U.
S. promises I haven't done a
single political things got a
loss state law school hello for
Vestre CEO Lopez I see that
you're Senator now I took your
class that being said when I was
ten years old I was teaching
hunter's education bills as an
assistant instructor when I
served in the eighty second
airborne division I serve on the
side gate.
I'm familiar with firearms I
have a problem with this bill my
number one problem is I have a
ex wife and she has tried wanted
by law enforcement by spreading
lies about me.
And the idea of being not able
if someone was to break into my
premises being able to get a
hold my firearm in a secure
fashion.
Are in a quick fashion would
render my right to keep and bear
arms in self defense completely
and totally inaccessible if the
bill was amended to say well not
on the premises bills right
firearms the stored in a safe
manner in a a safety that may be
a difference.
Problem happens to be with frame
receiver section of need four of
the bill well if you take a
revolver project disorder out
and put it in a separate part of
the house because you can't
afford.
You've read that revolver
completely unusable Montoya is
reassembled something that a
child would not be able to do
something that someone might be
able to keep revolver portion or
the the sort of questions you
tirelessly separate building or
a locked container that doesn't
necessarily mean the very think
section under G. R. as approved
by the department of public
safety.
I don't know what approved by
the department public safety
container would be but also the
lower receiver of any fire are
without the receiver is
completely useless this will be
our it can't hold the cartridge
it can't fire down a barrel
eight eight eight five bullets.
And so as such I believe there
was a lot.
I am.
That subsection was taken out
only because it means that my
ten year old son and finally go
hunting this year with his
grandfather who's eighty one as
I promised in two years ago when
he was asking to go deer hunting
I told you gotta wait till your
tent that's when I went to
hunters that however rendering
someone in capable of retrieving
a firearm for self defense wall
on their own premises to a home
invader is an absolute
application and complete
destruction of your second
amendment right to defend
oneself.
That's why I believe this bill
should not be backed thank you.
Thank you Mr.
And I see that there's still six
people lined up to speak
unfortunately we use up to
fifteen minutes comments and so
we'll go now to the supporters
and we have them fifteen minutes
as well and we'll start with
On the line need to Stevenson
followed by Pamela.
We see how.
No.
We'll go to families Carroll by
Regina Griego.
Thank you chairman or TV Moquino
on August twenty fifth two
thousand seventeen my steps and
how I think suicide and putting
in requests was had when the
trigger we found that in his
fantasy of blood and he was only
twenty six
six four we had a huge wingspan
rapidly than girls my whole body
sometimes he smelled really bad
because he suffered from major
depressive disorder and he often
wouldn't shower for days when
you snoring pretty low your use
treatment and he was twenty six
so there was little we could do
to force him to get help he got
angry with us but we continue to
love him and allow him to try to
work through this as he asked us
to.
Spent hours sitting listening
watching bad TV you right
through the Humane planned on us
and talking about his future he
was about to buy a huge building
in Albuquerque adding to
economic development and
international district where he
would live practices are last
lonely and teaching
underprivileged kids are he so
loved any incidents slide with
the gun a gun that I owned
sitting in my closet Mr
unsecured and to this day and
for the rest of my life will
haunt me forever.
I hope that none of you standing
in my shoes next year testifying
of losing a loved one to gun
violence I'm asking for your
vote to approve.
Just the two twenty four thank
you all very much and thank you
Senator at and that so
deliveries will.
Thank you to read you reenter
the followed by reach for these.
Regina are you there is you
know.
We'll go to the reason for these
to be followed by more end of
the school in.
Thank you so very much.
My name is related to race and
I'm in Los crucis here to
support Senate bill two twenty
four ever since I was a little
girl I want to the Energy school
teacher and my degrees in early
childhood education from New
Mexico state UNM and harbors
my commitment to improving the
lives of children and I was
blessed with a rewarding and
fulfilling career you can see
these children here on my on the
wall.
As a thirty year career working
with kindergartners and first
graders in some of the poorest
schools those precious and
precocious kids sustained to
this day.
And even in retirement.
As as a volunteer for casa
borders to record and moms
demand action for gun sense in
America.
I still look for the well being
of children and that's why it's
so disheartening to realize guns
and gun this is the second
leading cause of death and in
New Mexico for New Mexico's
children with thirty two deaths
a year forty seven percent of
those work and suicide.
Unintentional shootings
increased by seventeen percent
in Albuquerque.
So as the.
Then from Everytown for our.
The five one two three
documented.
Unintentional shootings.
Are one of the reasons that I
think we need to have the
secure.
Bill would secure firearm bill
Senate to twenty four and with
the prior legislative experience
I've had thirty years of working
with children in a volunteer
information career I realize not
all children are going to learn
what any ego would like them to
learn so I please hope that you
will consider what securing
firearms Senate bill two twenty
four thank you so very much
thank you Mr.
Then we'll go to
Red is only by Lynn Ruger.
Miss Holly are you on.
We'll go to Lynn followed by and
Maria and all.
Good afternoon my name is
Limburger I love in Albuquerque
I'm a volunteer with moms demand
action for gun sense in America
this bill will save lives and I
urge you to support it thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr.
And in reinstall three followed
by rural Nissen.
Hello my name is Anna Marie it's
all and I'm a volunteer with
moms demand action I also live
in Albuquerque and I urge you
all to the yes for this bill
thank you.
Is to be followed by a more
versions.
Burns to be followed by a Janet
Wallace Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
more different than I am a new
volunteer with moms demand
action and a resident of Otero
county New Mexico I support
Senate Bill Page we for in the
whole in some form that it might
help prevent unintentional
shootings and gun suicides
particularly among young
children thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you very much Mr burns
Janet Wallace Ortiz followed by
gadi Haas.
Thank you chair can you hear me
yes okay thank you for allowing
me to speak my name is Janet
Wilder she's tired professor
from western New Mexico
university in full support of SP
two two for a few months ago and
yet another tragic example of
done by outlook to do a young
with kids trying to intervene in
a domestic dispute a young boy
at that scene witness that kids.
The young one well that an
accident.
Now our community mourns again
the loss of another son.
Many twenty unintentional
shootings increased by seventeen
percent in Albuquerque.
Twenty nineteen ninety estimated
that half of households with
children.
Thanks for leaving their guns
unlock responsibly storing them
all.
One third of young gun suicides
unintentional deaths could be
prevented.
Self storage can delay and
sometimes stop potential gun
buyers home early this bill said
one.
With that worth it.
With all of this data and more
who will begin to say storage
bill written in this bill is
language that
would ones being used if the gun
is within our.
In the future perhaps by meshed.
What what we're all going owners
of god that they would be the
only ones able to operate a
particular gun but for now I
speak with monster monster
action SB two to four is the
very least we do and the most
important bill to pass to help
prevent or stem the tide of
injury and death by gun violence
in our state thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr Wallace where she's
so guiding us we followed by
Catherine Lee.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Kevin Hassett I live in
Albuquerque but I was born in is
when with just a few years in
the military and many more in
the reserves are.
Asked by many people visit as
well how come that so many young
so just getting some passwords
everywhere in public and the
public transportation and the
surface so little guy violence
and accidents in the it respect
to the US so I just wanted to
follow state groups of gun
safety.
R. if.
The guy on the.
More than one year in prison and
so I just leave the base or when
we come back to the base from a
mission you must remove the
magazine from the economic and
studied separately must also
conducted but if you times
and visually insurance the
trouble is empty.
The.
Yes that ammunition we start.
Right from the web page of the
to be locked in a different
color than the gun would be
locked in the safety on is not
enough to prevent the child from
being able to ship the economic
not only does it got into the
venting and and.
So this charge if the budget
dropped.
Very much support the small and
I think it's extremely important
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Finally we have Catherine Lee.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm Catherine I'm a mom of two
young boys and I've been a New
Mexico resident for twenty one
years for the past few years my
boys and their teachers have
been subject to active shooter
drills causing reoccurring
anxiety and trauma for all
parties I was surprised to find
out several studies including
from the US secret service that
between seventy three to eighty
percent of school shooters
obtained their guns from their
own home relatives homes or
friends now with COVID many of
our children are at home all day
long but unfortunately that has
not kept them all state fire
arms are the leading cause of
death for children teens in the
United States and in twenty
twenty there was a seventeen
percent rise in unintentional
shootings in Albuquerque I want
all gun owners to be educated
and participate and responsible
gun ownership by storing their
guns safely and out of reach
from unintended users so we can
all help put a stop to these and
Lestat's in injuries thank you
for your time.
Thank you very much.
There are actually two minutes
left to anybody else who's on
wants to speak in support of
this bill.
We take you know just raise your
hand.
Reactions I kind of brought.
Yes.
Mr chairman thank you for taking
me my name's Julie on a coop and
I represent with the nest other
read we represent every town for
gun safety and with the suicide
rates that we're seeing the New
Mexico specifically.
During the COVID we stand in
strong support of this bill and
the on the members of this
committee to unanimously
support.
Thank you and then our final
comment will be from somebody
who's now in gadhi houses
federal
thank you.
His wife Cheryl Hussey and I'm
also a teacher and Albuquerque
public schools few years ago at
grant middle school where I
teach seventh grade came to
school with a gun in his
backpack.
Is showing it off to the other
students unfortunately
Representative reported it to
the.
Teacher and basically nothing it
from.
Backpacks in classrooms.
This.
Nothing happened to us.
Of who did not store that gun
safely and so I feel strongly
that this needs to be on adult
not a child.
you can still find ways to lock
your gun and be able to get it
quickly if needed.
I mean
and injuries that my screen if
if that if we weren't so lucky
so anyway I.
Very much support this law.
Thank you very much we use up
the.
Are we a lot of research public
comment section.
We had fifteen minutes from your
clients injured came from the
supporters then we'll go now to
the members of the committee is
there any discussion from
committee members.
Senator.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Or
legislation forward.
I do have a question chairman
and senator
one of the comments that we
heard this afternoon this from
someone who's concerned about.
Taking his gun out from his are
stored yes storage container.
And then disassembling it for
cleaning and.
Gets distracted said to go
answer the phone what have you
how what that situation.
I'll be impacted by this
proposed law thank you.
Thank you for that question
Mr chair and Senator McKenna it
is a really good question
because
one of the things about this
kind of legislation is
interpreted in a common sense
way around the country it's not
inner interpreted in a in an
overly restrictive way or in an
unconstitutional manner that's
basically of a when when
when legislation is passed and
it it implicates a
constitutional right generally
it's interpreted as as being as
that complying with the
constitution.
It.
At least that's how you
interpret it this this is a not
a law where somebody is just
leaves it for a few seconds is
all of it so I'm going to be
A criminal and by the way this
is not a lawyer I know it's as
relating to gun safety creating
the crime but the the.
The penalty is our vines yes
there there in New Mexico
apparently we don't have civil
fines so we have fines with no
possibility of jail and that's
what the penalty is here but the
true purpose of these kinds of
laws in other states is to make
sure that gun training courses
include this kind of material in
their training when I took my
drink was years ago I remember
they talked about what the law
was and if you look at other
states where they passed this
law all of a sudden the law is
incorporated in the training and
that's really important the
other thing that this law does
is it provides public education
so that people
I I definitely think that it's
important moms I really commend
most in demand act monster
commonsense whatever I'm sorry
their organization moms demand
action or whatever it I really
commend them because one of the
things they do is they do
guidance safety training and
they go out and they think
people about this and so this is
really buttresses the whole
notion you know just like we
didn't permit cigarette
cigarette the.
So it to be smoke to be in order
indoors this is a public safety
measure and it will have more of
an educational function than
anything else
it's unlikely that it would be
unconstitutional for police to
go around looking to see whether
your your guns are stored
because there's no if there were
no justification for entry but
it could be a fine in the
aftermath of a disaster on top
of everything else that would
happen after disaster but like I
said I see it mostly is having
an educational function.
Thank you for that.
Mr chair.
Else.
I think thank you Senator steel
so.
I.
If you people know that I've
lost six.
Family members and friends over
the years to gun violence under
some very tragic circumstances.
but still and I may not be do
no legislation and I may not be
listening correctly but.
Is there a way to address the
issue of when a gun is
disassembled.
Your.
This but again I I guess I'm
just not I'm just really
concerned about someone who's
cleaning their firearm.
It's totally disassembled is
here she is pulled away to take
care of something.
what happens to them.
Thank you I thank you Mr chair I
I see the concern if you look at
subsection eight of if that is
that if the gun is rendered
inaccessible or unusable to any
person that is when it's
disassembled.
That's fine it that there's no
problem with any kind of the as
long as the gun is unusable it's
safe and it and it's fine.
So you would not be in violation
if you had to disassemble gun.
Is that what you mean.
Okay yep perhaps and senator I
drugs I didn't look at that
carefully thank you I'm gonna
I'm gonna read a third time
thank you very much no no when I
appreciate it I.
The thing is is about these laws
is sometimes they can be
confusing and and I again in my
head
I when people are complaining
about you could teach your gut
your your child by civil no you
would be in control of the gun
and then I realized there was
why I.
Subsection F. so I appreciate
that pointing out the
ambiguities and problems just
like to forget thank you so much
appreciated Mr chair.
Thank you senator.
Senator smitteez followed by
Senator Gallegos David Mr we we
we've gone past public comments
and we will be taking anymore
come in when you thanks.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I think like like many people
in this discussion I I had a
good friend in college
Who committed suicide was a long
gun.
It's it's difficult to think
about some of the situations
and.
Very very disturbing.
I I had some questions I like to
work work through with you with
the bill Senator Lopez
in one is kind I just want to
start off with with the
amendment does you know we had
if we had just seen that
The the mentor now that we've
amended the bill.
We we don't really have a a sub
a definition for minors so my
question is as the bill stands
at Senator can a minor be an
authorized user yes Sir.
It will be the restriction on
how may be an authorized user.
Okay it removes the age
restriction Mr chair of of who
can be an authorized user so now
a gun owner could authorize
anyone.
Whatever age okay so Mr chair
Senator my understanding is that
a gun can authorize a minor but
if we just read the bill in in
subsection B. it says if the
owner knows that a minor could
gain access.
So how how how do we deal with
that.
A minor who is an authorized.
So if you authorize your minor
to use a gun.
Is on the rise the minor but if
you leave your gun on the coffee
table and a minor where to use
it.
That's not an authorized user.
Okay Mr chair in the center for
second time I'm gonna move on
from that topic but it may be it
may be prudent to say to a man
and say on authorized minor you
know I'll just leave it at that.
Mister chairman Senator would
you could you comment on the
constitutional challenge
comments about this flexibility
do you think this bill could be
subject to a constitutional
challenge.
Thank you for that question Mr
chair and Mr smitteez there is a
very aggressive of.
Organized groups that are
challenging gun legislation
around the country so I can say
that it could be subject to a
challenge but this bill was
written the the way the
constitution works what the
second amendment and and just
just go away and allocate was
very clear about this there is a
second amendment individual
right thank you balance it
against public safety and what
the court said is they would
uphold reasonable rate
reasonable regulations for.
actually I remember was
reasonable or or but what
they're looking for is a
connection between the problem
you're trying to solve at the
end of I should read out hello
right before but I didn't but
what they're looking for is the
connection between the problem
you're trying to solve and that
and and the legislation you're
looking for for a connectivity
between their that's why the
statistics about gun violence in
New Mexico and the statistics
about the high rate of suicide
in New Mexico are so important
because there is a public health
problem that we're attempting to
solve and we're looking for an
nexus between that and that's
one of the reasons I thought it
was important to remove
subsection just because.
This problem is not a problem of
of of gun owners teaching their
children.
Sure that's not a problem and so
when I realize that that that
that limited it I thought that
that would be a problem
constitutionally and so I I
removed it.
I think that this is carefully
crafted when I realize I have it
I'm sorry I have expert and I
said what and so I find this
very carefully constructed to
address that problem under the
Heller case and I will also see
if my expert has anything to add
to the constitutional question
it's a very good question
I I think it would withstand
given what's going on in New
Mexico and gun violence I think
it would withstand
constitutional scrutiny but I
will also turn it to my experts
who is
works a lot with a lot of these
guns and these are laws around
the country thank you Sir.
Thank you Sir and thank you Mr
chairman echo a lot of what the
Senator tests and I think this
bill is carefully crafted and my
expert opinion it is not a
second amendment concern the the
case and how our again makes
clear that commonsense gun
safety laws and laws that are
designed to protect public
safety are non constitutional
and though the case and how our
that involved a DC law on the DC
law was much stricter than than
this law around storage and
again I think and and my expert
opinion this is a this is fully
compliant with the second
amendment of course there's
always a possibility of a
challenge but the bill is
carefully crafted and please
stop.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez I I would
actually.
Question because as my attorney
friends tell me you can you can
sue anybody for anything and
that's just what is the judge
gonna say so that was really my
question was one of the judges
in the state so
Mr chair I I Mr chair Senator
committee I think that the
judges are going to say this is
a reasonable legislative
regulation based on reasonable
legislative findings of a public
health problem okay I am.
Thank you Mr chairman center I
have a couple questions on who
to could be potentially be
criminalizing in a I just want
to ask a couple things there so
if I have a gun in my house in
someone breaks in and and my my
gun is not secured in a safe
they they break in and steal the
gun.
in my now.
For that.
With Mr chair.
It.
Would be unsecure yes if it's on
secured in the bar and burglar
breaks into my house and takes
the gun is that going to
criminalize me for not securing.
That firearm there are two ways
in which this will not
criminalize you Mr chair and
Senators maybe if a fire that
this applies to a firearm owner
or authorize user who knows or
reasonably should have known
that a minor at risk person or
creative person could gain
access and so if you have if you
didn't know that anybody was
going to steal your gun that you
would not it would not apply to
you and then second the
penalties here are even though
the the the.
Apparently in New Mexico we
don't have civil fines.
I would call civil I would call
of bill that only permits fines
and no jail time in the nature
of a civil fine I'm and when you
have a petty misdemeanor with no
jail time you don't really
acquire record I am the same way
if you would like if you were
fine it's just like almost like
a traffic violation you paid the
fine and and you move on so you
would not be a criminal Mister
Mr chair and Senators maybe.
Okay Mr chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez I I if you could clarify
that for me I looked up and I'm
looking at here on my computer
thirty one dash nineteen dash
one and it it says right here
and and just a it says up to a
year
in in in jail so are how are we
it is imprisonment so are we
looking at it's something
different yes in if you look at
the bill on on subsection do a
parent a person who violates
subsection eight is guilty of a
petty misdemeanor punishable by
a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars and then it and
actually remember you the the
the situation of somebody
stealing your gun of which.
We need to rise to the level of
of being covered by this law but
if subsection.
That is here is your work you
know kind of you to leave it on
the coffee table or whatever
that would be five hundred
dollars and then subsection beat
is where where you knew or
should have known
that.
You know that remember you
should have known that somebody
was it was going to have access
so if you leave it on the coffee
table and a minor and you know
that you have a child and you
know that that child likes to
get things on the coffee table
and and that could be proven and
there was always a of.
The prosecutor has to decide
whether they can prove that then
you get a thousand dollars find
and it's it's limited to a fine
I suppose we could amended input
but not jail time and in each of
those that you absolute clarify
you only get into thirty one
nineteen dash one.
When the firearm was used to
commit a crime or injure that
person so you have to know that
you that you were for example an
example would be your brother in
law is living with you and he
has a prohibited person because
he has a domestic violence of
prohibition from owning a gun
and.
You either authorize that person
is prohibited.
For your very negligent and you
know that that he's likely to
get it like you don't even have
it in the in your closet that
might be a situation in which
that would be a misdemeanor
published by thirty one dash
nineteen but as I understood the
hype that'll give you gave me it
would not rise to that level and
I was so I was answering the
hypothetical you gave me and I
told you know you would not be a
criminal.
So what I'm saying so it was
misleading in any way but they
were tears here and you have to
be really egregiously reckless I
think to end up.
Coming under thirty one dash
nineteen dash dash one
Thank you I'm sorry that was
clear and Mr chairman center I
just I have one last concept to
to work through with you and it
really came as a the is a former
patient of mine
and I'll I'll skip through a lot
of the details but he was very
sick gentlemen and and his
workers were I I live in the
course it is what he told me and
I was explaining to him he
really needed emergency
treatment and he didn't know how
long he was going to need to be
in the hospital for and he was
so afraid
of having his home burglarized
he he actually left a hospital
against medical advice and
explain to me how he made a
comment about how in the world
well our systems don't work in
my neighborhood we we defend our
homes within our property with
firearms in that service and
then he actually left and and
some something fairly bad
happened after the and so I just
bring that up as and even in my
own my own household you know I
have a whites and and and
children that
you know that week we live
together obviously and and farms
are part of our protection and
so when I look at this bill I'm
concerned even more concerned
let's just say take it up a
notch and say that I am I'm not
home and then it's just my wife
and the kids at home and and
then instead of having a firearm
kind of ready to go at like at
night time
I would feel less safe that my
wife wouldn't have farm ready to
go if she's by herself so could
could you kind of help me out
with that concerning the flights
a valid concern that I have
thank you I think it is a valid
concern of Mr chair and and the
and the senators committee
direct control means of firearm
within arm's length of the
firearms owner or otherwise have
other FY two percent so if the
if the firearm is near you know.
unsecured but stay in your
A lot of people carry them that
need to manage your in a drawer
next to the bed that would be
within arm's length and so that
would that would make sense
the closer the firearm is to you
the more accessible it is arms
length has been used in other
states
I think it's it's just a way of
how health care how
how extensible it's it's just a
shorthand way of saying in your
control and kind of an easy way
to say in your control but I
would suggest that if you have a
requirement next year bad in the
drawer do you that would be
perfectly fine.
Okay Mr chair Senator thank you
for that answer we we certainly
don't know I I don't leave guys
out on the coffee table sort of
that that's you know and and you
know I I that that's something
that that clearly is yes this is
not.
Not something that we do
but I can just see times when I
mean there's like you know the
kids are running around and my
wife doesn't know she's not
going to carry a gun on her I
don't carry a gun on the usually
when I am at at home and
sometimes at night yes it is
within an arm's length but
sometimes it's it's not within a
an arm's length because I I just
choose not to not not a gun and
most of the time when I'm at
home but I I I still think it is
valuable and helpful to my
family
went when there is a farm that
we know kind of where it is
where to go if there's a problem
you're my wife can go go wrong
there quickly and access that
firearm but it's it's not always
right there and so yes at at
night it kind of is but during
the daytime other times in the
evening it may not be and so
that it's still it's still just
concerns me
and so in in in lastly I have a
last question is back I I know
look at this federal code in you
know we're we're trying to keep
keep guns away from you know
felons people have a restraining
order against him and those
things those are all existing
law do you think there's any
room here.
For for flexibility for sale a
woman that has a restraining
order against.
For early you know spouse or
whoever it may may have been or
or acts is there room for more
flexibility to to keep these
guns on on secured or or do you
think that that doesn't need to
happen.
Mr chair Senator status I'm not
sure that I understand because
someone who has a restraining
order it's it's illegal under
federal law and so I wouldn't
want to pass so of the state law
that is inconsistent with
federal law
so I I'm not sure if that's what
you're asking
I guess what what I'm asking Mr
chairman and senator is that if
there is a it is one that that
has has had a domestic violence
eight eight a restraining order
placed against someone else okay
and what what this law still
apply to to her in her home and
her prince.
So when she she would not be a
prohibited person right right
she's not a prohibited person
but is she still required to
lock up for her firearms.
Or keep it keep it within her
control if you have Mister chair
Senators maybe is an amendment
to to make see the thing is is
With this is a dress to is not
to responsible gun owners who
keep them out of reach of
children but this you know
that's a responsible state but.
You have if she has the gun and
she's got children and she has
it on a coffee table or in New
you know in the place of
successful to children then I
would say yes the two subject to
this but if she has a
restraining order against her
and she is carrying a gun for
protection of courses would not
a pleasure.
And so I I I'm not sure I was
clear but okay no no that that's
clear we not the intent okay
thank you senator for answer my
questions thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Senator
Gallegos followed by Senator
Tallman.
Mr and Sir US available so I
appreciate it I've I've learned
a lot so I want to start off by
thank you for not starting the
state law it's in conflict
federal law understand that
chair of the marijuana bill will
be coming soon and it will be in
conflict with federal law but
I'll get back on this so.
Mr chairman and senator.
And the you know you got be
within your control did you see
that you would be brandishing
fear if I had to carry my pistol
to every room that I go in the
home I've got it located in a
place that like Dr Schmidt he
said you know works at your wife
now works at in case of an
emergency it's there I
personally Kerry full time
twenty four seven I do put in
the drawer next to bed when I go
to bed but that's just the main
thing what we have one that my
wife knows point at if I'm not
there but it's it's remote our
girls don't live with us my
granddaughters are often but I
would think that it would bring
more fear into the world if my
wife had to go put it in the
kitchen well she's could put it
in the locker room doing laundry
put it next to the TV one she's
watching television and that's
what I appreciate your bill is
doing you see that
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator guy goes I think I.
And maybe that could be made to
make it more more clear that to
me this is a common sense thing
this is she's she's in control
of it if you've got it in the
locked closet or where I don't
know where you where you say
that or if you have it
to someplace that is not visible
to someone who might have broken
into your home or somebody who
was visiting and maybe was
suicidal or you know it sounds
to me like you're above a
responsible gun owner and if
there is
Courts interpret these laws and
so that the district attorneys
and police officers to render
them constitutional and so that
kind of intrusive monitoring of
whether somebody's carrying a
gun around in every in their
room which is not happen that's
that's not that's not our
country
and so that for me it feels like
a review of an extreme
hypothetical that is not of is
is very very unlikely under
under this law because nobody
monitors people like that and
and and I would not want to live
in a world where people were not
monitored like that.
But I appreciate that Mr Mr
chairman and senator I guess the
way I look at this if.
I would like Dr Schmidt he said
that it communities committed
suicide and they will find a
way.
Regardless because state that
it's mental issue and I have an
uncle years ago were our ranches
in Colorado shot himself not
once but twice and had to reload
the firearm because he was
determined.
To commit suicide but in that
theory if my wife had a gun I'm
not home and someone came in and
use that gun to shoot themselves
the first time of the second
time that it would make my
widespread criminal way I
understand this because you want
the one even though she may have
had it hidden or
The one that she has a she knows
where tech is not law.
It's it's yes you all access and
and the reason for that madam
chair and senator are Mr
chairman and senator is because
if you've got moments during a
break in to protect yourself to
be able to find the key in my
drawer in my of my room for my
socks are to be able to get ups
lock box we have in the closet
takes too much time so we have a
couple of farms in there that
are law but the one she has for
safety.
Is not in the way I look at this
if she were.
The last fire so that not not
planned for today but some were
to take that are and commit
suicide the way I read your bill
that she would be the one that
is criminalized is that not
right.
Well remember as we went through
it and I'll just walk through it
with.
We not because if she knew or
reasonably should have known
that it was and so she more or
that.
She would have to anticipate
that he knows where your gun is
in the in the sock closet or
whatever it wherever it is that
she would have to know that and
that would only happen and I'm
sure she's not like as if she
told them Hey I know you're
suicidal our god is in the in
the in my closet or my sock
drawer that's the only way that
this would be triggered.
Or not the only way but that's
the kind of way but if she
doesn't have any knowledge that
she's aware that it's in the
sock drawer and has no knowledge
and he just takes the gun and
commits suicide she's not she's
not responsible well.
It is our guy that's not a good
way of saying that you're not
responsible what I'm saying is
this law would not apply to her.
Mr etcetera I appreciate that
because my thought was if and
you may get a get out of jail
free card because we used in
that awful of money could not
tell he was depressed or had any
kind of mental anxiety or
anything in what I understand
from you now that you would take
for taste keep my wife out of
jail she did not know Italy
headed over to our or have any
kind of
thought process that would go
over that is suicidal I'll go on
to my next point because.
I was a senator I would take
that case well I appreciate that
of pro bono by the way but the
Mr.
Well we're all friends here and
I'm trying to say that.
The Mr and and Senator
one of the ladies said yes I
early on that it would in the
comments that we've had thirty
two guests if firearm here in
New Mexico you know if that's
correct in what year that was.
you know what I don't have the
data books right here in front
of me but the data was taken
the from several sources the
data that I'm most familiar with
is the internet the report of
the intimate partner death
review team and that has to do
with suicides I mean this is
like the domestic violence
Yes whether it's suicide murder
or accidental well accidental
kind of weird because it has to
do with domestic violence but
those kinds of deaths a lot of
times they'll stated it was an
accident what would you
interesting about those deaths
in every single one in that in
that report the gun was not
secure.
What.
And Mr Senator and I was just
trying to think this through
just to be honest we have a very
private flute so you may have
known from Lee County is very
very good defense lawyer and I
always told my wife that she saw
a check for retainer for very
encouraging kids because I was
going to take her out and that
was a joke around our home but
in thinking through domestic
violence of these acts aren't
always just spontaneous I can
see that I've ever been there to
the point that I've got anger
issues to end up that I can go
on a lot by box.
And get the gun out and still
shoot my wiper child whatever it
is I don't think that it it it
goes back to the point and I
believe this truly that is not
the gun the problem if I'm gonna
do with the line funding deal
with the car I'm going to do
with the truck the.
Object is the problem it's me
but what we're doing here is
we're making the gun the issue
of the murder of the suicide for
the domestic violence I think
what we need to do and I know
we've got a different view on
that between you and I I think
we need to make our laws more
stringent so that way when I do
something I pay the time for
instance I've got a brother
those shot in the back.
Thank you.
But he was robbing someone.
So it was his fault he was there
at that point I never blame gun
I never blamed the officer
because my brother put himself
in a predicament that took his
life not the gun not the officer
it was his choice and so my
thought is I I just have a
problem with this just because I
see it is taking away rights up
earlier on and I was reading the
Mr chairman and senator on some
significant issues it says the I
had to write it down because I
didn't it's a dust so it's
office of the district
attorneys and their fear was
it's going to lead to a lot of
challenges based on prostitution
and are pulled up the the New
Mexico constitution and I know
you guys have talked earlier
about the constitution but this
is the point that I think that
for me.
In section six of the
constitution article two is the
it says no law shall abridge the
rights Susan to keep and bear
arms for security and defense
the piece of bothers me as a
security.
If I cannot get to that farm in
a reasonable amount of time to
protect me my wife or my girls
that I as a husband and a father
and I've done my job and and and
this is me that right to do that
and I think that your bill is
diluting my rights as a parent
and as a husband in order to
offset someone else that is use
that same firearm maliciously by
their own intent there again I
can go back to they could have
done it within that they do it I
mean there's people to strangle
as Asian can't take their hands
away we don't lock their hands
up bring that just for worker
for hygiene but there's so many
things that I think wrong with
this bill that really makes me
concerned of what's next if you
get this pass this year what are
we going to add on you look at
the.
Mr and center
I just lost it.
Representative Garcia has always
had done it.
Eight years I was in the house
he had one every year and so
it's like not of are we ever
going to be considered
satisfied as long as anyone is
being hurt by done again let's
take away our cars the where
trucks and I'm gonna and with
the because I don't think that
and I can come to an amendment
one on this but I did want to
tell you Senator share Mr and.
Senator it just give me a letter
in is from the rational sport
Fund foundation.
And I read this today and I was
sort of surprised it's been in
effect since eight nineteen
eighty nine and they have
maintained the server singleness
of purpose is to guide the
organization to become the most
respected and trusted
sportsmen's organization in the
political arena it is really
hard to be concealed Kerry
center in a political arena
because there are a lot of
people that are freighter have
opposition to one thing that
they had and there's none of
those factors
Mr chair and senator.
Talking earlier about the
hundreds Education and it shows
that they their main thing is to
be able to help she is to
become.
Knowledgeable and farms and work
through a manner super visit
super by vacation by being able
to have these two kids have the
opportunities to come to
experienced I've got to read
this part because I thought this
really good
In their journal subscriptions
there during the become a
lifelong conservatives and.
That contributes to the natural
resource stewardship to the
American system of conservation
funding I think that's something
we all agree on we need to be
conserving our economy and in
our world but that's their main
point and they brought up that
the for the just for fun in New
Mexico it was.
Forty million dollars state
based of conservation to the
system so there are some really
good people that are out there
trying to be good stewards of
our country that are in
opposition your bills I've got
another gentleman that was from
the and our and our equity ten
tensioner in rat tone.
Yes strong concerns Mr chairman
and senator of they have of
their facilities three thousand
thirty thousand acres twenty
shooting ranges that in seventy
three nineteen seventy three
they help a hundred and five
thousand visitors from all over
the world in twenty nineteen to
be able to enjoy there's
shooting sports I think that as
we take away some of these
opportunities we lose heritage
from my generation to my
granddaughter and we build the
fear factor and that she will
never pick up a gun because all
we talk about the negative
aspects and not the positives
and with that all yield I
apologize I I don't see me
sporting your bill I appreciate
the dialogue but I personally
look at is taken away my
personal rights and that of my
family to protect ourselves from
others tried and true to our
home so Mister Mister are you
thank you thank you so.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Center for bringing this bill
forward Senator motion eighties
our access to Google my
questions.
I was wondering
How this is going to be enforced
as is it to me if I'm wrong but
the.
Only time will be no forces of
phone.
Someone something bad could
happen to someone who got a hold
of a gun and they did
investigation I found out that
this.
Gun we had not been properly
secured.
Is that true because obviously
the law enforcement are going to
be able to go in and.
People's homes to see if further
properly securing the done so my
way of thinking correct me if
I'm wrong the only time this
with anybody with
The hand the.
The arrested is this something
violation occurred it
investigation I found out it
wasn't secure what's your
response to that thank thank you
senator thank you Mr chair thank
you senator Clemente that's
absolutely right that's really
the only time that you probably
see anybody getting fined or it
was really egregious
Had a misdemeanor under thirty
one thirty one dash nineteen
test one is if there's something
horrible happened the more
important thing about this bill
is that all of the gun safety
training courses will included
as a standard in New Mexico and
that's the important part of
this bill is when you're
teaching gun safety one of the
responsibilities is to teach
with the guns gun laws are so
secure storage will be included
in all of the curriculum.
With a and in all of the gun
training courses around the
state.
That's the importance.
Thank you.
Regional but.
Thank you senator thank yous Mr
chair just one more question up.
I find that the National Council
of state legislatures is a.
Treasure trove of information I
call them quite often and having
lived in seven different states
I'm always interested what's
going on in other states so
twenty two states have similar
laws any idea what the
experiences benefit of that
experience good experience of
the at the then the lawyers
don't know.
I have not seen the amending the
law Mr chair but what I have
seen is the law in each state
being included in the training
curriculum and then also seeing
blogs about like I ended up
on Google in that whole arms
arms length thing because as you
can imagine I've got a lot of
emails about this and it turns
out that in some states it's
occur at that they that that's
just shorthand for it you've got
control and somehow in your
present premises and so it's
been rooted in in a in a way
that makes a lot of sense and
the other
The other thing that I really
liked about those those I guess
the most important thing was the
educational function about
people talking about what this
means and and that's great I
think making people educator
about how important it is can
only help us I was looking for
studies to show after this was
passed did did suicides actually
go down and or did accidental
shootings actually go down and
that's something I'm going to be
looking for in this state very
carefully if this if this bill
is passed I'm going to look at
the data prior to the to the
passage of this bill and the
data afterwards to see if it had
an impact on most of these guns
State new measures are so new
that you don't really have
enough data to to draw that much
of the conclusion but I will be
looking very carefully at that.
Thank you Secretary thank you
Mr chair that's all I have thank
you.
Thank you senator what's the
will of the committee.
I'm in the past.
Motion by Senator a serial
through due process is a second.
Seconded by Senator McKenna was
that you.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Also.
Is it for both the motion is.
I went to go get a snack vote
no.
Well no.
I think it's excuse don't soon.
Yes.
Senator is.
No.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thank
You know.
Yes.
For you to know one X. two
excuse to excuse.
Legislation senator due to us
for your next Judiciary the
shares thank this is a little
warm up for you for Judiciary.
That's one of the reasons I got
rid of subsection after.
Thank.
And that's just I was just
joking that that was a joke
you Senator up Mr chair Senator
thank you very much for the for
that formative discussion and
that thank you.
Members of the Senate bill one
twenty eight Senator o'neill's
suicide prevention response and
treatment and we have a
committee some early yes thank
you Mr chairman committee Mister
chair I have to compliment you
on your outfit today amid
Meiring the color contrast I'm
just telling you then that's
good I'm sure you are the best
dressed boy in ninth grade in
your wherever you were but
anyway so in all seriousness
Committee really want to thank
your staff for being patient
with us right we have a
committee substitute but before
I let you know making us to make
a motion to drive for committees
for discussion purposes I know
you have a lot of bills you got
a backlog just like we haven't
Judiciary what I would like the
committee to consider is.
We'll explain the committee subs
that we already went to be
pretty expensive public comment
before when we when we presented
I have Sabina from Legislative
Council Service and I have you
know
miss Carlson for Minnesota but
we're we're just going to like
take questions but what I would
propose to your committee is if
we could adopt the committee
substitute for discussion
purposes we can explain all the
work we've done on it we've had
several very productive zoom
meetings with interested parties
this has a lot of impact on all
kinds of folks from UNM
hospitals to DO aged etcetera
etcetera we can explain it in a
general way.
Keep in mind this is a work in
progress I think you know big
picture we really had a nerve
with this bill because you know
suicide is such a pressing issue
in our state and I want to thank
miss Carlson for contacting me
to to sponsor this so would like
to do is talk about in a very
general way I know you got a lot
of other bills to consider and
then if we could my my hope
would be if we could get a do
pass so that we can continue
working on it and honestly I
want to refer it to finance we
have a ridiculous you know
fiscal impact on here and so I
just want to keep it alive we're
really making progress with all
these different stakeholders so
that would that system the where
I'm coming from as the bill
sponsor so having said all that
to remove the committee subject
for discussion purposes I can
explain in a general way what we
what we come up with so far and
then I will we are in your hands
Weiss Committee.
Okay so.
Do we have a motion to do not
just.
Senate Bill.
One twenty eight but for
discussion purposes to do this
committee so for one to Senator.
Public affairs committee so for
the Senate bill one twenty
eight.
Motion.
Thank you thank you senator user
second.
For discussion Senator McKenna
seconded.
So so I just need to fight for
it is.
Can somebody remind me when it
was mailed to us.
Removing our Gen funding the
committee so.
It was today at two fifty one
Today well was mailed yesterday
yeah.
Mr chairman I have the the as
the as of those in the analysis
is there when was the actual so
so mail to us.
My career added to you
yesterday.
Yeah yeah you probably committee
but I don't know when we got it.
Analysis.
With the big mail Senator.
Kim has gone for the day I can't
tell you exactly the time she
mailed it.
Rise in Alice's let's see.
Mr chair I can either do we know
what time it came in I.
Well as forty eight.
It should be the subject be in
the list of bills that was sent
to you by camera earlier.
maybe we sent I'm supposed to
maybe you said to the.
Legisla- cal I get on the
legislature okay.
So it was the committee so was
included in one of the Cayman.
Yes Mr chairman it is.
Okay okay.
Should be here.
Thank you Mr chair I could run
my our copy over to you in your
office.
Your dad back the bill itself.
Yes.
I don't see the bills.
I just got a hard copy of it
from from the committee for this
committee secretary.
In addition the the.
LFC is very notices against the
F. I. R..
Then you've got the hard copy
right there.
It was fifty seven yesterday on
Thursday fifty seven was the big
email with all the bills and all
the attachments we have the sub
at that point.
In there okay.
When we find.
To.
What.
Two to fifty seven in the
afternoon is what I said.
Two fifty one maybe it's in
there.
Now look again.
On the screen here.
One bill.
When the screen was.
Nineteen.
Mr chairman I I have that that
email but it's it's just the
analysis and then yeah yes I
have yeah I don't have the
ability self in that in that
package okay this for I have a
gap in my emails I have
something that was seven one oh
expect when a weight then two
tools for them for twenty five
so that explains it for some
reason I wasn't getting emails
and I haven't gotten emails for
two hour period.
So I I don't have it.
Look and I don't have it either.
Okay we've got we've got too
many members don't have it right
It's been ten days since we
presented and I know your
wonderful staff wants to kind of
be done with this
and then I guess what I would
suggest is that could we talk
about like what I was suggesting
to I can explain what we've done
sure yes and then maybe go from
there with what you feel
comfortable doing as a committee
but but we've been working real
hard with a lot of different
stakeholders on this I had no
idea how how involved this would
be but the more that that we
work on it the more we feel like
we have something here that's
really the people are interested
in but can I just say in the way
of explanation what we're up to.
What this.
To the sub and because this
system on yeah and I'm sorry
about the technical issues with
receiving the bill itself but
what we've done is the inter
agency behavioral health
purchasing collaborative will
administer the provisions of
this act so that was a big
change we talked to the folks
from the behavioral health
collaborative the substitute
increases focus on providers in
different settings than the
facilities task than the
original bill expanding of the
was the suggestion and from this
committee telehealth television
rural health really want to work
at an especially trying to serve
you know the rural parts of our
state and after much debate
really appreciated Senator
Schmedes point about law
enforcement where we can ask
them to to be part of this
training and I realize they're
burdened with what they are but
in rural areas you know it's the
police that really are in the
social worker role like to be
able to recognize signs of
suicidal ideation and so forth
so we we kept that in the bill
after some significant debate
it was strongly suggested that
we strike the penalties yeah we
don't want to criminalize folks
here
also from our very extensive
zooms care providers should be
added.
Section three may duplicate
national standards page fourteen
that of the we use of violent is
too vague
definite that the definition of
a warm hand off was needed to be
clarified.
Finally to more things from
Larry around with Presbyterian
or well I'm not sure this code
section six C. indeed need
clarification and I learn here
and from Presbyterian made it
real clear that you know the the
way the bill was worded or is
worded in its current form
Requires Presbyterian or another
hospital to make sure that the
person has a home like they
can't just release them but you
know a lot of people you know if
you're gonna put that
responsibility on the on the
hospital that's a problem so so
anyway as you can tell this is
pretty extensive and I guess
you know it's it's fortunate
that you don't have the actual
build a look at.
Any kind of do pass out of this
committee where we can continue
to work on it what I'm gonna do
is on the floor request of a
referral to finance is really
that's the issue here everybody
wants to do something about
suicide but the way that you
know we can't the the FIR is way
too high and we need to figure
it out like you know to be were
to have something viable and
workable rather than a symbolic
kind of kind of statement so
that I've sent enough
Committee.
Anything what what's your take
Mr chair what do you think.
Just send us the bill.
Okay.
The committee so
but we haven't really had a
chance to go to go through so.
Did everybody get their usual.
Mr Chairman hasn't come in to
either my provided for my
personal so I don't know maybe I
have a problem with the email.
I have Mister chair just came
through the mail just came
through yes so here's here's
what I'm gonna suggest Senator
with.
We don't have a floor session
until Wednesday.
Okay this first if we pass out
today regressive Mundy is still
not coming in read out on the
floor to win okay okay so what
do we what we've we've got it
now is everybody so Senator
Sedillo Lopez doesn't have a job
some reason.
We'll get to all the committee
will read over over the weekend
okay.
You have extra witnesses wanted
yes I know that would be fine.
okay well let's see is there
anybody out there my sister you
know as the presenters were good
the zoom I just called soon
The panel noted it's okay well
it will you know she's on our
panel and Sabina so be more
interested in you know public
comment if there's peace Cynthia
Cynthia Milligan.
The state and then prices here
with the state great great.
But I don't know.
It is a shame.
I think all of us are very
committed to working on that so
that's that's the good news so
you know we're talking to lots
of different stakeholders here.
Sure you want to say something
about this bill by senator ask
questions or make comments.
Thank you Mr chair members
Senator Neil I would just at
applied any suicide prevention
initiative comes out of the
legislative body so just really
want to appreciate the
thoughtfulness I agree with
senator o'neill that there's
some technical issues some
financial pieces that we have to
work out and then how to align
across the state and so that I
other than that I have no
comment thank you for the
opportunity is here with a real
person collaborative right the
real collaborative yes Sir my
apologies C..
Yes so so that provision
shouldn't switching to your
responsibility you're you're
organization's responsibility
your in your new field all
right.
I'm yes Sir with the additional
funding and resources and and
love to hear that senator
o'neill struck the fines and
fees but just in order to have
that regulatory authority there
needs to be the promulgation as
he's as the states in the bill
of rules or regulations and so
that I see you know kind of some
are consecutive pieces here that
need to occur the only other
thing I would say is that with
the nine eight eight which for
those of you that don't know
that federal government has
delivered a directive that
states need to shift nine one
one calls better mental health
crisis two eight nine eight
eight number and I see Wendy
from and M. Cao and as soon so
my understanding is that the HSD
is receiving some federal
planning dollars for that and we
will be looking at the entire
state including those you know
sort of call backs those
outbound calls that occurred
posted suicide attempt some of
the post mentioned that needs to
occur for individuals families
and communities and then that
Google responds that array of
response through through and
calorie safety net services so I
think that you know that's
another another thing in the
queue there for us as a state.
What you want to say anything
about this bill.
Thank you senator chair or to
the penal I appreciate that and
I just
I also agree with the the state
insurers analysis that
thank you so much Senator
o'neill as I mentioned last week
for bringing this to our state
it's such an important measure
and there are a lot of complex
pieces to a and and I appreciate
the opportunity to work with you
on this and hope to continue to
work with you on this because
it is such a huge need in our
state to have suicide prevention
and we would just like to ensure
that the bill is the right bill
for the shoe efforts.
Are needed within our
communities to minimize dust
into ensure humane treatment of
people who are experiencing
mental health concerns during
those vulnerable times and so I
I support suicide prevention but
would like to continue to work
with you to some
to outline this bill and.
What's the fire community.
When.
This is.
No Sir not yet I was the.
Okay.
Senator maybe you can get her
coffee to.
anybody else in the public so
wanted to speak on this
committee so.
Larry hearing ended you want to
say anything.
Thank you Mr chairman Larry
around Richard lobbyist for
press train health care services
I appreciate what Senator
o'neill described her
discussions and
we ought we agree with the
intent of the bill.
But we think it needs some work
to make sure we can comply with
that and that we have on the
services to comply with into the
bill so we're happy to continue
work with the sponsor we did
have some really good
discussions on it yesterday and
and are happy to continue those
discussions with sponsor.
Right.
Thank you thank you very let's
go to the committee and see if
the committee has any comments
for you Senator we won't act on
this until Monday.
Senator Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll be
real brief we've had the chance
to discuss this offline but
since it's Friday and I I won't
see Center o'neill to our next
for session perhaps a just a
couple to really things one I
would once again just make sure
I was clear on the law
enforcement issue I'm just gonna
make up a number for
for discussion sake let's say
it's twenty four hours of
training I I I may be mistaken
but I believe the law
enforcement academy already has
all twenty four hours mandated
and so if we do an additional
two I think that might be in
conflict with the number eight
within different areas of law so
just I just want to make sure
that they're able to do these
two hours I know that they want
to but we may actually have to
change another section of the
loss of their your statutorily
able to the.
Okay Donna we discuss that with
just just a yeah that's good
that that we don't mandate
twenty six hours but they're
only allowed to do twenty four
hours exactly okay and and then
lastly this bill is is
definitely very medical and and
we may need to discuss this
offline and I know that's a big
but I just wonder what we can do
in schools I know that schools
like school bullying and those
sorts of things have led to
suicide in in this this bill
this committee order as I'm
scanning it seems to be very
much in the hospitals outpatient
clinics those sorts of things
but a lot of these I think stand
cans from from school activities
so just a suggestion of I don't
know if you want to that might
be too much to tackle on this
bill.
Wanted to bring it up that I
think that the bullying issue
with suicide we if we're gonna
take a serious look at it we we
may and maybe this bill the
medical side new to come with a
separate bill for the school
side but just want to throw that
out there so thank you for your
great I just want to make those
brief comments thank you thank
you thank you senator Senator is
anybody else on the committee
with comments or suggestions for
Senator annual
Senator serial.
Yes I did thank you.
It must have been a delay
because it came for.
I was just looking at it.
So Senator Neil Harris will say
over the weekend will will will.
You know just take as much time
as we can to to to go through it
and then be prepared to take
action on this committee so
leave the pending motion.
Two two two on the table and
when we come back on on Monday
will deal with this first great
thank you Mr chair that's a
great idea and I this before
signing up I just want to thank
Sarah Carlson from Minnesota
because we we wouldn't be having
this discussion of she had not
taken the initiative to contact
me so I really appreciate that
Sir and so we'll keep working
okay.
You will get off your agenda
some day I know I know Burr are
just love to see if.
Thank you.
Okay thanks thank you.
Senator Lopez
do we let her know that we're
ready for.
Senate bill two thirty on
institutional racism.
To stop a little after six is
probably be the last bill we
have a chance to get to I don't
see.
Committee is.
There's a lot more energy than I
do I don't see us we could try
to do that definition rural
library.
Try to squeeze that in the.
Most of the others or or or
built it'll take a lot of debate
and.
Discussion.
So is this.
Mr chair would you like me to
text her or his.
I'm just here to.
The message I center is we need
to do
but the message.
Everybody if we just take these
two bills I know senator Schmidt
issued you and you've been very
patient on your bills the.
Oh sure there's a lot of people
that want to talk on and on well
so it's in this.
If we hadn't gotten a late start
today we remember remember.
Million.
Issues.
Welcome Senator Lopez we're
we're ready for your Senate bill
two thirty institutional racism
and state agencies thank you so
much Mr chairman I apologize I
within Judiciary so.
We're doing the dance Miss
Mister chair would you mind
announcing again that are the
bill that my bill will be rolled
over again because I noticed
some a person
That probably should we.
Because of the delay started
today we're we're going to roll
over all the bills except Senate
bill two thirty which really
here right now and then Senate
bill two seventy three the rural
library bill will be the last
two bills any other bills will
be heard on Monday.
Meeting on money will start at
one thirty.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee
I am here to present the Senate
bill of two thirty again that's
been in front of the legislature
several times over
it's an important discussion Mr
chairman and the measure of
course might my co sponsor
senator pope so I don't know if
he's been able to join us just
yet or not.
But what Senate bill two thirty
is proposing to do Mr chairman
is it's requiring state agencies
to develop and implement
policies that will to identify
assess a decrease institutional
racism.
what we are asking through the
state of personnel office is to
begin to look at how they can
develop these policies conducted
this is the state government
employee data sets on developing
provided anti institutional
racism training all employees.
Mr Chairman on page two we're
us on or before December thirty
first of each year first at each
state agency or state entity
receiving state funding to
submit a plan to the appropriate
interim committee which Mr
chairman members of the
committee would be courts
corrections and justice the LFC
and of course the legislature
orders and in general for in a
report sent to us as to how they
addressing institutional racism
and then Mr chairman on the
bottom of page two of course it
does at list specifically about
how we are to look at increasing
I'm different steps in hiring
and promotion processes
including a prominent statement
done all advertised annual
reviews something on page three
Mr chairman that clearly
articulates the state's
commitment to reducing and
preventing institutional racism.
Mr chairman members of the
committee also states that all
employees are required to
participate in anti
institutional racism training.
and Mr press Mr chairman members
of the committee you'll remember
that during special session we
did move the measure through it
went through both chambers but
died because of an amendment
that was maybe Mr chairman the
amendment has been included that
was made in the house during
special session and I've worked
with state personnel office of
we're making sure that the
language is correct this time
that didn't match what we but
the bill was amended to in June
of last year.
And of just for final Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Know that the.
The Rousseff institutional
racism are hidden in our
criminal justice social economic
political
schools banks housing industry
private and public employment.
These institutions assigned to
and maintain different
minorities in our communities
different sometimes considered
and many times consider
stressing inferior positions you
Mr chairman the collaborative
failure of an organization to
provided appropriate and
professional service to people
because of their color culture
ethnic origins origins Mr
chairman is something that we
are trying to wait to deal with
making sure that we create the
change Mr Chairman there are
several measures going through
the legislature this year I want
to know that is sponsored by
Senator o'neal that talks about
how we can begin to look at
legislation that we passed
through both chambers making
sure that we do look as to how
these legends these pieces of
legislation affect different
communities within last.
And Mister chairman I'm sure
that we may have more discussion
and I will stop here and to
stand for questions.
I see research from the state
personal offices who do you want
to say something Mr stern.
Yes good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee it it's
a it's a pleasure to go with you
to support Senate bill two
thirty we have worked with of
the center's office in drafting
the language and writing data
that will serve as a benchmark
for how will evaluate the extent
to which agencies are all of the
policies and practices that that
counter institutional racism so
we have staff actually that are
already actively working and
researching on some other
experts all content that will
become the the training that we
believe will be meeting for for
all state agencies so and and I
can answer any questions you may
have the personal thank you.
Thank you Mr stern.
Is there anyone else in the in
the public that would like to
speak on this bill I have a
number of people who well Chris
ready yes I see here there Chris
would join me.
Barron Jones that few Chris.
Chris Ramirez.
Chris will come back to you
we'll go to Barron Jones and
then we'll come back to Chris
from is.
Mr Jones yes thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee my name's parents also
with ACLU New Mexico the ACLU of
New Mexico deeply supports this
legislation and thanks to
sponsor for bringing that as as
a civil liberties organizations
we are deeply committed to any
racism and other net and
equities and we see this bill as
a way is getting just at that
goals thank you so much again
Senator Lopez rain and thanks
from use the chairman.
We also want to speak from the
from the public.
Crews from his way because he is
signed up to speak.
I'm assuming John black lily
Irvin Vitela.
Alexandria Taylor.
Miller Herndon are in here.
All
members of the committee is.
Mr chair C. Christopher of this.
Yes.
M. several times but I don't
think he's there.
Okay what do you want to say
Chris.
Afternoon and and they're
getting thank you senator Ortiz
Pino chair in that senators I I
wanted just to get the executive
director of together for
brothers and also one of the
Cortini members of
deconstructing rations in New
Mexico when we have done work
here in Albuquerque around any
health equity or any the other
issues connected young men of
color their families
institutional racism of agencies
has come into every part of our
work and so we support this bill
because we believe that
addressing institutional racism
at the state level will will be
a great step forward for New
Mexico so we appreciate that
Committee doing it to pass and
thank you Senator Lopez for the
continued support of this bill
to address institutional racism
as a state and again we know the
fiscal impact that dated a
health equity and the health
outcomes of every New Mexican in
our state thank you so much
Senator to the canal
Mr.
Any body else want to speak on
this measure.
We'll go to the committee
members of the committee.
Seeing no we've heard this bill
several times to.
If you skating better each year
Senators using sharpened.
Any other any other discussion
with some of the committee I
move the past.
Seconded by Senator McKenna.
Any questions.
We'll call the roll.
Yes.
Search.
No to explain my vote please.
Lopez yes.
Sir Tom.
Yes.
You know.
Yes to explain is Senator
Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
I you know I I don't want to pay
the bill I I I know it's going
to move to the committee so I
don't want to take up time we
can have some more discussion
later because I I think there is
some fruitfulness that the that
can come from discussion here
but you know it's late and and
everything but I just think that
Want to be realistic about what
this bill does
and and looking at how different
world views kind of collide for
example the definition of
diversity.
and I find it city fascinating
I've done a lot of cross
cultural training you know I've
live in a culture that is
completely different from mine
and I know how stressful and
difficult that can be and I
recognize how stressful and
difficult can be for someone to
come from another country to to
come here to the US but I I
The just when I see in practice
what what some people do
diversity as and how they strive
for it is so different from how
how I define diversity and I I
feel like someone that views the
world like me I tend to
prioritize the diversity of of
thought diversity of world view
of verses yes of how someone
looks in and that's just one
example equity is another one
equities another word that a a
progressive and conservative
just won't be able to agree on
respectfully and so
I in as well as it the word
inclusion
people have said I have long
lots of experience with people
have said that they want
inclusive environment but I look
at and I say that's that's not
inclusive at all and we can't
agree on that word so this so
it's just I I'm I'm voting no
because of my experience in the
inability to agree with people
who additional who have
different world views and we
cannot agree on the very basics
definitions of those words
that's All I Want to say today I
think we could have a very
interesting discussion but just
want to explain my vote so thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you for you know listening
is still Senator.
I'm sorry Mr chairman I don't
have my other file with me and I
think it may go to Judiciary I
don't remember.
Mr chair yes.
Yes I did vote yes for this
very.
Do have some issues but I'll
talk offline with the Senator
Lopez.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Congratulations Senator you do
yes thank you.
He looks like you doing a lot of
online and offline
conversations yes Sir thank you
everybody has can.
You too the final tonight will
be the Senate bill two seventy
three and Senator Tallman would
you share the committee will and
present this bill.
Your.
Okay to Senate bill two seventy
three definition world library
as a sponsored by Senator cheesy
piano go ahead Senator.
This is actually a.
Senator Indian rural and
cultural affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three but we made some
revisions the suggestion the
state librarian and.
In this committee they were
adopted so the this is the
committees of the came out of
there.
This is a bill that tries to
clarify yes this of the rural
library.
Endowment fund.
Two years ago.
Some issues raised in connection
with one provision of the
funding to provide.
Who might be eligible for the
funding in the future and so we
we clarified that in the
sections underlined.
On page
On page three.
Do is even if.
Or no it's actually on page two
lanes.
In section be impatient to so
what it says is that once a
developing rural library or
establish rural library
qualifies to receive grants from
this endowment fund.
The library will remain
qualified to receive those
requests even if their
population.
Municipality or the Indian
tribe.
Exceeds three thousand in the
future this is taken to echo the
possibility that in the future
some of these very small
communities might actually grow
even though that has not been
necessarily.
The widespread experience in the
state.
With me may expert witness Mr
show my more.
I think I believe the state
librarian is also on and the
general counsel was on earlier
for the department of cultural
affairs yes he's on to Mr Peter
since any of them wanted to
speak this is the opportunity.
We.
Mr.
Okay so.
We're just trying to correct the
language that was in the
original bill the the other
problem with it was stated said
the bill said when library
center were established you
should have three thousand or
less and we are thank.
B. B. at what particular rate
was established maybe
Albuquerque had three thousand
people with the intention of you
recently down into the smaller
real libraries are doing a lot
for their communities there they
have wifi going during this time
it they made me feel happy what
I.
So it's really important to the
rural libraries these down
hopefully some day we'll have
fifty million dollars in it and
really provide supports the idea
that libraries should still have
the money the R. B. eligible for
the down and funds after they
grow over three thousand if the
town's Grover three thousand is
that the libraries are it should
be a dependable source of income
from them so we don't really
want it to go away if there
Townsend creep over the three
thousand mark after again being
income eligible for the funds.
Mr Chairman here the state
librarian or the general counsel
for cultural affairs department
want to add anything.
Is there anyone want anyone else
wishing to speak.
In the.
Favor of this bill.
If so.
Please identify yourself.
Mr chair excuse me this is you
like an and the state library
and I'm not here to speak in
favor or against the bill but I
am here to answer any questions
that you have thank you.
And right next to him on our
screens Peter I Susan general
counsel but he's not able to
amuse himself apparently.
It just.
Okay.
We have anyone wishing to speak
in favor of this bill.
Hearing none do we have a.
I mean if they you in opposition
to the bill excuse me.
If not to everyone anyone
interested and speaking in favor
of the bill.
So hearing none return now to
the committee members any.
Committee members wishing to
speak.
In favor of this bill I don't
see any hands up thank you Mr
chair here we go with Senator
City you'll Lopez go ahead
Senator
thank you thank you thank you Mr
chair and Mr chair I'm many of.
I'm just reading it now because
remember I couldn't find the the
the thing and now I'm just
reading it so I may be off base
here of the the analysis says
has written the legislation from
excludes and tribal libraries
from qualifying based on
population served and then it
lists a committee agree of
something a bit.
Mescalero amis is literally
going us under the Domingo and
SUNY.
Is that a problem.
Mr chair.
Mr chair.
What what is what is getting
around to is.
Well maybe maybe I should defer
to my experts witnesses show all
you want to censor response.
Question Mr chair members of the
committee Is there are nineteen
Pueblo libraries in the state
ten under these this definition
will be eligible for the funding
there are about a hundred public
libraries altogether in the
state including
including the tribal libraries
and
About fifty one of them will be
eligible for the funding under
this definition so are the
larger libraries tend to have
larger budgets is of the once in
the in larger communities
because the municipalities I
just have more money to support
their library so there there
still will be ten.
A tribal libraries eligible.
Okay what Mr chair just just to
clarify I apologize it's it's if
I may be tired all of the
pueblos do have a public library
on them is that which that.
All nineteen in the state.
I don't believe he hurries low
as Mr chairman I don't believe.
Rigorous formal as leverage
there may be others that don't
but Mr Mr I'm marking the case
there in nineteen tribal
libraries course we have more
than that in and if you add in
the.
Patchy and that'll populations.
So they would be eligible if
their under three thousand it is
basically the same criteria is
for them is for anybody else.
Okay thank you.
I I apologize and I I apologize
to the to get this point I
understand that qualify if there
are three thousand what my
question is do they have a
library because I'm just
wondering about the car if we're
going to support libraries
within under three thousand five
relation and then they they go
on to perpetuity I love that I
think that's great my question
is I just wanted to know whether
all of the I lows and I assume
that because a Navajo Nation and
maybe that's a bad assumption I
don't know because the the
nation and the
The Apache your Correa and
The Mescalero Apache Mescalero
Apache message are so
Are larger and have more
resources I assume they have
libraries to what I was trying
to get at is our are we.
And maybe that's not the goal I
just want to know whether all of
our native communities all of
our pueblos and tribes
throughout the state have a
library and I'm sure I ask that
really in order to get what we.
For Mister chairman Senator
Sedillo was only for him to
show.
So because he's got all the data
on that.
So and then I'm the Navajo
Nation.
Yes I'm a Navajo safe in there
is one library that is eligible
it twenty on that the community
has a very small population and
so I'd they're the only lab that
I know of I'm the devil we're
nation right now as a senator or
TCP noticing said that that all
the pueblos necessarily have
libraries there's nineteen
tribal libraries
as state librarian you may may
have one nation about that.
Mr chair members of the
committee there are three Pueblo
three Peublo do not have a
library as of yet agrees Taos
and to C. K..
And this legislation will help
them should they want to start
that because they're not on the
list.
Mr chairman.
Go ahead go ahead you are I
apologize Senator Mister chair
and senator members there is
funding in the rural library
endowments to start libraries
where library does not exist.
So that that's a great thing
okay thank you this I think that
this is a good bill and I
apologize I just had I was
trying to read the analysis with
the bill and I was trying to
understand what the point of
what made and you help clarify
that Mr chair thank you.
Thank you senator any other of
members of the committee which
thing to speak.
Senator a.
Okay.
Thank you vice chairman and
thank you Senator Ortiz you know
for this legislation I'm curious
I do have the analysis in front
of me and.
It's not gently with my mind it
is the time of day I don't
understand why.
The line tribal libraries are
being excluded from qualifying
Good thing or bad thing.
The.
Mr chairman and senator magenta.
We were just simply applying the
same criteria.
To tribal libraries as to the
other libraries if the server
community of under three
thousand there include.
Thank you.
They already are included the
receiving grants is the ones
that are in larger communities
that that because they're larger
the assumptions of more
resources just like
municipalities their larger have
more resources and so that was
the that was the reason for
doing that the other thing is
pool is only the folders ingrown
the pool is the same size so the
more libraries that are.
Taking funding out of tools the
less there is very very insular
fifty.
Forty nine either in there now.
So that's where there is a cut
off on the assumption that
they're big enough in serving in
thinking of community that
community can provide the
resources elsewhere.
But if they start in this
program we don't want to cut him
off just as a community group C.
as the idea.
I'm very.
And and actually and and senator
Ortiz picking up so actually so
the line that are excluded it
gives them the opportunity to
look for resources with the
federal government or
Foundations that the like is is
that and my tracking correctly.
Mr chairman and senator McKinney
yes that that Elise is the is
the theory behind this is that
if your large you know you'll be
attracting resources from
whatever source.
Very good thank you chairman Tom
and and thank you Senator Ortiz
you know.
Thank you senator any other
members of the committee wishing
to as speaker regarding this
bill.
The hearing none entertain a
motion.
I would just.
On the committee so for Senate
bill two seventy three.
Thank you we have a motion made
seconded from.
A second second from Senator
Sedillo Lopez so any please call
the roll.
Yes.
Sorry.
Yes.
Yes.
Sierra.
Yes thirteen you know.
Yes.
No motive I.
Six years.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Actually I have the.
They do pass and now we will
turn it back to.
Senator a.
Mr chair to send this on the
weekend with some closing
comments.
Thank you thank you madam vice
chairman of those were able to
get through today Senators
committees will we'll start with
your two bills on one Monday.
Okay we'll have well actually we
will use our reserves of those
resources Senator.
Neillsville to deal with.
Hopefully we'll have had a
chance to read the committee so
thoroughly familiarize ourselves
with you we already had the
analysis of the cell that was
available to us both the one
that was done by our staff and
when the FIR.
Yes
if you.
Mr chair my analysis was on the
server we also have an FIR from
the Human Services Department
between the two you get a good
view I don't know about the
hello you know the the formal if
I. R. is caught up yet but these
two I think will help everybody
everybody has the bill now yeah
you have to move rapidly on
Mondays.
Okay.
And so I wish you a good weekend
I know some of you will have
meetings this weekend different
committees and so on we'll see
you on Monday at one thirty.
