and Lopez.
present.
All right, we have a quorum.
And I know uh when we had left
the last meeting, which seems a
few days ago, um, which it was.
Uh, we, I had asked if you would
consider with your amendments to
bring, come back and bring
forward a committee substitute.
So I do appreciate that you've
come forward.
So for purposes of discussion.
Um, the chair move or do not
pass on Senate Bill 84.
But did you pass again for
consideration, Senate Health and
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 84.
Thank you very much, Senator.
And if you would go ahead and
walk us through your committee
substitute.
Sure. Oh, and also for the
public, we already um had a
brief description of the
original bill. We already took
public testimony.
So now we're just delving into
the bill itself.
Oh please, Senator, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh I
have my expert here.
person this time rather than on
Zoom. I will let Sarah Cracker
walk us through.
Some of these changes and, and
we'll go through the whole bill
at the same time, cuz we didn't
do that last.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Sarah Kreka.
I am an attorney and an advocate
for youth who are in foster
care. I still represent children
who are currently in foster care
as well as aged out youth and
have been doing that since.
2001.
So we're before you today asking
you for revision of the
confidential confidentiality
clause of the Children's code.
Um, we know there are issues
that are plagued this that
plague this child welfare
system, and those are complex
issues. What's exciting about
this bill is that it will
transform the way that the
department does business now,
which is under a.
Very thick cloak of secrecy.
What this bill does.
is
Amend the current code.
To add the term personal
identifier information.
And I'm when I referred in my
testimony, I'm referring to the
clean copy of the bill, so at
pages 5.
And 17, it identifies.
A definition of personal
identifier information, meaning
the person's name, contact
information including home or
business address, email address
or phone number.
Prior to this, there was no
definition of personal
identifier information, which is
really a legal term of art, um.
Now that would be included.
It also makes court docket
numbers public record. It's
really important to note these
cases will still under this
change in the law, if passed.
Cases will still remain sealed.
Um, from the general public
readings will never are still
sealed from the general public
under this change.
Um, this act also will require
the judge to submit a written
order explaining the reasons for
excluding media when media is
excluded from child welfare
hearing hearings if you turn to
page 7.
Of the, um, this is the
substitute right of the
substitute bill.
It's really important to note,
of course, you can see.
Media's already allowed. So the
current law allows media in
hearings. If you, at the bottom
of 7, we have some changes
clarifying, um,
Just, I think parent or guardian
instead of custodian. We have so
many.
Kids who are being raised by
relatives, foster parents and
foster parents, so that really
made it clear.
Page 8
is where it says the judge shall
submit a written order
explaining the reasons for
excluding the media from any
hearings, so that would be an
addition.
What this act also does is allow
for the filing of an immediate
appeal when the judge excludes
media from a hearing.
Really importantly, this act.
If passed, defines near
fatality.
And just for practical purposes,
um, what's happening as as this
body knows we have a major issue
with fentanyl in our state and
we've had a number of cases
where children are ingesting
fentanyl and are being revived
by Narcan, sometimes multiple
times, so that would be an
example of near fatality.
Certainly when we get to the Q&A
portion of today, I can answer
questions about that as well,
but um, what this act would do
if passed is clarify the
information released by CYFD in
the event.
of a fatality or a near
fatality.
Why this is important is because
under current law, when a child
dies or almost dies.
The only referral is an internal
CYFD investigation, which
doesn't become public and you
heard me speak about that on
Monday.
And a referral to the district
attorney's office, and even the
DA's office has a hard time
getting information disclosed
from this agency when they are
prosecuting near fatalities. So
defining those is really
important.
I just wanted to see if we could
direct.
To the page that discusses new.
Yes, page 17.
Section 4
Fatalities and near fatalities
record release.
Near fatality means an act that
as certified by a physician,
including the child's treating
physician, placed a child in a
serious or critical medical
condition. I have a client who
um didn't just drugs and is on
life support for the rest of his
life.
In custody, um, as are his
siblings, that would count as a
near fatality. We turn the page
to page 18.
Subpart B directs that after
learning that a child fatality
or near fatality has occurred.
There's a reasonable suspicion
that the fatality or near
fatality was caused by
abandonment, abuse or neglect.
The department shall release the
following information if in the
department's possession within 5
business days. Turning to page
19.
Or fatality, they shall release
the name, age and gender of the
child, date and location of the
fatality, cause of death.
And if known for a near
fatality, the age and gender of
the child.
But not, uh, clearly not the
name, uh, just.
To clarify for fatalities, HIPAA
and at all times federal privacy
laws will preempt.
Um, this law. So if there's any
conflict, obviously the greater
protection provided by federal
law would apply, but, so for
example, HIPAA expires upon
death.
So that is why we have for
fatality, the name is also
released.
If we go on down for near
fatality, the department shall
release whether the child's
currently or has been in custody
of the department within the
last 5 years, or the child's
family has been served under
investigation by the department
within the last 5 years. Whether
the child lived with the parent,
guardian, or custodian or was in
foster care, was in a
residential facility or
detention facility was a runaway
or had some other living
arrangement. This is so
important.
Under current law, the
department does not have to
disclose that.
So when we are having children
harmed in the custody of the
agency. We don't know.
The only reason if I serve as a
plaintiff's attorney in my
capacity sometimes from time to
time, that those cases come to
me is word of mouth. It's not
because the department is trying
to make sure that these families
are served and that justice is
served when negligence occurs on
their watch, they are in fact.
Currently under current law
allowed to hide that from us, so
this is, this really is
transformational. This
transforms the way the agency
does business when children are
harmed in its care and our kids
are.
Absolutely worth it.
So important that their stories
get out that their families are
able to have justice. That's
what this section does.
It continues to say, um, the
department shall release whether
an investigation is being
conducted by the department or a
law enforcement agency if known,
the detailed synopsis of prior
reports of abuse or neglect,
involving the child, siblings or
other children in the home. I've
now turned to page 20. Any
actions taken by the department
to ensure the safety of the
siblings if applicable, and any
other information that's
publicly known.
This act also will require CYFD
to provide a summary report on
fatalities and near fatalities.
This is a this is again um would
transform the current practice.
Down at the bottom of page 21
subpart I, I think is what picks
up that section, the department
shall continue to provide
timely allowable information to
the public on the investigation
into a case of fatality or near
fatality of a child, including
the summary report.
And the report will include the
actions taken by the Department
in response to the case.
Part two, the information
described in subsection JRK,
which is.
If the report involves a child
who was residing in the child's
home, contain a summary of all
of weather services were
provided. So basically, whether
the child was in custody,
whether the child, a member of
the child's household or person
who had been arrested for
abandonment, abuse, or neglected
the child prior to the fatality
or near fatality. I'm now
turning to page 23 was the
subject of a current or previous
department report, all
involvement of the child's
parents.
Or the person who had been
arrested for abuse or neglect of
the child prior to the fatality.
Or near fatality in a situation
for which the department report
was made or services provided.
Subpart for any investigation
pursuant to a department report
concerning the child.
And then part K describes the
summary report involves a child
who was in an out of home
placement, the summary report
shall include and it includes
licensing history of the out of
home placement.
So what this means is foster
care.
Importantly, at page 24,
subsection L says nothing in
this section shall apply to the
Indian Family Protection Act,
Information or records
concerning Indian children or
Indian parents, guardians or
custodians as those terms are
defined by the Children's code,
so any proceedings pursuant to
our, the Indian Family
Protection Act, which has, you
know, you all passed as our
localized embodiment of ICA is
exempt from this.
The other thing this act would
do is create a new section of
the abuse and neglect Act
entitled Creation and
Maintenance of Dashboard on
department website, annual
report, requiring CYFD and
you'll hear
Potentially from the agency that
they do this now, they, they
sometimes do this now, um, the
dashboard has been taken down
from time to time, but this
would require CYFD to create and
maintain a public dashboard on
their website, updated
quarterly.
It would also require the
department to submit a yearly
report to the governor and
legislature containing
information laid out in this
section. So the reporting
requirements would really again
transform the way the agency
currently does business, and it
allows for the release of
certain information for systemic
analysis, so that we can
identify when we're trying to
reform the system, what needs to
change?
As far as release of information
and fatalities under current
law, according to a recent
report from the University of
San Diego School of Law.
First star in the children's
advocacy Institute.
New Mexico's current failure to
release that information has the
most restrictive statute on the
books in in all of the 50
states. So what SB 84 does is
really bring us up to speed with
the modernization of the release
of certain information,
especially in fatalities and
near fatalities.
This act is based on model
legislation, it's consistent
with the federal CAFTA, the
child abuse prevention and
Training Act, which acknowledges
that while maintaining
confidentiality of child abuse
and neglect records is
important.
There are some cases which have
been carved out from this shield
and must be made public
specifically where child abuse
and neglect leads to or
contributes to a fatality or a
near fatality.
OK, and with that we stand for
questions. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, is that all?
Do you have anything else to
add?
Did you call me Azell?
Oh, sorry.
I don't think I'm senator
though, uh, no, that's all.
Thank you. Uh, please stand for
questions. OK.
Great. I appreciate it. Thank
you.
Um, any questions or comments
from committee members?
Senator Sio Lopez.
OK.
Thank you.
Um
Oh this, so this is a very
complex bill, and I understand
what the attempt attempt here is
to balance transparency and.
Privacy.
And so I guess I'm just kind of
curious why, um.
How you believe, oh, before I
get into the specifics about the
bill because I have some
specific legal questions.
Well, I always start with what
is the evil we're trying to
prevent or what is the good
we're trying to do when we start
that, and I guess I'd like to
hear from you what exactly we're
trying to accomplish with this
bill.
Madam Cher, members of the
committee, Senator Cio Lopez,
thank you for that really
important question. So,
currently, um,
Under current law,
Providers
Family members who support
children in foster care are
excluded from hearings.
That's just basic matter.
This opens up who the court is
allowed in the media section, it
really clarifies who's allowed
to come into hearings, of
course, with court approval, um.
And I can turn you to that.
That's on page.
7, let's see.
So Part D, accredited
representatives of the news
media shall be allowed to be
present at closed hearings,
that's current law on the
condition they refrain from
divulging information,
identifying the child or the
parent, oh sorry, that's the
wrong section.
It grants greater access to
court hearings, it grants
greater access to information
that um about department
decision making.
can turn you to that section.
Page 11.
So we have on page 11 that.
Public release of department
information.
Construed as openly as possible
under federal and state law that
subsection B and C, it defines
the information the department
can release about its decision
making.
that section.
And right now, so just as a
practical matter, families call
me all the time. I've had, I had
two parents last week whose
parents whose children were
taken from them and they felt.
Abused by the system, like they
didn't get due process or
fairness, um, and they want to
know what to do. They can't even
really get access to the full
file, this allowed this really
clarifies department decision
making is accessible right now,
under current law, even though
we have an appellate court.
Decision that directs in Dunn
versus CYFD that the confident
current code protects, protects
families, not the agency. The
reason that is in that decision
is daily, the agency tells
families, advocates, I mean, as
a guardian to light, I should
have access to the full file I
should get any email I want.
Especially if I'm challenging a
placement change.
Tell me, show me the emails that
went into this decision. Those
are confidential. Those are
confidential.
So this really clarifies that
they can't just use it as a
cloak and a shield. Even though
we have that appellate court
case that is still happening to
this day. So I need to find the
page so I can direct you. Just
give me one moment on the
section that says department
decision making.
Um, so that doesn't include
identifying information of any
OK. Page 16.
Part I, the department shall
provide pertinent department
information upon request to a
prospective adoptive parent,
foster parent or guardian, if
the information concerns a child
for whom the prospective
adoptive parent foster parent or
guardian seeks to adopt or
provide. That's not the decision
making section, but that section
is so important because I just
received a text today from a um
foster parent of my young
clients who is.
Frequently denied information
about our clients and has to ask
me what is going on because the
department again uses this
confidentiality code in the
current form, not to share
information about that she needs
in order to parent these kids,
so that clarifies into in part
I.
Our case says the department
shall provide a summary of the
outcome of investigations to the
person to the reporter.
I can't tell you when, when our
community who had lacks an
enormous amount of trust, the
trust has been so breached in
this New Mexico community
between our families and the
people really trying to keep our
kids safe and this agency, and
when they call in a report to
statewide central intake.
They don't, they are, they don't
get follow up. This requires a
summary of the outcome of the
investigation to the person who
reported it so that our
community can then be
responsible for holding the
agency accountable for keeping
that child safe. Because as you
know, thousands of reports come
in and investigations are not
always open. Many are screened
out, so then the reporter can
know it was screened out. So
maybe if it's a teacher, a
neighbor, they can keep an eye
on that child. That's so
critical. Um, if it's screened.
Then they have to have a summary
of what of department action so.
This allows us to hold this
agency accountable, I have a
case where the ant.
will never forgive herself.
Because she called into sky.
Um
If you don't do something soon,
my nephew is going to die, and a
week later he was dead. If she
had known no one had gone to the
house, she would have called
every day. She's not going to
rest, because she didn't know
they didn't go follow up.
So that's something that
immediately would change because
of Part K. And if you give me a
minute, then I'll find you the
department action section I'm
thinking of, sorry.
Madam Chair.
I, I guess my first question,
OK, because we're going into the
details of it, which I think we
should go into the details of
it, but my overall question is,
it sounds to me and maybe I'm
missing something that we're
passing this law because in your
opinion, CYFD is not doing what
the court has already ordered it
to do.
Um, in the, you know, in the
court of appeals cases with
regard to releasing the
releasing that.
Madam Cha, thank you for that
question because that's, that's
not the case. Tell me what
exactly we're we're striking
this balance between privacy.
Which I think is really
important, especially in abuse
and neglect cases, because if
you get accused of abuse.
Or neglect
And it turns out to be false.
Uh
It can be devastating to the
reputation of the individual.
As, as you will know. On the
other hand,
We want to have transparency
with the agency about what it is
they're doing.
We want to know what the agency
is doing. We want to know, but
we don't necessarily need the
child's name.
Um, because again, the stigma,
um, that that presents.
To the family.
And, and so there are so many
issues and and working at Elanza
Communitario, I saw this like
real up close and personal, um,
and I, my experience with the
attorneys did get the data.
Not everybody did.
Um, like, if, if I needed
something as an attorney.
I could get it.
Um, and I don't know if that
experience is somehow different
for you, um, and of course this
was uh when I was there 8 years
ago.
Um, so it, it has been a long
time, but again, I, I, I'm
worried about such a complex
response. I know, I know that we
have to uh comply with CAPTA.
Yes, that, that's like basic.
And so the department has to
apply with CAFTA.
And this kind of reminds me of
the gun bills where, you know,
we already have federal law, but
then we, we pass state law to
make sure that the state
enforces it.
At least CYFD thinks that
there's some provisions here and
we'll go, well, we can go that
don't comply with CAPTA.
And, and, and, you know, maybe
we could go there, but
I still want to have and I know
that um our judiciary doesn't
like purposes in statutes, um,
but I personally do. I like to
understand what it is and for
everybody to be on the same page
of what it is we're trying to
do. So if you were to write a
purpose section for the for your
uh your bill, what would the
purpose section say?
Madam Chair, the purpose section
would say.
Transparency of what goes on.
In sealed proceedings.
Especially when malfeasance
occurs by an agency that holds
an enormous amount of power
going into our family's homes.
It is critical. The transparency
is critical.
If we are going to change what
we know to be.
A beleaguered system where abuse
of power occurs every single
day. This will transform.
Their ability to harm children
and not.
Ever be held accountable for
every case you see on the news,
there are hundreds of cases. I
don't mean death necessarily,
but.
Hundreds of cases of foster
children being sexually
assaulted, no accountability.
Of a grandmother losing custody
of her grandson because she
assisted in the criminal
prosecution of her own daughter
for murdering.
Her other grandchild. The
apartment didn't like that.
They came and took her grandson
from her, 7 years old, the day
before a major surgery, becau in
retaliation for her.
Complying with a law enforcement
request to get an update on
what's going on in the child
abuse case. They said she
violated confidentiality.
They took her grandson from her.
To put him with a non-relative
stranger. This will change their
ability to do that and have no
answer to it. OK.
Madam Chair, so that's, uh,
Madam Chair, that's what we're
talking about with regard to
transparency. What are we
talking about with regard to
privacy, like why do we have
rape shield laws, for example.
Why do we protect
confidentiality, domestic
violence victims. So, so tell
me, you told me the purpose of
transparency, and I think that's
important. I don't want to
minimize it in any way, but then
what's the privacy value that we
have to balance?
Madam Chair, SB 84 directs the
IPP, the personal identifying
information not be released.
This means that sibling names
will be redacted as they are
under current practice is the,
the agency is actually good at
redaction.
They air every single day,
Senator Saddio Lopez on this
side of protection. So even when
I am an an advocate and an
attorney in an open lawsuit. I
have.
The rules of civil procedure. I
have the court allowing me open
access, they redact.
And I have to fight them not to
redact, So IPP will continue to
not be released. It already
isn't. This is already a measure
the agency puts into practice.
It has limited exceptions.
It includes when the name has
already been released. This is
in recognition of First
Amendment rights of media.
And of the public at large,
media rights are not above
family rights in this bill.
Regarding release, hearings are
still closed. These are sealed
proceedings also.
These changes, Cencio Lopez
represents the floor.
And what that means is, if a
court pursuant to rule 79,
motion to seal if a party raises
an issue about something being
released, of course, the court
can add additional protections,
Madam Chair.
OK.
So, um,
I'm not getting the the the
overall thing I keep going to
the bill, so let's just go to
the bill, you know, let's let's
let's just go there. Um, so,
The person personal identifier
information, do you think that
the person's name, contact
information, home and business
address, email address or phone
number. Do you think that's
enough?
Madam Chair, I don't understand
the question. Do you think
that's enough to be protected
enough information.
Um, like
Just hypothetically, what about
immigration status?
Madam chair, actually.
Since I've been representing
children in custody since 2001.
1 thing that the agency has done
very well, is not identify
immigration status. I have never
one time seen that in any
record, and I've reviewed a lot
of records. This agency has made
it very clear it will not
participate with ice, and that's
a policy that
I'm grateful for. Um, I also
would direct you to.
The volume of, of what they call
pigs. Those are the policy
guidelines that they issue
internally, um, of some of that
could be regulated through that
as well, Madam Chair.
So, um, so you think that's,
that's sufficient to be
redacted. That's the minimum
that should be redacted from the
records.
Madam chair, if I could just
add.
Since we're a fire information,
it doesn't currently exist in
statute.
So, however, they're doing it
right now.
Um
However they're doing it right
now.
is not releasing that
information, so this.
Way I'm reading it just
clarifies that this is what.
I asked for in the certain, in
certain cases.
Um, so I hear what you're
saying, but I don't think that
needs to be further spelled out
in this definition. And I think,
yes, this definition is as broad
as it needs to be.
So what if um and I know that
the hearing can be, can be
closed to the media.
If the child wants it close to
the media.
Oh, I read this and but the
court has to specify reasons and
then there's a an immediate
appeal.
So
Um
In my experience, these cases
need to be timely.
I, the worst thing that happens
is when these cases drag on and
on and on.
So I am really concerned about
having a an interlocutory
appeal.
For the media, because the media
didn't agree with the court's
decision to seal. I would guess
that in most cases the media
would disagree with the court's
decision to, to close the
record.
So
I'm kind of worried about what
that means for the proceeding,
and what that means for the kid
to wait around and I've done
appeals and there's and this is
the problem, you don't specify a
problem, I think you don't have
to specify how quickly these
this needs to be, and I know you
can't because of separation of
powers.
Um, and so it's up to the Court
of Appeals what they're going to
do with these, I would hope.
That they would be top of top of
mind priority.
But if they're not,
I'm there that we don't know,
um, and it would be good to know
exactly.
Um
What the court is gonna do. I
know that the court has rocket
dockets, it has all kinds of, it
has kinds of things. Um, it
would be good if you specified
at least a path for the court of
appeals or something.
Or even a standard of review
because the the legislature has
power to determine what the
standard of review is, but
there's no, not even a standard
of review. So I'm really
concerned about this immediate
this immediate appeal, um, and
then it doesn't have a timeline,
so let's say the the court seals
it and then the media finds out
about it 15 days later, and then
all of a sudden they appeal and,
and the case is again slowed
down. That really bothers me
about.
this.
A chair, I don't read anything
in this that says that that the
case will stall or be stayed
pending an interlocutory appeal.
So what you're talking about is
a stay.
No one is more concerned about
delay in in permanency for their
clients than me. I have children
who have been in custody for 6
years because of an appeal on
the substance of the
termination, not interlocutory.
So,
I'm grateful for that question.
I understand the extreme value
in expediting things. It doesn't
say that there's a stay. So what
I envision is media is not media
is not happy. The case, of
course, the case continues.
First Amendment rights are not,
do not supersede or in any way
um cause a stay. They can, they
can then appeal their right to
be excluded and proceedings
continue, but as you know, these
proceedings are slow. There's 6
months between hearings. So uh
whether they're and
We can't, as you mentioned,
direct that it get on the rocket
docket, you read my mind, I
would hope that the Court of
Appeals would allow, um, if
there's any impact, which I
don't read there to be any
impact whatsoever if the media
is appealing, being excluded.
It doesn't stay the case.
And I'm sure. Um, yeah, AOC
thought that there would be uh
an impact, but um.
It doesn't say that there won't
be a stay.
And I, I think that you're
probably right that children's
court judges.
Would continue.
But it doesn't
Um
Judges really, when, when
something is on appeal.
You've got that sort of side
show going on.
And then you've got the case and
judges are very aware of, of
what's what's going on. The
media is
By the way, gonna be really
upset, right, because the
proceeding is going on, the
appeal is going on, all this is
happening and
And we're not really necessarily
getting a resolution.
Or the transparency that the
media wants because they're
gonna have to spend time and
money.
On an appeal.
Um, so I'm just not crazy about
that mechanism, um.
For this, um,
And, and I, I believe these
cases are sealed for a reason.
These, um,
Children who are abused and
neglected.
I think they deserve the
privacy, um.
In the first place, I, I have,
I've referred a situation where
I I represent the situation.
I don't even know how the media
got it.
But it was a child who who was
removed because of health
reasons because she was too.
Heavy
And um it was an immigrant
family.
It was the most bizarre
situation. It became a media
circus and it really wasn't fair
to the family.
And
I don't know why. I can't
remember now cause I got
involved later.
Um, after, after that decision
was made.
I just think a media cir circus
is the worst thing you can do to
a child to a family where there
is an accusation.
Of
Of abuse
Neglect
And it has not been resolved.
Madam Chair, um, if I could
direct.
So our zeal to Lopez, your
attention to page 7, pages 78.
And 9
This is current law. You'll see
very few changes. This is media
is already allowed, as you
mentioned in that case that and,
and I would also like to add all
the parties are represented,
especially the children.
And any party at any time can
make a motion to further seal,
this is the floor.
It's not the ceiling. So I can
easily make a motion under rule
79 to seal.
Any part that that had been
unsealed that I don't like if my
client is being exposed in the
media, I would immediately file
a motion if I had concerns, um,
this is already all current law.
I think, I think your critiques
in the last question are about
current law.
No, I'm talking about is the
appeal, the immediate appeal of
the decision.
I, I understand current law,
which, by the way, I, I think it
should be any child on page 7,
you changed any to the child. I
think any child involved in this
um.
In the precedings.
Um
Uh, on the condition they
refrain from divulging
information that would identify
the child.
A lot of these cases involve
siblings, a lot of these cases
involve witnesses that might be
um
Other children and I, I think we
should protect.
The children that are involved
in the proceeding, not just
Well, I guess any child involved
in the proceeding, not just the
child.
Um, but that's, that I, that's
just another note I have, but
I'm sorry.
Go on.
Adam Chair, I don't, I see that
as a distinction without a
difference if the child's
involved in the proceedings,
then they are not the
information is not allowed to be
divulged, often sibling, it's
very rare that if a child's in
custody, their sibling is not
also in custody. They're
involved in a proceeding as
well, so that would cover them,
Madam Madam Chair.
The witness
Would you say the witnesses
involved in the proceeding?
I can't think of a single
example of a child witness in
any of my cases in the last 24
years, Madam Chair.
OK, I can.
I can't playground cases,
teacher cases.
Madam Chair, if those are before
the children's court in a child
abuse neglect case, as I
mentioned,
that could be. I'm sorry, they
were, they were criminals. They
were mind.
But still, um,
Madam Chair, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Um
OK, so we already, I think we
already talked about the appeal.
The the written order is
required if you're going to have
the immediate appeal, I again,
I, I, I think there should be a
standard of review. If you're
gonna have the immediate appeal,
um, I'm not crazy about that.
Um, let's go through going,
going thing.
Um, this near fatality thing is
certified by a physician.
To be a near fatality.
Um, one of the things in the
that was in the FIR is the
brutality that
They were concerned about
inconsistency with what's
determined to be a near fatality
because it's a physician,
there's no standard for the
judge to apply judges to apply
uniformly, they're deferring to
whatever a physician.
Finks was a near fertility. Are
you OK with that?
Madam Chair, no one should
substitute their judgment for
the medical professional about
what a near fatality is in the,
in an instance where that's
raised again in motion practice,
the court could um review that,
the physician can be called as a
witness and put under oath,
Madam Chair.
I, I guess I hadn't seen the, I,
you know, that the certificate,
where is it?
That's on page 17. It's, is it
7?
1717 19, OK.
Um, near fatalies is an act that
is certified by a physician.
Uh why is, why is it certified
by a physician and not just as a
physician testified. Why isn't
it just an evidentiary thing,
like most other things? What's,
what's certification different,
uh, Madam Chair, again in my and
members of the committee senator
Sadia Lopez, in my experience
with near fatality, there is a
slew of medical documentation
about what has gone on, there
are, um, blood drawn drug test
results. Um, there are hospital
records there are.
results of tests, I, I think
again we need to be sure we're
deferring to physicians. If we
allow the department to define
your fatality, we'll be back at
square one, Madam Chair.
Well, has
Uh, I guess my question is just
has a, has an evidentiary
matter, there is evidence.
There's lots of evidence, you
just, you described a lot of
evidence, so why does it need to
be a certification by a physic
physician.
So wouldn't you just have the
judge review the evidence and
say this was a near fatality.
Because, and I like it, I like
that it's um.
place the child in a serious or
critical medical condition.
That's better than just having,
not having any uh
Any definition, but why
certification to me means that
the physician has to do
something.
certify, review the evidence,
make some kind of certification.
I mean, I'm just curious.
Why the language is certified by
a little unusual.
Madam Chair
So dent senator Sadia Lopez, um.
My reading of it also is that
it's in this serious situation.
I think relying on the child's
position.
And an actual medical
professional.
Is a higher standard than.
Someone who is not the child's
physician.
Um
If you're gonna go to judiciary.
Um, and I'll, I'll let the chair
of judiciary, it's just unusual
to have a certification. And I
think the court is going to
wonder what is it a certificate,
you know, I don't know, uh, if I
were the judge, what is meant by
certification? I know how to
review the evidence and come to
a conclusion if I'm a judge, so
what does a certification mean?
But I'm gonna let judiciary deal
with, I would like to just point
out this section really is
directing the department on when
to release records. It's not
necessarily directing the court.
So it's directing the department
that if a physician has
certified the following and so
if there's a medical record, I,
I imagine the records custodian
at CYFD would consider that
certification.
So the the the records, the
records because so we're looking
at page 17, 32A 4, 33.1,
subsection A near fatality.
It says Records released.
So this is, again, but this
section is directing records
release. Yes, that's not the
court. The court doesn't preside
over records release, the
records custodian at CYFD when I
make a request, determines
whether or not to release
information. This is a directive
to the Records custodian of CYA,
and that makes sense, so it
should be certified by a
physician on a form.
Um
Created by the department or do
you know what I mean, a
certification how is something.
Um
And what, what does it mean to
certify the records by a
physician so that the records
could soliation the records
custodian could decide to
release it, and then if they
disagree, a court to determine
whether the evidence was reached
by the the the physician. So
there's in a way, two levels to
to my question and
You know, a lot of times when
you require certification, it's
certified by a physician on a
form developed by the
department.
Um, Madam Chair, in the event
this passes, Senator Lopez, and
I am denied information under
this act, because it is not
quote certified by a physician
as an advocate, I will turn
around and get the physician to
put in writing on letterhead,
and I expect this records
custodian to then release that
sure just to add, I'm, I believe
since it's a directive to the
agency that if there was any
confusion on that, they could
come up with it in rules.
OK.
Um, that's helpful. Thank you.
Um,
And
On page 11, I, I wrote down
here.
In a case in which a child or
the child family has been
publicly identified through news
reports, a lawsuit or other
means, the department may
respond publicly with factual
and complete information about
the actions the department has
taken.
Um, is this to protect the
department?
Madam chair
Madam Chair, thank you so much.
This is the section I was
frantically looking for, so what
it does is.
It directs the department can
respond with factual and
complete information about the
actions the department has taken
in the case. That's the section
I was looking for earlier. So
what that means is
That
And so I think this goes
directly to when there's a
fatality that's in the news and
then the the agency is asked to
respond. They say we can't
because of confidentiality.
This says, yes, you can.
And you will
You need to let us know.
What
Actions the department has taken
in the case, or at least that
they can, they can no longer get
on the news and say we can't say
a word, this is an open lot case
um under the Children's code.
This opens that door for them to
respond and provide the public
again, so that accountability
can be had, um, to our
community. What action have you
taken in that case? And they may
respond, they may choose to say
this is in litigation, this is
under investigation.
And say me.
Yes, it says me, Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair, I just wanted
to point out the chair.
Sorry, Madam Chair, I just
wanted to point out that the
beginning of that sentence
you're just referencing on line
15, or well, really on 16.
That is anything that has not
been publicly released shall be
redacted.
As a need to safeguard personal
identifier information.
I think that part's really
important as well. I agree. I, I
totally agree with that. Um, is
this, um,
One of the things that was in
the FR also was on page 12, um.
That the information could be
released by the department to a
person's conducting bona fide
research or investigations.
The results of which provide the
department information on child
abuse neglect that would be
useful to the department
developing policy and practice,
um.
Has having an academic
background, I, I like that. I
think that's good, but the
department said that was
possibly not consistent with
CAPTA.
Um
Is that correct? That is
incorrect, Madam Chair. This is
model legislation, um, and has
been carefully reviewed for
consistency with captive by a
number of attorneys, um,
including one who is an expert
on CAFTA, Madam Chair.
Because the as I understood what
they were saying is in New
Mexico because we have such
small.
counties.
When you release um data like
this child was African American,
this child was whatever in small
communities.
Um
It's
It's not really confidential
anymore.
Actually really understand that
because some of the biggest
fatalities have occurred in the
small communities and that's
just that is why we have the
exception if it's otherwise
public. Communities know they
care. Neighbors care about
what's going on to the children
down the street from them
deeply, and they should, they
shouldn't be excluded from that.
And I caution any member of this
committee or this legislative
body when the department is
trying to quote advocate for the
protection of children, what
they're doing is protecting.
Madam Chair.
I, uh, Madam Chair, I really
like that the information is
going to be um provided to
foster parents, um, all of that,
and of course school personnel.
I was curious though why it
would, the information
concerned, I understand social,
educational needs.
Why does the school need medical
needs?
Can you remind us?
On page 13.
Um, if this is existing law
except you added medical needs
and I was curious why.
Madam Chair, our school
personnel are really the front
line of protecting our children.
They
When they have concerns and they
are blocked from getting access
to how they are able to educate.
And many of these children,
almost all of them in custody
have um individual.
I, they have IEPs,
individualized education plans.
Many times that touch on medical
needs, that is to clarify that,
of course, if they're serving a
child and having to make
accommodations based on medical
issues that they're allowed
access to that information,
Madam Chair.
I don't know if that raises some
HIPA issues or whatever, it
just, it was a little bit
curious to me. Um, thank you.
And then, um,
And I don't know if this in.
And I've done this on on page
15, a party to a court
proceeding relating to a
department investigation may
comment publicly as long as the
party does not disclose personal
identifier information. That's
the battle of the case in the
media.
And it's not good.
It's just um
And I guess I'm old fashioned.
I'm from the the era of when
lawyers are not supposed to be
commenting on on litigation and
not to try the case in the
In the media, so it's just, uh,
that was, it just kind of.
Um
And, and I, you know, I'll admit
I've done it too, you know,
comment to the media and.
But not regarding a child.
Madam Chair, I think this is
actually opening it up so that
parents are not punished when
they comment on their own cases,
there's a number of parents who
have been very outraged by their
treatment by the agency, and
they feel gagged.
And they feel like they aren't
able to speak publicly, they
aren't, they are admonished when
they post on Facebook. They are
trying to seek community. Um, I,
again, the, the
Enormous amount of power this
agency has going into our
family's homes is so unchecked
and unchallenged, and I read
part F to really empower those
parents not to be scared to talk
about their cases. Oh, so you
didn't see this as attorneys,
um, making the comments. You saw
this as the.
It's parties.
It's, it doesn't say a
commenting as long as they
don't.
say their child's name.
Absolutely they're a lot a party
to a court proceeding relating
to the investigation. It really
empowers parents not to be
scared to see community, which
they need when a child's been
taken from their home. I'm sure.
OK. And then what, uh what was
this district attorney uh
information, the district
attorney successfully petitions
the children's court that
disclosure.
The disclosure would cause
specific material harm to a
criminal investigation. Can you
give me an example?
And does it happen now?
I'm I'm talking about 16H on
page 16 is.
Does that happen
That the DA thinks that the
disclosure.
Would hamper
I, I, that's, that was another
interesting thing to me.
Because, well,
Is that the criminal part is a
separate part.
Madam chair, yes, so there are a
number of cases where there's a
companion case where the
district attorney is prosecuting
the parent of the child in
custody.
And I think that what this does
is ensure that
The DA needs to stay in their
lane and only get information
about the family is what it
looks like, um.
I, I can't think of an instance.
The question, Madam Chair and
Senator C Lopez is, is this
happening? I, I can't. I think
that's more of a question for
the district attorney's office,
I can certainly reach out, but I
don't have an answer for that
now. I, I couldn't, I just.
Again, I couldn't picture that.
Um, they're real separate.
The proceedings are real, are
very separate in the DA's
office, in my experience, like
kind of has their.
Their file
Um
And that I don't know, um, I,
I'd never involved, I never got
involved in the criminal aspects
of these cases.
So that was unusual to me.
Um
But I, I would be interested,
maybe I'll talk to the DA to
ask, and then, um,
It but, but I think my colleague
um.
Senator Charlie's gonna, you
gonna ask about?
The
So I, and you have, OK, so I'll,
I'm, I'm gonna skip that, um.
Mhm
And I think of.
I think I will save the rest of
the question to see if they're
not answered because I know I've
taken up a lot of time, but I do
have more, more, a little, a few
more little technical things,
uh, but I have a feeling they'll
probably come up.
And I know that um my colleague.
Senator Charlie will do a really
good job with regards to the
questions about the April part.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Gallegos.
Sure, thank you and
Center and
I believe your name was Sarah.
Madam chair and goes, yes, sir,
said Sarah Cracker.
Thank you for that um.
Madam turn or Madam Chair
Senator Sarah, I just want to
give you a little history, so,
uh, I've been
Trying for years to get detail
from CYFD. I understand Senator
Brantley's on this bill.
Uh, we've had problems.
Uh, Representative Doo myself
and others trying to get
clarity, so one of the things
I'd like to
Madam Cha Center and Sarah is.
Just for clarification for the
new members.
Uh, can you explain to me what?
The attorney in Llium does.
And what your job is.
Madam Chair, Senator Gallegos,
I'd be glad to so anytime a
child is taken into custody,
they're assigned a guardian ad
litem attorney if they're.
Aged 13 and under, if they're
aged 14 and above, they're
assigned what we call a youth
attorney, and a guardian ad lite
attorney, which is the role I've
served in since 2001, including
before the law changed where.
14 year olds and upward
empowered with a youth attorney.
What we do is zealously advocate
for the needs of our children,
our child clients, and that's
different than Guardian Alium
and any other forum, um, I've
served as guardian ad litem and
other um capacities in different
courtrooms, but in children's
court, it's very clear in the
children's code, we are to be a
zealous advocate for our
clients, so we're attorneys and
we're also advocating for their
needs. Um, we are also an arm of
the court, but it is.
A little bit different than in
in other capacities where we're
exclusively an arm of the court.
So we're, we're reporting at
each hearing, um, I do home
visits, I report on.
My my child clients.
Education, how their basic needs
are being met, if their
placement is appropriate, if I
agree or disagree with the
department's recommendation on
uh permanency, so that can mean
return home or adoption. Um, so
we are advocating at all times
or the the child. Now when the
child is young, we are also
substituting our judgment for
what we think is in that child's
best interests, frankly, as a
child gets older, um, of course,
14 and up when we are converted,
our role is converted.
to a youth attorney, we are
representing our clients
expressed wishes, so just like
in a divorce, um, maybe I don't
agree with my client living in
an apartment at age 16, but if
that's what she wants, I'm going
to go to court and fight for
that, you know, so I mentioned
divorce because a lot of times.
Uh, people get confused when
they've been guardian ad litem,
and now they're supposed to
represent the young person's
expressed wishes, and they don't
agree with it, well, there's
lots of times where we don't
agree with what our clients
want, and we fight for it
anyway. So 14 and under as a
guardian ad litem, just to wrap
up and answer your question. We
are um going to court and
stating what we believe is in
the best interest of the child,
and we're also in the home,
where else I go to all of my
clients, um, IEP meetings. I'm
involved in.
Um, making sure they're getting
appropriate education under
federal and state law. I hope
that I've answered your
question, Madam Chair.
Desmond chair and center and
Sarah, I, I.
The short answer is the best
interest of the child.
And so, uh, knowing that.
And knowing CYFD and I'll tell
you I went back before the
committee sub and spent a lot of
time on the bill.
Because, uh, just for instance,
I live in Hobbs and that's when
you saw the failure CYFT system
in the Mona Lisa case.
That brought her back to New
Mexico under our care.
Blind and battered
Her life
So I, I've been following this.
I, I like your bill, but I do
have a question, so compared to
where we're at now.
Will this bill better protect
the child?
Madam Chair.
Absolutely.
Well, thank you for that, and
then I'll I'll go on, um, and I
understand why you're bringing
this forward. uh, my next
question is um.
And Madam Chair and Senator
Sarah, I understand, you know,
the that, um.
It's hard, a little bit more
background. One of my daughters
is an investigator for CYD, lead
investigator for manage
investigators in Lee County. My
other daughter is over, uh,
costly count she's executive
director, so I had both sides.
They will not talk in a room.
Where I'm at. Even without names
or issues, just topics.
And forever we've been asking
just for a window in the CYFD to
help them.
Fix their problems, which they
don't, uh, they don't allow, um.
But one of the things that that.
Because of that, we're always
naming this is uh.
To get quality information from
CYFD just to improve their
system.
Um
Right now, and I think you'd
made a comment to it right now,
CYFD only protects CYFD, not
even the children.
And this isn't at the low level
on the ground, this isn't a
structure.
From here in San Fe down. I have
met a chair center and, and, uh,
expert witness, uh, an agreement
with the secretary CYD in July.
And she went back on it this
session.
So I don't know how you trust
anyone that you can't honor
their word.
And so I understand, you know,
you're trying to get as much
clarity and CYFD as you can.
Uh, and
And I'll go back and and my
terms trying not to ramble, but
Madam Chair and senator and and
expert witness.
In this bill.
In our current statute.
Do you see the issue with the
con confidentiality clause, and
does your bill.
Uh, repair that, I think it's
unconstitutional where they're
at now.
Right now
You address that in your
Uh, Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute.
bill for
Senator.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos, I
believe you're uh referring to a
10th Circuit case that was out
of Denver, so it wasn't in New
Mexico, but we are, of course,
and we share jurisdiction in the
10th Circuit with Colorado. And
yes, the um expert I.
I refer to the attorney who is
an expert in CAPTA has reviewed
just for that very purpose and
what this does because current
law could be challenged as
unconstitutional pursuant to the
case you're referring to because
it doesn't allow it, it is so
closed. So this opens it up and
will remove what we believe
would be a fair basis and a fair
challenge to the
constitutionality, constitution
constitutionality of the
current law, and this does bring
it up to it comports with the
10th circuit requirements. Well,
thank you for that, Madam Chair
and Senator and expert witness
for Sarah, um, we continually
have lawsuits.
Because we don't take care of
what our job is.
the child, but, uh, going on, I
just in.
In trying to understand.
With this bill, how do you
perceive, Madam Chair, Senator,
and Sarah.
Assists um.
How does this bring relief?
To the uh child welfare system.
Just thinking about CYFD and
what they do in your bill.
How do you perceive it'll give
us relief?
The CFD
Madam Chair, so being able to
understand a department decision
making and individual cases is
one answer that comes to mind,
the provision that allows for
release for of information um by
the department for those
investigating, so we hear all
the time from the secretary, the
governor and others. Let's get
an expert to analyze. Let's get
an expert to analyze
investigation problems. So this
opens up the ability to uh to
have those who want to look at
the high level systemic issues.
Um, get that information. I
think that's huge. I also really
want to add that I think
transparency will help build
trust in our community. The
reason that the meat there is a
media frenzy and the concerns
raised by Sadilia Lopez, Senator
Sail Lopez are so valid, is
because it's a closed system. So
ironically, opening it up the
way this will to, um, but with
checks and balances, I think
we'll decrease that media frenzy
where they're just trying to
find something out, um, or get
the lapel footage from
law enforcement because there's
no information from the
department. I think this
actually will help build,
rebuild our community trust in
the agency, and that is
important for all of us. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
that, Madam Chair and senator
and and and.
I like that that you're looking
at the stop and the medium
frenzy.
Secretary currently asked me to
turn off some media information.
in the July time frame to come
to an agreement on.
Uh, clarification on, on this
bill that I carry.
Did that.
Because once the people
understand you're trying to get
the honest truth.
It'll go away.
I'm asking those same people now
address her now because we've
got her on record, uh keeping a
word, but.
Thinking through that, uh, just
talking about the, um,
Visibility of the department,
uh, we, we produced a task
force, an oversight task force.
I drove 325 miles from Eunice
New Mexico to Albuquerque, be
turned around as a legislator.
Because the department wants
only certain people in the room.
That is the problem. We don't
get clarity.
As a legislator.
As in turning
If you're not able to see what's
happening on the inside.
And how do we protect our kids?
Madam Chairingen.
Uh, the last thing I want to ask
is, and just thinking through.
Uh, there's things that we do.
Uh, here in the Capitol.
But I'm, I'm just wondering,
does any of what you're doing in
the Senate Bill 84 need to be uh
also produced in the Children's
code.
Because we have 2
Distinct areas
Uh, to be able to address what
we do to our children or for our
children. I'm just wondering if
that's come up my chair senator.
Sir
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
only dealing with the children's
code is in.
OK. Well, thank you for that,
uh, that clarifies my concern
because we've got other things
that we're.
Trying to codify them both.
Oh, I appreciate that and
I'll I'll stand down after that.
I, I appreciate what you're
doing.
Uh, I'm glad and like I say
we've been doing this for years,
so I think you've got some
headwind. I appreciate my
colleagues on the other side.
Doing the right thing.
Before we lose more children, so
with that I'll y thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Senator.
Um
I'm curious if somebody from the
department is here today.
OK, I was just wondering if
somebody was in the room, um, on
behalf of CYFD I don't
necessarily have questions for
them, Madam Chair.
Um
But it's important that they're
in the room.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, um,
What does promoting?
Media attention.
In these cases.
Remote
Madam Chair, the uh.
Senator Charlie.
I want to remind everybody media
already has access.
So when you look at the
provision on media, it is almost
fully intact to what is
currently at page 7, current
law.
Madam Chair, Senator, that
doesn't answer my question. What
does promoting media attention
in these cases.
What does that promote?
Thank you.
So, I think current law allows
media with limits and checks and
balances because of the public
interest in protecting children
in custody, because when these,
if, if there was no media
access, and again, it's with
limits, and it is.
Under the court's discretion.
We might never know what goes on
with certain cases, what
department actions are taken or
not taken.
I promise you, the courts are
very protective in these cases,
which I.
I have exclusively practiced in
children's court since 2001.
Media is rarely rarely asked to
be admitted and is rarely
admitted. Courts are very
protective of children. And so
if I, I understand by
implications, Senator Torreli,
of your question that there is a
big concern about privacy. That
is consistent with practice, and
that is consistent with um what
we're recommending today under
SB 84, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and senator, if
media is allowed, um, and
through this bill promoted to
attend court proceedings. How
could this impact the outcome of
a case.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, I'm just curious what
part you're reading that makes
you think they're it's being
promoted. Uh, Madam Chair, the
bulk of this.
Um
Bill is addressing media access
to court proceedings.
Madam Tristan or really.
The me, correct me if I'm wrong,
I say the media section on page
7.
Which is under the conduct of
hearings in the media that we're
editing.
I mean, page 7 line 20 says
accredited representatives of
the news media shall be allowed
to be president closed hearings.
That's already there.
All of these other pages on page
8 and 9.
And 10 have to do with is all
current law having to do with
how the media is currently
allowed to attend these
hearings.
And the one change we're really
making there.
Is on page 8, the only
underlying section is on line 7.
And that is that the judge must
provide the written reason for
excluding the media.
Uh, Madam chair and senator,
thank you for that in an
excluding media and going
through the appellate process.
Um, I wanna draw your attention
to the FIR that says allowing
for an immediate appeal when
media is excluded from a
courtroom will increase the
number of appellate cases filed.
Do the appellate courts have the
capacity for this increase.
Um, burden.
Madam Cher, thank you for that
important question, Senator
Charlie.
Again, me, I practice in Berlio
County, where over 50%, 52% of
all children in custody reside.
So I practice in the by far
largest volume courtroom for
child abuse, neglect cases in
the state and have done that
since 2001. I can count on two
hands the number of times media
that I'm aware of have asked to
be in the courtroom. In fact,
they're usually in touch with me
when they are, and it is
extremely rare. So I, I can very
confidently.
answer, there will not be a
flood of.
Um, appeals because there are
rarely media inquiries. Media is
not.
My experience with media is
particularly the Albuquerque
Journal, is just trying to get
to the bottom of what's going on
in our system. It's not to
stigmatize families, media entry
under SB 84 and current law is
is subject to limits, and it is
a check and balance that CAPTA
recognizes to um honor First
Amendment rights, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Senator, is
anyone here from the appellate
court to confirm that?
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I'm just, you know, it's
already been set out here, but
I, I am just concerned about the
court of public opinion and and
the outcome of these cases with,
um, increased media involvement
as a result of this spill.
Um, which leads me to how will
this affect the privacy of a
child.
Madam chair, the children, these
are recommended changes to the
Children's code, which, um,
although this section is not
before you, the best interests
of the child is paramount.
That is the the heart, the
spirit, the spine of the
children's code, it, it
underlies everything we do.
Sports again, um, this is a
floor rule 79 motions can always
be brought. These are already
sealed proceedings. They will
remainse proceedings.
Um, children's best interests is
paramount, and they will be
protected because personal
identifying information about
the child shall not be released,
I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, on the
3rd page of our FIR outlines
some concerns that were raised.
So this new exemption around um
confidentiality, and I'll just
read it, um, for the audience
who might not have.
Access to the FIR, um.
That
In the case of death or near
death of a child.
Um, the concerns raised that
this served no purpose other
than to allow the public to know
where the parent guardian
custodian of an injured child.
Or dead child lives.
And how they can be contacted,
thereby burdening the public's
ability.
Broadening the public's ability
to vilify and harass the parents
or perhaps worse.
This would be the case even when
a death or near death of a child
is not the result of abuse,
neglect, or other wrongful
conduct.
These concerns could be
addressed by further restricting
the definition of identifier
information, not, um, senator,
would you like to respond to
that?
You said page 3 of the FIR. Yes.
It's the last paragraph.
2nd to last. Oh, this one.
Madam Tarot, and these are
concerns raised by the family
representation Act Agency.
I'm going to be really frank,
Madam Chair, Senator Turley. The
majority of employees at that
agency are ex CYFD employees.
When I reviewed the FIR concerns
raised by that agency it struck
me that many seemed very agency
driven, and agency protective.
Um, this particular instance, I.
Again, we are, we are presenting
you with a bill that opens up
what the agency is up to while
protecting families with checks
and balances. I cannot imagine.
Purposeful release of an address
so that.
A family can be targeted. I
think what what this does is go
into
Oh, a sort of wild goose chase
on the what ifs.
Buried in this act. I don't see
that as being a plausible result
from the act, if there's a
specific example in um the
section or an amendment, then
I can respond to that, but I
don't.
I just don't really understand
how that would come to fruition
based on this act, Madam Chair.
Um, well, I was gonna save that
for my closing, but I can go
ahead and dress it, address it
now, Madam Chair, the 80% of the
children who are relate, who are
involved in these cases, their
poverty related and this
disproportionately affects um
black and indigenous families.
So,
When it comes to putting out
this information, um, like my
colleague talked about earlier,
we know who these people are in
our communities. And this
further, um,
Creates the circumstances for
which people.
Feel the need to address this
outside of the court system.
Um, this concern coupled with
the media attention concern that
this bill would bring, um, I
think speaks to this, and Madam
Chair, is anyone here from OF?
RA who can confirm.
What was your shared?
OK. Thank you.
Um, I want to get into a little
bit of
The Indian family Protection Act
clause in here, um, where did,
where did this come from? Like
what was the intention behind
it?
Madam chair, the as this body is
aware that act has higher um
scrutiny, higher standards and.
Different rules and laws for our
native families.
Um, I think the recognition to
exempt.
The native families from which.
Based on recent report, 5% of
our children in custody are
Native American and from our
pueblos. Um.
that we wanted to, to continue
to not create conflicts with
that.
Our local
If
If
are um
Codification of ICWA, we wanted
to make sure we didn't create
any conflicts with the higher
standards of that act. I hope I
answered your question, Madam
Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, um, Senator,
thank you. We're tribes
consulted in the development of
this bill.
In regard to IA.
Manger and senator, um, it was
originally drafted and Senator
Duha is still the main first
sponsor.
But I'm not sure if you would
add to that, so I don't have the
direct information, but I'm, I
can't answer yes or no. I know
that we wanted to make sure it
was strictly compliant with
CATTA, the federal law, um.
And if there's a direct question
around concerns that would.
Go to tribes.
And pueblo's, I'm happy to, um.
feel that question now.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you. I appreciate that the
concern is tribes are constantly
left out of these conversations.
Madam Chair, is there a specific
concern that would relate just
to children who are are tribal
and Pueblo children that that.
Um, SB 84 raises for you.
Yeah, madam chair and Senator,
yeah, did you check with?
tribes or even the Equa
consortium on adding this
provision in here and any
potential unintended
consequences.
Madam chair, I.
Can't answer that yes or no. I
don't want to say no, um,
because I can't say whether
Kate's representative Duig did
or not. Um, but is there a
concern that would negatively
impact that you're aware of that
would negatively, I want to make
sure that we do address that,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, yeah.
How, at what point does the
court determine if there is a
native child in custody.
I I'm sure that occurs at the
custody hearing, which is the
1st 10 days after a child's
taken into custody and at every
single subsequent hearing. So if
even if.
My clients, there is no
indication or indicia that they
are native at every single
hearing we revisit that issue,
I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I,
I thank you for that there is a
child right now, there's a court
proceeding happening who was
taken into custody of March of
2024.
Only until recently, the last
couple of months, has it come to
the awareness of the court that
this child is eligible for
enrollment.
In a tribe.
Now, if we put this bill in
place,
We've allowed all of this
information to get out there,
but we're saying if it does
apply to.
To this, that, how does that
work?
You've already released the
child's information,
Madam share to the court.
Madam Chair, Senator Charlie,
this doesn't mandate release of
information.
This is if, if a family really
it's geared towards families
getting their records if a if a
family member or um other person
wants to inquire certain
information shall shall not be
released pursuant to this, but.
Senator Charlie, you're correct.
And I've had those cases.
When a child is then identified
subsequently.
Madam Chair, then, of course,
we'll apply that law, but it
doesn't mean and most cases, no
information's released. This is
just clarifying what can and
can't be released upon request
on the records release section.
Um, I don't want anyone on this
in this committee or legislative
body to assume information is
just being willy-nilly released.
This is setting out the
parameters for what shall and
shall not be released, Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um.
I wonder if you could just go a
little bit broad with me.
How does this protect a child.
How, how does this do that?
Madam Chair.
It protects the child because
the child's identity shall not
be released. The only time a
child's identity is released is
when they've died.
And the reason for that is that.
Of course, as a community, we
want to know what happened, what
went wrong, why did, what were
the agency's steps and missteps
that protects.
The child after the fact and
then gets the family justice.
Before that, there is no section
where the child's identity is
released, it clarifies what is
and is not released, it allows
information to be released to
foster parents who have the
child in that home, so that they
can better advocate for it. It
allows um extended family
members to come to hearings more
with more frequency to support
either the parent or the child.
It it is so excruciating to
watch.
people excluded from hearings
because the agency can just
exclude anybody they want.
Um, this protects families in
making sure that.
Information that helps advocate
for the unmet need of the child.
Decision making around the
agencies. Why are they deciding
to either move toward adoption
or not.
A parent can access that now.
Parents are desperate to find
out why the agency is making
decisions that they're making.
And they're told we can't tell
you because the agency sees
this, the current law as its
shield.
They use it as a shield and a
sword. And so what it does is,
is.
Really limit their ability to do
that, and that lifts our
families up, not just the kids,
but also the parents who were
subject to the to these.
Um
Intrusion by CYFD, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
senator, um, an expert witness,
I appreciate you bringing up
justice.
Um
And justice for families.
Let's imagine the worst possible
case scenario.
Where we do have a child who
we've lost.
Um
And we want to further hold the,
the agency accountable.
By way of finding details that
were.
Previously sealed.
With this better.
Help the outcomes of your case,
your cases against the agency.
Madam chair, when I do serve as
a plaintiff's attorney on behalf
of wrongful death estates of
children. I am asked by opposing
counsel in all cases to issue a
gag order, so that any
deposition testimony of their
employees about what they did is
sealed.
I resist those, um, this will
really change that practice,
they're gonna have to
dramatically change what they
asked the court to, to tell us
not to release, um.
I think yes, so the answer is
yes, Madam sure.
Um
In
Um, and then I just wanna, I
wanna turn our attention to the
analysis that came from, um, the
committee.
Specifically,
Page 12 line 8 that speaks about
a bona fide researcher.
What is that? Because as I read
that a bona fide researcher in
this day and age.
could be a podcaster who's
trying to get information and
makes more stories out of this.
They get paid. What's a bona
fide researcher, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, so, um, that
section actually begins at page
11, um, subsection D, line 23 on
page 11.
So other than in a case of a
fatality, redacted information.
May be released by the
department, so I think we have
the terms may as well as
redacted for a reason, um, and
it, it may be released.
By somebody conducting bona fide
research or investigations, the
result of which should provide
the department information on
child abuse and neglect that
would be useful to the
department in developing policy
and practice. So
It it has to be read. I, I'm
with you. We want to be really
careful about who we're letting
in. Um, it has to be read in
context there, so that it is
allowing the department to learn
how to do better.
That is the intent and so bona
fide research or investigation
has to be read with the intent
and again I want to point your
attention to the redaction
section.
Madam chair.
Uh, Madam Tay and Senator, thank
you. I
That does it for my questions,
but
Really, I agree, CYFD needs
accountability. There are things
that are going on over there
that are not OK and it's
systemic.
Absolutely 100% agree with that.
But they also need help.
We're not going to sue our way
out of this.
We're not going to not send her
children.
In our way out of this.
They need help, and as we
continue to vilify them.
And
Make riches off of these
children who they don't have a
voice, right? I know there's a
guardian apply on my, I
understand your role.
Um, but really, children when
when they're processing their
trauma, you don't do it until
you're an older person, right?
And, and.
Um
Often
And I just, I firmly believe
that.
We need to stop.
Caring at CYFD and trying to,
what is the scaffolding that is
gonna help that department.
Scanned itself back up, turn the
culture around and get to some
of the things that we're asking
for here.
That's why I was interested why
CYFD wasn't at the right,
they're in the room and I
appreciate that.
We can't keep tearing them down.
We have to, and us in the
legislature have to commit to
helping.
Yeah I'm not up.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you.
Thank you.
Senator.
Uh, anyone else?
On the list.
Senator
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
questions have been answered.
OK, Senator Block.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you Senator and Sarah,
thanks for being here. Um.
Sir, who do you work for?
Madam Chair, I'm Senator Black,
I am self-employed, but when
anytime a child comes into
custody and they are assigned a
guardian of item. It comes
through.
the Office of Family
representation. It used to come
through the administrative
Office of the courts, um, so the
short answer is I'm
self-employed, longer answer is
I'm also on a contract as a
contract employee to represent
children in custody.
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. If
you could just speak up a little
bit more uh with the mask or
just take it off while you're
talking here to me.
Um,
Well, so were you contracted by
somebody to help.
Shape this bill.
Madam Chair, no, I'm
volunteering my time.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Sarah, why, why are you
volunteering your time?
Madam Cha center block, I went
to law school for the sole
purpose of representing children
in custody and my.
was to just represent children
in foster care and be a mom.
And when I
Understood the
Deep
Fishers, problems, and
corruption in this agency. I
couldn't sit on my hands. I also
couldn't be a cog in a broken
wheel. And when I understood
Right around 202,010, so 10
years into my practice that no
matter how zealously I
represented children, there
could be a bad outcome in one of
my cases.
I had to pivot. I've just been
pivoting ever since. And this is
where I've wound up, Madam
chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So Sarah, um,
You know, I've heard about CYFD
not being in the room, but I
believe their general counsel is
is back there. It's the, the guy
in the long beard.
Um
Did you have any coordination
with CYFD or talk to them on
this bill?
Madam chair, Senator Block, no,
and I'm going to just um
reference kind of a little bit.
About what Senator Charlie
mentioned, which is so valuable
that we can't just keep tearing
them down, we need to teach them
how to do better. We need to be
part of the answer and part of
what.
I did in um.
My one of my shifting attention
was when I read the Oklahoma
lawsuit system reform lawsuit in
Oklahoma, our neighboring state,
and it sounded exactly like
every problem we had here.
I collaborated with 7 other
attorneys and became co-counsel
in the Kevinness lawsuit so that
we could have system change
here. And in the implementation
of that KevinS lawsuit, the
barriers that have been set, it
was intended to be a
collaboration.
The collaboration level between
the agency and advocates is that
is very low. It's never been
high, but it's very low in part
because of the the
confidentiality act as it
stands, it allows them to really
shield what's going on and to
not collaborate and so.
I didn't ask them. I, I expect
the agency to say let's not
change the law so that we can
continue to protect our
practices. I don't expect them
to to be encouraging or
supportive of opening the system
so that their decision making
can be scrutinized, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So you mentioned
Oklahoma.
Um, is Oklahoma have a similar
policy to this particular bill
that we're looking at.
Madam Chair, Senator Bloch, I
haven't read their confidential
confidentiality statute, but I
do know from um Amy Harfeld with
this University of San Diego Law
School who.
Basically does nothing but
study, confidentiality, statutes
in child welfare in all 50
states that it is her opinion
that ours is by far the most
constrictive. So even though I
can't answer specifically what
Oklahoma does, according to her
analysis and the report I cited,
um, which she co-authored.
Everyone else except for New
Mexico has a more open
confidentiality act in their
child welfare systems. Thank
you, Madam Chair, thank you,
sir, because
Oklahoma has a heavy native
population, do they not? Madam
sure they do.
OK.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Um
Sir, you're, you're an attorney.
And so is the senator next to
you, you, you know.
I'm not an attorney.
I thought you were an attorney.
You look like an attorney. I
don't know if that's a good or a
bad thing.
I thought you were an attorney.
I'm sorry. Uh, well, one of the
sponsors is an attorney, um.
Sara Duhag, a very good one, by
the way.
You know, my thoughts on on CYFD
are a little bit all over the
map.
And I sat down with the CYFT
secretary in my office and had
a, a phenomenal conversation
with her.
And uh that woman is trying
desperately to make things
better and CYFDNI.
Very much respect that a lot.
And quite frankly, Madam Chair,
and, and, um.
Sarah, senator, I, I think you
are too.
Um, let me just ask you this,
uh, I'm a little concerned.
Where there is the word
unconstitutional brought up.
And
Madam Chair and Sarah, I think
you or maybe it was.
Uh, Senator Sidil Lopez, who's
a, uh,
Very good attorney as well, use
the word unconstitutional. Are
we?
Is there something
unconstitutional about our
current
Law in New Mexico.
Madam Chair, if, um, the 10th
Circuit case out of uh which
analyzed the Colorado version
of.
Um, I don't know, I can look up
the year, but it, it's a recent
case, uh it was.
Determined, I'm hearing it's
2022 determined by a lower court
in Colorado around there um the
the.
Basically someone was discussing
information that they're
confidentiality Act said was not
allowed to be discussed.
They challenged it
And they were, um, vindicated by
the court that the act itself
was unconstitutional because it
was too restrictive of First
Amendment rights of free speech,
that the government couldn't
restrict, um, consistent with
our constitution, their right to
talk about the information that
they talked about.
That case does get into personal
identifier information. There
has to be checks and balances.
There's an analysis. There have
been attorneys, um, in New
Mexico ready to challenge our
confidentiality.
Uh, act as it stands, and we
were very careful to make sure
that SB 84 comports with the the
criticisms of the 10th Circuit
case about the Colorado version
of our confidentiality law,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you, sir. So can I assume
then?
Um, I'm not a lawyer. I'm just a
nuclear weapons guy.
Um, can I assume that this bill
would, would either mitigate.
Eliminate
Or clothes
Our legal liability in the state
of New Mexico.
Not sure that that brings to
mind the joke about if you get 8
lawyers in a room, you're going
to get 8 different opinions. So
nobody can make that guarantee,
but we sure are um hoping that
the answer is yes, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um
Tell me how this bill.
Because I think there's a bunch
of
Gaps, Madam Chair and Sarah.
Senator
I think there's a lot of gaps in
CYFD between CYFD maybe within
CYFD there's some, but also
between uh agencies as well when
it comes to things like this.
Tell me how this bill uh
improves.
enhances
Um
Cooperation
Interagency cooperation, um.
Yeah, tell me how this, if, if
at all, enhances interagency
cooperation between CYFD and
other agencies or organizations.
Madam Chair, Senator Buck, I'm
not sure that it increases
collaboration other than the
area that allows um release of
department decision making and
release of information to um it
was a section that Senator
Turley pointed out the, the bona
fide research or investigations
so that we can look at systemic
issues. I think that would be
important, um, I know that the
Kevin asked lawsuit requires
collaboration between CYFD and
our healthcare authority, um.
So there are other avenues to
that. This is really focused on
something different, Madam
Chair.
Let me ask it this way, Madam
Chair, Sarah.
Would this
Enhanced cooperation between the
family.
And CYFD.
Man, Senator Block.
Yes
It wouldn't.
OK.
All right. Thank you.
Um
Tell, tell me how, uh, Madam
Chair and Sarah.
Other spi uh brings relief.
to the child welfare system, how
does it help?
Kids currently in the system
that are going through some of
these issues.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
When I was also brought onto
this bill. It was reiterated and
I think on for whatever day we
were here last Monday.
Whenever we were here last,
there was the large book I like
the down spiral book that was
handed out to the committee, I
think, which is a review of the
federal.
Chapter
Rules as well as other state
agent other state applications
of that federal law.
And
The federal law really is.
The golden standard of how to.
Regulate your the child welfare
system well.
And the changes in this bill are
taking examples from that as
well as the other states who do
their child welfare system.
Well
OK.
Just
Yeah, I'm sorry, go ahead just
to follow up, Madam Chair,
Senator Block, of course we
can't fix what we don't know
about.
And so the increased
transparency will not only help
all of us as a community of
legislators, um, advocates,
identify what needs to change,
but I really believe that
transparency will increase.
It is like the Grand Canyon.
Chasm of
Between the public and trust
with this agency.
It is a massive thing to
overcome, and I have seen cases
where people didn't call CYFD to
help a child.
And the child died because they
don't trust the agency we had,
it gives me the chills just to
say that.
We have to do what we can to
repair trust with the public so
that we have an agency we rely
on that allows kids when they're
taken away from families to
thrive and that there're only
taken when they need to be
taken.
I feel so passionate about this.
I have dedicated my career to
this issue.
I feel very strongly that its
Senate Bill 84 passes, we will
be on our way.
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, sir,
A couple of the senators brought
up some.
Uh, valid points regarding our
tribal partners.
Does this bill
Does it put our
Our children on our tribes or
pueblos at a disadvantage or
they.
I know there was another act
that they mentioned was um what
are they, are they covered? Are
they even safer with this, with
this bill?
Madam Chair, Senator Block, I
will after this hearing
immediately re review the FAA to
make sure that the
That
The exception in deference to
IFA.
is because if addresses some of
the similar issues. Um, I, I
share the concern. We need to
make sure there's additional
protections, but that's what IFA
does. It has a much higher level
of scrutiny and standard of
review for all of our native
children in custody because they
need to be treated um with
higher regard. That's what the
law does. I'm sure.
100%, Madam Chair, thank you for
that.
Um
Did you, did you write the bill?
That's a great question because
I forgot that I did write a
different bill that Senator
Dixon sponsoring on CYFD data,
so I think that I was allowed to
help revise, I did not. I can't
claim um authorship of the
primary bill, that I'm sure.
So was it, Madam Chair was a
drafter in LCS.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So I assume you and
Senator Brantley and Senator
Duhey and and uh Senator
Burgum's there. You guys all
worked with the drafters and
drafters and collaborated.
Um, you know, we talked about
consultation. Did you, um, did
any of the group who were
working with the drafters
consult with any.
Other agencies or was it just
kind of a uh small circle.
Madam Chair.
Again, I wasn't there from the
beginning, um, maybe Sarah can
elaborate, but this, this bill
only applies to CYFD. I don't
think anyone attempted to go
outside of the agency. OK,
that's good. Thanks. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Sarah, I'll, I'll
ask you as an attorney, uh,
because I'm sure you have an
opinion.
Um, where do you think?
Where do you think this bill
doesn't go far enough?
I mean is this, is this perfect?
Or is this bill could it go far
a little bit further in some
other areas.
Madam
Madam Chair, Senator Block.
I hesitate, I hesitated to say
today that to me this bill is.
One, it is one of 3 bills that
could really transform the way
business is done. I don't want
to say the bill, but it is at
the very top. I have a lot of
confidence in.
The impact this bill can make to
transform how CYFD does
business. I am extremely excited
as an advocate.
For children, my clients were
still in custody, but also as
somebody who challenges um
decision making where children
die.
This bill is critical to both of
those efforts, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir. I, I agree. I think
this is going to protect
children. I think it's going to
be more transparent. I think
it's gonna strengthen CYFD.
As well.
And I, I think the 4 of you
women.
Um, Republicans and Democrats
did a great job getting together
and, and working on this.
Which I love to see.
Um, is the bill perfect?
No bills 100% perfect because
everyone's not gonna like
something in it, and I, I get
that.
But one of the things that
Is, um, I've been coming to,
I've been
Learning to understand and
accept this.
Um, Madam chair and, sir, is you
might not like something, but it
moves the ball a little bit
forward, and I think this does
and um
After hearing uh your
Interactions back and forth with
the other side so I think this
is a
A good build that kind of
matches up with some of the
other states that are doing the
Oklahoma piece.
Um
is a compelling argument to me.
Because of their heavy native,
so.
Um, and I think we got to
tighten it up here in New Mexico
with this, so.
Um
Senator Sarah.
Thank you very much. You got my
support for this. I look forward
to seeing this passed on the
Senate floor and getting signed
by the governor and
Madam Chair, I yield.
Thank you, Senator for a 2nd
time.
Um
Senator Galgos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator during the dialogue, I
had a couple other questions.
Come up and one that I wanted to
state.
Uh, this bill actually started
in 2022.
But Madam Chair and center and
Sarah, do you remember why in
2023 CY was the table working
with us.
Senator Gallegos, my father was
gravely ill in 2023 and I
basically sat out that session.
Um, I can't answer that
question.
I apologize, sir.
Uh, Senator, let me enlighten
you, Justice Chief V Hill.
The secretary at the time.
And she sat in discussions with
this. This is a priority.
I just wanted to make sure that
people knew.
that this thing has been vetted
even through CYD.
Them not being at the front
right now.
have no clue why not.
But at that point in time,
The the justicevihill, who was
Secretary, was there, but my two
questions came up, and chair.
And Senator is understand there
there have been national experts
who've reviewed CAPTA.
And it's the mandates of public
disclosure, all about child
abuse and neglect fatal.
They tell her near fatalities.
Can you tell me where New Mexico
stands.
In those rankings, Madam Senator
and Sarah.
Madam Chair, we
Senator Gallegos were 50th on
reporting standards under
current law without these
revisions.
According to um
The study that you're
referencing, Madam Chair.
Vaner center and sir, I
appreciate that I knew that. I
just wanted clarify that for the
public, um.
In, in, in this version in '84.
Can you clarify why this bill
protects children and families.
It was brought up on how it
affected the families.
I know how it affects a child.
But I'm sort of not totally uh
understanding the family part of
it.
I'm sure center and sir, Madam
chair, Senator Gallo goes at the
risk of getting too far in the
weeds, what really comes to mind
is the.
Example of the grandmother who
had called CYFD repeatedly over
concerns about both her grandson
and her granddaughter.
Um, and had been with her
granddaughter on her 5th
birthday.
This is a case out of Silver
City and a few days later, her
granddaughter was dead.
And
The
At all times, there was an open
investigation at all times
relevant, she offered her
support as a relative caregiver
and the children were not taken
from the parents and placed with
her until her granddaughter was
dead.
Her seven year old grandson was
in her home and removed.
Because she participated in the
criminal prosecution of her own
daughter to get justice for her
granddaughter. She cannot today
under this code find out.
Any documentation or information
about the department decision
making on why they took her
grandson away from her.
This allows her to do that. This
empowers her to do that, this
empowers respondent parents
whose children have been taken
from them to get information
about decision making in their
very own cases. It lifts our
families up because information
is power.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chan center and Sarah, one
more last question, and this
goes back to there's some
discussions on HIPAA does HIPAA
currently extend to death.
Madam Chair, Senator Gallegos,
no HIPAA, um, rights of privacy
expire upon death.
I'm chair center. I want to go
further, Sarah, does it go
beyond that?
Madam Chair.
Senator, I think.
The answer is still no. If, if
it expires upon death, and
that's where it ends.
Madam Senator, you're right, uh,
does the current CYFD law.
Have anything in HIPAA.
it, it does it do anything for
us with the hippolo.
I'm chair and senator in
comparison to your bill.
It might be the easier way to
look at it.
Madam Sheriff center guy goes,
I'm not sure what the question
is, but I do know that if
federal law like HIPAA.
is more protective than what we
have in SB 84 in any instance,
it will preempt to protect the
privacy of individuals. I don't
know if that answered your
question.
It sort of does. I'll, I'll
clarify
and Chair and senator, uh,
currently.
Your bill gives his moral
clarity on HIPAA.
we've ever had
And that's what I was trying to
draw down to is because there
are things we can't see.
And what you're doing is you're
earlier and chair and I promise
I'll stop with this. Earlier,
madam chair and senator, and I
think it was you, sir, talked
about a shield.
Talking about CYD actually if
you Google Shield, it says it's.
To defend or protect and
safeguard.
Nowhere in the explanation.
Is it is it used to obscure.
From the truth
And I'll yield with that because
I, I, I will continue to sport
your bill. Matter of fact, I'm
looking.
Try to figure out why I didn't
sign on to it.
Because you've been doing
something we've been doing since
22.
And now we have an opportunity
to do this.
Which will help us going
forward. So with that all you,
thank you, Madam Chair for
allowing 2nd time.
Thank you, Senator Pinto.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Is there any
Madam Chair Center, do you mean
from an interim committee?
Not on this current bill, and
like I said, I wasn't there from
the beginning, but Madam Chair
members of the committee was
this ever presented to any of
the committees.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, we
don't truly know, I don't
believe it was since we weren't.
I wasn't there from the
beginning. That's a better
question for Senator Doha.
But
From our collective memory of
the room, the answer is no.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
I have a few questions just to
clarify that real quick, Madam
Chair, I'm not sure I could look
up real quick the previous
archived agendas of CCJ, but
there might have been a day when
CCJ did hear this.
Yeah, most likely it would have
Madam Chair, Senator Siddy
Lopez, off, off mic and most
likely would have been CCJ that
heard it.
That all, Senator?
OK, thank you.
Um
First, I, I appreciate, um,
The discussion we've been
having.
And I think it's, it's an
important one.
Um, and I guess for
clarification.
Is this bill the same bill that
was presented to you. Do you
know, Madam Chair, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, uh, maybe Sarah
can.
Substantially, yes, but with
some revisions and I
I don't want to misremember, but
that might be because it did see
Senate Judiciary last time, but
I'll have to double check that,
OK.
I just asked that one because,
you know, we've had a few bills
as Senator Gallegos mentioned
come through the legislature.
And I know, um,
They're they're worse in
presentations in courts,
corrections and justice during
the interim when we did have
some hearings regarding
Uh, CYFD and some of the other,
but my memory will not remem
recall if this particular
measure was brought in front of
the committee at that time.
And I know when the legislative
Health and Human Services, we
did have a, I think a good
hearing in Socorro.
That was extensive about
covering different issues with
regards to CYFD and a whole
bunch of other um concerns that
come up with regards to our, our
children and families, but I
don't remember if this was
presented in front of the
committee at that time either.
Um, but, um, this is just an
observation that I have. First
and foremost, I appreciate the
questions that Senator Senil
Lopez, um.
Brought to our attention and.
As I read the original and kind
of catching up on some of your
amendments and stuff too. It's,
you know, I, I have some similar
concerns.
Um, second of all,
Ah
It is it the intent then that
every family that um
is brought before the court with
regards to abuse or neglect. So
every family that comes in in
front of a judge.
That information is then to be
divulged.
Unless the child says no if
they're over the age of 14. I
mean, the other um things that
that are listed in the bill.
Just a question, um.
On that.
Madam Chair, no.
What this does is set forth upon
request.
What can be divulged in most of
the sections. So I'm glad that
you brought that point up, this
is, these are sealed
proceedings, these are heavily
sequestered proceedings, and
they will remain so pleadings
will not be revealed. Uh,
there's nothing in this that
allows that to happen. So all
the court filings with this, the
information about what went on
in the case.
Not touched, um.
I just wanna, I, I'm, I'm
thankful for that question,
Madam Chair.
OK. So I asked that.
And so then, could you please
express to me
Explain to me on page 7.
Line 7, where it says the court
docket number is a public
record, so can you please
explain what that means by a
public record.
Madam Chair, it means only the
docket number, so, um.
That's the number that is
assigned to every case that's
ever filed in in any court, but
in children's court we have um
special case number.
AQ and so only the docket number
becomes the and is there any way
in any information that can be
obtained.
Based on that court docket
number.
And I'm sure as a um current
practitioner in court, we have,
um, limited the access is
limited, even the attorneys have
to have a special um.
Approved access, so normally
anyone can access any court.
Record, but these are
sequestered proceedings, so only
attorneys who practice in that
specific case. So even, um.
Even though I'm in children's
court, I can't access any other
children's court case, only the
ones to which I'm assigned. So
that is consistent with that,
the current practice, which is
the answer is no, only parties
um can access the pleadings in
there, I'm sure.
OK, so, and thank you. Do you
anticipate that there will be
many.
Cass
That come in front of the judge.
That will be open.
based on the information.
In this bill.
Madam Chair, open in what way?
Of where the information, as is
mentioned in here, um, or
What information can be shared?
The personal identifier
information.
Madam Chair, so what we can do
is go through hypotheticals
around how it's um.
Access or like how it's
requested. I'm asking is, do you
anticipate as a practitioner,
that there will be many of these
cases that will be made public
with specifically with the
personal.
Identify your information.
No, Madam Chair, I do not
anticipate that. Well, first of
all, the children's personal
identifying information is not
released. So it's uh.
Are you talking about
The adult
I don't, I don't think it's
gonna be a high volume, but you
know, this is a hypothetical.
chair.
OK. So if you don't anticipate
that,
Then with regards to the appeal
process, if it's determined
that.
Where the judge or by the child.
And the child's representative
because it's not gonna be the
child that is making under,
under, you know, 1311 months
under.
He's going to be saying no, so
it'd be the child's
representative.
The GAL most likely or whomever
is representing the child in
court that'll say no.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, are you referring
to media access, saying no to
media, yes.
Um, can you repeat the question
from what I sorry cause my.
My breathing is labored, so not
because of this, but other
health issues.
Um
So when you go into court.
Right?
You have the, the two parties,
etc.
Um, for a determination for it
to be public.
As it says in your bill that
you're being, that you're
proposing.
If the child is 14 or over, the
child has a can make a
determination, right?
If you're under the age of 14,
then it's the the the GAL or
whoever is representing the
child.
Makes a determination or the
judge, right?
So I'm just, I'm just asking for
those who are watching also for
some clarification on what we're
discussing, Madam chair, I
believe you're referring to page
8, subsection E, which is
current law.
This is not a recommendation of
a change in law or an increase
in access to the media in the
courtroom.
Um, and any GAO worth their salt
and sults with a client that
they believe because many
children are sophisticated
enough at 13, at 12, um, as a
GAO on behalf of those youth, I
certainly would consult them,
um, that's the way I practice.
But again, we're referring to
media access as it currently
exists in law.
OK.
So as as for and this is looking
on page 10 on the bill then.
So, on line 12 and in
investigations and proceedings
alleging abuse or neglect.
The department shall not
disclose personal identifier
information of the child or the
child's parent, etc.
I use my hands, except as
follows in.
Um, so you're defining in the
case of the fatality or near
fatality of a child.
Ah
And then uh some of the other
issues that you've listed here
too.
So is it your intent then that
this information would be shared
just if.
Um
How would I say that there's um.
I guess the question is, I, I'm
kind of going around on some of
this stuff too.
What, what a concern I have is.
To making sure.
That information for a child
who's brought in.
The family
Excuse me, with regards to abuse
or neglect.
That we're not going to be
divulging information.
Specifically because that child
is, has been brought in whether
it's been substantiated or
whichever.
Um
And I think it was mentioned
previously because some of the
definitions that we currently
have and maybe the department
doesn't proceed on this.
But if a child is brought in
based on um neglect, it can be
determined, right, if there's
poverty in the home.
Or whatever else and a concern.
Is how
This could be construed.
OK. On information that can be
made public.
That could hurt the family, so.
Um
It's one of the concerns I have.
The other also.
is on page 17.
And you mentioned on line 19.
Where you were talking about the
definition of near fatality.
And yes, it is in capta, right?
But you did add in there um one,
a few words on line 20 where it
says including the child's
treating physician.
That currently isn't in captive,
so if I may ask, why did you add
that?
Madam Chair
We want the most available
information regarding the
child's health and also just a
reminder, this is the section on
records release.
So this is when um somebody is
requesting record release.
Um, I wanna make sure we
understand this is narrow.
And it's narrowed only to the
request of records, and the
whole intent here is in the
example of more than one of my
clients who have ingested
fentanyl.
Um
That we're trying to identify
what on earth went wrong, how
did a child?
Get a hold of that. We want
information that will help us.
Study and learn after a fatality
or a near fatality, what has
occurred?
Um, and that's really important
to the effective.
Provision of services to our
families by an agency that
invades their home.
It's really important to the
effective reform.
We can't just allow these
fatalities and near fatalities
to occur with zero.
Scrutiny
Of how it occurred, Madam Chair.
OK, so
What you're telling me then is
that you've added the words,
including the child's treating
physician.
Um
To gain better access to
information. Is that what you're
saying? Madam chair, it would be
just to identify, it should be
the.
The physician treating the
child, the current treating
physician is a legal term of
art. Um, I don't do medical
malpractice, but what it means
is the person that is really
providing current treatment over
the child.
I'm sure.
OK. I just find it interesting
that you're adding this, but
anyway, cuz under CATA it does
not include those um or words.
And
When you're looking at the
information which is new, um, on
page 17, the personal identifier
information.
And this, of course, is for
those um.
The children's family, I suppose
that that's where we're talking
about for a person's name.
And all but the last four digits
of the person's taxpayer ID.
Financial account number, credit
or debit card number. Why do you
need that information to be.
Sure, it means it won't be
shared.
Those are defining
OK.
And then, um,
There was a question I had also
about where you're releasing
information.
And I think it was raised
previously.
Um, who can this information be
released to?
So, um,
I don't think they were just
like the.
There was not
And I didn't write the page
down, so my my bad on that one.
But there was a listing on that
or um
Where it was supposed to be
released.
So, my bad, I didn't write on
that one because I was writing.
Madam Chair, if I could just put
on page 16.
Subsection I.
It says the department shall
provide pertinent information.
perspective adoptive parent,
foster parent or guardian.
Yes, which, OK, I can understand
that. Yes.
But there was another
There was another area in in the
bill, and again, I was taking
too many notes on, on the side
here.
But I think there was um.
And I wrote it down in my bed,
so I guess never mind that
question at this point in time.
So
Long story short, um, I
apologize cause my, my breathing
is a little labored this
afternoon.
I um
I know I had heard throughout
the interim.
is that there was possibly a
bill that was being worked on by
the department with others that
was gonna come out.
Um, with regards to the
confidentiality issue.
And I know that there's been
several groups who've been
meeting throughout the year.
And um,
I know that some of these
subjects were not touched by
certain groups during the
interim.
And you know, quite frankly.
I would hope that there would be
others than just yourself, Miss
Kracka.
Uh, but you're bringing some of
the other advocates together
working with our tribal
communities.
Um, and making sure that there's
input because what we.
This information is very.
Sensitive to many communities
around the state.
And New Mexico, yeah, maybe
we're on the list, but I think
sometimes we need to do things.
Collaboratively and within with
input.
So, um, I think this is, this is
another good start, but I just,
I have some concerns still on,
on what we're doing here at this
point, especially with input
that.
It should be held around the
state and with other community
groups because I know there were
some advocates.
Um, who has some concerns and I
thought there was some
information shared trying to
address some of those concerns,
but.
Based on the committee process
we've already kind of gone
through that and I
I feel that if those persons
were not included, that it
should have been an inclusive
process throughout the interim.
Because they too are part of our
communities, um.
So
Uh, and I know that we've had
Some serious end results of some
deaths of children.
Um, in our communities and there
is faults in where what had not
been happening.
CYFD, but it's more, it, it just
goes a lot deeper.
of what's happening in our
communities around the state. We
talk about all of the other
issues.
Um
And, you know,
I don't know that this bill will
actually improve CYFD.
It may improve some of the
access, but I still have.
A few concerns with regards to
what and and how.
Um
But the effects will be on some
families, and if it's not the
immediate family, it's called
extended family.
Uh, for the state of New Mexico
cause we all live in small
communities.
So I just wanted to mention that
and again, sorry, I've just, I
can't continue because I'm
having some labored breath
breathing issues today. And
Madam Chair, can I just respond
to that for a second? Um, I
haven't been part of this bill
from the beginning, but I do
know recently that Senator Haig
has been in conversation with
some of the advocates and asking
about their concerns. And we've
definitely been working to
address them and we would still
um be happy to collaborate
moving forward if there's
anything or certain amendments
they want to offer.
And I just also want to commit
as a sponsor of this bill to
Discuss with anyone who from
this committee process or that I
haven't heard from yet.
I want to commit to working with
them and if they're Senator
Charlie.
And the concerns you raised
about the EA Association, I
don't know the.
I don't know the, it's not
association they with
consortium.
Um, I would love their feedback
on this and would love to talk
to you about that afterwards.
Along with any other concerns
you have also, Madam Chair.
Well, I appreciate that, and if
this bill moves forward to the
next committee and judiciary.
Um, which I know Senator Du he
does sit on that committee also.
Um, you know, I, I just hope
that there's more scrutiny as we
look at this at this bill.
As it continues to move forward.
And for our new members,
nothing's ever perfect that
comes out of here anyway.
Um, it just, it's part of the
process that we go through.
But I would also hope that the
department is part of the
conversation too.
So I'm hopeful that uh.
The department and I know we
have legal counsel here, but I.
I really believe that the
department needs to be part of
this.
Um, this conversation too.
So Senator Block.
Thank you Madam Chair, uh, for
your comments. I would, uh, move
for no recommendation.
As
There's a motion for a no wreck.
Is there a second?
I don't see a second.
Is there another motion?
Motion to table.
There is no debate on a second
needed on a motion to table.
If you could call the roll,
please.
Senator Block. No.
Senator Boone. No. Senator
Charlie, yes, to explain my
vote.
And Gallegos
And another
No.
Pinto.
And Scott
And Arserio Lopez.
Yes to table.
And a hickey Senor Lopez.
I was saying yes to table.
by a boat of 5 to 4, the motion
to table fails.
So with that, the chair would go
back and uh.
motion for no recommendation.
Senator Block,
and if you could take the block
and our boon.
Yes. Senator Charlie, no.
Gallegos
Yes
In her nova. Yes.
Then our Pinto.
Senator Scott
Centererio Lopez.
No.
And her hickey, Senor Lopez.
Yes, for no wreck.
But I'm hoping that there will
be some more conversation.
And the inclusion of the
department with this bill too,
um.
I, I, I do believe that the
secretary had been working with
us on Senate Memorial 5 Task
Force, I think collaboratively
over the summer.
And I believe there is a willing
willingness for her to sit at
the table, so I would hope that.
Between our judiciary and the
floor that there's some um some
work in the council. I'm asking
if you all would please work
with them.
And at least when I ask a
question that there's been some
interaction and coming to the
table, I'm hopeful.
And also working um.
With Senator Charley and Senator
Pinto, um, in the Indian Family
Protection Act is a big.
Um, when for the state of New
Mexico?
And uh, you know, collaboration
is so important.
That needs to happen. We don't
just make a statement and say
it's not until you actually
interact with the community.
That's for collaboration and as
a state law.
That means and should be
happening and anything that we
do.
So just forewarning as you move
forward to judiciary.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. We're hear you
loud and clear.
My bad, Senator Charlie was to
explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And Senator, I believe in the
humanity and dignity of people
and what that means in the
context of this is privacy.
Um
I would have been more opted to
support a no recommendation pass
if.
The families
Oh, you are representing the
stories that you brought today,
they were here.
Um
Cause these are claims.
And, and I just, I cannot.
The part that CYFD was not
consulted in.
Development.
Thank you
Thank you.
Thank you. Senator Lopez, did
you want to Senate Bill 105?
Oh
I'm sorry, why don't 105 Senate
Bill 120 will be carried over
till Friday, Senator Hickey had
to leave early.
Did you wish to present?
Why don't you go ahead and
present 177 and we'll see if
Senator Trujillo, I know finance
is meeting.
177.
Cause I know finance is meeting.
So let's see if she's able to
pull away from.
Senate Finance.
So in the meantime, Senate Bill
177.
Which was like.
This is 105.
I apologize and I'm sure I
brought.
Madam Chair, I know we're going
to the floor at 6, so I'll try
to be, I'll try to be brief, um
actually, actually, Senator, 6
o'clock, but that's dinner. We
have a little bit more time to
go. OK, great. OK, thank you.
You have a little bit more time,
unless you wanna go get dinner
before we go on the 6 we can eat
on the floor. We can eat on the
floor. Thanks, um, thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
The UVa certification Act comes
out of a conversation I had with
an immigration attorney a couple
of years ago.
She told me just absolutely
broke my heart. She said that
her clients were struggling to
attain the necessary
certification from various
agencies around the state to
then apply for the U visa.
The reason this was hard for me
was that I had previously been
the executive director of
Elasaitario, a nonprofit
organization in Albuquerque that
provides wraparound services for
victims of domestic violence.
And in last, we relied on the U
visa to help survivors feel
comfortable reporting their
victimization to the police and
participating in the
investigation and prosecution of
those crimes.
The idea that the police were
substituting their own judgment
about whether someone was worthy
of a U visa was astonishing and
frankly outside the scope of
what was intended by the federal
law.
The decision to grant legal
status is solely that of the
United States citizenship and
immigration Service, police
officers do not grant legal
status.
This bill is responsive to that
problem.
SB 177 creates guidelines for
agencies to complete or to deny
the U visa certification. It
establishes a time frame for
responding to the certification
request requires internal record
keeping and finally establishes
private enforcement through the
courts when a certifying agency
refused to follow the law.
It is our obligation to ensure
that eligible victims are able
to apply for the U visa and not
precluded from doing so due to
animus or to misunderstandings
of what the U visa certification
does.
This bill does not preempt the
federal law from executing the
federal government from
executing their duties. We have
taken the language from the
United States Code that speaks
to the eligibility requirements
for the U visa and the entities
that are empowered to certify
victimization and assistant
assistance in the detection,
investigation or prosecution of
that crime.
Senate, uh, SB 177 has been well
received by law enforcement and
advocates alike. District
Attorney Bregman of the Second
Judicial District, Sheriff John
Allen of Bern Leo County, uh,
Chief Harold Medina of
Albuquerque Police Department
and the New Mexico Crime Victims
Reparation Commission have all
supported this bill. As you can
see from our handout, we also
have a list of community
organizations that support SB
177. I would now like to pass to
our two experts on immigration
law, Deshonda Shapiro and.
Valeria Garcia Tavares, who can
speak more on the U visa
certification Act.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, and
esteemed members of this
committee, um, my name is
Valeria Garcia Tavares, and I'm
a senior attorney with the New
Mexico Immigrant Law Center. I
provide direct legal
representation to survivors of
crime, domestic violence, and
human trafficking, guiding them
through their immigration
process to obtain legal status.
I'm also an adjunct professor at
the UNM School of Law, where I
teach immigration law and
remained an active alum of the
university.
I'm here today alongside my
colleague Deshonda Chaparo to
strongly advocate for the
passage of SB 177, the U visa
certification Act, and to
explain why it is crucial for
New Mexico.
The Yunnan immigrant visa is a
vital humanitarian benefit
designed for victims of serious
crime, who have cooperated with
law enforcement or other
relevant agencies in the
detection, investigation or
prosecution of those crimes. As
part of this process, victims
must obtain a U visa
certification from the agency
that benefited from their
assistance. This certification
is not in and of itself an
immigration benefit, but it is a
necessary prerequisite for
applicants to have their cases
processed.
By US citizenship and
immigration services. Congress
established the U visa program
to empower federal, state, and
local law enforcement agencies
to certify that an individual is
a victim of a qualifying crime,
and that they were helpful to
that agency. The U visa enables
victims to safely report crimes,
collaborate with law
enforcement, and seek justice
for themselves and their
communities.
Since entering immigration
practice in 2019. I have
represented crime victims from
all corners of the state.
Unfortunately, I have seen
firsthand how the U visa
certification process has failed
many of these victims. Too often
my client's request for U visa
certifications are denied
without explanation or worse, go
unanswered altogether. In 2023,
for example, the New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center requested a
youth certification from a rural
county sheriff's office after
the client was shot.
the eye with a BB gun. The
undersheriff declined to issue
the certification and refused to
engage further or provide any
rationale.
For many victims, the U visa
represents the only viable
pathway to legal status in the
United States. And with the wait
time for adjudication currently
being at least 8 years long,
obstacles at the youth
certification phase can cause
devastating delays. This lack of
transparency and inconsistency
in how these requests are
processed throughout New Mexico
causes severe harm to victims
and undermines their access to
justice. Moreover, the failure
to properly address the
certification requests is not
only harm victims.
It harms public safety. It
erodes the trust that immigrant
communities have in law
enforcement, which is critical
for creating safer communities
for everyone.
My colleague Deanda will provide
further context on how
widespread these issues are in
New Mexico, and we'll explain
why the U visa certification Act
is necessary to fill the gaps in
our current system. Thank you so
much for your time and
consideration.
Madam chair
and members of the election of
the state bar and the current
community advisor for the New
Mexico Dream Team.
I've practiced immigration law
in New Mexico for close to 7
years. And in that time, my
practice has been focused on
working with immigrant survivors
of domestic violence, human
trafficking, and sexual assault
in their applications for legal
status.
Through this work, my clients
and I have experienced delayed
response times to U visa
certification requests.
Sometimes no response at all,
and other times the certifying
official has given reasons for
the denial that have nothing to
do with the underlying
victimization.
In 2021 I was working with a
victim of domestic violence to
obtain a U visa certification.
Our first attempt to obtain the
certification by the police
department, who arrested her
abuser abuser was unsuccessful,
and the reason for the denial
was that the certifying entity
received conflicting information
from the abuser, a common
dynamic in domestic violence
situations.
After that, I attempted to
obtain the U visa certification
from the judge who issued an
order of protection against the
abuser.
However, that certification
request was wholly ignored.
I had to tell my client that she
and her 3 children would not be
able to apply for a U visa and
we had to close their case.
Even if my client is able to
obtain a U visa certification
should this bill be passed and
enacted, that is 4 years lost.
Currently, our clients are
waiting 8 to 10 years to obtain
AU visa, and we are advising new
clients that they will likely be
waiting 15 years for their U
visa.
The delays in our state of
processing these certification
requests, whether it be 6 months
or a year, means that our
community members are waiting
that much longer to obtain
employment authorization and
stabilization for their
families. I cannot overstate the
urgency and need for SB 177.
In preparation for the U visa
certification Act Dreamers
Project in New Mexico immigrant
Law Center submitted 131 IPRA
requests to law enforcement
agencies throughout the state.
Including police departments,
sheriff's offices, district
attorney's offices, and courts.
Through these 131 A requests, we
only received 17 responsive
records from agencies who are
they already have a U visa
certification policy in place or
have at least identified a
certifying official.
81% of our requests resulted in
no responsive records, meaning
the jurisdiction does not have a
policy in place, nor have they
identified a certify an
official.
Of the 17 responsive records
some agencies have internal
tracking systems, but most do
not.
Of those responses, not a single
policy or practice contains a
time frame for responding or
completing the U visa
certification.
We conclude from these IPA
requests that the vast majority
of jurisdictions in New Mexico
do not have a policy in place
for processing these
certification requests. The lack
of official policies in our
state is affecting our community
and leaving vulnerable survivors
of crime without options to
apply for a legal status, a work
permit, and without protection
from deportation. It further
affects families and children
who are unable to find
stabilization without the U
visa.
SB 177 addresses these issues by
requiring agencies to process
use certification requests
within a set time frame,
requires certifying agencies to
publish their youth
certification process to the
public.
And ensures victims are not
subject to arbitrary
requirements for obtaining the
youth certification.
It is time for New Mexico to
join 19 other states that have
already adopted U visa
certification laws. Our
community deserves a fair and
transparent process with a time
frame for completing the
certification.
Is that all, Senator?
Yes. OK.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support?
Of Senate Bill 177.
OK, I'm not gonna ask each one
of you to come forward.
Um, cuz we are kind of in some
time constraints, but there are
a few of you who would like to
come forward, please.
Maybe choose amongst yourselves.
A few
Like 5.
You please identify yourself.
And your statement.
Hi please.
no
I've
Thank you.
Gracias.
OK, go ahead, please.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Daniel Hernandez. I'm
an officer with Eco Police
Department.
My sister and I are children of
a resilient, undocumented single
mother who raised us through
difficult circumstances.
With support from nonprofit
legal organization.
Such as the ones here today.
She learned about her rights as
a survivor of violent crime, to
secure the necessary documents
for your visa application.
Including her you certification.
Our mothers see worked through
authorization.
Through her U visa application,
but there was a two-year period.
When she couldn't work due to a
delay in the certification
process.
As a result of an immigration
Legal Services, she not only
obtained her work authorization,
also completed her GED.
Earned a degree in early
childhood education and is
currently working at UNM
Children's Campus.
I also know that my mother's
case was an admitatous position.
Due to the jurisdiction.
Considering some jurisdictions
do not sign userts.
As a police officer whose first
language is Spanish, I
understand.
The importance of building trust
with communities, particularly
those who are often survivors of
violent crime.
And vulnerable to victimization.
And who may not feel comfortable
working with law enforcement or
fear of being detained or
deported.
This legislation is the first.
Excuse me, this legislation is a
step forward, fostering strong
relationships with the community
and ensuring that everyone in
our community feels supported.
This is why I asked for your
support. Senate Bill 177.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And members of the committee.
Well, that's it. I'm sure
members of the committee. My
name is Juana Arriola. I was
eligible for a US visa, but due
to the certification of his
prolonging the sign of the act
of certificate. I live in
Costan.
deportation as member of 3 on
3 I1 Costa for that my abusive
will find and harm me and my
children.
What we have to immigration
attority and a profit
organization like this one are
present today. I was eventually
able to get a visa certificate
signing. Eventually, I received
a work permit. This provides me
a sense of security.
Uh, my case was prolonged from
the time of the incident.
To the moment I received the
certification certification 2
years have passed.
I had not received your
certification, I will have no
con continue living.
Where for deportation. I stand.
Before you today to urge you to
support that USB 177. That's the
fiction.
Thank you for your time and your
consideration, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Soil Campos Biggs, and
I'm the chief policy advisor at
the Albuquerque Police
Department. U visas are an
important way for our officers,
our leadership, our criminal
investigators to solve crimes,
giving survivors an opportunity
in a safe space for them to
report to police.
is how we take dangerous
offenders off the street. Thank
you very much.
Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Marcela Diaz. I work
for an organization, a statewide
organization called Somosexion
and Somosum Pueblo Nido, uh, we
organize an eight counties, uh,
7 of them are rural.
Here in Santa Fe, where we also
have an office in 2017, the
mayor appointed immigration
committee, worked with Somos,
local law enforcement officials
and solace sexual assault
services to craft a streamlined
certification policy for you
visa applicants, which has been
extremely effective since 2017.
It included training for
officers, a community outreach
plan and a clear standard policy
that has provided much needed
predictability.
to service providers,
immigration attorneys, and most
importantly to witnesses and
victims that are generally going
through a difficult and
vulnerable time. But some also
organizes in a lot of counties
where they do not have this
policy. So we have seen
firsthand some of our members,
um, be victims or witnesses to
crimes and not have their local
sheriffs certify. They flat out
refuse to certify their visa
applications, because they don't
understand their role, and in
some case
for political reasons. That's
why a standard statewide policy
is needed so that every
immigrant crime victim or
witness knows what to expect.
Without a uniform, U visa
certification policy, immigrants
will not come forward, and that
means that no New Mexican is
safe. That is why we urge you to
support.
The spill. Send a bill 177, and
just in case they don't have
time to get up. Um, we also
partner with uh El Centro de
Guadarri derechos and El
Centropoderiacion who also stand
as an Albuquerque-based
organization for this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, senators. Uh, my
name is Denardo Castaneda. I'm a
senior policy advisor for the
Department of Workforce
Solutions as our state labor
agency. We are one of the
entities that can certify your
visa applications. Uh, this is a
really valuable tool as others
have said for us to be able to
investigate labor violations,
wage theft, uh, discrimination,
even uh crimes that happen to
people in the workspace, and
this bill provides much needed
clarity at the state level on
what our role and what
The procedures are for us to be
able to certify this. It allows
us to use this and to
communicate with clients about
the availability of U visa as a
tool for them to be able to come
forward with claims or with
declarations and so it provides
uh standardization and clarity
that that we all want as
agencies who are asked and
tasked by Congress and the
federal government to certify
these when appropriate. Thank
you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
See none will go to uh Zoom.
I do have a list.
s
We'll start with Daniel
Williams.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Daniel Williams. I'm a
policy advocate at the American
Civil Liberties Union of New
Mexico. I'm addressing the
committee this evening on behalf
of the Public Safety Coalition,
which is made up of 11
organizations that are committed
to advancing community-based
solutions to public safety
during the legislative session,
and the coalition stands in
strong support of SB 177.
This bill will ensure that all
victims of qualifying crimes in
New Mexico have a fair and
accessible pathway to U visa
certification, regardless of
where in the state the crime
occurred. By establishing
uniformity and transparency,
this legislation will uphold the
intent of the U visa program to
protect survivors of crime and
foster trust between law
enforcement and immigrant
communities. I urged lawmakers
to support SB 177 and remove
unnecessary obstacles for
survivors of crime seeking
safety and justice.
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, Carla Law.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee.
My name is Carla Law, and I'm
the program manager for the
Mexico Commission on the Status
of Women.
I am also a first generation
Chinese American, and a second
generation Mexican American.
In both my personal and
professional experiences. I have
seen the impact that lack of
legal status can have on
undocumented persons. This is
especially true for victims of
crime, including survivors of
domestic violence and sexual
assault.
As the commission regularly
visits communities throughout
the state, we have seen how
crucial domestic violence and
sexual assault services are for
survivors of crime. These
advocates worked tirelessly to
aid survivors in navigating
complex legal systems, intrusive
medical screenings and
intimidating law enforcement
interviews. Also that victims
and survivors have a chance at
healing and finding justice.
Having to also navigate
confusing and lengthy U visa
certification process should not
be another challenge that
survivors need to face.
For many undocumented women, a
UVa is their only form of
immigration relief with U visa
certification being only one of
many steps on their path to
legal status, a path that is
already riddled with obstacles
that seek to discourage and
re-traumatize women.
In supporting and passing, SB
177, our legislature can ensure
that survivors have a clearer
and more streamlined pathway to
obtaining the humanitarian
relief they are already
qualified for. That is why I
urge you all to vote in favor of
Senate Bill 177 and offer these
women some solace on their
journey toward healing and
justice. Thank you.
Thank you, Matt, I, I think it's
Meraki.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Matt Marraki, director
of Advancement operations at
Elase Communitario, a culturally
specific domestic violence
service provider for Latinan
immigrant domestic violence
survivors in central New Mexico.
In last stands in strong support
of SB 177, which we know will
streamline processes for U visa
processing and help ensure
uniform application of these
processes to the benefit of
victims of violent crime,
including domestic violence
survivors.
And Lase knows from firsthand
client experience, how important
a role of a streamlined time
bracketed U visa process will
play in the lives of domestic
violence survivors, especially
immigrant domestic violence
survivors who are seeking to
stabilize themselves and their
children in a violence-free
home.
Given the uncertainty of federal
protections of victims of
violent crime, and especially
immigrant domestic violence
victims, it is imperative to
shore up state level protections
for victims of crime. We urge
your support on SB 177.
Thank you.
There's someone um listed for
CBRC admin.
If you could identify yourself,
please.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
is Frank Zuby, director for the
New Mexico Crime Victims
Reparation Commission. Our
agency is committed to ensuring
that victims of crime receive
both support, protection, and
resources they need to heal and
seek justice. We recognize the
importance of SB 177, the U visa
certification Act in
strengthening protections for
immigrant victims of crime in
New Mexico. This legislation is
critical, is a critical step.
To ensuring that law enforcement
and certifying agencies provide
timely and consistent U visa
certification for eligible
victims who have suffered
significant harm and who have
cooperated with the
investigation or the prosecution
of criminal activity. By
streamlining and standardizing
the certification process, SB
177 will enhance victim safety,
encourage reporting of crimes.
And promote trust between
immigrant communities and law
enforcement. CVRC strongly
supports SB 177, and we urge
policymakers to advance this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Mary Ellen
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, this is Mary Ellen
Garcia, chief executive officer
of the New Mexico Coalition
Against Domestic Violence, and I
stand here with our 32 domestic
violence providers across the
state and over 25 years of
personal experience working in
an intimate partner violence
here in New Mexico, and this is
one of those pieces of
legislation that we stand in
strong support of and recognize
that it is long overdue. Uh, and
working with survivors.
For over 25 years and with many
of the organizations and the
individuals who have stood in
support today. We recognize that
this has been a systemic
barrier, and I applaud the
senator and um those who are on
this committee passing this and
moving this forward so that we
can protect survivors in New
Mexico, um, to receive the
immigration services and relief
that they deserve. So again, we
appreciate your support and we
stand in full support of this.
Thank you. uh, Lorena Sanchez.
Miss Sanchez, are you still
there?
OK. Hello. Oh, there you are.
Sorry, I, I couldn't get myself
on muted.
We can hear you.
Thank you. Um, my name is uh
Lorena Sanchez with uh Somoso
Pueblo Nido. Um, I don't have a
testimony. Um, I was just in
favor of it and
Put that in the text, um, chat
so you guys could have that we
were in favor as we are here in
the Southeast with the Muslim.
We do have a lot of cases with
people um who have benefited for
this, so we think it is a great
um deal if you guys could please
support.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
None. OK, we'll go to questions
or comments from committee
members.
Questions or comments?
Senator Nova.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing the
bill forward. Um, I, uh, greatly
appreciate just the
consciousness and the education
that you've all provided, um,
Madam Chair, I think it's very
important that we uplift, um,
the facts, uh, in regards to the
process of.
Obtaining a U visa, um, and I'll
have to share this, um, because
I think it's valuable in terms
of the context of what we're
talking about, for folks who are
not as familiar.
Um
Many of you all know, I come
from an immigrant family, Madam
Chair, and my sister is a single
mother of two girls, 8 years old
and 10, and last.
January, she was, she lives in
Santa Fe and she was leaving
Target when she was leaving
Target, she was putting her
things in the car and Madam
Chair, she was attacked by
somebody. She was with my niece
who's 8 years old, and this
person had a taser. They
attacked my sister. She passed
out. My, my little niece ran and
hid behind a car, um, and my
sister woke up, uh, without a
purse and just mortified because
my niece, thank God.
was still there. Um, she was
attacked by a repeat offender,
um, and after that very
traumatic experience, my niece
is very traumatized. My sister
holds DACA, which is work
authorization, as many of you
know, um, and now, um, madam,
uh, chair, my sister is in the
process of the U visa.
However
Um, it's opened our eyes to the
complications of it, um, this is
by no means anything that I
think anybody would do
intentionally.
And I think that is important to
point out, Madam Chair, um, and
Senator, and I think what you're
bringing forward is incredibly
valuable as I was reading
through the bill, specifically
related on page 5 line 12, where
it says um procedures for the U
visa certification and where it
state certifying officials shall
process a request for you visa
certification within 30 days
from the receipt of the request.
And then it says, uh, provided
that request to a district
attorney's
Office of the state or the State
Department of Justice for
expedited U visa certification
that should be processed within
14 days, uh, those, those time
frames are nowhere to be found,
especially as someone who has
been supporting in the process.
Um, so I would like to just
uplift and acknowledge that
because the occurrences that
call for a U visa are none that
anybody would wish upon anybody,
and anyone. Um, so I think
This is really important, really
valuable, and I thank you for
bringing it forward. Um,
And as I was reading through the
FIR I had a question, Madam
Chair, just in terms of some of
the things that were pointed
out, um, the FIR refers to the
new process for U visa
certifications, um, specifically
speaks to the new private right
of action and district courts,
and I was wondering if the
sponsors would like to yield.
bedroom chair um.
Because we don't have any kind
of authority, if somebody
certified to certify or
appropriate to certify doesn't.
There doesn't seem to be any
relief.
And so what this does is it
where it provides some relief to
someone who is wrongfully denied
um a U visa and as you heard
from from.
Um, my experts.
It happens more than it should.
Um, where for whatever reason.
Sometimes innocent, they just
don't understand what they're
supposed to do, and sometimes,
um, not so innocent. They just
choose not to help.
Um, and this, this really
Provides guidance and then
provides an enforcement um.
Possibility.
And, and if I may add, um, Madam
Chair and um Senator Nova, uh.
Like we mentioned earlier, the
UVA tends to sometimes be the
only available form of relief
for a lot of undocumented
people, um, and so.
Not having any kind of formal
process to at least have a
review of a denied you
certification, uh, completely
closes the doors on those people
who again have no other pathway
to legal status and
Senator Cedillo Lopez stated
this provides some form of
relief to at least have a
secondary review of the denied
you certification.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much,
sponsor.
Thank you. Other questions,
Senator Scott?
Um, well, we still have time for
some questions.
Are you all hungry?
I know it it it it comes to that
time, um.
And, and I've done this for a
few other uh bills that have
come in front of our committee.
We've had an opportunity for
introduction information shared.
We've gone to the public already
for those in favor and not.
Um
What we can do is we can roll it
over for Friday and we can just
start with you and continue the
discussion on the bill on Friday
when we come back to committee.
If that will work for you, at
least your experts, I hope, can
come back. Are you available?
Yes.
manager. OK. We'll go ahead and
do that.
That we
Um
It, it's just, it, it's just
where we are because we are
supposed to be going down to the
floor.
We understand, Madam Chair,
thank you,
thank you very much I appreciate
at least we had a chance to hear
the community and then we'll
just pick up the bill on Friday
itself. Thank you, madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you.
So, um, we'll send.
Uh, in German until Friday.
