These maybe now.
We.
Yes.
Yes again Senator think sure.
Welcome everyone to the.
When.
Appropriation addition of the.
Senate.
Shares Committee we have.
Solidi Jennifer J. and it will
start off with Senator Kernan
Senate bill one forty good
afternoon Senator Kernan
welcome.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman today I am.
Bringing to your Senate bill one
forty child support changes
Senate bill one forty with in
next several changes to the
child's.
Child support laws in New Mexico
the federal office of child
support enforcement informed HSD
that continued non compliance
with federal rules will
jeopardize HSD is ability to
obtain federal funds one hundred
twenty two million dollars for
the temporary assistance for
needy families program of the
pandemic program in twenty two
million for the child support
program would be in jeopardy we
must modifier statues in this
session to retain one hundred
forty seven million dollars in
federal funding support.
Senate bill one forty were also
revised the retroactive arrears
time frame also referred to as
the look back period from twelve
years to three years this change
is not fair with required that a
common best practice for top
performing states this bill does
not take a forty why from the
court's Authority when
establishing or enforcing child
support orders and with that I
would like to ask I have two
experts with me I have Kerry
army how in Germany a list with
them Human Services Department
and at this point if I could ask
them to make a statement thank
you.
Thank you senator and I would
come in at this point the
secretary of the department of
Dr Scrase.
Originally planned to be here.
Meeting of starting exactly the
same our as is regular.
COVID nineteen update press
conference so.
We're still glad to have you yes
it was the first to.
The secretary or more or you
know first.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chair at and
members of the committee very
happy to be here with you today
and as you mentioned Mr chair at
the secretary asked me to
apologise on his behalf for
missing that committee hearing
this morning but he did I'm
sorry this afternoon but he did
ask the team the rest of the
team here to Representative Mr
chair with your permission in
would it be okay if I shared my
screen we have a couple of slide
we just want to put up on the
screen for folks if that's okay
yes I will help you with that.
I'm sorry Senator would would
return a return share screen
yes screen with the W. secretary
Kerry army ho did we have a
document sent.
Because of the settings only
I'll turn it off it's for
everyone have it turned off
the light would be the one to
share can I send it over to you.
Yes.
We did send that I'm sorry we
did send a slide we.
From Kimberly earlier this week.
Happy to resend that if needed.
Mr chair I think you may have
been sent to the committee
members it seems like our
receipt and yes and I have and
so you know who is it's a
committee L. as in we can just
go ahead and is our meal.
So the people that are in the
committee could also see it.
Sure why don't I go ahead and
get started and if folks want to
keep working on that they can't
so sorry that glitch there okay
so wanted to so folks have slide
it looks like the.
and it's got some graphs the and
so I just wanted to make sure
that you all are looking at the
right document there
we want to the Human Services
Department want to start by
thanking Senator Kernan for
sponsoring this critically
important legislation when we
heard that we were in jeopardy
of losing are hundred and twenty
two point six million dollar ten
of Pojoaque grants course we
were critically concerned about
that and that is of primary
importance to us is to make sure
that New Mexico statute for
child support is in compliance
with federal law I'm in addition
to the components that Senator
Kernan mentioned on the bill
will also increase child support
collections we anticipate her
your thank you it's great as you
can see here at HSD projects
that child support collections
will increase by four hundred
and twenty dollars and thirty
three cents per year per case
for New Mexico children who rely
on child support program that
where was that Representative
thirty point nine percent
overall increase per year or two
hundred and eighty four dollars
per child I'll talk a little bit
about why that will be by we
think you know given the very
low income families that rely on
our support that extra money
will mean a lot to New Mexico
families.
In addition this change in
statute will really improve our
voluntary compliance with child
support orders and allow agency
to focus on providing employment
opportunities and job security
for non custodial parents to
increase their accountability.
In summary changing the statute
does three things first it
requires consideration of the
noncustodial scan noncustodial
parents ability to pay this is a
federal requirement that is set
forth in federal regulations and
is one of the reasons
New Mexico statutes current non
compliance with this requirement
is one of the reasons that are
ten of block grant is in
jeopardy
today our current child support
orders
in cute income to non custodial
parents that they don't actually
have access to so this provision
of federal rule is designed to
ensure affordability in child
support orders I'm secondly the.
Federal law requires that
modification of child support
orders is necessary if needed to
establish medical support for
children this too is a federal
requirement is designed to
assure that we are always
establishing medical support for
children including I'm opening
you support as grounds alone for
the opening of a child support
order.
Senator Kernan mentioned Bill
proposes and national best
practice that will improve
collections
by changing the look back period
retroactive arrears timeframe
for twelve years to three years
to improve collections.
And that will as you can see in
the top right graph.
There's a precipitous decline in
collections the longer that
retroactive arrears period at so
you know you can see that if the
retroactive arrears period is
one to three years we collect we
caught.
Twenty two almost at twenty
three million on pieces with
that that time frame of
retractable rears compared to
four hundred and fifty thousand
or five hundred and twenty two
thousand when that retroactive
careers period is longer than
ten years so centrally having a
long retroactive arrears period
results in fewer collections
because the debt is unaffordable
for noncustodial parents to get
caught up.
Senator Kernan mentioned these
changes were made in
consultation with the courts and
HSD really appreciate it
appreciated their participation
in addition to working with
them.
Child support commission in
determining the child support
guidelines we also work with
them and the drafting period of
this bill.
I'm so all will serve wrap it up
by stating that modernizing the
child support statute will
result in more money to New
Mexico children by holding non
custodial parents accountable.
I'm we also know from studies
that noncustodial parents who
make payments on their child
support orders and are
voluntarily compliant I work
likely to have relationships
with their children.
And it will allow HSD to focus
and emphasize job opportunities
and sustained work participation
for non custodial parents you
can see in the top the bottom
right requests that the Orange
Line it represents a pilot
program that we have going in
our Rio Rancho child support
office collections are much
higher where you can at focus on
these employment opportunities
and in Rio Rancho we've seen an
eighteen and a half percent
increase in collections per
child
and a fourteen and a half
percent increase in the
percentage of cases paying
monthly and that actually has
held true even during the
pandemic within us folks are
really challenged with at work
and so you can see that actually
about wine above the blue line
which is our statewide
collections rate is actually
much higher and has continued to
be much higher during the
pandemic.
And so with that I will highs C.
as director Toulouse has
anything to add and if not we'll
hand it back over to you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much W. secretary
and Mr to listed you want to add
anything.
You know Mr chairman committee
members not a whole lot that I
think you're W. secretary me how
and Senator Kernan who you know
again we're very appreciative of
for sponsoring this bill you
covered everything you know just
just a restatement kind of
summarizes the call these
revisions to increase reliable
child care for children by
sending child support orders are
based on the noncustodial
parents actual earnings in
income or other evidence of
ability to pay you know.
I've been in sales press for for
a long time and the order said
be on a parent's ability to pay
can lead to unintended
consequences such as
unmanageable debt reduced
employment participation in the
underground economy increased
criminal activity none of those
you know really you're the
children's best interests so
that's all I wanted to say you
know I think the committee for
the time on this Mr chair I turn
back overview.
Very different now we have some
other people that is signed up
to speak.
But before we go to the to the
public Senator Kernan is there
anything else you wanna say
about the bill.
And Mr chair now I think that
that that they have covered it
very well and we certainly are
looking forward to hearing from
the public and then up from the
committee and just I think you
want to leave the school there
we go okay thank you that's all
we'll we'll get back to you
thank you Senator Kernan before
we get started public comment
secretary of the early childhood
department Groginsky wants to
come and the needs of the link
can can we get your.
Thank you would be.
Trevor can you or your can can
you get the link to the
secretary of Groginsky.
Okay so we have some people
signed up ahead of time to speak
on this the first name I have
Is it judge and Deborah meanness
or is it remains.
I don't see.
Mr Chairman this is Deborah
merece yes please good afternoon
everyone Mr chairman I just
signed up in case the some of
the family court members to work
with CSPD in connection with
this bill and I signed up just
in case there were questions
that
that Mr to lose wanted me to
answer but I have nothing to
speak on specific.
Very good thank you thank you Mr
injures remiss
how to drive change in or of the
center for policy research.
Mr chairman and committee
members Dr nor is an economist
to provide subject matter
expertise to she she won't be
making comments okay great thank
you Mr to loose
and then were we able to get the
billing to the secretary.
You see what do on who wants to
speak so we'll go to him but
please keep trying to get the.
Secretary during the NC a really
childhood the that link welcome
Mr Secretary.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
I really like in the cabinet
secretary at the children youth
and families department I just
have the appreciation for
Senator Kernan for sponsoring
this very very important bill to
point all the reasons you just
heard I just want to in the
state to point the first is that
the changes this bill will make
how child support enforcement
which would not Crystal parent
is very important for our
population our staff it will
help take some stresses and
pressures off our families will
help keep more families and
children together moving forward
will help us work with those
families were very.
Changes.
In.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Did industry I mean the
secretary of the early children
department again excuse also
with this would you would you
like to speak now.
You need to you know you may be
listening on the webcast.
And there is a thirty second
delay.
So if you turn off the webcast.
You'll be able to hear and
start.
The secretary you see if you can
you can go ahead and make your
testimony thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee good afternoon and was
about Groginsky secretary for
the early childhood education
and care department and I'm here
today is to stand to stand in
strong support of Senate bill
one forty we know that the loss
of any tentative funding to our
to our state would be very
devastating for low income
families and many of whom we
serve in our childcare programs
pre K. home visiting.
We also want to recognize that
the Human Services department
provides funding to our
department I'm on a yearly basis
to support home visiting and to
support child care programs and
our pre K. program so
recognizing that modernization
and best practices are always a
good direction for our state to
move in we want the committee to
please that are in full support
of Senate bill one forty that if
the families and children of New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you madam secretary.
But is there anybody else who
wanted to make a public comment
you for or against this bill.
Seeing none will go to the
committee then for for questions
and comments from committee
members.
Please raise your hands using
that icon.
I have a question and well
people gather themselves.
Secretary earning and I guess
this question would be for Mr to
lose.
During this last summer the
previous summers interim
committee hearing where we we
heard about child support
enforcement made us question and
and I wondered if you could
update me.
The question had to do is.
At that time there was a
practice that to do that the
division was following of taking
licenses away from people who
were.
Refusing to pay child support
behind to seriously behind is
that still going on because it
would seem to be another case of
shooting ourselves in the knee.
Secretary our Mr chairman and
committee members you know
license suspensions part of the
parental responsibility act
which is also federal
requirements that we do that but
with that said we do have
guidelines in place if if there
if the current if the national
parents are currently employed
if they have likely Adam finance
or if they're cooperating with
us you know we we were either
won't take their license or will
give it back you know it it's
it's one of those enforcement
tools and and the bevy of all
the different interventions that
we use a child support
enforcement you know to ensure
compliance but it is not a
requirement that we keep up but
we are very flexible yes knock
so parents work with the singing
and you know like I mentioned
your W. secretary me had
mentioned that you want to
premises of of Senate bill one
forty is improving gauge mint
with are not additional repair
so they don't run and hide from
us of a you work with us.
I'm glad to hear that secretary
secretary Senator Sedillo this.
Thank you so much Senator Kernan
I mean yes Senator Kernan for
bringing this bill it is an
excellent bill very important.
Most.
Okay eight people people are
freezing around the screen so if
I get awful come back if if I
get kicked off but I I just
wanted to say this is a really
excellent Bill I particularly
like that they're not going back
ten years anymore that it's
going back three years because
it exactly what was said it cost
parents to disappear from the
children's lives and that is
that is not a good that is not a
good result I also think that
the adjustments look appropriate
as I looked at it very carefully
and I think that it does make
sense absolute sense not to
impute income of because well I
guess federal guidelines require
it but there's a practical
reason and that is impugning
income is is pretending that
there is money there when there
isn't and so parents then don't
have anything to pay they get
into more debt they disappear
from their children's lives it's
it's really a bad situation we
did a lot of these cases when I
was in the clinic in our
community warring family clinic.
And I'm so impressed with the
revisions and I am very very
proud to support this bill I
only had one question what did
you do about very very high
income parents.
Go ahead Senator no no you go
ahead I was going to refer to
you so thank you.
Sorry.
Mr chairman and committee
members and and Senator Sedillo
Lopez it's it's a ratio of over
over thirty thousand dollars
it's ratio than the gets added
on depending on you know how far
over thirty thousand dollars.
You know they make a may I I can
say in the twenty five years
I've been in sales for don't
think we've effort ever actually
had a child support obligation I
within the program but to me
what if there is a cancellation
there that was added to the.
You know what could you show me
where it is I just didn't see it
and I maybe I read it too fast
or something I.
What page of the bill is the
very end of the of the on here
all along.
Well.
This page fifty five okay.
I don't know for sure is that it
that's probably right fifty
five.
I'm not sure we that are left
in.
Thank you Mr.
Because it's always been
controversy that's not always
but that raised a little
controversy with the last time
there was a revision you'll
recall that people thought that
is just and at a certain point
and that our children shouldn't
take advantage of the fact that
the other parent was wealthy
which I totally disagree with so
I just wanted to make sure that
the ratio was there and I didn't
see it but.
That doesn't mean it's not there
I just didn't see it.
Mr chair and and Senator Lopez I
do believe that it is on page
fifty five I've got the bill in
front where it talks about.
Income of thirty thousand or
more is that your me where we
should be looking.
That is right that is where the
child support guidelines table
actually and.
I'm looking for the paragraph
that explains how to calculate
over thirty thousand okay.
Yeah I think we I didn't find it
but I'm I'm sure it's there I
just it yeah actually it is on
page fifty five also.
It's income over thirty thousand
or more.
Okay I see it.
Yes Campbell scrunch together.
Okay.
I think that that's very
important not that we have that
many people like that in the
state but I do think that a
child should be able to share in
the a parent's wealth and so I
think that that's.
That's really great so thank you
I'm looking forward to to to
voting for this bill and thank
you for bringing it Senator
Kernan it's very important.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
next to the senator gave us.
Chairman Senator Kernan thank
you for this.
I think she worked all on
something like this years ago in
one of the things I'd ask a
question for you Mr chairman
center Kernan is at that
remembers and sons we go ahead
and pay for those employees
there on our sorry in our pay
scales but I was wondering do
they capture anything in here
for people are self employed and
if so how do they calculate that
is verifiable.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I don't know if
that.
I would like to respond to that.
Mr to this hand that whatever
tier yes
Mr chair and committee members
and Senator I I was looking for
in the in the child support in
the in the bill itself it's it's
there is a definition under it
starts on page two under the
definition of income and how you
know how what we consider income
in calculation of child support.
Mr chairman and and etcetera I
guess those my my concern if
there's any way to verify it.
My wife works for a Housing
Authority and I know they have a
hard time getting the exact
numbers and thank you goes to
Senator Sedillo Lopez was a
discussion on
be able to enjoy the wealth of
the of the parent a lot of that
is actually hidden and and not
saying but my final question man
Mr and Senator Kernan is is it
calculated on gross income.
Mr chair and senator I will let
that let Mr to listen to that
yes Mr chair committee members
and Senator yes it is calculated
on gross income.
I and I appreciate that because
is is you know some of the other
benefits take away from that and
I just want to make sure we
captured as much for the child
in the needs of the child in the
family as possible with that
I'll yield thank you Senator
Kernan for this bill.
Thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair and I wanted
to thanks Senator Kernan of
course but I want to thank the
department for their good work
and I know that this particular
division can sometimes have a
lot of backlash
thanks for hanging in there and
doing the good work because a
lot of people with yeah
involved with child support are
not the
most compliant thank you very
much.
Thank you that those are all the
committee members raise their
hands was the will of the
committee on this.
I move.
I think we have a motion for a
new issue Senator Sedillo Lopez
and a second from Senator
Stefanics you want to say
anything in closing Senator
Kernan.
I'm sorry.
I just I want to thank the
committee for the good questions
and certainly I want to thank
the staff of HSD for helping me
learn about this topic it's been
very informative thank you.
This committee you're welcome
back anytime Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senate bill one forty Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am.
Turning go.
Okay.
No sorry.
Okay I'll go.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes do pass.
He's still missing.
What kind of service men and.
Senator Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
Care too you know yes.
The St century of into passed
from this committee.
Thank you so much Mr chair.
Thank you
Senate bill one forty one.
Creation and parole sanctions
and this is a sponsored by
Senator doing.
Senator.
Yes hello Mr chair sorry I I
just I just got on.
So go ahead and bring us up to
date on Senate bill one forty
one.
Changes parole and probation
saying probation and parole
sanctions.
Right thank you Mr chair.
This this is a narrowly targeted
bill that builds on concepts
that that a lot of the committee
members have seen an voted for
over the last couple of years.
And this deals with a situation
that that.
A lot of you have probably
actually been hearing about from
the LFC since about two thousand
eighteen where they were
reporting that about a third of
the people who are currently
incarcerated in New Mexico are
there on technical probation and
parole violations most of most
of those being failed drug tests
or missing appointments.
And in the the LFC is two
thousand eighteen report on this
it quoted that the our our
rating folks for these technical
violations came in an annual
cost of forty million dollars to
the state.
And that that huge cost to the
state might make sense if we're
returning folks to jail because
of a dirty drug tester missed
appointment and that actually
made our communities safer or
changed inmates of behavior
going forward but national
studies that have looked of this
at this I have found that that's
not the case so we're in a
situation where we're spending a
huge amount of taxpayer money on
something that's not making
anyone safer and so SB one forty
one would both safeguard
taxpayer money and hold parolees
and probationers appropriately
responsible for their actions by
providing a uniform statewide
procedure for resolving these
technical violations and
providing a defined series of
escalating that non
incarceration sanctions prior to
putting someone back in jail for
violation.
I have two experts with me here
today Kim Chavez Cook and
Jonathan Ibarra both from that
office of public defender odds
they they are the real experts
in this area so they will talk
about this bill in more detail
and otherwise I'm I'm available
for questions thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator let's go to
Kim Chavez Cook please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee and
thank you to Senator Duhigg for
carrying this legislation as the
sponsor mentions this bill is a
building on a conversation that
this body has been having for a
number of years
previous iterations of bills
trying to distinguish between
technical violations and
standard violations took
different approaches than this
bill does it definitely I think
it creates a clear distinction
for one thing but is also the
first bill to actually codify a
statewide Senator graduated
sanctions for technical
violations which is crucial and
was specifically part of the
recommendation that came out of
the twenty eighteen LFC report
that the sponsor mentioned on
page two of that report which it
did provide to the committee as
a hand out the LFC specifically
recommended the adoption of a
statewide steps sanctions system
and just by way of background on
what that means there are a
number of sort of judicial
district by judicial district
there are a number of steps
programs around the state that
approach things differently the
one that this most closely
resembles is the one from the
second judicial district which
of the ones I looked at which
were multiple was the only one
that didn't jump straight to
jail time the fifth judicial the
third seventy judicial even on a
first technical violations do
impose a small amount of jail
time the second judicial
districts program starts off
with community service and non
carceral sanctions so we went
with that approach it does allow
for jail in later sanctions on
the the third or fourth
violation
so this bill does that in a way
that previous bills did not this
that this both houses passed a
bill in twenty nineteen that
were.
C. W. toe so this body has
looked at this issue before this
bill however does avoid a lot of
the other areas that those
previous bills looked at so
we're not touching a lot of the
other issues that those bills
were more comprehensive Morse
expansive in terms of what they
were addressing in on probation
and parole US statutes we are
about half the length of those
bills and only really focused on
sanctions for technical
violations.
I have I'm sure plenty of
material I could go into I
received the LFC FIR and see a
lot of the the issues that were
raised there I'm happy to answer
any questions about any of those
things but I think the broad
strokes concept that it's
important to understand is that
the the studies the evidence
based studies that the sponsor
mentioned have all found that
custodial sanctions do not
actually make someone more
likely to succeed on probation
then noncustodial sanctions or
other interventions and
certainly interventions that
occur outside of the corrections
department cost a in
exponentially smaller amount of
money so while I do think that
along side of what this bill is
doing there is still the need to
increase those services and the
access and availability to those
services I would love to see
that happen as either a separate
legislative effort or something
that can be done through the
executive within corrections but
you know leaving aside the fact
that of course treatment
programs are are limited and
halfway houses are limited in
all of those sort of peripheral
issues as far as a structure for
how the courts and how the
programs should look at
technical violations I think
this bill really accomplishes
the meat that the primary needs
of that of that policy issue so
I'm all all hang out until after
public comment and.
Thank you Mr.
John this could connect to go to
Jonathan Ibarra.
Thank you chair and Senators my
name is Jonathan Ibarra I'm with
also the office of the public
defender I'm a former for those
of you don't know me I'm a
former prosecutor for almost a
dozen years and and actually at
former District Court judge for
awhile as been at the public
defender's for several years now
but including in the probation
violation division of the public
defenders here in Albuquerque so
I have extensive experience with
how it works sort of on the
ground in in a Peavey courtroom
a lot of what I would normally
say and not surprisingly
mistrust cartes covered for me
mostly I'm here to be able to
answer questions about how
things look on that on the
ground but I will say that you
know in the time that I was
doing probation violations which
is a couple of years ago now
technical violations were a
significant part of that docket
that's not only a problem just
that were having to deal with
those cases on the docket but
anybody who's in the probation
violation
just about everybody thank you
it takes about forty five days
for them to get to a hearing in
court you know there's five days
for the probation officer to be
able to do report five business
days than five business days for
the state to file their motion
to revoke and then thirty days
for a hearing on the initial
the initial hearing and so
that's up almost forty five days
before a person even has an
opportunity to get to a hearing
to get out of jail because all
these people are in jail in the
meantime and so this this bill
does a good job of helping us
avoid that on cases where these
people don't need to be sitting
in jail that doesn't mean that
there aren't.
Reasons why we need to go there
vengefully and and this this
bill allows for that obviously
but.
Especially on early on
violations in places you know
several of the judicial
districts throughout the state
don't have
a technical violation program
and as Mr of us cook said the
ones that do almost all of them
require jail time up front
that's it's just hurting people
it's it's hurting everybody it's
hurting not just the probationer
but their families and their
ability to make their rents and
and I've seen it first hand and
so you have questions about how
this is working on the ground
I'm more than happy to help.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you Mr.
Now we'll go to public comment.
And I have four people signed up
to speak against this bill and I
to speak in support of it I'm
gonna ask you to keep your
comments to about a minute a
minute and a half each and we'll
start with
Well more and district attorney.
Thank you Mr chair.
And I clicked well board
district attorney for years the
seventh judicial district
representing New Mexico District
Attorney Association and that I
actually have specific
objections to the bill and
certain wording and I'll spell
those out and I will say that
I've been working with the the
Sanchez experts miss Kim Chavez
Cook and I'd we may resolve
several of these a particularly
on page two in at the old
there's an exception for DWI but
that particular section that is
listed there does not include
subsequent the Do�a ice that
particular section for
subsequent B. B. D. W. eyes
which allows support to place of
probationer on five years
probation is in progress F.
which I I've asked to be
included in there miss cook and
I a javascript can I talk about
that my second the issue that I
have in the district attorneys
have or is on page eleven at
line nine that last students
says the court may only ordered
these conditions if it finds by
clear and convincing evidence
these additional conditions are
necessary to ensure public
safety or the safety of a
particular individual that's
regarding the court having the
ability to place a sex offender
or a serious violent offender on
standard conditions of probation
instead of the
program that is being proposed
by this bill and the it has a
clear and convincing standard
which is higher than were even
required to show to revoke
somebody's appropriations were
only charge required to show by
a preponderance of the evidence
in order to revoke somebody's
appropriations this particular
sentence would necessitate as
having a full hearing putting on
evidence to a level that is just
below of beyond a reasonable
doubt
that.
the probation should be placed
on standard conditions
appropriation of acid that
section just be completely
deleted and then my last
objection specifically is to the
definition of responding Mr was
cooking I've been working on
that we've not come to any kind
of agreement with that I would
like to thank miss agendas cook
for for working with us on that
and and sponsor also for being
open to the the suggestions are
making for changes and with that
that's particularly on that
particular definition of what's
funding it requires the
subjective standard for the
state to show if we were to
revoke somebody's appropriations
for
of skylink that they had a
purpose to invades the reply to
the person supervision or
obligations by making the person
self unavailable for supervision
it's a subjective standard we
have to basically and and that
standard get under in the
person's head and explain why
they are avoiding appropriations
and we're looking at possibly
coming up trying to come up with
an objective standard that is
something is clear and and is
this to everybody and with that
I think you Mr chair for for
allowing me to comment thank
you.
Thank you Mr will more in the
next we have Marcos Montoya.
I'm not sure Marcus zoom he's in
trial up in that tone I'm not
sure if he was able to get on or
not okay well then we'll go to
Jacquelyn Lopez.
Mr chair this is Melanie
Martinez I'm the director
probation parole and she's my
admins I think requests might my
on my behalf okay well we'll
listen to you and and misplaced
changes please go ahead thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Melanie
Martinez director of the
operation coral and I do want to
point out
I think the sponsor mention LFC
report and a third of our
population are returned for
technical violations I would
like to add that of the third
sixty seven percent are ponders
and more than fifty percent are
there on the charges so what I
did based on that information as
we dug in deep to what technical
violators were returned who is
currently there and the report
that was released to the LESC at
the time so we're working with
you and then right now
there is there is a reduction
along with probation parole and
we're looking at exactly what is
causing these individuals to
return so I just wanted to
mention that as well
I I also wanted to mention that
the wave the current bill is is
drafted
it removes the ability of the
officer to work with the
offender population our goal is
to to provide diversion
recent conversations and the way
the bills right and it ties our
hands where we would have to you
know do the three five seventy
section or whatever that looks
like
It also you know it as far as
parolees go it limits technical
violations to only up to ninety
days but it does not mention the
treatment component in two
thousand fifteen we we did away
with our state thirty sixty
ninety day technical violator
program because the treatment
component wasn't taxed so we're
sending individuals back without
any type of like behavioral
change component and we're
making them worse off and what
we but they were so we did away
with that the technical
violations and this would only
allow up to ninety days for
anyone who violates the
conditions of parole
also short term sanctions you
know I know I think the expert
mentioned that it's it's a quick
sanctions are in and out but it
also allows individuals to
introduce contraband to
detention facilities which is
also a concern of our.
So that's all I have to say and
and like I said and I think it's
a great start I think you know
maybe bring us all to the table
and and slowing it down a bit
might make more sense getting us
all involved in the on the front
end and that's all I have Mr
chair thank you.
Thank you very much
Miss Martinez and then finally
we have for number Trujillo.
I'm gonna declined to speak at
this moment thank you.
Okay members of the committee.
Okay so so you didn't want to
speak Fernando okay fine.
Then we have members of the
audience who want to speak in
support of the bill and we'll
start with the Diane Suman cash.
Good afternoon my name is Diana
cash I support HB one forty one
the adoption of this legislation
can would be of tremendous
benefit to families like mine
that are impacted by our current
often seemingly arbitrary
implementation of the conditions
are probation especially the
practice incarcerating people
for technical violations SB one
forty one could go a long way to
providing a more fair and
equitable implementation of
probation and parole bill says
that though probation parole
officer show impose graduated
sanctions if the sanctions the
necessary at all and the
graduated sanctions don't allow
for automatic jail time.
The wide adoption of this common
sense approach would prevent
needless incarceration that's
financially costly to taxpayers
and puts people at needless risk
of getting caught up in the
revolving door of repeating car
serration and its attendant
lifelong collateral consequences
thank you very much thank you
thank you very much Jim is the
next as Bianca ludicrous
followed by Rickie Lee Jones.
Is.
Welcome back to her Rikki Lee
Chavez followed by and Barron
Jones.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Rikki
Lee Chavez I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association we want to
take a moment to thank the
sponsor and her advocates for
working so hard on this
legislation we have been
following this process for the
last two years and before that
but really in the last two years
we have significant work to try
to address our probation and
parole system there was some
great legislation on that people
all came to that people on and
worked on and actually passed
this body and and was ultimately
vetoed after receiving.
What's of opposition in the form
of letters to the governor from
the district attorney's and so I
think that the advocates in the
sponsor took so much of that
work and put that into this bill
it's just too easy Mr chairman
members of the committee for all
of these people that we are
putting into the criminal
justice system to get caught up
in the rubble building cycle
probation violations and so this
bill is addressing that it's
helping our communities
appropriations places some
really stringent standards on
people are communities of color
and are low in lower income
communities have a roll really
difficult time and and hearing
to those
stipulations and so those
communities are most impacted by
the probation violation system
so we thank the sponsors the
advocates we encourage you to
support this important reform
and thank you for your time
today.
Thank you very much reviewing
then we have Barron Jones all in
mind reading guarantee.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is barriers although I'm a
senior policy strategist ACLU of
New Mexico we stand a strong
support of HB forty one
especially after the efforts
over the last couple years
left this probation and parole
reform and we think the Sanchez
Senator Duhigg an expert is
javascript will bring this
important proposed piece of
legislation for in addition to
the reasons already out
eloquently stated we believe
this lost long will do
especially when one recognize
the records created by COVID in
full disclosure I am
unfortunately spent more than my
time incarcerated and have been
sent back to prison and that my
life ended for technical on
parole road violations and I
have in the last couple years
I've worked with hundreds of New
Mexicans with had to navigate
this very onerous system so I
just ask you all to support this
legislation and and and really
it is the first is a good step
to reduce them are created by
all of our tough on crime
policies of of today yes you
thank you so much for your for
allowing me this opportunity.
Thank you very much Mr Jones
then finally the final speaker
and public comment will be
breeding guarantee.
Thank you chairman I need to do
now and members of the committee
my name is Bree Garrity I work
for lobbyist raccoons and I to
support this legislation on
behalf of the ACLU thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much.
Okay
Senator doing did you will your
expense want to respond to any
of the issues raised by
opponents of the bill.
Thank you Mr chair yes I would I
yield to my experts can drop
this kind please.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm and
thank you Senator Duhigg I will
first start with that sort of
easy piece which is that DA
Welborn did mention a couple of
language fixes that he and I
discussed and absolutely we are
we are prepared to address those
so I've already have plans to
drop simple amendments for
Senate Judiciary if we have the
good fortune of making it there
and I think they'll be pretty
easy fixes they were essentially
drafting oversight so they don't
even Representative policy
debate questions the one that
does is of the definition of UPS
Connor I agree with Mr Welborn
we have yet to to actually see
fully eye to eye on that we'll
continue to discuss it for the
moment I think the definition
that we have does actually do
exactly what I wanted to see
what I'm hello you know we
compromised in a lot of areas
already so I don't know if we'll
get there I do think that even
if we don't in the dust are
unable to agree with the
expanding definition the amount
of compromise that has already
been done in other areas to
accommodate their concerns
should that that should not end
up being the you know that the
deal breaker for this piece of
legislation I will add that I
included in the handouts to the
committee a an analysis so to
speak of the bill that addresses
the reasons why that absconder
definition was chosen in terms
of what the meaning of that word
is as opposed to and in order to
distinguish it from someone who
misses appointments and that
there really is a mental
culpability aspect too
absconding that distinguishes it
from missing appointments and so
I don't and I don't know if
there's a way around the
subjective element but as I said
we are continuing to discuss
that
and then as far as is Martinez's
concerns from the corrections
department I appreciate that
that that I I know that
corrections has been working
under the current secretary.
Terry to try and improve their
own systems that they have in
place to try and minimize the
amount of incarceration for
technical violations not only do
I think this bill goes further
and is therefore necessary but I
think it's necessary to have it
in statute so that future
secretaries who might not be
quite so open minded so
progressive in their thinking
are still bound by these
principles so I will clarify a
couple of issues that were
raised by ms Martinez one of
which is she expressed concern
that officers per appropriations
processors would not have the
discretion to work with
offenders before following these
steps I don't know if she's
looking at the point one version
of the bill that we actually
addressed that very concerned
because ms Martinez expressed it
to me previously in the point
two version that got filed so on
page is.
Two and three of the bill there
are is language in here that was
updated from the point one
version to ensure that they do
retain that discretion so page
two one six I shall was changed
to a made to make it clear that
a PO may impose the graduated
sanctions in the following
manner it allows for them to
impose lesser to not impose a
sanction at all if they think
that they don't need it and then
additionally on page three the
beginning of subsection do an
entire new sentence was two
sentences really were inserted
to clarify that the officer may
declined to sanction a technical
violation or may impose lesser
sanctions than provided so I
think we fixed that problem the
other piece is that technical
violations getting up to ninety
days she mentioned for provide
pro violation of factually
inaccurate the bill for
technical violations says up to
thirty days net up to ninety
days is the standard violation
sanction but that aside the the
primary concern I think was the
lack of that treatment
requirement attached I'm happy
to write that into statute I
will say though that in my mind
that was something that I
assumed would be handled by
internal and MCD regulations
that once the statue passes
they'll have to update their
rules and rags to conform with
the statute and that they would
adopt in you know in
implementing this statute we
would include a treatment
component for technical
violations that I I wasn't going
to meddle with that but I'm
happy to put it in the bill
going forward if that would
assuage those concerns
and I think the last thing I
wanted to just clarify and I I
sort of woven in a couple of
times already was to address
agency could miss Martinez is
concerned that she doesn't feel
that they were brought to the
table I find that a little
surprising frankly because this
entire piece of legislation is
the fruit of the interim
discussions of the.
Sentencing commissions criminal
justice reform committee from
the interim of twenty nineteen
and they were at the table for
that and I spoke with her at
length on Jan in late January on
these issues and as I said I've
already incorporated changes in
response to those conversations
so I'm sorry that she feels that
way about it but I really have
made as much effort as possible
to bring all the stakeholders to
the table I'll conclude that by
saying that while I am an
advocate for the public defender
as a general rule this bill is
not my dream public defender
bill by any means I if I had my
druthers I would not want any
incarceration for technical
violations and probably not for
expanding at all either just new
crimes is how I would probably
bring it this is a compromise
bill already this is the first
of two years of compromise
discussions with all
stakeholders able well I can't
make everyone a hundred percent
happy I do think it's important
for the committee to understand
that history and that background
and how we got to where we got
so I think you and I'm happy to
answer any additional questions.
Thank you.
And I would point out to the
committee that the definition of
standing is on the bottom of
page twelve in the top of page
thirteen if you want to
reference and then we I see we
we are joined by somebody that I
passed over for public testimony
in support that is beyond
comparison before we go to the
committee Alaska's compared us
to say comments for about a
minute then have please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members the committee I
apologize my tardiness my name
is Bianca the status I'm the
contract lobbyists that the
justice action network and I
don't want to be repetitive but
we do strongly support this bill
I'm I just wanna point out that
over the years other states to
begin creating smarter
approaches to addressing
technical violations namely
providing us with clear
proportionate responses to these
violations an army probation
officers the tools necessary to
individually sanctions violation
correct the behavior.
The for revocation becomes
necessary a really quick example
and two thousand seven Louisiana
cap incarceration for technical
violations in ninety days what's
the state subsequently reduced
and they reduce the time served
for technical violation by nine
months on average decreasing but
demand by over two thousand
budget each year but that more
effective response to technical
violations cut even more crime
revocations by twenty two
percent and save the state
seventeen million each year so
that's all I have to say thank
you so much and
I support this bill.
Then we'll go to the committee
for comments and questions and
we'll start with the senators to
FedEx in senators in the oval
office.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for bring this forward
first of all
I don't have a any problem with
the concepts in this bill is
there are more bill in the
house.
Mr chair senator know if there
is that we did not double drop
this I do believe that
representative Williams
Stapleton is that the US sponsor
on the house side but we we only
dropped this.
Well Mr chair Senator are
analysis unless I'm reading the
wrong one which is possible
indicated that Representative
low my **** might be dropping
this as well our might have
dropped it and might and let me
go on to my next question in the
past and again I could be
reading the wrong analysis it
says that our governor did not
support it the last time is
thought has something changed.
Mr chair senator I know that
Representative my Estes had
brought a similar bill in years
past but my understanding is he
is he is not has not dropped one
this year and Miss Janice cook
knows more about the history
with the governor's all defer to
her on that and and actually I'm
having some issues with my
computer I'm gonna jump off and
jump right back in so I
disappear that's why.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator is to provide expert for
the question I I see in the
analysis where you got the
impression and I will clarify
for you it includes a quote from
the Albuquerque journal article
that ran during last year's
session about the bill for which
Representative Maestas was the
sponsor and that is an article
about last year's bill so he
does he and as far as I know and
I've talked to about this bill
so I don't think he is planning
on doing anything else that I
think all referred to his bill
last year which did not actually
passed both houses last year the
bill that was vetoed by the
governor two years ago from the
twenty nineteen session was
vetoed specifically because the
district attorney's expressed
concern about not being involved
in the process which is why this
bill was brought to the
sentencing commissions criminal
justice reform committee the
following interim to ensure
stakeholder involvement and this
bill is the fruit of that
discussion so I hope that
answers both of your questions.
Well Mr chair and senator that
the part of my question about
the governor is really is the
executive supporting this bill.
This
chair senator we certainly hope
that she well I I think that
that Mr was cook has has really
gone above and beyond to seeking
to to meet the concerns that
were voiced in the past on this
topic and so we are we are
optimistic that she will see
that would be supportive.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you senator.
Senator Cervantes the the fire
refers to House Bill tool one.
Dealing with probation but I
think it's not of this bill is a
different one sponsored by
Representative the hello Lara
Cadena.
Thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair we had I've
I've sat through at least two
presentations maybe more in the
two years I've been here in the
interim I and I was on the on
the subcommittee and I think
this bill definitely reflects a
compromise from where where we
started two years ago and I I am
very I really like the
definition of ops Gondor because
so many people don't have bus
fare or have child care problems
or whatever and then they end up
getting caught in the system.
Because they just couldn't make
their appointment.
And so within their label to the
Skylanders which seems like
worse than it is and we used to
have that happen in the in the
clinic and and it and it was
such a heavy lift to fix that
and so I I think that the bird
if you're going to if you're
going to take someone's liberty
away that they've earned there
should be some kind of
responsibility you know some
burden on the state to state.
US yarn is still under and and
the the bill says under all of
that under the circumstances so
I think it's easy to to show
over someone someone was at a
party.
And you know really didn't want
to show up.
Versus somebody who was trying
to show up and I like the idea
that there is an intent again so
that is what I remember one of
the issues being.
In one of these many committee
hearing meant it you know I
can't remember which one but
they were like what what is if
they're just scofflaws and
that's why under the
circumstances is so important
because that's what gives the DA
the opportunities Hey there are
you know they're invading
because they're they're not
showing up in there they're
showing up at a party or they're
showing up somewhere else
instead of trying to get there
so I I think that you should
stand strong because to put
people away.
You know to take away their
liberty.
Even for a short period of time
when they didn't they were
trying to abscond they were
trying to evade is is
frustrating when you were
talking about
The standard and of a clear and
convincing.
Was any thought given to more
likely than not.
The that the DA did so the dust
say clear convincing it's hard
and I get that because you have
to show specific evidence
you know we can be of course you
want something less than beyond
a reasonable doubt.
But what about what what what's
wrong with more likely than not.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo but I
believe and and Mr cook and can
correct me if I'm wrong but I
believe on on that issue with
the clear commencing that this
is an issue that's actually I
think already been resolved with
the dust and and there's that an
amendment that ms Chavez Cook is
drafting to to meet those
concerns I think that was more
about this very issue I believe
and and please feel free to jump
in Mr asco okay so I didn't
catch which issue they were
resolving so thank you thank you
madam chair and Senator Sedillo
Mr chair and senator single bus
to be into clear we have not
actually that it we haven't
resolved quite that that one
although that may be where we
end up resulting it this is one
of the points that we're still
sort of working out but I did
want to kick it to mystery pada
if I made to address the clear
and convincing versus
preponderance because he's
litigated in the courtroom so
many of these cases I think he
may have some insight into why
we started with clear and
convincing maybe we can again
that might be where we lance to
to you know help the dust get
more comfortable but there there
is some logic to it now that
mystery about explained okay.
You Mr check you did share and
Senator Sedillo Lopez one of the
things I wanted to clarify about
that was that you know I I like
and district attorney Welborn
and and I appreciate what he had
to say but he I respectfully
disagree with them about even
the standard and probation
violations it's it's not a
preponderance of the evidence
standard and probation
violations partly because that
would imply that that the
defense would have to put
forward evidence a preponderance
like by its very nature means
which side is higher and and the
defense doesn't have to to do
that it's it's the state burden
state versus Baca.
Says that it's a reason it's
it's a very.
Nebulous standard of an
establishing to a reasonable
certainty sufficient to satisfy
the conscience of the court
in other words absolute judicial
discretion it really is very
yeah I mean it's it's very vague
I I we have consistently argued
and and I think that judges at
least here and and and finally a
county have consistently found
that that's higher than a
preponderance of the evidence
standard it's it get something
closer to the.
To a clear and convincing
standard clear and convincing is
also pretty nebulous standard
there's a little more definition
on what that means in case law
and you know that's you know
that has to and and immediately
you know make the court believe
that that's that's accurate it's
the same standard they use both
in hearings and for termination
of parental rights that's a
that's a pretty high standard
obviously or at least supposed
to be
and so you know clear convincing
I think just has more definition
I think it may make sense to me
you know that that a probation
violation finding needs to be
about that level not at a
reasonable doubt but more than
just fifty percent or more than
just barely enough
and so so I think that's that's
why clear and convincing makes
more sense than than
preponderance of the evidence
obviously this is about setting
conditions of probation not
about finding a violation and so
I I I agree with Mr Abbas cook
that it's worth having the
discussion with the district
attorney's office about that and
and maybe that's where we end up
but I do think that there's a
reasonable basis to use clear
and convincing and so and I
think that that's closest to the
standards we already have
dealing with probation
violations.
Mr Chairman if I can follow up
really quickly I'm sorry I think
I money the waters and Senator
Duhigg was actually right that
language reasonable certainty is
in the provision that we already
have an amendment worked out and
I was thinking it was within the
upstanding definition so that
but they did what we wouldn't in
my mind I wouldn't change the
reasonable certainty it would be
the rest of the sentence that
would change because that
sentences actually aronie Asli
written to make it look like
we're talking about the
conditions of probation that
would be imposed and that's
actually not the intent and all
if you read the first sentence
of that subsection it's actually
about whether the court can
designate a condition the
condition will be imposed but
designated as a condition that
for this particular offender
will not be technical violations
status but would get a sanction
for a standard violation instead
so that just got sort of lost in
the in the drafting language
that's the clarification that I
intend to amend but the standard
would remain.
Of reasonable certainty.
Correct Mr chairman and Senator
Sedillo Lopez which is just as
Baca C. just when best with the
supreme court's.
Okay that's usually why is okay
all right well thank you that
that clarifies that a little bit
of for me Mr chair I like I said
I've sat through many of these
and I think that this looks like
a very reasonable compromise and
I congratulate everyone for
coming to this compromise thank
you Mr.
You senator senator.
Renovation at.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Duhigg for this
legislation I'm here I'm I'm not
an attorney I'm not a
criminologist and I'm not.
I don't have the big wealth of
knowledge when it comes to law
enforcement and the like but
what I do have is the background
of
A citizen has been engaged at an
really alarmed when I when I
hear time and time again the
United States it's the world.
With the largest number of
prisoners.
We are ahead of China Brazil and
even Russia.
So I think Senate do this bill.
Is the start of thinking smarter
and spending taxpayer money
smarter.
I'm.
And as it's been explained to
me.
Some folks are being
Back to jail for these minor.
minor incidents which probably
could be explained away because
of.
Challenges they're going through
to read their lives and it makes
to me it's makes so much more
sense and this this tax payer
would be one that would
By that person a bus pass so
that here she could get to all
those appointments to fulfill
their parole obligations I'm so
with that I'm supporting this
legislation is moving in the
right direction I really like
how it has
engage the stakeholders as was
requested in twenty nineteen.
And I think it's responsible so
thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you senator McCain then we
have Senator told them to be
followed by Senator guy in most.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I
don't have a question to stay
at.
Quick comment to certainly agree
with this.
Senator a.
as.
Make statements about the the
high number of people in cars
right back to the United States
is exceptional country in and
that we have more highest
percentage of people in current
car to rated.
If any other modern
industrialized country I just
want to applaud the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward is it
is a common sense of approach
that saves money and
Improve the lives of the of the
I'm parolees I so want to
applaud her and thank her for
being willing to sit down with
the we have the opposition and
and address their concerns so
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Tom and then
finally we have Senator day and
most.
Mr chairman and senator do we
appreciate the discussion I
guess some of the other ex
extreme of had quite a few
family members in prison and I
always heard from them they did
not do it first second third
time but I just believe that
there's got to be some.
means of holding them
responsible for what they do but
I do have my my question is for
your expert witness on the
standing absconding definition
is that and I I may have missed
it was that in part of the
amendment that she's going to do
and if so how she amending that
it.
If not.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator gave us for the
question I think my last answer
probably confused that that
issue for you the expanding
definition we do not have
language worked out for yet
we're just in continue
discussions on it I and my in my
opening my remark was that if we
can't find and it reach an
actual agreement on that I I am
prepared to go forward with the
language as is but that we are
still trying to find something
we might be able to agree on
I appreciate that Mr chair
Senator Duhigg Mr Alice.
I've had long discussed with our
DA and that seemed to be the
biggest point to she had a with
this bill but the big for that
reason all way to language
changes hopefully you'll do
before the floor vote because
I'll be voting no today thank
you so.
Are you thank you thank you
senator gave us
what is the will of the
committee on this bill.
So move.
Thank you.
Motion passes and trying to
pass.
Senator Senator Tallman losing
that Tom and.
Move it to pass thank you.
Sir Senator Sedillo min seconds.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
One forty one centered Garo's.
No ma'am Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
Senator.
Senator.
All.
Please Senator.
Tell him up or down.
You.
Just for the moment was going
and Canada.
Yes to pass.
Okay yes.
Yes.
Yes you should panel.
Any indication from Senator
Ingle he's returning guests no
not yet so I would say yes and
we'll we'll list him as
Use for this phone.
Mr Chairman committee thank you.
No you went.
Well with that.
Those the the Senator doing so
congratulations and thank you
for your presentation thank you
Mr chairman thank you committee.
So members will go to Senate
bill one forty two Senator
Brandt threatens shooting.
Mr chairman thank you appreciate
the quickness getting this bill
scheduled you have seen this
bill before at least those of
you have been on this committee
this is like deja vu building in
front of this committee.
As I was on this committee for
the last eight years
This bill is a little bit
different than what we've seen
in the past because in the past
week we really put it just to
school shootings and we just
made it worse all shootings one
of the comments I got in the
past was yeah we're talking
about bomb threats in the state
Act should probably start
beginning construction several
new members to never seen this
bill.
This bill came out of the LESC
meeting in Aztec after the
shootings that took place in
asked to there was a lot of
recommendations brought by law
enforcement as well students and
asked second this is one of the
recommendations.
right now in New Mexico law it
is a felony to call in a bomb
threat to a school or to any
building so I'm gonna get away
from school and not talk about
it anymore it is a fourth degree
felony to call bomb threat in
period anywhere.
It is not a crime in our state
to call in a shooting threat or.
To put on Facebook that you're
going to go shoot up a facility
or church or mall or anywhere.
So that's why we brought this
bill was brought it was
requested by law enforcement as
requested by district attorneys
to really have something that
they can charge when people make
a threat they're going to go and
shoot up anything any place so
we got away from school
completely we have pretty much
copied options are pretty much
it's almost word for word the
bomb scare
In section B. matches section a
except we made it by shooting
threat still bomb scare.
and that's what we're doing with
the bill it's does make it a
fourth degree felony which is
consistent with the bomb scare
Act so obviously that that.
Thank you.
We'll go to the audience we have
I don't have anybody listed as
supporting the bill we have
three against and I will give
people who want to support and a
chance to speak as well so the
first one is for non doing
Trujillo.
That will.
Hello can you hear me.
Mmhm in this bill would.
No no.
We can hear you sorry.
Okay.
My name is federal look to is
your and I sat against on this
legislation because.
I don't think that the lasing
of.
I don't believe in criminalizing
people free their.
And I feel that this would
disproportionately affect
communities of color.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr trio the next is a
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico from all defense lawyers
association I want to thank the
sponsor of for bringing this I
know that our elected officials
are seeking to make our
community safer however we do
respectfully oppose this
legislation we do feel that
certain component of this bill
would be better served in the
form of education informing
people about the impacts of
taking such action as opposed to
criminalising it especially at
us at the level of a felony it
is really easy to get caught in
cycles of the criminal justice
system we did we just talk about
you know probation and parole
cycles and I think that moving
away from enhancing crimes
increasing penalties is a better
approach to positive criminal
justice reform and for those
reasons we respectfully
encourage you to propose thank
you.
Thank you Mr is in trying to
increase to guarantee.
Okay is there anyone who was in
support of this bill.
I see a Barron Jones did you
want to speak against it.
Yes yes I do Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Gary
Johnson with the ACLU of New
Mexico and for a and and and we
are yes this piece of
legislation for the reasons
already stated and like miss
Rikki Lee Chavez said we are
able to anything that would
expand our on our legal system
in a way that and snares on
folks and and the folks the most
marginalized of our community
members and I. acts you all to
on these recommended do not pass
and excuse me for doing that on
the fly.
Russian.
Okay is there anyone who wants
to speak in support of this
measure.
We'll go to the committee and
senator Antoinette Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chair and and thank you Senator
Brandt for bringing this this
bill forward I am.
I I think that this the idea of
calling in a shooting is it is
an extremely dangerous thing to
do in particular because we have
so many guns in the state a lot
of times people follow up their
their threats and what I learned
about this is that the police
don't feel if if it's not a
crime they feel that they can't
go in and investigate and so
what I like about this bill is
calling in is a crime so then
they can move forward and
investigate the the issue and
perhaps save lives so that's
what I like best about this bill
my concern is is what was stated
before about making it a felony.
Because
I guess I'm thinking more of
children.
a lot of times at juveniles are
the ones to call in because they
don't want to have a test or
whatever they make these stupid
stupid mistakes.
And.
With the juvenile code works is
it is I understand it is that
you you worry juvenile offender
if you.
Violate a law that would be a
crime if you were if you were an
adult.
And so sometimes when we have
these the expansion of crimes I
mean I I just I never called in
a bomb threat or or I never did
that but I knew people who did
when we were growing up because
they don't want the one to get
out of the test or bad study or
whatever and I'd hate to see the
made out to be felons and in the
in the juvenile justice system
with because when when you're in
the juvenile justice system the
more serious the crime the how
do I put it.
The way the way you're treated
is much different than if if the
crime that you would have
committed has adult is a lesser
crime but if it's a more serious
crime in the way you're treated
as much more seriously and I'm
sure the public defender's would
do a better job of of that of
discussing that so I was just
wondered if if you if it's
absolutely important to you that
it be a felony.
Mr chair.
Senator.
Thank you guys just unmute
myself sorry no senator I was
just doing that because that's
what the bomb threat one is so
we're just trying to keep the
language the saying I would be
happy to make it the and in you
know better on that you're the
attorney in the room you would
know better what level to make
it or we could do that at the
next committee I would be glad
to do it to the I don't know
what the degrees are we could do
a misdemeanor would be fine with
me
well I think you're right though
law enforcement doesn't feel
like they can investigate
because it's not on the books as
a crime so we made it a
misdemeanor they be able to go
investigate it
it would have as high a priority
but then I do understand your
concern I'm sure we've had this
discussion the last couple years
about that and I think the
testimony has always been that
you know children's laws totally
different they don't look at you
know at it it's not done the
same way and I don't remember
the explanation which is why
haven't worry too much about it
right at you know we have what
happened you know in in DC And
yeah I do see if if someone had
threatened that they were gonna
take a gun to the capital they
could be corrupt charge if
someone threatens to bring a gun
to this capital they can't be
charged and only just bring one
because legally you can legally
bring a gun to this capital but
you know what I'm saying when I
say that I this I don't want to.
I don't want you know.
You know what I mean yes you see
my dilemma has it stands now I
can't look for it however if it
were a misdemeanor I feel much
more comfortable voting for it
because I do think it's
important for state public
safety at the please be able to
investigate
these kinds of threats.
And so that that's my only
comment Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Senator a
thanks followed by Senator guy
and most.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator for bringing this
forward
Number one I think I would
support with the misdemeanor but
number two I have a question my
question is
How is a mental health.
Problem handled.
In a case like this with they
still receive the full charges.
Mr Chairman
Etcetera I honestly don't know
yes the same way it is with the
bomb threat issue
you know how do they handle
mental health issues within our
criminal I don't think we spell
it out separately in our Los and
maybe maybe Senator Lopez can be
by expert witness on that
portion because she's actually
looks like she has some
information that might help us
on that but I I don't know
personally okay
I have Mr chair and senator I
have always been very leery.
creating new felonies so that's
the only comment I at all making
all wait to listen to other
people thank you.
Senator told
me Senator Gaydos followed by
Senator Tallman.
Mr chairman thank you Senator I
appreciate the dialogue on this
I just have a few questions or
any other states doing this to
tell you and and as you know
being on the school board we're
always concerned about the what
ifs and I would see this as a
deterrent not as a penalty but
do other states have this
already on the books.
Mr
Chairman Sir Gallegos I I
believe Florida does I'm not
sure if other states do our
something similar I haven't
really looked at it like so that
came out of the LESC meeting and
asked tech where all of the
experts from law enforcement
from school security said that
this is something they really
need I have heard from you and
let me Martinez was the DA in my
County he just isn't anymore
because it turned out or did run
a camera which but
He contacted me and said this is
something they really need that
can't they couldn't deal with
the situation it did come up in
the schools and I think that is
where it comes up the most but
it doesn't just apply to the
schools and what we have seen
the last couple of months I
think makes this really
concerning that the it's not a
crime in our state to threaten
no it's not a crime to call up
and threaten the gonna go to the
judge it's not a crime to call
and threaten that you're gonna
come and shoot the the chairman
of the committee because you
don't like or like what he's
doing that's not a crime in the
state and that that concerns me.
Mr chairman and senator I
appreciate this during that same
time I don't think you is that
the LFC but at that time I was
looking at staff conceal carry
for protection for students NMCA
had brought this up to me back
then because of their concern
but if I remember right you can
correct me on this I understand
that the youth that have done
these scares that have been
caught all on parole did any of
you have to go to jail you know
anything about any stats on
that.
The ones that that were have
been tried in Florida
none of them actually got a jail
time they were all given
appropriations and source I know
that I've repeated so it's so
maybe something that's helped.
I would say Mr Chairman center I
think that's exactly what it
does it to help it's reduce the
opportunity and at least put the
fear and that there are
consequences for their actions
so for that reason I will be
supporting your bill thank you
Mr and also you.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman Senator McKenna and
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator brand for bringing this
forward Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes my question which was can
that with the sensor willing to
reduces to a misdemeanor I I
would support that thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Tallman
Senator McKenna followed by
Senator Schmedes.
chairman I believe so Senators
metes has had up first all
follow him thank you Sir okay
Senator Schmedes followed by
Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator
I just wanted to make a comment
I was on the public affairs
committee in the house and I
have seen to similar versions of
this bill
and I I wish I could give credit
where credit's due with a
gentleman that came from our.
Attorney General health services
office to give testimony on one
of these because he taught me
quite a bit what one of their
attorneys and I just want to
bring that to the attention of
the committee based on what I
learned from this very very
intelligent gentleman.
And so you know what this bill
in please correct me if I'm
wrong Senator but that this bill
you too to actually get a
conviction of this
you have to meet some very very
serious and stringent criteria.
First and foremost you this has
to have a malicious intent this
is not a a silly silly teenager
you making some flippant comment
you have to have a delicious
intense and then as I read the
bill from the top down you also
have to satisfy other criteria
your your your threat has to
cause a pretty significant
reaction that once again has to
meet criteria by the judge has
to instill fear in somebody that
they're gonna have once again
great bodily harm you have to
you know change peoples people's
behaviors on a on a on a large
scale as met in in criteria from
this bill and so I can tell the
way that this bill is drafted
and the way that the other prior
versions are drafted is this
that this is not Maez by any way
to address kind of the what we
call more the the sillier
flippant
threats this is a credible
malicious threat that has caused
a a drastic change in behavior
as as found in proven by the
prosecution and and and found by
it by the judge so I just you
know I I'm not doing as good of
a job in particular of his job
as someone from say our our
attorney general's office has
has done in the past on these
bills but I just want to bring a
sense the committee that that
you really that this language is
very specific
and and you have to meet certain
criteria so that's why I do
support the bill and I I would
supported and either either
level as as is appropriate
appropriately deemed by us by
this legislative body thank you.
Thank you senator Schmidt is and
then finally Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman or cheesy
Pino and thank you senator at.
I too have concerns about.
The use of felony in this bill
and so I'm wondering
Senator if you would entertain
thank consider a misdemeanor but
I think my over arching to other
concerns are the following.
And that is yes we've we've.
We've been.
Witness to school shootings
shopping malls shootings movie
theater shootings
And.
Time and again.
What concerned me with every one
of these shootings these mass
shootings is the availability of
firearms.
For these individuals you know
to have.
Relatively easy access to use
them and so what concerns me is
that this legislation and maybe
it needs two different bills to
address that is addressing the
ease with which.
People including people have
access to.
Firearms they kill people.
Something else that concerns me
about it is.
Where we don't talk about age
here and it's my understanding
none of us really fully develop
our minds our brains until about
twenty five years old.
And we know that.
Folks younger than not they make
poor decisions.
Get into big trouble and there
they don't they're not
circumspect about them when they
make these poor decisions when
they're teenagers.
And and so.
I know that's kind of.
Three different ideas in there
but in this bill those are those
are my thoughts
on a.
Why I I just I can't support it
in its current form
set thank you chairman and thank
you senator.
Thank you senator McCain
senator Solomon did you want to
say something for a second time.
Yes thank you Mr chair.
Is there a minimum age to
disability ply to Mr chairman
Center still Lopez can correct
me if I'm wrong but I don't
think you can make a a crime
eight specific I I just add that
with the I think that would be
discrimination of some kind
probably age discrimination so I
don't think that you can make
something a crime for one age
group it's not a crime for
another although we do with
alcohol and other things but I
think on very limited basis I
don't think you can do that with
something like this in the crowd
thank you for it thank you for
your answer action center sermon
kind of raises an interesting
question.
Because a lot of children that
would realise the seriousness.
Time although on the other hand
I guess the.
So officers could use a little
discrimination and take that
into consideration thank you Mr
chair thank you senator.
For the second time.
Mr Chairman center wrapped I was
just wondering if we did Amanda
here would you be amenable to
that I would like to see this go
to the next committee to have it
re look at and I was just
wondering if you would feel that
would be a good decision to be
able to change to misdemeanor I
would have no problem with that
and we have to split out C. bit
actually have a turn to that
page so I can look at that and
you know.
We do one of two ways I've seen
Sir told several times to
support moving a bill the next
committee knowing that that and
then that's going to come or we
can do it right here if the
committee is comfortable with it
but we have to split that out to
just take the shooting threat
out of C. and then do the same
language and maybe Senator low
city Lopez could recommend what
the level of misdemeanor would
be because I really don't know.
And Mr chair and senator I also
would like you know that be
great to have it with the no
recommended resolve this between
here in the next committee I
guess from my side I would hate
for us to do nothing and
something were to come out and
happened and then I would feel
that we're sort of responsible
for our non action but with that
all yield to Mr chairman thank
you.
Thank you senator.
What's the will of the committee
where you want to put in before
us to track down.
Well Mr.
This yes.
What I would recommend we
move forward I I trust a Senator
Brandt to.
Take our comments into
consideration at and have the
amendment prepared specially we
have such are some assistance so
short.
And that's only my bills to die
but any interested keeping us
moving in.
And in light of the fact that
maybe I had time I would to.
Moves to we have.
Move this past recognizing the I
am I.
Sure that Senator Brandt will
take care of our take are
considered to the consideration
thank you.
I'm sorry.
So we have a motion by Senator
Tallman seconded by Senator guy
it goes through due process with
the with the understanding that
senator rand will work on
reducing that felony to a
misdemeanor of some level or
whatever.
Any other discussion on the
motion.
I I just don't want to have it
on my record that I voted to
expand of a crime like this into
a felony the
I agree which the language would
be
The mid guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable pursuant to
subsection eight of section
thirty one dash nineteen dash
one NMSA nineteen seventy eight
I feel uncomfortable amending a
bill when I haven't discussed it
you know was somebody like
Senator Brandt of Senator
Tallman feels more comfortable
amending it or I don't know
Senator Brandt if you want to
propose language but that's the
that's the management magic
language to make it a
misdemeanor.
Money in other words they would
there's like there's critical
I'm involved but other than that
you would there's a of
misdemeanor punishable by a fine
or thirty one dash nineteen dash
one which actually has some jail
time.
So those are options I don't
know whether you would think it
will provide I mean I will find
a criminal fine for jail time.
What we we have a motion will.
So when we vote on the motion
and see what it does is sales
and we can take of some other
the of.
Motion from the committee.
Mr chair can I amend my motion.
Well
you can you want withdraw your
motion if.
If I Senator a deal because.
Feels uncomfortable we we I all
of a amend the motion to.
To amend the bill and.
To reduce from a felony to a
misdemeanor can we do that.
Mr Chairman I'm fine with that
thanks Senator Lopez has the
right language if she can get
with penny just to make sure the
report reads correctly I have no
problem with that and I can talk
to a Centers bill Lopez on the
floor tomorrow to make sure we
get it right.
Make sure we have it all
correct.
So what we're doing is Senator
Tallman you're withdrawing your
motion.
To for a due process and instead
you're so you're you're
proposing an amendment with the
wording supplied by Senator
internet studio lotus and would
you read for Frank and Barrick
solution captured would you read
that language again Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Page two line eight strike
felony and then certain Lou
there of misdemeanor.
Sure.
To section thirty dash nineteen
dash one.
Yes you are correct yes.
Okay thank you.
You're leaving here.
Trying.
Let's see.
You.
There is still a felony fourth
degree felony.
Yeah you can you can you can
just.
So we we will have a a new.
Yes yes.
Warning of that section and put
in a new secretary good point Mr
chair good catch we noticed what
she would only pay insert.
Basically that's.
Okay alright.
For the shooting threat.
Thank you.
Yeah we will.
Lee bomb square the bomb scare
of fourth degree felony and we
will have a new paragraph
whoever commits making a
shooting threat is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable pursuant
to section thirty one dash
nineteen dash one.
That would be correct.
Questions on the amendment are
going to be voting on now.
So so we're
legend document and then we'll
vote on the bill as amended to
repeat them Mr chair could we
repeat the amendment one more
time.
let me pull that back up by a
put it down okay whoever commits
to H. two line seven lever next
making bomb here.
Right for sure Representative is
guilty of a fourth degree felony
a new pair.
Whoever commits making.
A shooting threat is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable pursuant
to section thirty one dash
nineteen dash one.
Thank you the.
Correct Mr.
Since.
It was actually it subsection
eight of set of section thirty
one dash nineteen dash one is
what I'd said.
Read today want to look at that
before you get to Judiciary to
see if that's the the correct
one what I have the proposed is
the lowest level of of
misdemeanor and he made.
I agree with that but I I my
proposal with subsection eight
of section thirty one dash
nineteen.
Mr Chairman centers the Lopez
I'm actually fine with that it
allows law enforcement to get
involved so they can look at it
and actually investigate as a
crime.
Thank you.
So Senator goes you and seconded
the original motion is is Munoz
was second this amendment.
Sir okay and Senator McKenna you
have a comment or question.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Brandt Senator Sedillo
Lopez
we touched on this a little bit
about this page piece.
Is there any way we can talk
about.
Those under.
Yeah I'm just concerned about
the amendment the middle school
kids the the high school kids.
Who will make a very very bad
choice.
And I once again I'm thinking
about how our minds our brains
are not fully developed until
we're twenty five.
I do like this idea of a
misdemeanor but I'm just
wondering legally.
Can we.
Can we put in anything in there
about a use the fence.
serial.
We would have to go into the the
juvenile justice act this is
just in the regular crimes but
the juvenile justice act has a
catch all that says if if that
that it is you it has
definitions is at work and see
your juvenile offender if you
have committed a crime that will
are you would you have made it a
statute that would be a crime if
committed by an adult.
And so that's how it's brought
into the juvenile code but that
but that the.
For example there might be
unintended consequences for
example
the higher the crime if it's a
felony that gives the DA the
option to try the person is an
adult and take them out of the
juvenile system and so that's
another reason I would not
support this being a felony I'm
actually kind of conservative
realize a bomb threat was a
filling but it is
I know it's current law it but
you know I I don't know how the
juvenile system handles that but
that would be my concern.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you chairman I think you
Senator Brandt that's all my
questions.
On the amendment we're gonna
vote on the amendment first is
the bill as amended and will
vote on the bill as amended.
Secretary called the roll please
Senator I'm clear on who
seconded the sentiment but.
Senator Tallman made a motion
okay thank you.
Hi to Senate bill one forty two
center guy it goes yes ma'am.
There in go yes.
Canada yes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks
yes.
Yes.
The panel.
Yes and I just.
Nico Stallis juvenile justice
division.
Any says if it's a misdemeanor
juvenile justice services
contemporary K. so
this this of me several issues
that have been raised.
So with that we have an amended
bill and you want to make a
motion Senator Tallman on the
amended bill.
Just so moved.
Three do senators goodness you
want to second that one yes Sir
I will thank you to any other
discussion issues and people
want to raise about voting on
this bill as amended.
Secretary will call the roll on
SB one forty two as amended.
Bill one forty two.
Yes ma'am.
Thank all yes.
Your McKenna yes.
Here's.
Yes.
You're welcome.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
In a.
Yes.
Legislation Senator bread you
have to do to us and I'm not
sure you ever got a new press
when you're actually on this
commitment is going to see you
again.
Thank you Mr chairman I really
do want to think Senator Sedillo
Lopez for help on this and look
forward to working with her on
the future great thank you
senator.
All right members will now move
at least three pick up the pace
we can still do this budget or
time senator Byrd has two bills
with us Senate bill one forty
five and one forty six let's say
one forty five first well.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Senate bill one forty five in
the is a a bill to deal with the
sunset of committees boards and
commissions.
LFC convenes a committee to
address committee set
commissions and boards that are
set to sunset within a
reasonable amount of time they
do analysis on each one of those
committees boards and
commissions the report back to
this committee we had our.
I am the chairman and.
We had our committee meeting in
October we had.
Ten of the twelve.
For more.
All got to do pass in this.
Workers this is all recommended
by the legislative finance
committee and since that time
there were two other committees
on the list that did not pass
and we're not part of this
committee and since that time
there's been a lot of discussion
with the governor and Leslie
finance council we have found
that the chiropractic board in
the athletic trainer practice
board are up to speed using
Representative members they are
complying with all of the rules
regulations and so I do have a
committee substitute Mr chairman
I think you have that handy I
hope the member said that anti.
Committee substitute or an
amendment it's it's an amendment
yes ma'am at.
Those little two committees in
to the bill good do so do we
have that Trevor can you put
that up on the screen so we can
look at it.
Yeah I'll get that a.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman said the exact same
language as on the previous ones
but just adding those to
chiropractic an athletic trainer
not much to see there is the
same language okay exactly same
just change the name basically.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
The motion we adopt the minutes.
We.
The session manager.
Yes.
This is the only amendment
there's only one of them.
This is the only one yes.
It is simply Mr chairman adding
the two additional committees
well I see okay I'm just having
a hard time reading and causes
of Chinese but I see those are
the two okay very good.
So Senator.
I have a question.
After the amendment is at our
second the member for discussion
but I have a question on the
amendment.
So did somebody actually move
the amendment.
Yes.
Hi guys and seconded by Senator
thanks all right any discussion
of the amendment at all yes yes
okay Senator synthetics okay so
when I need to know Senator Burt
and thank you Mr chairman center
for bringing this forward.
What are some other boards and
commissions that are left out of
this entire bill.
Like what about the board of
nursing that at Mr chairman and
senator there are I believe a
total of three hundred boards
and commissions within the state
of New Mexico I may be wrong on
that the only ones we're dealing
with are the ones that are
coming up where they're going to
sunset they will if if they
don't comply and they don't show
good intent they will come up to
us since that date which is
coming up in twenty twenty two
at this point.
And they will be terminated so
the board or commission or
committee would go away at that
time yes there are a whole bunch
of other wars and commissions
and you may get to deal with
some of those next year but
these are the only ones coming
up for sunset in the year of
twenty twenty two.
Thank you so much yes.
However you can take on that
amendment is there any
opposition to the amendment.
This.
Will consider the amendment is
of the German adopted to and to
move to the bill itself and you
have an extra witness Senator
yes I do like to introduce and I
was able to is the analyst for
Leslie finance council for these
boards and commissions and a
really would like to publicly
commend her for all of the hard
work that she did to bring this
committee as well as this
information and eventually this.
This legislation together thank
you all.
Senator Allison did you want to
say anything.
Mr chair thank you for having me
today no senator Byrd did a
great job just think everything
but I am available for any
questions or additional contact
text about that
thanks thank you and then
is there any public comment and
Miss poppies you want to make a
comment.
Hi a good afternoon center to
see Pino and members of the
committee my name is Janet Popp
in a physical therapist and
member of the New Mexico chapter
of the American physical therapy
association stands in although I
feel like I'm just sitting up
straight in support of Senate
bill one forty five we really
strongly believe the
continuation of the physical
therapy licensing board is
important for public safety and
health thank you.
Very good thank you and.
Somebody else saying but I don't
see his name showing up here is
the money coming eight millon.
Available or.
Okay seeing anybody go to the
committee then for for questions
or motions.
Over the past we have a motion
passes seconded by.
By Senator McKenna also
recognize that we have Senator
McKenna seconded and in I didn't
notice Karen the so do you want
to make public comment before we
act on this motion.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you I am
also a physical therapist and I
am the legislative chair for at
the New Mexico American physical
therapy association and we do
strongly support this bill it's
very critical that we continue
with our board in order to
regulate physical therapy in the
state for the health and safety
of all our consumers and our
public so thank you thank you
Mr.
Any other discussion seeing none
the secretary will call the
roll.
Forty five center guy go.
Senator Gallegos.
The motion there is.
Are kicked up here you.
Both.
Yes.
There is.
Central.
Senator Ingle no he's not at his
desk so.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Yes.
Or to.
Yes.
Legislation senator do you have
a do pass on one forty five tell
us about one forty six thank you
Mr chairman thank you committee
members of one forty six.
Is a bill actually that that if
you were here last year you saw
this bill.
It is the defense force bill
basically what this does is it
brings our National Guard in the
state of New Mexico up to
compliance and in the same level
as other National Guard units
around the the United States my
a my expert witness.
Is our educate General for the
guard here in New Mexico the
general Kenneth Nava and would
like to have him on board
basically this bill again just
like I said that.
For.
Some years the card has perform
their duties very well however
with that some changes I believe
in twenty nineteen
to the
The defense military affairs and
make some changes also to the
National Guard military code.
And brought them up to speed and
so what this bill does the same
thing it did last year which in
the governor's endorsement
past all the way through the
house special we through the
Senate I went to the governor
there were I think a few
technical issues that were
identified at that time by the
governor staff and so they asked
us to come back this year and
tweak those just a little bit so
that really is what is the bill
that you're looking at right now
it allows Dale or National Guard
in the state of New Mexico to
play on an even keel if you will
the other guards from around the
United States and I would
certainly defer to the experts
general knowledge for additional
comments.
Would you like to speak on this
bill.
Thank you yes Mr chair members
of the committee I would like to
thank Senator Burt for being
such a good partner and
continuing to work with us for
this legislation I would like to
remind the chairman and members
of the committee that this bill
this this bill is very very
similar to Senate bill one
seventy five which passed
unanimously through the Senate
and the house last year and
again it was pocket pocket
vetoed by the governor for a
couple specific reasons those
two specific reasons have been
addressed one of them namely
section twenty dash to dash
three of the statute we were
trying to expand the governor's
authority to use the National
Guard should not occurred with
that she she's she believes that
the national guards the door she
has right now is is adequate and
so that peace we've totally
removed that language again that
was section twenty dash to dash
three B. I we remove that that
is not in this bill right now
the other piece that was
problematic was.
If you look on to on this bill
one twenty five.
Like twenty five we're looking
at section four there is this is
the department of military
affairs is composed of consists
of what we had in last year's
language was a cabinet level
departments and consists of the
non concurred with that language
specifically as you know the
department of military affairs
is the is a unique Department I
I am not a cabinet secretary for
the governor on the governor's
military chief of staff so for
those two small technical issues
we we've addressed both of them
so to recap Mr chairman and
members of the committee here
the things that are being done
with this bill.
it authorizes the adjutant
general of me too.
Utilize basically person who are
willing members of our state
defense force again the state
defense forced exist in statute
but the only time they can be
utilized right now is in a
scenario that I have found the
of.
Referred to as the zombie
apocalypse scenario which is
right now we statute is written
the governor can only call out
the state defense forced when
the National Guard is unable to
fulfill the mission as you can
see this last year the National
Guard is done Munoz marvelously
with our COVID nineteen response
we have assisted with the
security around the capital you
not presidential inauguration
many of these things I cannot
envision a scenario where the
National Guard will not be able
to respond in the state of New
Mexico part of my duties as the
adjutant generals to ensure that
we can respond to something
however in the COVID nineteen
response I certainly would have
liked to been able to use some
of our state defense force
professionals again I have
doctors I have lawyers I have
nurses I have folks that work
for our department of health
that are in our state fence
force I could not use them
because again we do not meet
that threshold it's currently
written in statute so one of the
things that will happen is this
this law will allow them state
defense forced to be utilized as
an operational
part of our response to an
emergency in the state of New
Mexico.
It also provides a critical
updates to the court martial
convening authorities report
Martians and so it's basically
we're cleaning up the statute to
align with the uniform code of
military justice and make sure
that the right levels of our
organization can administer
military justice if necessary we
had referred to some very old
units those on units no longer
exist this is cleaning that up
it also prohibits sexual
activities between recruits or
trainees and recruiters this is
a crime in the army is a crime
in the Air Force we need our
statute to align with those
With the with the services that
we belong to
those are really the large
things that we're changing the
most important we honestly is
still offense forcing
operationalize you ma'am I've
mentioned in previous testimony
Mr chair members of the
committee our neighbors to the
east Texas has over five
thousand people in our state
defense force right now we have
about twenty five people I
believe the right numbers around
two hundred or three hundred
these are your volunteers these
are people that want to help
their fellow New Mexicans and
and I would like them to have
that ability to do that Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Burt I'm ready for any questions
that you may have.
Thank you very much general.
Thank you.
We don't have anybody signed up
from the public
But
Anybody want to speak on this
bill you can raise your hand or
do you immunity to to raise your
hand.
Seeing none will go to the
committee for questions or
action.
Chair yes Senators.
Are you ready for a motion yes I
would would you pass.
Second.
Seconded by Senator Gallegos
will will make a civilian prison
motion and the city and any
discussion at all.
The secretary will call the
roll.
One four six senator going goes
yes ma'am.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
I don't believe he's president.
Lopez yes.
Thanks yes Sierra.
Yes.
Piano.
Yes.
Thank you very much Senator
virgin general number it's good
to see you and thank you for for
working on this so so diligently
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee to.
Thank you to general number for
being here today and the thank
you for supporting your New
Mexico National Guard.
Thank you very much Senator.
Senator Ingle did you want to
vote on that measure.
Senator you're still muted.
There you go.
This bill birch bill yes.
It's ME Senator.
Let me think just a minute.
While you are get preview
promoting for this **** whatever
you have Senator that's probably
a side bar but I would
appreciate support are okay
although yes right so we we have
a personality thank you in the
glare of your forehead.
Close it's like look on a
welder.
Costly votes Senator levels are
costly thank you.
Thank you very much Senator will
move now to Senator Tallman Bill
the high middle of the day
Senate bill one fifty two
continuing care aging contracts.
And this is a bill that we've
been receiving much comment
about senator Clemente so I hope
you have.
Hello right.
Mr chair thank you members of
the committee this bill.
This bill was what last year was
Senate bill fifty one this year
is one fifty two.
Mr chair we're going to give
Senator Brandt.
It's going to have a second
opportunity to have a bill
passed because that.
Representative Liz Thompson and
and center Brad are co sponsors
on this.
Because the.
All three of us a.
Have a facilities the in our
district that we're gonna be
talking about and this is this
bill up.
The Senate floor last year with
bipartisan support we got
throughout the house and the
one thousand and one committee
in the house and then we ran out
of time this bill is exactly
identical to last year's bill.
And
so what are continuing care
residential facilities briefly
Mr chair there
Representative the Saudis that
the house early
folks on a long term basis they
require the.
Sure the substantial upfront
initial payment of anywhere from
a quarter to half a million
dollars plus a monthly fee of
three thousand to five thousand
dollars.
The the.
It depends on the size of the
unit.
I also.
This these facilities provide a
lifetime of marble Services
including independent living
units assisted living amenities
transportation medical care
skilled nursing care memory care
and hospice it becomes
increasingly folk popular with
folks who have the resources not
only five or six of these
facilities in New Mexico but
surrounding states so there
there are a lot more of them.
No major issues have arisen
regarding the oversight and
solvency of these organizations
I've been involved in this issue
for two and a half years since
June of two thousand eighteen
when I was contacted by Senator.
Residents about some of their
concerns Senator the
there are several concerns
number one.
They were concerned about how
their upfront fee was being used
since the organization and
purchases a.
Over the last seven eight years
of purchases facilities in
Oklahoma Colorado Santa Fe and
Rio Rancho.
And they were concerned that
their initial up front fees are
being used to purchase these
facilities that I just mentioned
to the quality of care was
slipping.
Place about the quality of food.
Their complaints about the the
promise of a long the new
expanded health care unit not
being constructed.
and number three they are
concerned that the debt is
increased from forty five
million two hundred and twenty
million over seven eight year
period.
Number four.
Mr up.
Chair they were concerned about
the.
The reports that are being sent
every year to the aging long
term Services Department however
these reports.
Being analyzer reviewed because.
Aging and long term services
didn't have the staff they were
qualified to review these
reports with a discerning eye.
So Mr chair up in New two
thousand nineteen under a new
administration secretary
Catherine hope.
Program Lopez was hired as a
secretary of aging long term
service issues and very helpful
and very support of she assigned
heard general counsel Jacob and
Jacob Sarah Jacobs to assist me
with this bill we were here from
her shortly.
And we have I.
Letters from the residence that
that that we I won't read on
because we're going to hear from
some of the residents themselves
are and a and a few minutes this
bill is a recognition of the.
Aging a long term services
commitment to provide stronger
regulation and oversight as I
said before this bill is exactly
the same as the one you heard
last year.
Mr chair in the the fall of two
thousand eighteen Liz Thompson
and I Representative topside
we notified we contacted the
attorney general's office too.
To investigate the the their
father financials in December of
two thousand nineteen the
attorney general's office did
issue.
The notice of violations however
we were that permitted they were
not permitted to share the.
Those are violations with us
however the actually we will be
made aware of those violations
Mr chair what this bill does
three things one.
It.
Provides that a community
organization must provide it.
Plan for residential relocation
upon closure.
Of the facilities or
circumstances and S. is S. date
relocation number two it
requires the office.
The aging and long term services
department to review the
disclosure statements filed
pursuant to this act and number
three.
It.
Allow any person to report
violations of this act to the
train general's office and chair
of isolation be reported.
The internet general's office
show review the allegation and
that upon a credible allegation
file appropriate action in court
so.
Mr chair we are now a.
now introduce Sir Jacob C.
general counsel for the office
for the office of aging and long
term services and they wish to
make some added comments and
then we will hear.
From some of the residents thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
Tom Mr because.
Thank you Mr chairman the
committee it's nice to see you
on this new forum I appreciate
all of your time and I I don't
have too much more to say I echo
what senator Tom has said this
bill does look at exactly the
same as it passed out of the
Senate last session we were also
in front of this committee last
year who did not get past the
bill prior to the changes as
they came out of the Senate we
work with residents and the
health care association on this
on this bill over the last few
years I think we have it in a in
a very good place our
secretary is committed to
providing the oversight that is
required of us by law
and we've also been working
closely with the attorney
general's office on some issues
and we've also been meeting with
the residents to try to address
some of the concerns the closure
language specifically is very
important to the aging
Department what we see in
communities
go insolvent and residents are
being forced out and into places
that they.
you know the process happens
very quickly and not in a way
that any of us would want to
would want to build and
including this language in the
bill would allow our department
to promulgate additional roles
in the contracts around what
what needs to happen upon
closure and we think that's
added protection that residents
need and so again thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee for for hearing us
today.
Thank you so Senator you may
have said this what what
happened last year and to pass
the Senate rule we're what
happened why did it become law.
It went well because our
maritime and went to the house
to get through one committee and
then actually.
And and might have gotten
through but and and a lot and
analysts.
will he follow jazzy messed up
he didn't the I told him that
you know we're.
We need to act in a timely
fashion and they didn't get it
scheduled.
Okay.
Basically ran out of time yeah
good but it wasn't me that was
what I was getting in.
Okay great let's go to the
public I don't have anyone
signed up in opposition.
It is.
Somebody.
Mr chair might it also I.
This bill was not germane for.
Thirty day session so I had to
petition the governor and the
she was kind enough to get on
the agenda of those.
We're in a time of.
Thank you Sir thank you Sir.
So we have a.
A whole host of people eight
people signed up to speak in
support of this bill I am going
to ask you to restrict your
comments to.
One or two minutes no more than
that because we have still in
two more bills to deal with this
afternoon so we'll start with
Rebecca do mon.
She here.
Yes please go ahead you can
unmuted yourself.
And make your comments thank you
Mr chairman and committee my
name is Rebecca do mine and I'm
a resident of Louisiana this is
my third year that I have
written letters emails and been
present in the committee
meetings asking for your support
to get this at I'm seventy two
years old and I've lived in
there for four years I'm
concerned about but the
financial stability of the place
where I live and I'm concerned
because see season **** CCRCs
community continuing care
residential communities offer a
soft promise to continue care
into a resident's death in
exchange for a hefty by in
charge my particular case my
husband and I pay three hundred
and fifty thousand dollars and
over six thousand dollars a
month in rent the howling Carter
lifestyle group is an insurance
for future care we sold our
house and and give them turning
us stay with our relatives
wouldn't have to take care of us
when we get older or need
additional care my concern is
that the facility does not have
sufficient revenues from these
entrance fees the fund the long
term actuarial obligations I at
seventy two live here for twenty
plus years if the president
survives I worry whether or
exists that long and what
services would be cut by them in
order to squeak by insufficient
reserves create systemic risk
leaving approximately a hundred
and twenty five seniors at my
facility alone financially and
medically vulnerable bill one
fifty two will go a long way to
help secure our futures thank
you to senator Clemente
supporting this bill.
Thank you very much Mr most.
Women followed by the Polish
shorts.
Mutu so.
I'm sorry I'm thank you Mr
chairman I have lived here her
at the building up for five
years and I ask all of you to
please vote yes on Senate bill
one fifty two thank you thank
you Mr.
Polish workers followed by suing
done Norton's.
What is the new kids on the
block I moved into the VA a year
ago not knowing it about any of
the movies and have I learned a
lot so basically that he has
already said what I need to say
I urge you to support this bill
on behalf of all of us who are
aging and stay in place trying
to keep healthy thank you do
activities and trying to be good
citizens we help with thank you
thank you.
so though as soon done Norton
followed by Charlie measures.
Centers thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you in
this afternoon.
My wife and I looked at well the
held for eight years.
One of the first things we want
to during that period of time
was the quarterly resident
management meetings.
When we first attended one of
the presentations.
They present the financials and
they told us that there were
fire walls between each one of
the units of Evelyn Carter.
He discovered several months
later at a financial meeting
but well beyond was part of an
obligated group so there was no
fire wall between the residents
Hey into.
You know traveling Carter the
bye and Video is thank you said
over a quarter of a million
dollars.
Substantial monthly please.
We learned during the period of
time that the residents of
L. B. L. are considered cash
cow.
What thank you Sir and I
completely support what she
said.
We moved out of L. V. L.
November thirtieth one of the
few people that have the
resources to be able to do that.
There's a difference between.
The type of.
Residents and L. B. L. some are
assisted living some are in
health care some are in memory
Kerr.
These are.
Units that are governed by the
state.
The independent residents are
not.
We urge you to support this and
just when you pass motion.
You appreciate the opportunity
to speak to the committee.
Thank you so much Mister in
order then we have a Charlie
monk has fallen by Elizabeth
Dwyer.
Chairman members of the
committee Charlie Parker's
Department registered lobbyist
for New Mexico health care
association of personal our
state thank you to the cabinet
secretary and and course our
staff
Katrina wholesome Lopez we work
with them and with Senator
Tallman
over the past year.
And and we've we've come to a
place where we we have agreement
so but we do stand in support of
this legislation and converge or
support thank you thank you Mr
medicus those wire followed by
Jackie Cooper.
I would just like to support
everything that has been said so
far and I
Really appreciate of the staff
at aging long term Services
Department working with this of
we look forward to the beginning
of a long relationship to fix
some of these things in within
the the contracts that we have
so that we can just have more
security both for us and for
aging long term care thank you
very much.
Thank you to see you again thank
you.
Jackie Cooper following a Sharon
Stanton.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members are and thank you
Senator Tallman for bring this
bill back yet again my name is
Jackie Gruber and I'm in a a RP
advocacy volunteer air air P.
supported Senator Tomlinson
twenty twenty bill and we
supports Senate bill one fifty
true that provides disclosure
protections for vulnerable
seniors living in facilities
that they are paying for thank
you very much.
Thank you miss Cooper and the
last person we have done is
Sharon Stanton but I don't see I
don't see her on she is will be
remitted to to to get on and
speak.
That leads us to the committee
the discussion on this bill and
we'll go to Senator and tenants
and your lotus.
I just want to thank the sponsor
and all of the speakers for
coming when you're ready for a
motion of Mr chair and.
We've seen this bill I think
even the the new senators except
for senator McKenna.
Probably side in the house so
but we are we are prepared.
I move the do pass on second
second.
Senator still Senator Gallegos.
It let it let it be bipartisan
Senator.
Is there any further discussion
since we saw this bill last time
I think you build some momentum
Senator Tallman by next year
maybe it'll really get through
so.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator one fifty two Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes.
Sermon.
Yes the past.
To Senator Schmedes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Next yes Sir Thomas.
Yes and.
In a yes.
Legislation senator Solomon I
think you're oratorical skills
carried the day once more.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the of the
committee
Senator Brandt got a second bill
today.
Thank you for helping.
Now we'll go to the.
Senator Diamond who's been
patiently waiting here was
Senate bill one fifty four
subdivision okay.
Chairman can you hear me.
You're just wonderfully thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee I am hearing
introduced a bill one fifty four
this is allowing public agencies
and we.
As.
Reasonable fees.
Pursuant to this subdivision
Act.
We we had somebody with for
them you say go ahead Senator
thank you Mr chairman I'm gonna
begin by kind of defining the
public agency that we're
speaking have most year and that
is a soil and water conservation
district so to give you some
background on what is going on
water district is is it's an
independent subdivision of state
governments it's governed by a
board of supervisors these are
elected officials most of them
being landowners and residents
some of those seats are elected
and up to two of those seats can
be appointed so I'm water
conservation districts are
authorized by the soil and water
conservation district act to
perform perform a variety of
functions including to conserve
and develop the natural
resources of state provide for
flood control reserves wildlife
and protect the tax base this
work promotes the health safety
and general welfare of the
people of New Mexico there are
forty seven districts that
encompass the majority of New
Mexicos land area they do not
necessarily follow county lines
one of the responsibilities of
your song water conservation
district is to provide and now
assist of subdivision proposals
so in this subdivision review
statute as it is now the board
of county commission shall
within ten days of receiving a
preliminary plat draft request
opinions from for entities the
office of the state engineer the
department of transportation the
department of environment and
the local fund water
conservation district but of
those four entities soil and
water conservation districts are
the only entities that do not
receive state funds to perform
such services so essentially it
makes this an unfunded mandate
what this bill and it's very
straightforward aims to do is to
allow those districts to charge
a reasonable fee which would be
based simply on the cost of
materials.
The cost of person involved to
two to charge a fee to perform
those services and that charge
would be directly impacted by
the the subdivision developer
themselves so no cost to the
state that charge would be
passed on to the developer to
pay those fees.
well the capacity I do want to
address one note the capacity of
solar and water districts very
greatly so many of you as
senators here may have a very
resources fund water district
well funded they may part
possibly haven't bill levy and
provide many services and while
that may be the case in one
district the very next districts
and often the majority of them
are not well funded in fact many
of them have no more than a part
time staff to keep these offices
open I do have some expert
witnesses that I'd like to
introduce here today I see on
the telephone line we had Mr ho
Senator Lopez he's elected as a
supervisor for the Santa Fe
Pojoaque diesel and water
districts and he's also the
former chairman of the salt and
water conservation commission so
the statewide entity that
oversees all districts I'm after
Mr real Lopez provides me Madam
I'd also like to introduce Mr
Jason Espinoza who was
representing the New Mexico
coalition of conservation
districts so if I may Mister
chairman turn it over to Mr
because they were a lot of.
Mr little a little well.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee members I think
the Senator Diamond explained
the situation very well I'm
gonna speak brick but our
particular situation
actually said we are Santa Fe
for additional water
conservation district and when
we receive subdivision documents
we review and for technical
accuracy with regard to touring
management of Santa Fe County
sustainable land development
code although we do encompass
parts of the week.
Of the revenues the review was
I'm sorry that we're required to
do and comments on for state
statute for major subdivisions
are usually several hundred
pages long including engineering
drawings detail in the elements
of items which pertain to train
management including bridges
culverts sizing riprap creatures
ponding areas areas of cuts to
slope or built with different
grades among other items as such
it takes a lot of hours to
process one of these requests
mandated by statute therefore it
would be very beneficial if the
soil and water conservation
district anywhere in the state
could recall the money for the
time it expands on doing the
videos thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and senator
Graham and I would be glad to
answer any questions.
Thank you Mr.
Lotus then we go to Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman's member chairman
members of the committee Jason
Espinoza registered lobbyists
with the New Mexico wishing to
conservation districts Senator
Diamond and and and Senator
Lopez really explain that I just
want to mention that we do with
the coalition of conservation
district I do stand in support
of this legislation and really
see as it you know if we are
able to charge that reasonable
fee it's a way to help cover the
cost of performing those duties
and provide us the resources to
do so I am happy to answer any
questions as well thank you.
Jason thank you
Senator Diamond any last
comments before we go to the to
to the public no not at this
point I'll turn it over to the
members of your committee if
they have questions.
Nobody from the public signed up
in advance.
but if anybody's here who wants
to make you Madam now this would
be the time.
This
committee the input of the
committee members Senator thanks
when you're ready for a motion
I'm happy to support the soil
and water conservation
districts.
Okay.
Not sure there's anybody with
any questions I just I just had
one quick one then before we go
to Senator Stefanics for motion.
Senator Diamond.
The bill before us.
Actually
Doesn't really
spell out some of what you say
but but I'm assuming that's
because other language in the
when the legislation covers that
is that is that accurate.
Yes Sir Mr chairman you are
correct there is also a clause
in the subdivision Act it would
allow tribes to possibly per
find common as well so this is
kind of an open ended that they
also need to to recruit their
cost of materials and a person
fees that they would be included
in that as well so essentially
we're including everyone to be
able to to recoup a reasonable
fee by passing it on directly to
the developer.
So far is only the soil and
water conservation districts and
don't have a budget for this yes
Sir at this if this points on
water districts of the only
entities and that language
they're not charging.
Thank you.
Thank you for now Mr Lowell
elementary and or but a lotus
mentioned these can be three
hundred page report so many
hundred pages of drawings and
specifications however the
covering that cost now so
there's several different ways
in the case of Mr house Senator
Lopez he is personally doing
that is a volunteer elected
official on that board to make
sure that they're meeting
requirements in other cases they
may have a an employee that's
doing that and it's taking time
away from them and then what we
fear is there may even be is in
which it's not being done which
would be our greatest fears.
Providing.
Senator thank you so much.
Well we're ready Senator thanks
for your motion.
I would move it to pass.
Senator Gallegos secondhand
stores Senator Ingle one of them
somebody did Senator again
because of the B. he says you're
on the drugs in your Senator
Ingle.
There.
Mr Chairman what you need.
Thank you were attending a
second Senator Gallegos beat you
to the punch.
Where you know he is is very
quick on the draw he's what you
call we're used to call me
first.
For.
You remember that.
Chairman yes those days come
back in and.
Slashes in times of great drama
in my life currently this.
So the secretary will call the
roll on the Senator synthetics
motion seconded by Senator
Davis.
On Senate bill one fifty four
center guy ghost yes ma'am.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Yes.
Hello that for.
We
want to be needed.
Yes.
For you.
Lopez yes.
Just the facts yes Sir Tom.
Yes.
Thirteen.
Yes.
Senator Diamond thank you for
coming to the committee thank
you Senator for your time.
Thank you and the final bill
today is Senator Woods.
Which is Senate bill one seventy
four fiscal agent for capital
outlay projects.
Welcome to
Senator Woods thank you Sir so
kinda you to stay late enough to
hear about bill and that's it's
going very quickly so we can get
this done in a hurry.
Thank you one seventy.
What Senate bill one seventy
four requires a Legislative
Council Service don't accept
capital outlay funding requests
from non governmental entities
if a state county or
municipality has accepted the
role and acting as a financial
agent for the energy's projects
so.
That's in a form and a very
small Senate's got to expert
witnesses with me today.
Amber Hamilton and Brian Moore
if they would like to say
anything amber.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
there was for hearing this for
just I'm just wanted to briefly
touch on what we're looking for
today and all we're asking is
that nonprofits would have to
provide proof of approval for
the governing body that is
agreed to serve as official
fiscal agent when submitting
their request and they would be
able to utilize the LCS software
to track we anticipate just a
simple check box you know for
yes or no and required on the
end of the nonprofit and this
was something that was
identified as a priority of all
thirty three county managers
throughout the state and I know
we work closely with our our
guarantee municipal link as well
I'm currently just to touch on
as it touched on the fiscal
impact report there's just so
much that is involved in these
processes including procurement
asset management insurance
possibilities ongoing
maintenance it does affect the
budget of and those fiscal
agents and there's also a heavy
burden a lot of times with
buildings to go through the for
the finance process with your
leases and all of those kind of
things so we're just wanting to
ensure that local governments as
well as the state governments
prepared to take that on we did
have some initial conversation
early on when we started working
on this with and the department
of finance they were not willing
to take on these projects for
nonprofits and we completely
understand how important
nonprofits are to all of our
communities that we just want to
insure open communication and
dialogue between these
nonprofits as well as the
governing body so that we can be
prepared for what they're asking
us to do physically we are
required to plan for each of our
capital outlay projects and we
just want to insure that we're
working with our nonprofits to
plan accordingly.
Thank you Mr Wilson anything
else Senator Woods.
Our I don't know Brian Moore
wants to weigh in if you done
well all the questions.
Mister Moore you're on the
public comment list would you
like to say anything about this
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Brian more
than Mexico counties you know
it's interesting you get a group
account managers together for
conversation and it almost
always reverts back to this
issue yeah we all think that
nonprofits do a great job and we
support them in the work that
they do but sometimes there's no
communication and so you end up
with a project you know we got a
county manager and and one of
our bigger counties and they'll
end up with a project to get
some million and a half dollars
for a nonprofit that's about
half an US economic and so then
and then they're under pressure
from their legislator or the
nonprofit to you can make that
up in their budget and those
things are really really
challenging so what we're doing
is is trying to like ever so
we're just want make a check
mark in the in the capital
outlay requests says yes we've
had a conversation the county or
the city and the and they will
be our fiscal agent that's what
and with that Mr Chairman was
sample questions.
Thank you Mr Moore is is Steve
Copeland here as well or and or
you're handling the counties to
input.
It's it's on me tonight Mr
Chairman.
Good will.
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr chair so I need to
clarify we have lots of local
Governmental bodies that are not
cities counties state of the
mutual domestic associations
this taking as
the land grants us so how does
that work into your bill Senator
Woods Mr chair.
Mr chair the weight I understand
the bill this is simply the
these non governmental entities
and some of those you you
actually addressed are
governmental entities but
What this actually is this
little bit of civility.
Yes please ask.
The government and it is going
to be your financial partner in
this deal are you financial
agent.
Make sure that you know there
are financial able to carry
these out there is actually some
capital outlay out there that
wasn't spent because the
financial agent didn't accept.
We the responsibility.
So this is a problem that we
have a chance to make a little
solution to.
But lease letting someone know
ahead of time.
That these these monies are
being asked for.
Mr Chairman.
So I'm.
Mr chair senator.
I'm wondering if this has to be
put in the statute versus
regulation despite DFA.
Mr Chairman.
Not allow your.
The the only reason that that I
think that this needs to be done
it's simply us.
For Legislative Council to put a
line on there.
Have someone check it to say
that they've asked the fiscal
agent.
Our city or county or or the
state itself.
The the fiscal agent just a
simple check mark that says yeah
we discuss this with someone and
they've agreed to do this.
So whether it needs to be in
statute hi I'm a sermon that if
I was provided I was on the
Legislative Council I could
probably just say this should be
done.
But I'm not Legislative Council
so those were the only means
I've got it to get done is a
bill.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman is this Brian again
can I it weigh in on that
question.
Mr more go ahead.
You we work with Pam Stokes when
we were kind of putting this
whole thing together and and Pam
had a conversation with with
some accounting managers and me
and Steve and Debbie Romero from
DFA men are like amber said
original intent was just let the
if I do it all said no we don't
want to do it because we don't
have the time or energy either
so then I asked him I said could
this just be a rule in the
Legislative Council Service and
she thought it's better as a
statute so that's kind of why we
took we took her directions.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Sir
would.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes yes Mr chair when you I I
didn't know that this wasn't a
requirement because
I always tell nonprofit you need
to do this but of course I used
to run a nonprofit so I knew how
important that was so I think
that I I just want to promotion
I think it's a good idea and
when you're ready for motion I'm
happy to move.
I'm moving to pass.
Seconded by Senator Tolman any
discussion.
That we just mentioned.
They're all on the same lines a
group of people in the in the
Albuquerque area representing
the county some of the lobbyist
for the city and the county and
some of those nonprofits
including United Way have been
talking about this very issue
and and they're trying to come
up with a piece of legislation
that I said I would Sanchez if
you can get it together but I'm
basically.
Deal with the the end you
donation clause by giving
several options for for ways in
which non profits might be able
to deal directly with the state
instead of having to go through
a you know we have the second
indigent clause in the
constitution but that's not
elaborated anywhere so this will
be an attempt to clarifying and
we're specifying exactly what we
mean when we say.
Can provide services to second
indigent we're a.
Organizations that provide
services so you can envision
would be eligible many of them
come through we'll we'll bring
it through this committee as
well and we can take a shot at
it here.
any other comments or debate on
them on this mission and
measures.
The secretary will call the
roll.
One seventy four center very
close yes ma'am.
Senator Ingle.
Senator.
Give me time okay if you get in
such a hurry.
chair.
Yes.
Do you Lopez yes.
Thanks.
Thank you Senator Stefanics yes
thank you.
Yes to subpoena.
Yes and senator once you have a
due pass from this very tough
hurdle in did did you get
interested in good luck in the
future Senator.
Thank you very much thank you
for stand for me thank you and
the members of the committee and
so six o'clock and it's time for
you to go to dinner.
So we'll get off to the webcast
please so that we can make
comments about Senator Ingle
with the the whole state hearing
them.
We'll see you on Friday at our
next meeting and one thirty on
Friday.
Thank you all for your patience.
Thank you.
