One.
So you can start the webcast.
So welcome to the.
Monday March eighth meeting.
The Senate health and public
affairs committee.
And we're gonna start today well
first let's have the the members
introduce themselves.
Senator McKenna you want to go
first.
Great thank you good afternoon
chairman my name is Brenda
McKenna I am senator for
district nine thank you very
much.
Senator Sedillo.
You Mr chair I'm interested you
Lopez and I represent district
sixteen in Albuquerque.
Well
and we just started and I seem
to have lost one of our
committee members.
Senator was here but I don't see
how I am okay there you are yes
I believe so out so I'm Senator
Stefanics district thirty nine
pleasure to be here.
Right and senator John.
Thank you Mr chair does bill
Commons District Senate district
eighteen northeast heights.
Albuquerque look for today's
discussions.
Thank you senator and I'm
senator Jerry Ortiz Y. Pino and
Representative district twelve
which is downtown Albuquerque
and the older historic
neighborhoods and surrounding.
We'll get started right away in
the Senate bill three seventeen
Senator Hickey.
No that'll help costsharing.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators.
It is my honor to be able to
come before you today and share
with you some things I've
learned over my forty years and
health care especially the the
last eight.
And that is this.
There's a word for a state
pandemic this pandemic in New
Mexico that we have of substance
use disorder and mental health
and in spades since COVID
nineteen and before I go
directly into the bill I just
want to give a little
perspective I believe I
provided handouts that they've
gone out to the senators and
also I distributed them in paper
today and the first paper is
that general New Mexico facts on
the issue and I just want to
point out to you in passing
through one is forty seven and
forty three point seven percent
of New Mexicans reported
symptoms of anxiety and or
depression depressive disorder
during the COVID nineteen
pandemic in October twenty
twenty this is compared to
thirty seven point seven percent
in the United States.
In New Mexico the death rate of
opioid death rate per hundred
thousand is sixteen point seven
and nationally it sixteen point
six and as many of you know a
number of years ago we used to
lead the nation.
One place we do believe the
nation them very unfortunately
is suicide our death rate New
Mexico's twenty five hundred
thousand in the average United
States is only fourteen point
two.
The thirty state eight percent
of New Mexicans with the
classification of serious mental
illness and twenty eighteen did
not receive any mental health
treatment and that's the purpose
of this bill here today.
A national survey by the
American psychiatric association
went out eighty one percent of
people point out that eighty one
percent of people when the true
cost concerns as a barrier in
seeking mental health treatment
and the
last point I want to make is is
the second she.
The share faster easy this is
resulting in an admission to a
hospital is larger for that's
the mental substance use
disorder
and for all you do this it's
nineteen point zero versus nine
point five and this is really a
critical point to remember as we
get into how do we balance the
additional cost of health plans
will observe in this bill and it
will be in this area of decrease
need the visits increased
admissions and overall a
decrease in the.
The.
The treatment for behavioral
health and substance abuse and
many of us know folks in our own
families extended families
neighborhoods who have known
people who have had to undergo
a substance use disorder
treatment and the co pays the
deductibles that is insurance
that what you have to pay up
front out of pocket before
insurance kicks in coinsurance
can be can become very very at
the.
And many people drop out of the
therapy exactly substance abuse
because they can't go through
what we call IOP intensive
outpatient treatment and that
can go on for six months in
order to really make an impact
and this outpatient very often
preceded by thirty to ninety
days of inpatient but up to six
months and again paying these
out of pocket costs most people
would drop out they then start
using again they get into
difficulty they are chronic
diseases and two thirds of these
patients behavioral health and
substance abuse have co morbid
chronic disease and so it just
continues to build up Austin the
system I'm not here so much to
argue about us today I'm here to
say we need to get people's
creative and take down the
various doing that and
ironically in the and both the
patients will be much better the
providers not having to collect
on sharing and believe it or not
this will close at the end and
all the other documentation I
a few health plans not only in
that balance out they're going
to earn more but it's it's a
changes in the in the health
plans will.
So the next sheet you have is
just basically the vote points I
want to go through what this
covers in the bill it's it's
thankfully written behavior
health services are defined and
they're defined according to the
four categories of how health
insurance is structured in the
state that's why it is so long
but essentially again what this
does is remove the costsharing
which is a copay coinsurance
very often twenty percent and
the deductibles no deductible
can go up to sixty thousand
dollars his for some people were
buying bronze exchange insurance
insurance very very costly.
It would include all outpatient
therapy intensive outpatient
inpatient which is
hospitalization usually I'm
certainly for mentally ill some
people need to be in the
hospital for some weeks but also
for substance use disorder
detoxification period of one to
a few days of residential
treatment care and that's
basically where individual lives
at a treatment center it's not
impatient and they go through
immense amount of cognitive
therapy as well as our have the
appropriate medications to
provide and you know very
different medications are
different for bipolar disorders
bipolar one to depression what
have you and that's where of
both the cognitive therapy which
is critical in peer therapy
which is emerging as a new way
of this is now showing a lot of
success partial is a technical
term that includes you're in a
residential treatment center but
you are in the ability to go off
rounds up within a.
Thank you but again it's kind of
stepping back out into society I
do want to I do want to make a
distinction here that I am not
including what we called sober
living to sober living is a
staff that's very helpful were
you living with other people who
have substance abuse disorders
but the problem with sober
living is that it's unregulated
and there are a lot of programs
out there that really don't
reduce what they claim to be
there loosely supervised and
many people and out of reusing
again so I'm not including that
at this time I will come back in
the a couple years with bills
for the regulator if they're
turning out to be successful and
then the other critical piece
here is so important is no
barrier to medication.
And generics covered most of the
anti depressive and the great
the L. of the bipolar meds there
are some brand names for
psychoses are there still
expensive but again there so far
and few between we include them
in this no cold our copay
coinsurance or faster.
This would apply to large group
and large group is defined now
after the ACA more than fifty
employees
and small group which is less
they're approximately about
three hundred and fifty thousand
in the state of New Mexico that
are in this category and fully
insured
there is the exchange based
plans which between of people
who buy it off exchange as well
as on the exchange that all so
we're Ron's they constitute
about fifty thousand plus and to
be sure that we're really
reaching the largest group in
the state all I back it's Nancy
of the teachers APS retirees and
the state employees under the
rest.
Division and and of course all
the beneficiaries and that's
about another hundred and sixty
thousand this is not include
Medicaid Medicaid there are no
copays this is not include
Medicare because we would have
to have waivers from the federal
government to do something like
this and that's very complex to
do maybe at some point in the
future we will include that it
would not include federal
employees because they have
their own health plan it's a
very specific yeah thank you and
Dawn although their their
benefits are quite liberal and
and good overall and the high
risk pool already it's not
include because they already
have that drive this policy was
my privilege to be on that for
seven years and bring that up
and get it just so the
Students.
So and then the the last part of
the bill is how do we know
people are actually doing this
and we have asked the I. back
along with the OS II to work
with that's this is not in the
bill that they know if you work
with all the health plans to
come up with the currently
already collected information so
in the I. F. R. that's a cost in
here that would not occur this
is information that exists is
turned over to NCQA yes Senator
and other people it's just a
matter of fact of turning over
and reporting it would show that
they have more diagnoses in
behavioral health because fifty
percent of people with
behavioral health disorders are
undiagnosed and about half of
those from the disease and again
there's huge savings when you
okay.
Press the control behavioral
health and then get a reduction
in the conference on disease so
the the the last part of the
bills and and this is where I'm
going to point into this quickly
but I'm happy to go into the
detail I know time is important
but that I literally had a stack
of articles and home about two
feet tall in a few words that I
I didn't include that the actor
fees on on these publications
but there are hundreds of
articles that that either agree
or point and validate the
concept that if.
That money.
That individuals with a
behavioral health disorder and a
chronic disease and one will
look at the moment one two three
or four have extensively more
expense than people who have
chronic diseases with out of the
behavioral disease for the
substance abuse disorder at the
first articles from jamba just
gonna read the conclusion that
those of you have it there the
study suggests that not health
disorders Association
substantially higher resource
utilization of us among patients
and chronic diseases these
findings have clinical and
health policy K..
The next one comes from trend
watching this one is a little
disturbing this is the American
hospital association looking at
behavior health and if you look
at the the chart down to the
bottom
the of behavioral health needs
by and large often though one
that in twenty sixteen only
forty three percent of the forty
four point seven million adults
with any mental health disorder
that's diagnose receives
treatment in less than a lab and
percent of adults the substance
use disorder receive treatment
that's ready shopping and that
went south you drive into the we
have in this state to help herds
or get rid of this this
essential and then if you look
at the second page from friend
once I would point out you
depression and all behavior
health disorders the first
column on the left is is
behavioral health only this is
in billions one four current
condition to current three and
four and you can see how this
costs skyrocket the individuals
who have more more chronic
disease.
And then I think probably the
most prized article and and I
want to point out that the one
of the other health plans in
town found this article also
very very compelling and
essentially I have put into what
they call integrated medical
behavioral care in other words
as you see either one of you
also work in treat the and it's
it's very critical in the with
the teammate or some people are
able to do it on their own but
here's here's the here's the
punch line and here's the on the
executive summary it's
underlined in blue.
Based on our literature review
of the results of affected
integrated medicine behavioral
health programs we calculate
that nine to seventeen percent
of the of this additional
spending maybe say active
integration of medical care in
other words again it's
diagnosing and treating both of
that and and getting them both
center care.
I
If it gets a little bit
technical if you'd like to the
definitions that they use in
their charts
are defined in the first one
through four but the punch lines
are the fact that
majority of health care costs
and compared with behavioral
conditions are present for for
medical spending supposed
behavior spending the
significant increases in
facility based costs if you'll
remember back to what I said
about E. R. behavioral health
people coming into the ER
whether there maybe for
behavioral health he's also
quite likely because they're
chronic diseases out of control
in nineteen to twenty percent of
those get inventive versus
yes the
behavioral health so
the again I will I will let you
look at those in time I would
like to take just a couple more
minutes to address the FIR a
couple points if I might or
would you prefer to go on to
experts
at this point it might make more
sense for us to go to your you
have a couple of extra well show
info sponsor Huadian Senator
Steinborn the chance to say
something Senator Steinborn
thank you thank you madam Mr
chair and committee it is such
an honor to be co sponsoring
this legislation with senator
Iraqi I have taken time to read
all the research he has he has
assembled to understand what's I
guess known in the field really
it's a collaborative care model
it is Google that you'll learn a
whole lot more about integrating
behavioral health into medical
services and and as he said the
research all shows and I'm
looking an article here from
American psychiatric association
with a research that.
Thank you it saves money for the
health system and gets way
better health outcomes for the
patients so I think it's
actually written bill we're very
lucky to have I had a much
smaller bills do this for first
responders although not even on
the scale no not on the Mets but
the doctors visits and then I
learned about Senator Dr
Hickey's bill here and and was
very honored to to join forces
with him and not introduce other
bill I think it's still let go
and it there is also greater
accountability from the LFC to
help measure it and make sure
the health systems are doing it
leading into it I think we need
to follow Dr thank you for
lead and this could be one of
the most impactful bills of the
session and it's gonna take
courage to get it done but it's
absolutely right for New Mexico
so just very honored to support
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Steinborn Senator thank
you for your experts insurance
just in our yes I have one
experts and for proponents here
today the other expert on
fortunately have to take for dog
to the vet and so she was a
health care provider here in New
Mexico and what a for and what
if testified about how much
easier it is to keep people who
will need to stay in therapy to
stay in and then this piece is
there it's of course a great
boon for providers because they
don't have to go through the
hassle of collecting copays
coinsurance or deductibles and
that makes the state more
attractive to behavioral health
providers and my other experts
who is here is Dr mark theme is
the CEO of true health that I
used to be associated with and I
would let him address in the
additional or support thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator Dr
of seeing welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee appreciated checked
that dress you briefly out I
will be brief in my comments
that senator Dicky noted I am
here to help New Mexico on the
physician emergency physician in
previous roles of the chief
medical officer for New Mexico
health connections and to help
New Mexico and I was principally
involved with designing some of
the benefits that we're talking
about here today in terms of the
member experience patient
experience around behavioral
health care
we have since twenty fourteen
had this type of provision in
our member benefits are patient
benefits to remove any type of
costsharing at struggles are
obstacles to getting behavioral
health services and that's been
our construct from the beginning
why well with the affordable
Care Act it would clear mandate
to
remove barriers to preventive
services and we've used
behavioral health as a
preventive services in the
context of the overall health so
we remove those barriers
straight away by removing these
cost shares and we thought that
would be beneficial for all of
New Mexico to pursue it a
similar route
in essence why hasn't this been
brought to bear sooner we
recognize there's still
unfortunately a stigma
associated with behavioral
health disorders substance use
disorders and we leave this
heavily early the state their
needs this need to be removed
and that includes removing any
cost share obstacles for members
to patients so that even one
iota of anything that gets in
the way supports the
stigmatization of these
disorders as is removed
so that is part and parcel with
the whole concept of taking care
of the whole member the whole
patient so we remove those
obstacles straight away one last
piece I would say with this
provision with this that
particular piece of legislation
that it is not only patient
centric and members.
Educators community centric
because of the overall total
health benefits for the
population so it it's really a
win win win and there are those
in the health plan world and I
I'm the CEO of a health plan
he'll say Hey it's going to
raise costs and raise costs well
there are affected me if you
believe that there is abuse of
accessing its chair because that
the reason many times cost here
is put in place there are being
called utilization management by
which you can monitor the
services being provided to make
sure there the appropriate
services in the appropriate
setting by the appropriate care
providers it's called
utilization management and rate
rather than force that activity
frankly on to members by some
type of cost of the vehicle from
from three we put that back to
health plans that they work
closely with your providers to
make sure that the members are
available being unveiled at the
right services at the right time
and take it off the burden of
the shoulders take that burden
off the shoulders of the member
with that at all in my come.
Thank you doctor roosting.
Okay let's go to the
Let's go to the public and I've
got two people signed up to
speak against this bill.
You
no marriages health insurance
plans.
Despite all the evidence from
the doctor and seeing and Dr
Hickey you will now speak
against this bill.
Mr Miller.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee appreciate the
introduction my name is a brand
war and registered lobbyists for
America's health insurance plans
and we stand and respectful
opposition to Senate bill three
seventeen the reason for
opposition is these types of
bills limit options for.
People who are buying insurance
and as you can see from the
testimony it's clear that
there's an option in the
marketplace right now true
health is saying that they offer
it without cost sharing some
folks may not want that some
folks may say Hey I want a
higher deductible because I want
to pay less and premium and
that's really the struggle here
because what happens is people
pay premiums and then they have
their cost sharing and they try
to make that balance work.
A hip supports choices for
consumers and making that
balance obviously we want people
to take care want people to get
coverage that's not the question
the question is how we pay
providers and how much comes
from the individual it seems
like with this proposal what
you're doing is you're limiting
options and forcing more of that
wait to be borne by Australians
really there's an option in the
marketplace we respectfully
oppose this bill thank you so
much costs sure.
Thank you Mr Moore will go then
to Marla shows of Blue Cross
blue shield of New Mexico.
Mr Chairman.
Yes registered lobbyists thank
you registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
we stand in opposition with this
bill as well behavioral health
services are critical to our
members especially now we have
expanded access to telemedicine
to ensure that our members are
able to receive these critical
services throughout the state
removing all of of removing all
out of pocket costs for
behavioral health would have
large financial implications on
our commercial market.
Additionally this bill has a
very broad definition of
behavioral health but he clearly
application in case you brand
name prescription drugs.
We appreciate the Sanchez
intentions the next repeat the
believe that health plan should
have that flexibility that that
you're more would be describing
earlier to design plans that
meet the needs of their members
ever changing environment
finally proposals removing
costsharing for behavioral
health could be evaluated for
inclusion in the standardized
plans being contemplated on the
exchange OSI and be well New
Mexico will be evaluating other
standardized plans the interim
after the passage of house bill
one hundred last year thank you.
Thank you Martha.
Now for those who signed up to
speak in favor of this bill
there are quite a few of you.
And I'm going to limit ourselves
if you could put up a clock
tower I'm gonna limit ourselves
to to twelve minutes of
conversation in support of this
so keep your remarks pointed and
And if you if you currently say
what she wanted to say you can
just boy I sure agreement with
them I know to repeat something
we've heard from someone else
please.
Do you have that lock ready
Trevor.
The service agent.
I'm sorry twelve minutes well.
Mr Chairman I've I've got a
stopwatch here I've of the now
this yeah.
Well he has he has a a the one
post on the screen very many
conceded to senator.
And I'm not sure why.
There is okay so so we start
with
Barbara Webber of Health Action
New Mexico followed by you Suren
would lock.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
my name is Barbara Webber on the
executive director Health Action
New Mexico we strongly support
this bill the times that we're
in of the pandemic but
incredible stress mental stress
on almost every family that is
in New Mexico and to have
increased access without
obstacles to know help is
absolutely critical at this
point time so we are here to
support the bill thank you.
Thank you Barbara the chairman
would love to be followed by
maybe even now and.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Witt lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter we stand in strong
support of this bill we believe
that
behavioral health is health care
and this will bring New Mexico
into closer into alignment with
the mental health parity act.
for all those reasons the
reasons stated with Dr Christine
and Dr Hickey Dr Senator Hickey
we stand strong support thank
you very much.
Thank you chairman maybe McAllen
to be followed by a Randall
Swanson.
Mr chairman I think making as
missing.
At the vets then we'll go to
Randall Swanson to be followed
by David lay.
She here.
Okay then we'll go to date.
Related to be followed by Sandra
Spinelli.
Okay then we'll go to Sandra
Spinelli to be followed by
Andrew Patterson.
They will go to the Andrew
Patterson to be followed by
Kathleen Rooney.
Right hi this is.
Andrew Patterson and I'd like to
thank you all for hearing this
this is that such a privilege to
speak to ensure some of my and
but I'm the president of autism
behavior services and we serve
children across the entire state
of New Mexico our focus is on
autism but we serve other
disabilities and our core
focuses on behavioral therapy.
This is such an important
building has pediatric
behavioral health requires high
intensity for it to be
successful with the outcomes
that are important for instance
a typical three year old child
with autism is prescribed forty
hours of behavioral therapy
known as planned behavior
analysis and so.
One of the things that I work
with is I work with the families
in my role and yes we see many
families that they often times
to make the decisions that
they're not going to access to
care because of the deductible
copay or coinsurance but one of
the most common things that I
in I see is they're not able to
fill a prescription for the
treatment is they start then
having to choose how many times
they can receive the treatment
for their child and so that's
you a critical component is
allowing for them to have parity
be able to receive the same
treatment as a family on
Medicaid let and seem to long
term your liabilities for the
state when a child with autism
or another disability doesn't
succeed is there really are long
term liabilities that the state
has partnered with from a longer
duration that they're in a
special education program the
school district to group homes
after they mature out of that
that they're there for the rest
of their life to the state
losing you know at taxpayer you
know when they don't succeed and
so I will kind of cut out my
last comment because I strongly
agree with what your doctor
theme that is that this really
falls within preventive and
there are things that we see
when we want to encourage this
type of from preventive with the
ACA from vaccines and to other
type of care this falls within
that so thank you so much and I
appreciate everybody moving this
forward.
Thank you in the lean curreny
followed by Ellen planes.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee and Senator Hickey
thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak on behalf
of this important bill my name
is Kathleen hear me and I am the
co owner of the New Mexico based
behavioral health care company
called behavior change Institute
I'm also board member for the
New Mexico behavioral health
providers association and I'm
here today representing my own
agency as well as the providers
association both of which
strongly supports Senate bill
three seventeen.
My agency serves in the capacity
that similar to any Patterson so
I will keep it brief and
explaining what we do but just
to give some perspective if a
family receiving intensive
behavior therapy has a thirty
dollar per day copay and their
child receives six days of
therapy per week the families
responsible for just under ten
thousand dollars in annual
copays in addition to any
deductible over which we've seen
upwards to three thousand
dollars for the individual
deductible due to the rising
cost of healthcare many
employers and employees are
opting for high deductible high
out of pocket plans in order to
keep the monthly premiums
affordable thus it's not unusual
for our agency to quote a family
between ten and fifteen thousand
dollars of out of pocket
expenses for one year of therapy
and this therapy as prescribed
on a six month basis and is
often reviewed for several six
month increments thereafter as
you can imagine this is really
far out of reach for most
families and I'd like to point
out that what I'm quoting for a
single year is nearly twenty
nine percent of New Mexicos two
thousand nineteen median income.
What the total barrier for
accessing medically necessary
care lastly there are few
financial aid options for
families who are unable to
access care due to financial
constraints and failure to
access medically necessary care
often results in children
falling behind developmentally
and be here escalating to the
point times of losing placement
in school or daycare are costly
ER hospitalizations as well as
hi costs sometimes out of state
residential placement on behalf
of all the individuals in the
state responses and their
families as well as my agency
and behavior health providers
association strongly urge you to
support Senate bill three
seventeen thank you.
Thank you Mr.
so then we go to Elland finds to
be followed by Jim Jackson.
Thank you Mr chair and comments
on behalf of the disability
coalition and we support this
measure it's very well
recognized that out of pocket
costs at the point of receiving
treatment are barriers to
accessing care and they are a
barrier to adhering to
recommended treatment this bill
would remove those barriers and
we strongly support that we also
want to express our support of
the reporting requirements that
would provide information that's
specific to New Mexico that
would inform New Mexico policy
makers going forward in this
area and therefore we are just
part of the bill thank you.
Thank you.
Bill Jordan.
Followed by Sarah Baca.
Jeff Goldman.
Well Jim Jackson I'm sorry I was
going to gym.
Jim Jackson.
Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair some for
disability rights New Mexico on
eliminating this cost sharing
requirement will in fact remove
that barrier to access to
important services whether it's
a true selves are for the
medications we appreciate the
helpful impact of that that will
have on the people who need
these services and we also
appreciate the evaluation
component that's built into that
we think this will save the
state some money let's find out
and we encourage you to support
the bill thank you thank you Jim
Bill Jordan to be followed by
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman members
Bill Jordan with New Mexico
voices for children I want to
thank Senator Hickey and Senator
Steinborn for bringing this
legislation this is one of those
bills why you wonder why we
haven't done this already
behavioral health and substance
abuse treatment has so many
barriers including the stigma
and copays that we end up with a
lot of folks not seeking
treatment.
As a state we need to do more to
help our people get access to
treatment we just think this is
a brilliant solution I want to
thank Senator Hickey and urged
the committee to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Going to be followed by Joel
Davis.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is terra Baca and I am the
current to a thirteen year old
child about to them as well as
the marketing director for
bridges autism services to
provide behavioral therapy
services to children diagnosed
with autism and their families
in Albuquerque and Rio Rancho
I'm and ensuring Kathleen stated
we support this bill and what
the prime what it will provide
to our families over the years
the legislature has done a
tremendous job in opening doors
increasing access to services in
New Mexico one of the services
again is applied behavior
analysis therapy I would fall
under the umbrella of this
legislation of behavioral health
service so many families that
cannot afford the therapy are
faced with the decision whether
or not to provide their child
with this evidence based
practice or not and often times
the the results are that their
child will get older and they'll
need support later on in life so
we wanted to having increased
access to care we provide we
believe this bill will do just
that.
Thank you Mr.
Jill Davis to be followed by a
pretty not really or tile.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name's Joel
Davis I'm the policy chair for
elevated spectrum and all
volunteer autism advocacy
organization I am also the
parent of a twelve year old on
the spectrum and I can tell you
copays right now under silver
plan we paid a thousand dollars
a month when you look at how
much those costs are with you
the entire policy it cost us
about twenty five thousand
dollars a year which we paid for
the last eight years to get the
basic treatment for our daughter
that means other people in our
family miss out often times and
we were looking at this year
when our premiums went up to
seventeen hundred a month plus
those thousand dollar my copays
to be able to switch to the the
true health model which does
away with the baby yes it's a
huge burden lifted off of our
family and it also means that
others in our family will be
able to get more care now we're
we're in a position where no
there's many people across the
state like that and many people
are missing out on getting their
behavioral health health costs
because they don't qualify for
Medicaid or other other systems
to to take that burden off and
so we urge you to ask this bill
to help people across the state
the service thank you thank you
to all.
so then is Katrina and only to
be followed by Mexico in C. R..
Hello Mr chairman and members of
this committee my name is
Katrina Hella I am a director of
autism services for the up and
almost intervention team in
southern New Mexico I am another
provider for children and
families impacted by the autism
diagnosis many of my colleagues
have already spoken in support
of this bill and I'm in strong
agreement thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Maggie from NCO followed by
Mario Lopez.
They're also trend down most.
So maybe they've already the.
Been heard we'll go into the
final of speaker in favor
Charland mother when you're.
She here.
Right.
Senator Hickey you want to the
respond to some of the comments
that were made in opposition to
your bill before we go to the
committee.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
senator is I forgot to mention
my last and that that you have
it's a graph that looks like
this this is the true health New
Mexico health connections
reduction in emergency room
visits and admissions compared
to the other health plans in the
state to add essentially
healthier populations and the
national averages and I'm I'm
not going to go through this is
the next stop is the finance
committee where I go we'll go
through in detail but I will
demonstrate to them this will
not only they think it's going
to cost the money in fact it's
going to save them a lot of
money in the state as a self
insured entity with a hundred
and sixty thousand people is
going to have may be as the
seven one paper somewhere
between
I did a ten percent savings
which more than cover the cost
here the plan the state picks up
so it's a win win win win for
the patients mostly when for the
providers and also a winner for
the health plans and self
insured thank you chair Senator
you want to say anything about
the employers real quickly just
of the FY are outlined some cost
the is this is data that already
exists and those costs are not
there the state did look at the
different plans what costsharing
they may have to pay and if you
look at the articles that that
cost here will be paid for over
and over and over again so that
they will essentially make more
money by doing this.
Thank you senator okay let's go
to the committee then and the
first person was a handout is
Senator doctors families.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
join the discussion today
I I have heard you know being on
the health committee in the
house of heard.
Similar bills you know similar
structure about cost sharing
with different types of health
care services
And and and I've heard the the
argument that.
This is going to save money for
this.
This company.
And what I continue to wonder
what I want to ask you is.
If this is going to save money
for.
BlueCross BlueShield or some
other health insurance company.
Well do do we know something
that they don't what what if
this is truly indisputably gonna
save money.
what what do we know that that
they don't know.
Thank you senator.
And the Senators what we know is
the experience from through
health which is the last set of
of and that's what I gave you
the reduction in ER visits is
because of our policy or their
policy since the twenty fourteen
and also the reduction in
admissions and since the
sophistication to look at
chronic care costs in the lower
plant in is that it does exist
in big plans and if you look at
the papers and you look at the
bibliographies and I expect that
you can you'll understand to be
able to read them you'll be able
to see the savings that can be
produced by eliminating this
okay I know that other other
types of services physical
therapy occupational others
would want to they actually want
to jump on but they don't have
the literature to support them
the way the legislature supports
the elimination of chronic
disease not the elimination but
the vast reduction of chronic
disease costs so that's what we
know I could go on and on about
Blue Cross is owned by a CH a
CSC in Chicago I know them very
well at work with one of their
sister companies for four years
in New York they have a very
hard time working innovations
into their structure of earnings
for the year and I'll be happy
to talk to you in detail
offline.
And senator Munoz let me add
something to that I was
discussing that with the doctor
thank you this morning.
And and I think one of the big
issues here.
Isn't the savings are realized
over time over many years.
The insurance companies tend to
have a one year.
In Los focus to what they do and
say you can't figure the bill
recoup whatever these losses are
this year they won't do it even
though if they would do it over
the next three or four years in
more than recoup their losses so
I think it's a the narrow window
in which the U..
Or through a state issue.
Whether or not they're saving
money.
The same that we ran into the
same thing was Olum visitation
programs they said oh we can't
afford that well everything all
the literature shows that it
would save a great deal of money
but they're still reluctant to
try it.
Yeah I just Mister chair and
senator I just find it
interesting that.
you know we have a group of
politicians.
On this committee and we have
some insurance companies and
some some like it some don't
like it and we're going to say
well we're gonna make you save
money and you you don't want to
we're gonna make it I mean I I
know that's not exactly what
we're doing here but I find it I
find a little bit ironic
so.
Then my next question is will
will will provided Senator
Hickey respond is that the
purpose of this to say the
insurance companies money now.
The purpose of this is to deal
with the pandemic and the state
that is significantly larger in
both behavioral health and
substance use disorder and what
we're what we learned at school
in New Mexico health connections
and through health we made a
decision to eliminate the the
cost sharing and the results
speak for themselves as you can
see on their craft secondly I
would tell you other insurance
companies and probably the
smaller ones are starting to
pick this up Presbyterian on
coordinated care visits now
hands no copays collaborative
care this and we we did talk
about this bill with them and
they were ever interested but I
just would point that out to you
that others are beginning
together one of the great things
about being small and innovative
as a costs where we could do
million.
Thank you for that and.
And Mister chairman Senator no I
I I appreciate that I just on a
philosophical level just the way
we view government.
I I tend to if someone is
already free to do something.
And I I I'd rather leave it
leave it up to them in general
I'm not saying the cats are back
with this bill that's just the
general overarching Phil
philosophy of government the
that I hold you know and we we
did this with hospitals to us
not not this not costsharing but
it was it was a mandate for
hospitals that have different
know the different communities
that they serve and and my my
one question was whether
hospitals already free to do
this or not so yes that they're
they're free there's no
obstacles we put up in order for
them to adopt this so I said
well I just it's a great idea I
I support what you're doing but
if there are any free do it
let's let them be free to choose
but but I do want to ask so when
we eliminate cost sharing or we
limit copays or any kind of out
of pocket expenses one of the
resources I like to go to is the
United States preventive
services task force.
because if it's on that that
USPSTF lists.
I start leaning towards
supporting.
This sort of approach
would you mind commenting on
that is it has have US yes you
have to take a look at some of
the stuff I know they have I
mean obviously they have called
rectus screening cancer
screening they have depression
screening I think in adolescence
and things but could you just
comment on that for me briefly
some yes I'd be very happy to
number one on your a previous
comment as it relates to this
member rand catheterization so
maybe you were.
And I was teaching at UNM we
switched over from doing and two
to three days inpatient during
outpatient in the cardiologists
that not just couldn't do it
that is mapped Act the data
provide showed that there was
more morbidity with inpatient
capitalization and out patient
and so it takes a while
seventeen years in medicine or
something that gets learn
defined the diffuse through and
in terms of the preventive task
force that is the same issue two
years ago or last year request
we passed the bill and calcium
scanning we could have it for
another time literally eliminate
heart disease in this country if
we have that into preventive
task force but the
interventional cardiologists
certainly don't want that and so
it's gonna take awhile for it to
come and this will take a while
for the US preventive task force
but I do know a couple of the
members on that task force and I
also want to say if we do this
we will be the first state in
the country something we're New
Mexico eight the way which I
think would be a huge honor for
us to lead the way in the nation
for better health.
Thank you for that
And I sent Mister chairman
Senator huh I I realize that
that the professors Tax task
force isn't.
You know super super
What in their actions but I I do
want to say that that is a
resource that go to for for this
sort of thing that I've.
Appreciate your your point.
And I you know in in even I'm
actually glad you brought that
that calcium screening bill.
and I think it's a good point
that you make that even in
medicine you can have conflicts
of interest that can hold you up
you have politics within the.
Health care community doesn't
have to be physicians but you
can have these these internal
politics.
that can take your eye off of
the patient take your eye off of
the sick person.
And you know we we shouldn't be
doing that and shouldn't allow
it but it it does happen and
that's a very real thing
but I think the the I have the
same concern with with this bill
that I do with that custom
screening bill.
In that and once again I think
this is it's not a critique of
this legislation I think this
legislation is just summon said
written very well for what it's
intent is.
but I believe that the the more
of the out of pocket.
That we pull away.
From the consumer and wrap it up
into monthly premiums.
And I know that I know the
argument is now it's going to
save money so the programs are
gonna go up so I'll let we can
we can disagree on that or or
agree on it I I don't think it
matters for this debate
but it you know.
I I just think that the more out
of pocket costs that we remove
we disenfranchise the consumer
we disenfranchise the sick
person and I said this with the
calcium scoring Bill
you we used to have advertised
prices so those scans were
hundred fifty dollars
when my mom needed water wanted
one she actually had a choice.
she could pay the hundred fifty
dollars and have a shorter line
or there was another hospital
down the road that was putting
these things on sale and
advertising a price of seventy
five dollars for the skin.
That's what I want to see
because now it empowered same
you know my mom that instance
she could shop around and say
well here's the price here
here's the price here I can have
a shorter wait list and and go
to this the the the the chief in
and etcetera etcetera and so
went when we start to see
published prices we empower the
consumer we empower the sick
person when we when they have
more money in their pocket every
month from lower premiums which
I think we all agree want lower
premiums unless you're single
payer person premiums coming out
the door but
then once again we're empowering
the consumer and so
philosophically this bill it
goes against.
What I believe to be right in
the health care industry which
is winning more published prices
when we continue to wrap these
things and pull them into
insurance those problems prices
go away and in my opinion we
disenfranchise the consumer so
it's it's a it's a more
overarching philosophical debate
with how we see health care I
think but I very I do want to
very much appreciate though I I
think and I want everyone to
understand here that I think the
data you for you present is very
very good
but I don't want to mandate
insurance company to do it.
when they're free to do what I
want to let them look at look at
the data themselves
but I am very much I think the
print The presentation has been
very professional and very
sophisticated and I and I very
much appreciate it.
Thank you thank you senator
syringe next we go to Senator
Gallegos.
Mr chairman and senator Bridget
the log I I just have a few
questions and actually some came
up as Dr Senator Dr Schmidt is
talking but I am currently
trying get on to a there's a
gentleman in in my area a friend
of mine it's a heralds Health.
Therapist and he's trying to get
on to do more of via internet of
for calling types but as in in
your bill hello to define of
behavioral health services what
does that entail.
There is a description at in
every section of the bill and I
hope you look look at aids to
Behavioral health services means
professional ancillary services
for the treatment facilitation
prevention identification of
mental illness substance abuse
disorders trauma spectrum
disorders including inpatient
detoxification residential
treatment and partial
hospitalization intensive
outpatient therapy outpatient
treatment I think Representative
development and all medications
including brand name pharmacy
drugs when generics are
unavailable and telemedicine
would be included in out
patient.
Thank you for that man and I've
actually got the bill from in
there and like I say it does
have behavioral helpful with
through it but I guess I'd miss
that and I apologize for that
and I've earlier is putting on
a.
A bill and sent financially you
this may have been already
entered also I hope it wasn't
but
Currently Mister chairman
Senator are there are options
for a cost copays already.
for no cost copays.
Senator Gallegos and Mr chairman
I would be happy to do a one off
when our white we're not for
that but I'll give you a over
arching answers are the over
arching answer is yes in
different plans
and as I said says the Syrian
offers of land that has no
sharing or collaborative care
they have plans that don't
again all this does save money
so it will for senators
committee that will say actually
the health plans will compete on
price and lower prices almost
always wins so this will help to
help answer the price in the in
competition and Representative
right yes currently there are
there are options and you can
choose to help where you
wouldn't pay and you can choose
the process very with.
Mr Chairman etcetera then it
would be up to me depending on
the cost structure of the plan
to determine which one I one is
that correct that that's
correct.
Good deal and and I'm hoping
this my last question but I was
trying to understand
I didn't see a in the F. I. R.
any of funding to like
I don't see this propane funding
how's that for New Mexicans
gonna work is it already in
place houses bill gonna work.
To the yes.
Thank you senator guy goes for
that very good question the OSI
is mentioned in the bill has
Office of healthcare reform
the former had I Health Action
New Mexico in their they're
always looking at the data and
this is simply again collecting
the data that already yes also
the health plans have created
this is matter of rowing and
putting it together and some
more than and directional format
and the LFC I actually try to
give them June your money to do
it and they said that we
probably got this coverage even
though it went in that the the
issue again is collecting data
that already exists in just as a
matter of displaying it and
reporting so there's no cost
there.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
center now does this have
anything to do with GSD is that
department have any kind of
added work to be able to make
this happen.
No.
General Services doesn't.
General Services all.
General Services well already
have consultants who help online
budget it's self insured at the
the current time basically when
they do this and if they get
good consultants that there are
not there are very on edge I'm
sorry not an educated you're
just not they haven't been
thinking in the last ten years
about are you can be creative
and upstream take care and
preventive issues downstream the
cost so much more and that's
what this bill does so no it
will not cost them anymore and
hopefully they will have the V.
highly the up to date
consultants help them do their
funds.
Mister chairman Senator lead
we're all that's all my
questions I apologize I didn't
get a chance to proof read the
bill in time and or the F. I. R.
of like cells in the committee
trying to get a let's play
billable what that'll you'll
thank you thank you Senators
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair this type of
course I support this bill this
this is an example where long
time that we're looking at the
long term it's better for both
the population and also for the
for the finances and it's
another opportunity.
We.
We have.
If we had Medicare for all there
would be lots of incentives to
look at the long term rather
than the quarterly profits so I
support the bill and when you're
ready I'll make a motion we're
ready.
They make the to pass motion.
Is there a second installment
since second.
Senator phone eight seconds.
It is meant to I guess Tom and
seconded okay so let this do it
okay Senators funding seconds is
there any further debate or
questioning on this bill.
Secretary will call the roll.
No ma'am.
Thank all.
Yes.
No.
Okay.
By accident I'm sorry.
I'm yes.
Yes.
Yes no comment.
Yes when I wrote.
I'm sorry would you repeat your
vote.
Okay Sir yes explain my vote.
Yes.
So Senator challenger explained
his own.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Senator Steinborn etcetera you
keep for bringing this bill
forward.
This is an easy decision for me
when you have insurance company
involved.
Insurance company.
There I it.
Their motivation is always on
the on the almighty dollar to
the detriment of the of the
insured or the patient Dr
Schmidt he said that I should
be.
Should be on the patient is
absolutely right however that's
certainly isn't true the
insurance companies are there's
decisions always prompted by
we're going to make a profit or
not to the detriment of the of
those insured the patient you
know Services that everybody's
entitled to like police fire
health care.
No I'm not against the
capitalist system but it doesn't
work well in a in a when you're
providing services to to
everybody it isn't entitled to
so
Because.
Your doctor.
She says is he stalked about
shopping.
Well it's not like buying a car
you're not going to.
The whole whole.
Type of server side code
different type of decision
making you may and most cases
a lot of cases of emergency.
That you're Center Askari I I
kind of this you have time to
decide where the two cheapest
and best place.
Agree with us senator.
Sedillo Lopez we wouldn't have
this problem if we had single
payer you know thirty percent of
every dollar.
Insurance.
Health care costs goes to profit
and paperwork which you all be
eliminated well most of it be
eliminated if we had single
payer so in my world
There is no need.
For health insurance.
Companies being in the health
insurance business thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Ingle
we didn't I don't think we
resorted to vote for you did we
think.
All of you know Senator Ingle.
How do you vote on this bill.
Three seventeen Senator Ingle.
Mentors needed.
You're you're muted Senator okay
now can you hear me yes.
yes.
All right so tell me what's the
final tally on the road.
We were fixing internal
regulation Senator Hickey.
Thank you senator and committee.
Senator Steinborn thank you for
coming we'll go notices Senator
Lopez had to go she was almost
on the verge of the bill here
and she had called education or
somewhere finance bill there so
we'll go to Senator Brandt
Senator ranch with this bill.
Three eighty to another hospital
billing bill.
How are you.
Senator.
Welcome back to welcome back to
staff Mr Chairman could be
pushed back one I just got on
board the call if if I could
just go back one bill sure let's
go to Senator Sedillo Lopez and
thank you for investing violence
rule eight eight eight three
thirty eight.
Thank you Mr chair.
This is a bill that I I became
aware of the need for it when I
was the executive director of
the last the committee that you
what would happen is we would
have
a victim survivors of domestic
violence who were stuck in
leases and.
And they couldn't get out of
their lease no was another
barrier for them removing
themselves from a situation if
that's what they wanted to do
for the lease was in the abusers
name and so they had to leave
and they have nowhere to go
which is another barrier and and
I'm also the executive and also
the president of casa for the
less the which is the sexual
assault agency and a similar
thing happens with victims of
sexual assault they may need
they may not see feel safe in
their home.
And the least will work will
require them to state
and so what this bill does is
It actually empowers one of the
other thing is I've talked to
landlords you're at a loss
included thank you it was pretty
As long as you contacted the
landlord of the apartment
manager they really wanted to
help but they felt their hands
were tied for example they
couldn't they couldn't help her
if she wasn't on the lease and
they couldn't kick him off the
lease or and I'm using I'm using
gendered language he and her
just because that was the vast
majority of our cases but it
could be the reverse and so I.
It was also one of the things
they said is they really wanted
to help because if they didn't
help
escalated it might even get
worse for the and not unsafe for
the neighbors so they so this
bill what this bill does that
well and the other thing is
Senator Candelaria had a and and
interest in this bill because
you have what it is
constituents have this situation
so I've worked closely with the
with the coalition to speak
against the mystic violence and
the sexual assault coalition and
you have this bill I do have an
amendment that was provided to
the committee I know because I
received it yesterday but I'm I
know what was given to the
committee a way before that and.
Would you like me to present the
amendment.
Isn't it is something we can do
is put up on the screen and look
at yes it's a very simple
amendment region you can you
said amendment to our penny
somebody.
Explain the amendment thank you
Mr chair it's simply
on page six line for striking in
the dwelling unit or on the
premises and striking six one
eighteen striking in the
dwelling unit or on the premises
and this was at the request of
the coalition against domestic
violence because they said that
sometimes the abuse does not
take place there or the sexual
assault does not take place
right at the premises
and so they felt like if this
was in the parking lot or if
this was if this occurred in on
the street or this occurred
somewhere else it should not it
should not deprive someone of
relief and so I'm proposing this
amendment.
We are looking at so you're
moving the amendment senators
here on the.
I move this Senate this
amendment to Senate bill three
thirty eight is there a second.
Seconded by Senator Stefanics is
there any any discussion on this
amendment.
Pretty clear.
Any opposition to this
amendment.
Opposition will consider the
bill madam chair you can take it
down thanks and we'll go to
anything else on the on the bill
itself as amended Senator.
no I think that the bill is
pretty self explanatory if done.
It requires that there be some
proof of the abuse and the proof
of the abuse would be a letter
from any any domestic service or
special cell provider agency
which could include anything
from legal services to housing
services to wraparound services
to case management two of their
best any any any letter or
domestic or as a order of
protection
and I know that the FIR
mentioned that
Why not a police report and that
this was actually did to remove
the police report was actually
requested by the apartment
association
two years ago and the reason is
it they said it's easy to get a
response please report there's
no there's no verification of a
police report
And they they would prefer this
these proofs so that the
apartment manager wasn't having
to determine the veracity of
what was going on that they
actually had some fruit and with
that I'd like to turn it over to
Lente yes where is the the legal
director I mean the policy
director for the coalition
against domestic violence.
And the status it afternoon
Mister chair and members of the
committee I'm going Chavis
director policy for the New
Mexico coalition against
domestic violence and also vice
chair of the New Mexico intimate
partner violence death review
team which is a multi
disciplinary ality review team
authorized by New Mexico statute
thirty one dash twenty two dash
four point one and I'd like to
share some background on these
housing issues that are facing
victims of domestic violence and
sexual violence survivors of
violence is item number really
serious housing problems related
to the acts of violence against
them individuals and families
are often discriminated against
denied access to any victims
from housing because of their
status as victims
and we know that one in three
New Mexican women and an unknown
number of men transaction and
one in seven and one and fifteen
will experience domestic
violence in their lifetime so
this is not a narrow problem
this is a pretty widespread
problem I'm also crime free
lease addendums can increase
evictions for victims of
violence and make prohibit
activities such as too many
calls to the police which can be
grounds for eviction.
Victims do not call police when
they fear rejection a victim
safety is in imminent danger
when abusers if or what or know
where they live many victims
must leave for housing to
provide safety with friends
family or shelter and violence
does not and when the
relationship as in fact this is
the most dangerous time perfect
sounds and most intimate partner
violence that's occurred during
this initial period of
separation.
Users often also control of
family finances and economically
abuse the victim.
Loosening credit wiring that.
You're you're needed.
That happened thank you
users often control the family
finances and economically abuse
the victim you're ruining your
credit cornering that's in the
name of the victim out paying
rent utilities and acquiring
adverts civil documents for
fines he's accurate other
negative effects of financial
abuse and all of this combines
to create a cascading effect of
problems for victims a study
completed by the university of
Chicago Commission by the legal
services corporation reported
that one in four low income
households experienced an
average of six civil legal
problems in one year and and
many of those are housing
problems if the victim will
often be unable to afford
housing or will be denied new
rental housing based on at
credit negative rental history
reports and should the victim be
held accountable for termination
fees are continued caymans
you're not going to easily find
someone else to rent to them.
If it is safe for the victim to
remain in their housing Senate
bill three thirty eight would
provide the possibility of
removing the offender families
and entering into a new lease
agreement this can make the
difference between being housed
in being homeless
these housing issues can and do
spiral into homelessness
domestic violence is one of its
leading deposit is now saturated
by the pandemic sixty three
percent of homeless women have
been victims of domestic or
sexual violence additionally
women of color black and native
women have the highest rates of
domestic violence in New Mexico
unfortunately it occurs not
infrequently with this
population particularly if the
victim has two children for some
victims in New Mexico the only
option has been to sleep in
their cars whether temporarily
or long term after being evicted
there are very few homeless
shelters in our state outside of
Albuquerque metro area there are
very few places to go look at
any Walmart parking lot at night
and you will see homeless
individuals and families
sleeping in their cars next to
the vacationing our beers many
are homeless as a result of the
violence they've experienced it
is not uncommon for our
coalition and member programs to
receive calls from ending their
cars and seeking assistance in
finding housing often result in
a poor outcome Senate bill three
thirty eight will increase
tenant protections for victims
and are essential to stabilizing
housing for victims of violence
over thirty states including
Texas Arizona and Colorado
already adopted similar
protections for victims so this
bill is a step in the right
direction for us to add these
protections for some of our most
vulnerable adults and children
in the state of New Mexico I
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
leader says to other people and
signed up in support of this so
Senator should we go to them
analysts Stafford.
Mr chair chairman and members of
the committee thank you my name
is Pam Stafford I am with the
ark New Mexico we among other
things have a sexual assault
victim advocate program for
victims with developmental
disabilities this bill in
particular resonates with me
because of victims that we have
recently served and I really
appreciate the senator for
bringing it forward and we
strongly supported.
Thank you.
Then Victoria Torres of the gold
futures.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
hear you.
Thank you thank you chair and
members of the committee please
vote yes on house bill three
thirty eight my name is Victoria
Taurus in a proud mother of
three and a lifelong New Mexican
I'm incredibly grateful for
Senator Sedillo Lopez for
introducing this bill.
I was in a domestic violence
relationship for years before I
was finally able to leave and
get my kids and I a little place
of our own away from the abuse.
After about six months he found
us.
let the landlord know about the
situation and it wasn't safe for
us there anymore.
neither my situation or any of
the previous reported to change
the fact that I was breaking the
lease because I broke my only.
My rental my rental history was
ruined and I still owed a
balance it was difficult to move
forward and ran a safe and
livable places this bill would
help individual in these
difficult situations they're
trying to keep safe thank you
for your time.
Thank you Mr S..
Anybody else want to speak in
support of this bill.
Okay Senator I just have a
couple of questions for you
before you go to the rest of the
committee the FIR raises a
couple of points to.
This wanted you to address the
the use of the term temporary
domestic violence restraining
order this is no longer the the
language.
that's correct the although it's
I'm I think that it's understood
but I thought that we would make
those technical changes in just
Judiciary both of domestic abuse
as opposed to domestic violence
and a temporary domestic order
instead of restraining order.
Protective order it says use the
term protective order.
Yes so so you'll deal with the
judiciary if you get out of here
yes.
Number one the issue of the New
Mexico does not have a crime.
A little sleep filing for an
order for protection.
Okay.
This does this does not create
the crew the crime of it and I
think the intent was if there's
a perjury conviction
then this is just again this was
something that the
housing that we worked on this
bill three years ago this is
what the apartment association
wanted and they they added the
language we can fix that
language as well and in
Judiciary I understand the crime
is perjury.
Okay also a statement.
For making false claims yeah the
same with but for.
That was not there that's
another one you can do in
Judiciary okay yes it's a let's
go to the rest of the committee
then Senator committees.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
center
Very happy to support the bill
today I have a couple questions
just to make sure it's.
You know how this goes sometimes
we can strengthen it are just
make sure there's no there's
nothing loose about it
and a couple of things just
clarifying that that came up
On page five.
Right now all we already have
the mystic violence as
and accepted Defense an hour
adding sexual assault but I just
want to be clear on this so that
the court.
The courts still has discretion.
to to evict someone it you're
you're I mean that that's just
current law you're not changing
that is is that correct that's
correct.
Okay.
And it on page six.
That's what I'm just not
familiar with what exact
information is in a protective
order is there anything that
would intimidate victim or
present an obstacle.
The where they might not want
to.
Get a copy the protective order
in meeting like any any private
information or anything like
that with everything that would
be.
I potentially pressuring them
not to do so well yes the the
victims that we used to work
with that unless the committee
that you became very concerned
about going to the court houses
to get protective orders to
pre orders of protection when I
started showing up at the
courthouses so yes that and so
those victims would get out
would be under this bill if this
bill were in effect would have a
letter from a loss included
ideas six very brief letter
stating that there are few
seeking services.
Okay thank you and yes so Mister
chairman Senator that that
brings me to the next point.
Of that kind of the definition
of any provider if I had a
concern that might be the the
one that's that that is a
concern
You know.
In trying to I guess trying to
standardize that I mean it would
be possible that yeah I'm just
trying to think of all this is
the scenario so if an owner.
Work to say well that's not
legitimate that's from you just
got that from some website or
something I mean you know being
so I it is this
I mean in in the definition of
any provider I mean that's
that's definitely kind of Lucas
I think I have in my mind I mean
if it's certainly a.
You know obviously that
organization you were affiliated
with that I'm just trying to go
over the same areas of us of it
the landlord that is not
familiar with that particular.
entity or provider of the
services and I don't want them
to have this excuse to say all
that's that's not legitimate so
could you maybe help me with
that one a little bit to try to
prevent that from happening
because I don't want the.
That is a very good point and we
had a discussion about this and
with the the thing is there are
a variety of legal services
provided of of of service
providers all of the way for
legal services like maybe the
legal aid offices getting the
restraining orders that kind of
thing all the way to a private
psychologist.
And notice the letter would just
say that the the resident is a
victim of domestic violence or
sexual assault meant that.
And so it would be a very of
very private letter I suppose
the landlord
looks the letter didn't think it
was legitimate
what what I understood from the
apartment association when we
talk about this if they didn't
want to make a judgment given
that she that the person was a
victim or was not a victim or
that which it was a mutual
violence which was the which was
the primary abuser which I think
they didn't want to deal with
any of that they just wanted
some proof that's why they
didn't like the idea of just a
with the said if anybody can
file a police report and there's
no there's no
no verification of the police
report and the latter you have a
it an individual that might be a
therapist writing that letter it
might be somebody has provided
housing an entity that's
providing housing for domestic
violence is it could be full
services.
Organization like elastic regard
you was or could just be the
shelter and maybe that's the
only services are receiving is
is shelter services so I wanted
to be broadly.
You know we entity including.
That is providing services all
they have to state is a person
is a victim
I guess it would be up to the up
to the apartment owner to say
Hey this is just printed off the
internet I'm not accepting it.
Okay and Mister chairman Senator
yeah and I I didn't I saw that
in the FIR about the police
report I'd there was a kind of
concern for whoever did the
analysis side I wasn't concerned
at at all on that part of the
bill for the year exact
reasoning right there I just
come in and and you know I I
would support bill either way
here but I just.
I'm probably maybe just personal
preference I get your idea of
wanting to stay general but I
would almost say I just wonder
if it be possible to
you know come up just with the
comprehensive list so so you you
prevent any sort of honor from
trying to get out of it but I
don't think that's going to come
up much I mean I I I'd be hard
pressed to find.
You know that that type of
person that's really gonna
debate that or or give someone a
hard time and I hope it doesn't
happen I just want to make sure
it.
That in statute
Mr Chairman center I I just have
one more question on page seven
and that's when we splitting
splitting rent between you know
multiple parties
what what's gonna happen so that
the victim gets relief here.
From rent what would happen to
the the other people that are
still in that in that dwelling
You know I I guess I'm just once
again concerned that.
Are are they gonna treat you
know is the landlord gonna
pressure them to.
Get someone else so they're not
paying under read or they gonna
have to just start shipping and
a little bit more or how how
would you envision that going
for once again us this in full
support of the bill I just want
to make sure it's as tight as
possible.
If the as I am.
But I understand if the resident
is liable only for the rent paid
what I understand is is.
Join.
Joint tenants are.
The level but this would allow
the the one of the joint tenants
the victim to get out of it and
that would mean that the people
left would still be jointly and
severally liable to to the
landlord so they would have to
make a decision that we're going
to bring somebody in or are we
going to pay the full rent and
that would be that would be up
to them but only the victim
would be released from the.
From the.
From the least okay good Mr
victim okay I I think that's
good I just I want to make sure
it wasn't going to.
Inadvertently harm harm them or
or because it because it yeah if
if they're free to choose what
they want to do I I think that's
great so okay well thank you
very much center portion.
Thank you senator Senator chair
next.
Mr chairman Sir Sedillo Lopez
thank you for this discussion
and I do have a lot of
Reason to support this bill but
I was trying to go back to just
what the Dr Schmidt is talking
about the three people apartment
of the victim gets released if
it is under the perpetrators
name and now he's arrested then
the third person would have to
leave it there's three in there
but the perpetrator would still
be responsible up to the date of
the lease would that not be
right.
That would that would be up to
the owner of the apartment or
the or the department manager
how they wanted to handle that
this bill provides the options
they could retain that person on
the lease what I might what I've
experienced with our clients and
it may be different around the
state but with
apartment managers and owners
almost wanted to get rid of the
whole state so what they were
they were inclined to not
necessarily keep diffuser on the
lease although they have that
option they usually just wanted
to terminate the whole thing and
this this bill would give them
options if they wanted to keep
him on the least they could.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
almost get rid of all the drama
because I'm sure that households
had in the past but Mr and
etcetera I guess my next
question is so if the
perpetrator of the domestic
violence
If if he is I say he it the
perpetrators arrested how many
of the domestic violence cases
are played out within thirty
days are there very many in
state I I look through the
thirty days of being a really
short period of time and I'm
wondering if he.
However it is they keep saying
he would already be out or if
they would soon to be
incarcerated no date and time
line on that.
I don't have all the data I'm
not sure I I I will certainly
try to transfer to the issue has
the data but
one of these individuals are not
incarcerated
And some of the more
incarcerated some of them get
out very very quickly our goal
was to make the victims safe
whatever time they have whether
it was moving or or getting a
restraining order in place or
the whole goal was to make sure
that the victim was safe but I
will turn it over to miss Kate
is to see if she has anything
else to add.
So if the user is a wreck I'm
sorry Mr chair members of the
committee your user is arrested
which which the user may not be
arrested during the islands I'm
there is often a seventy two
hour hold so that the victim can
develop a safety plan that the
safety of that's what she needs
she or he needs to do and so
that seventy two hours as part
of a buffer period but but
abusers are rarely held for much
longer.
Thank you for that and that
helped me because
you know I I got to work on
Rachel's law few years back and
in that.
the views person had to keep
going in front of the Courts for
her
Any order in and I I in just
talking to her there are a lot
of trauma that comes with having
to face your abuser on a regular
basis and so I just want to make
sure expressions of seventy two
are old there's got to be things
in place because if I am the
abuser and I get out on the hunt
for bear because I mean not only
could you get me in trouble now
she probably got me addicted
from my own house what I would
perceive on house but
I appreciated I I just wanna
make sure their overall
protections for whoever the the
victim is put to a with that are
you thank you Mr thank you
senator Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and thank
yous Senator Sedillo Lopez for
this much needed legislation I.
Sure before that some time ago I
served as a volunteer at your
house which is a domestic
violence shelter and program in
New York state and I did help
victims of violence secure
orders of protection of the
family courthouse.
in so many times a victims.
What narrates their story to me
and time and time again.
They would express how they were
they were very fearful.
They put everything that they
could in a plastic garbage bag.
And got out as soon as they
could.
And then the fear would come
over.
And.
They would find a shelter such
as ours
or.
They said in their narrative
how.
They didn't leave before because
they couldn't afford to find a
place to live.
So with that I I really am very
proud that you brought this
forward
To help the victims and
Potentially.
Chair Mister violence's and
every socio economic.
stratus so.
We need to curtail that that's
that's for another bill right
thank you very much thank you
senator was will the committee
on this bill.
I would like to move into past
chairman I was.
Motion from Senator McKenna
seconded by Senator Stefanics is
there any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Three three eight Center guy it
goes.
Yes ma'am.
Thank all.
Senator.
Thank all.
Thank.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
Senator Corman.
I can hear him from his office
senator he voted yes there are
two.
What.
Senator Tallman.
I start.
Senator so then how did you look
yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino votes yes
to congratulations Senator
so the of this year of a rare.
Salim scorecard on this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee we'll
go notice Senator branch and I
think senator Munoz is in the
room to are you Senator when you
just see here.
We'll go to him after Senator
Brandt thank.
While I'm watching Seneal go and
rent thank you thank you Senator
rendering of sermon Joost was
jumping in here support my bill
that was what I was this is your
for your I do
appreciate your patience thank
you I.
I had just gotten a call that
took a little longer and I
thought it was going to so I
appreciate you all waiting for
we this is what I'm calling the
hospital bill bill.
so it really deals with hospital
bills I carried this bill four
years ago and I actually kind of
forgot about it
Intel just a couple months ago.
most of you know I'm in the
process of of changing houses.
And in the process of that year
you go through all the credit
check stuff I keep pretty close
I online but I saw a a
collections on my credit report
from the hospital that I had
never received a bill from.
and so I.
Took care of getting that
collection rate it was for sixty
two dollars.
That I had a collection of
hospital bill they had accepted
the VA insurance on which says
if you except the a insurance
that you can't build a patient.
So you know we we've got some
issues with our hospital
billing.
so I paid off and then contested
it got removed from my credit
report but you know how hospital
bills.
Hospital costs are the number
one
credit issue in the country.
They ruin more people's credit
than anything else and one of
the reasons is that they don't
build very clearly I don't know
if anyone has ever been in the
hospital but you get for several
years.
Of bills.
From one visit to the hospital
and yes and I mean several
years.
Of sometimes I I talked to a
friend of mine who for years
after they had a hospital those
that got the first bill for one
of the big one of the of.
Visiting physicians on how you
know how you put it one of the
ones with privileges they
haven't been billed for four
years and also to get a bill out
of the blue and they're supposed
to somehow remember what it's
for now that it's correct bill.
So that's the issue of trying to
deal with with the bill does is
it requires under the unfair
practices act that hospitals
bill you on one bill so if I go
to Santa regional or press for a
medical procedure I get one bill
from everyone so all the bills
come together they send it out
to me and they have ninety days
to do that.
And that's really the main
thrust of the bill that's really
what the bill does it says that
if they don't do that and they
don't get to bill you.
Yeah so it's very simple
but as usual I always get a lot
of pushback from this from
hospitals because for some
reason they they can send me a
bill and want the payment due
within thirty days but they
can't get the bill together
within ninety.
So Mister chairman without ideal
to questions.
Thank you senator right now we
do have some of those someone
signed up.
Thank you for your bill's
Senator Brandt a.
I guess it's probably some
hospital.
It is one of the San Juan
regional Medical Center.
Scott are you there.
Maybe he didn't I don't there's
so many people in the room I can
find themselves Scott are you
there discussion.
Committee professions in the
committee.
Senator mission.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator.
Yeah what a nightmare I.
Fortunately I have never had a
long stay in a hospital but I
can
empathize with the.
The chaos.
Of of the bill and.
Thank you Mr tails out of it.
Just just curious chairman and
senator.
When you have had any comp
possible conversation with
hospitals or their billing
department at cetera.
What was the reaction to your
legislation.
So madam chair the the main
issue for them when we ran the
still the first time we set
sixty days and their main bills
issue was that when they bill
out insurance providers that
sometimes it takes longer than
that to get a response from
them.
and honestly Intel we change
something in the law to where
they have to get this done
within a certain amount of time
who's in a hurry
so I I think it's going to take
a law change to make that change
as well
I thank you for the if if the
hospitals tell the insurance
companies you know we're
required by law New Mexico to
get this bill to the patients
with a certain amount of time.
Those insurance companies will
will expedite that is not
nothing in this in this bill.
Trying to get confused I guess
the hospital bill versus bill on
the hospital bill but nothing in
this bill says it has to be the
final bill.
So and we could put something in
here if need be that would say
that they have to send out the
initial bill.
couple things up and thank you
doctor in dealing with that one
concern of their first that's
been the biggest concern they
also don't like the fact of you
know that we're gonna have to
bill for all these other
providers and I'll tell you when
you go into a hospital I've been
in the hospital a couple of
times are usually at the VA so I
have to deal with any of the US
but I've been in a couple of car
accidents where I've had to be
taken to the hospital
and in those situations when
you're being taken by ambulance
you don't stop at the emergency
room and say now wait a minute
how's my bill gonna work out.
yeah that's not something you're
really thinking about you don't
expect to get a separate bill
for radiology in a separate bill
from the attending physician on
a separate bill from someone
else you don't even know at the
end can't remember ever seeing
and you literally get for five
bills from different places over
to the three year span.
Yes chairman and senator yeah
it's.
Yeah it's it's very frustrating
because I understand to.
And a patient is transported by
ambulance you don't know if that
particular ambulance company is
under your insurance right.
Same thing if you have to be
transported via helicopter you
don't know that particular
helicopter company is covered
under your insurance and so many
times I understand patients have
these huge surprises after they
get home they're trying to
recuperate of these these bills
because I ate a certain section
of their care there transport
was not under their engineer and
exactly when we're in a margin
State I'm gonna remember
it is your.
Is your
is your van helicopter under my
insurance
deposit make a phone call and
see if you are.
Right yes okay thank you very
much I appreciate this thank you
senator magenta Senator
committees.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator
if they have another health care
bill in the in the committee of.
I'm glad we have the the name
change their.
I just want to make sure I
understood the so.
They get sixty days and most
cases.
Now there's kind of this this
other.
Reason I guess why they can get
more sixty days and it says it
is due to go she Asians with
third party payers correct then
they get ninety days so they get
a little longer is that is is it
my understanding that that
correct that's correct yes okay
Mister chair center so what.
Well it example of what what
that would be like I mean is it
kind of like the.
The insurance companies not not
communicate with the hospital or
something or what why did you
put that in there I guess what
I'm really getting yeah that was
to try to deal with the with the
complaint from a couple years
ago process for years ago now
two thousand seventeen of the
the fact that sometimes
insurance companies take a
little bit longer when I asked.
Four years ago you know they
said it usually can take
anywhere from sixty to ninety
days to get those responses from
insurance companies.
Okay okay and you know Mr Mr
chair Senator you know it's
really interesting that this
bill comes in the context of
some of the debate we've had.
And even a call the Senate over
over the unfair practice excuse
me practices act
well.
And it's
You know it seems unfair to me
and this type of billing.
And I I think you did a good job
on but I want to expand
number one is the credit issue.
And B. because this issue is
affecting people's credit.
People don't find out about you
know they have even two hundred
dollars or something chart is
when they try to go back on.
And you.
Some personal.
Issues with that.
Of course I had somewhat similar
issues with medical bills that
they sent to the wrong address
you never heard of you never
even knew existed you would have
even if it was a lower cost you
we would anticipate it you know
two years ago and then you
suddenly find out that you have
a and that that is I mean
that's.
To have people on the hook for
their own credit in and damage
has been done to them
financially they'll even know
about it try to make a major
life decision I I think that
qualifies for the unfair
practices act you know we need
better consumer protection I
think in this area and then one
other one other piece I wanted
to grow up I don't think you
mentioned is is the budgeting
piece.
You know people just monthly
budgets and and how and
When you have when you're trying
to to.
Our.
Health care expenses.
Let's say you know you went to
the hospital you know you got to
try to you know leverage some
things for a few months but then
a year later you get something I
I've had this happen me to work
with.
With my wife and then all the
sudden a year later when you
think you're.
And you're you're putting your
budget together for the month
and and you're you're not
putting that in because you
think you're not because it's
but you forgot about is been a
year ago and all the sudden a
bill for a thousand dollars
shows up in your mailbox and and
they expect you just pay it
you know I I think that that
also qualifies for unfair
practices because that that is a
conservative should issue on
people have moved on by that
point and we we really need to
put some kind of time frame.
on this.
and so my Mr Mister chair and
and etcetera my my last question
and and don't let me off with
this I I I think the major
problem is that it is hospital
care I think it is but when you
were drafting this bill
did you think about pulling in
any other health care entities
are facilities you know like a I
don't know you know any other
any other entities or or did you
just want to maybe just focus on
hospital since they're kind of
the main player how did that
work you know honestly Mr
Chairman Senator I think that I
don't know that you see that as
much in private doctors and I
will again.
In transparency I haven't been
to a civilian doctor in.
Thirty years so my wife and kids
have the usually you don't have
separate bills coming when you
go to a doctor's office I think
although you could probably tell
us more than I could on that I
think we go to the doctor's
visit you have a copay you pay
it right there or you get billed
at any rate on your bill but
it's usually one bill so I'm not
really sure where else it would
apply you don't have to just be
hospitals with their definitely
the biggest issue when it comes
to even the credit side of
medical care is mostly in the
hospital arena and and a lot of
that is.
You part of it's the billing
issue the other part is when
they again one was paid by the
state.
So it an emergency situation
like mine were taken to a
civilian hospital the VA pays
for everything but as part of
that if the hospital accepts
that payment it's payment in
full they don't get to bill me
and yet they still do and so
that's one thing it's not in
this bill that is something we
need to think about going
forward is dealing with that
issue is where as well we're not
even supposed to be able to give
send me a personal bills when
they accept a check from the
government that's supposed to be
the paid in full chat and yet
they're still sending bills to
the patient.
Acting like.
I can you know that I'm supposed
to pay the remainder well that's
not the way it works.
Right.
Mr chair Senator not precisely
right now I I remember I had a
patient that has thought that
worked out a single payment
before they they got care right
possible did not honor that
agreement whatsoever it is very
harmful to that person because
once again it budgeted for the
expense and the hospital just
relate well it was with portal
just very very poorly with but
no I I think you know I'm just
say I'm a fan of we do.
Health care reform in a lot of
other issues as well not taking
out a huge bite in the very
beginning you know make a
positive difference for what you
can focus on what's most
important and then you know it's
it you know hospitals we take
care hospitals first and then if
you go on to other other
entities that may be excluded
that that that are having some
of this type of behavior that's
affecting people that then you
kind of go go on on instead of
bringing everybody and that's my
personal style because I think
it's more realistic.
And then doing these broad
sweeping changes throughout your
entire system so and I think
this is the place to start then
it would take care of most of
these issues so.
Your major motion Senator.
I'm I'm happy to Mr chair if
you're ready for and we're ready
for a motion I would move to
pass all second second.
What was used in this and photo
you Senator good was very hurt
because I think this much very
tiny.
Chairman.
Thank you Jerry will call the
roll.
Senate bill three Senator
Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Thank all.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez yes.
Stefanics yes while Telemeds.
Yes there are to see Pino yes.
Legislation Senator Brandt once
again you get out of this
committee with a yes thank you
Mr chairman appreciate this
committee and their work.
Thank you we'll go to senator
Munoz bill Nixon and committee
members I I just have to remind
you that we've known.
This meeting for.
Two hours and which cover three
built three early simple built
in there wasn't a lot of
innovative that not a lot of
division of opinion about so if
we could em paste will never
unless you to go to Basil never
came through this agenda the
senator Munoz here a.
Thank you Mr chairman I move an
impasse motion.
In addition.
At that point.
There.
Thank you Mr chairman.
There's a helicopter outside the
window.
thank you Mr chairman Senate
bill three fifty eight what it
does is it increases the
penalties for trespassing on
private land.
When the department issues a
license.
Person gets a landowners take
you can you he's given the right
then to do that
that the criminal trespassing on
private land has not been
changed.
It's twenty five dollars
currently we want to increase
that to twenty five hundred.
It happens a lot of time with
this criminal trespass deal
happened in fish comes back in
the negotiate for them and then
they put it in their funds we
need to go to the general fund
and so we're just increasing
trespassed Commission this.
I think the the FIR says it's a
thousand dollars currently.
The seeds so.
So you'd you'd be increasing it
to twenty hundred.
In support of this bill.
This bill.
What.
But.
Because of the local since
station prior to the.
On it.
Should any Rivera please.
Why Mr chairman and members the
committee to you're more
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
on behalf of our twenty thousand
member families statewide we
struck in support Senate bill
three fifty eight we believe in
the American capitalistic
private competitive enterprise
system in which private property
is privately owned privately
managed operated for profit and
individual satisfaction any
erosion of that weakens all
other rights guaranteed to
individuals by the constitution
we really appreciate the work
that the sponsor has done on
this bill in regard to
increasing the penalties for
trespassing on private property
and stand in full support of
this bill thank you thank you
any Terry **** something Romero.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Kerry Clarke from
our registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico council about traders
and guides we stand in strong
support of this bill hunting and
fishing outfitters and guides
work closely with private land
owners and many times are
private landowners our industry
has first hand experience with
the growing trespassed problem
in this state especially as it
relates to large hunting ranches
and properties that have river
frontage unfortunately.
Unfortunately there is currently
very little disincentive for
trust Prosser and often times
they receive much more than a
slap on the wrist this bill
attempts to correct that issue
and we appreciate Sanchez
efforts to strengthen a
landowner's ability to protect
their private property against
trespass we encourage you to
support the bill thank you thank
you Mr Murray and then finally
Lauren Patterson.
Yes chairman members the
committee lord Patterson on
behalf New Mexico cattle growers
association for the reasons
previously stated and the
modernization of the trespass
laws we support this bill thank
you Sir thank you Mr Paterson.
Members of the committee.
Mr chairman Senator Ingle do
tests is our second call second.
All you need to be said Senator
Gallegos seconds there any
debate or discussion.
Senator magenta.
Thank.
Thank you senator in the US I've
read through the bill and I'm
the FY are.
And I'm going to what Senator
Sedillo says it times what is
trying to stall it's not evident
me.
Here you Senator I I I do need
you because of the background
noise.
One one center.
Our.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator the current problem is
when somebody trust passes right
there's a thousand dollar fine
and they go under going to court
and the judge usually either
lowers a fine dismisses a fine
or the game fish comes degree
meant that they pay into the
wildlife whatever fund and they
get the benefit of really
happened so and over it is upon
that consistently happens is
every hundred thinks the biggest
game is on private land when
actually more big game and
records are kids on public land
and so it as that happens and I
will give you the perfect
example of a former
representative who worked for an
oil company we have a farm in in
Carmen ten on the NMAA revert
decided they would go fishing
one day without permission and
there was no way to charged them
with trespassing or to find and
but when people trust pass you
become the becomes a liability
issue for landowners and at some
point of the public needs to
know that private property
rights are right and they need
to understand the penalty of
what happens is the dollar
amount right you know it's a
thousand Bucks we don't really
get anybody's attention right
there but when they destroy
property they hunt they fish
becomes a liability for everyone
involved and I don't know how
many cases I know of two cases
this year that the game and fish
that
that were dismissed for pretty
much twenty five Bucks in a
donation to the game protection
fund
People are going to continue to
do this they're going can you
when the landowner is absent
like I was in San Juan and
didn't know until I went to the
governor's mansion and heard the
story of them fishing on the
river so it's continue to happen
in somewhat someone has to hold
them accountable.
And thank you thank you senator
so in this scenario thank
someone.
Sure.
Kills elk.
Here she not realize.
The animal finally succumbed to
the whirling around our property
but it's really shot on public
property you're state property
under not sure how that works.
Would.
You're going to retrieve the
LFC.
The LFC calmed and died on
private property would hear
she'd be trespassing to re treat
the animal Representative the
carpets.
No under current law the
shooting shooting Alcon it it
crosses on to another out of the
out of the unit or on private
property you're allowed to
retrieve that came what you
should do is is try to contact
the land owners had shot that's
LFC and shot him here and he ran
across the died over there and I
wanted to the game so you don't
get in that situation but they
are and they cannot charge for
that.
Okay.
Chairman and senator.
The same location a hunter and
elk.
What.
This proposed a change kick in.
I'm using the example of hunting
elk.
State Land private land.
Centerstate the first part that
question again okay so using the
same variables that I that I'm
used with my first question an
elk.
Sure private land state land or
federal land.
where would this proposed
change.
can.
Does that make sense.
I think I'm trying to get
Richard so the only proposed
changes can come in and the laws
are not going to change it's
just the penalty that changes
just a penalty okay.
We will.
Okay I guess so that when you
were talking about the the
fishing on the Animas river.
The fine was a thousand dollars
and is the property that was
not.
The deterrent.
That is correct okay all right
thank you much better.
Understanding thank you.
Very good any other discussion.
Seeing the secretary will call
the roll.
Senate bill three five eight
Center guy across.
Yes.
Senator Ingle
I'm three five eight Senator
Ingle.
I
space for that'll and yet you're
holding down.
Yes.
Thank you so.
No.
Yes.
Okay.
I didn't catch it.
Task force thank you sorry.
You
Lopez no.
to see panel yes motion.
So.
Senator.
Earlier.
we have the I agree your.
Mr chair.
Sure
No no it is enjoyable you're
absolutely right.
So the L. train motion.
Correct.
Do you enjoy then destroy them
yes.
Senator said will deserve a
second for and do business
without a wreck.
I can tell you can't do do
passing through there do pass or
no Representative as we said in
New Mexico this is no record.
This is.
No Representative okay.
I'll change my
option to know REC.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members.
I.
Yeah we had a second room
Senator Schmedes thank you for.
Why right.
For.
Recommendations.
There are guided ghost.
Yes ma'am.
Well yes.
Yes.
That was.
Yes yes.
Yes I'd like to explain briefly.
Hello past.
Lopez yes.
Thanks now.
Yes.
If you know.
Yes Senator issue meetings to
explain is known.
Yes thank you Mr chair I just
want to say I I support this
bill because I think it it's it
sounds to me like the from the
bill sponsor senator knows it
basically saying that this
provision is currently on
enforceable and even though it's
focused on private land it's
it's really getting it people
that are affecting a public
trust that they're affecting
public property the public
resources that we all share come
together such as the fashion the
LFC and whatever wildlife and so
that's that's really what I
wanted to say and why I think
it's it's appropriate to have
this bill go for thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Schmedes and
senator Munoz you know record
this.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm getting there thanks you
too.
Senator Lopez school guardian
now for.
Senate bill three twenty four
protective services for
children.
I'm super children.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee
I am here in front of you was
Senate bill three twenty four
and what this bill is proposing
is to amend
The process of what we do and
how we
how should I say and how we
place children into protective
custody within children youth
and families department.
so in particular Mr chairman
members of the committee what
the bill does is it again
proposing is to limit law
enforcement involvement in
decision making and in the
assumption of temporary custody
again as to regard the temporary
move all of children.
Mr chairman what we do is we
call these short stays usually
within that forty eight hour
time frame that we have heard
long many different times of it
what is happening within the
children youth and families
department I'm Mr Chairman I do
have a few experts would like to
say a few words if they could
we have Erica Sanchez a care who
is here with New Mexico Canada I
could first defer to her Mr
chairman.
Okay let's go to a.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Sanchez I am the director of
policy and advocacy at New
Mexico can a non profit with a
thirty year history of working
to improve the experiences of
children and youth in foster
care I am also the co chair of
the supreme court's children's
court improvement commissions
legislative committee.
As Senator Lopez says the
judiciary and the legislature
aware that New Mexico doesn't
follow best practice for who has
the authority to remove children
from their families when there
is suspected abuse or neglect
and as a result New Mexico has
the highest number of short term
stays in foster care in may
twenty twenty the legislative
finance committee released a
report on the need to address
this issue.
So the way that the system
currently works is a family
comes to the attention of CYFD
here law enforcement law
enforcement decides whether to
remove the child from the home
and if they do the child's place
with CYFD CYFD has two days to
evaluate the family situation if
they determine the child can not
remain safely and their home
they filing abuse or neglect
petition if CYFD determines the
child can remain safely at home
the child's return to the family
with the child having
experienced a short term stay in
foster care we are one of only
four states where law
enforcement has the sole
discretion for taking a child
into custody and the data show
that as a result we see far too
many unnecessary removals of
children from their families
then national average for the
percentage of children who are
in foster care for less than
thirty days is nine percent in
New Mexico this numbers forty
eight percent so forty eight
percent of continue Mexico are
in care for less than thirty
eight.
The short stares ninety two
point six percent return to
their families within eight days
this illustrates that many
children are being removed and
subjected to unnecessary trauma
in its report the LFC notes that
research shows children removed
from the home Austin have worse
outcomes than those not removed
costing taxpayers and families
tens of millions of dollars per
year these negative impacts are
likely to rip related to the
trauma associated with the
parental separation and the
child's fear feelings of fear
uncertainty and abandonment.
In response to the LFC report
the children's court improvement
commission convened a workgroup
to develop recommendations to
address this problem.
The workgroup included over
twenty participants from across
the state including children's
court judges tribal judges and
child welfare staff CYFD staff
law enforcement from rural and
urban communities former foster
youth and attorneys for children
and parents this group heard
from national experts on removal
frameworks and from some states
about their experiences on the
ground the survey was also
developed to hear from law
enforcement statewide to get
their perspective on law
enforcement's role in removing
children and the major take away
from the survey was that police
are not social workers they
assess those reports through a
law enforcement lands and they
will always err on the side of
removing the child.
The workgroup proposed a
framework for removing children
and some other recommendations
that culminated in Senate bill
three twenty four judge Snyder
will speak to the details of the
bill but I also want to note
that Montoya Nicolas Sanders as
the Albuquerque police
department as a member at CCAC
in part of the workgroup and he
intended to attend today's
hearing but was unable to make
it and so in his role as a CC I
see member he wanted to ensure
that the following points were
made law enforcement works with
CYFD almost daily in the best
interest of children however
each entity has specific rules
that only support each other to
a point law enforcement as a
criminal criminal investigator
and CYFD is the family
reunification an education
expert.
Having CYFD is the primary
entity to make the decision of
child removal and placement puts
that decision in a more
appropriate hands that have
better training and will be
longer involved with the family
as a whole the removal of the
child is extremely invasive CYFD
has the tools training and
continual family contacts that
law enforcement does and giving
them the authority to make the
initial decisions of where the
child would be placed should
reduce child stress increase
families willingness to
cooperate with law enforcement
for criminal cases improve
overall results for both
agencies and with that I'll be
available for questions.
Thank you Mr insurers
we'll go to a judge that are you
are you with a state judge
Snyder yes I am Mr chair thank
you for.
Mr chair.
Thank you Sir Mr chair members
of the committee good afternoon
I'm Angie Steiner I am the chief
judge for the twelfth judicial
district which encompasses
Lincoln and Otero counties I
preside over adult criminal
juvenile delinquency and child
abuse and neglect cases I also
serve on the juvenile justice
advisory commission the
children's court rules committee
the substitute care Advisory
Council and the children's court
improvement commission and I.
S. Erica I'm mentioned I
I co chair with her at the
legislative subcommittee and I
was also part of the group
workgroup that Erica mentioned.
SB three twenty four modifies
the children's code by revising
procedures for placing children
in protective custody it also
modifies time frames associated
with this process to more
efficiently and expeditiously
bring these matters before the
court.
Currently law enforcement
officers have the sole authority
to take children into protective
custody in New Mexico SB three
twenty four against this
discretion to the child welfare
agency and the court.
At the same time the bill
supports a collaborative process
between CYFD law enforcement and
medical personnel.
Currently the only way children
come into protective custody in
New Mexico is by the discretion
of law enforcement the bill
provides two ways for children
to come into protective custody
the first is by order of the
District Court when the
department determines removal is
necessary the department is
required to seek an ex parte
removal order from the District
Court this is done by submitting
an application for removal that
is supported by the sworn
statement of facts that sworn
statement of facts can be
written by the department by law
enforcement or by medical
personnel this process requires
a District Court judge to make a
probable cause determination
before a child can be removed
the second means of removal is
when exigent circumstances exist
as be three twenty four gives
discretion to the department to
remove a child from the home
before filing the application
for removal if as circumstances
exist but within twenty four
hour excuse me within eighteen
hours of the decision to remove
due to accident circumstances
the application from removal for
removal must be filed with a
District Court the bill also
comprehensively defines what
existent circumstances are.
SB three twenty four also
expands the time frame the
department has to file it with
the District Court for temporary
custody from the two days it
currently has two three days
this time frame expansion gives
the department more time to
evaluate the situation to work
with families and to more
efficiently and effectively
conducted their investigation
the bill also shortens the time
frame within which the District
Court to hold the temporary
custody hearing from the current
ten days to seven days they
shorten time frame shorten the
time frame more closely aligns
New Mexico with time frames
mandated in other states.
Average time frame for the of an
entry custody hearing after the
issue issue one seven ex parte
custody order is five to seven
days nationwide some days some
states use may even have a
shorter time frame attendees as
is currently allowed in New
Mexico is on the extreme end of
that time frame.
By implementing a process by
which the removal of children
from their homes is done with
child more at well for expertise
and judicial oversight we can
limit the removal of children to
those situations where removal
is truly required to protect a
child and in this way SB three
twenty four will protect
children who are in danger of
abuse and neglect while
lessening the inflection
infliction of unnecessary trauma
on children and families in New
Mexico and with that Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you very much for this
opportunity to present to you
and I respectfully do ask for it
to pass the legislation and I
will stand for questions.
Very good.
Senator Lopez you have any other
expert witnesses we have a
number of people who want to
speak against the number who
want to speak for it but if you
have any other expert witnesses
will go to them first Mr
chairman I do have one more
merece of the hill I believe
she's here with us Carissa.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm just of the hill
and I'm a former foster youth
Senate bill three twenty four is
critical for children young
people and families many
children and young people in
foster care get lost in the
system that's not designed to
raise them but it's supposed to
be a temporary place to get them
safe in many cases children
entered foster care due to a
lack of resources and support
for families and young people.
Family should be connected and
resources and children should
only be removed when their
safety is at risk.
If there's no there are being.
Family and being in foster care
has a huge impact on your life.
Not just.
But for their whole life it's a
point that the person deciding
whether that child.
Highly trained in comma training
at
with a wide range of situations.
The child I believe that side.
Thank you members.
But that'll be all Mr chairman
thank you thank you Senator
Lopez
I'm gonna go now to those who
want to speak against the bill
and then come back to those on
speak for it I would ask you to
try to keep your remarks very
a little bit about seven or
eight administrative side and
we'll start with those who
signed up in advance against.
And the first one is Maryland
back.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Maryland back and I'm a former
foster parents I'm in my time as
a foster parent I had more than
thirty nine children in my care
I'm in the majority of those
were actually short stays first
of all I'd like to thank the
theme Senator Lopez for bringing
forth the spelling working to
solve this continuing issue of
short stays in New Mexico.
As it exists today New Mexico
was an extreme outlier interest
is in foster care well I
appreciate the effort and the
continuing advocacy that the
senator has brought forward to
our state's most vulnerable
children I cannot support this
bill it is as it is written
today it would cross reporting
to law enforcement if CYFD rolls
out of the is it would also
require separate probable cause
findings to remove each child in
the home if the original finding
for removal relates to only one
child and that there is another
child in the home that could not
be removed unless a separate
abuse cases found I have
personal experience with this is
one of the economic basis I
cared for was a sibling group
before they removed all court
children in the home I'm and the
reason was and they only removed
the first at one time once that
child was removed the abuse went
on to the next three so removing
only one child from abuse when
there are other children in the
home is concerning to me as it
stands right now as many of you
and this committee are becoming
intimately familiar with there
are no checks and balances on
CYFD without checks and balances
or accountability we cannot in
good faith support I cannot in
good faith support about their
miss cross reporting to one
percent.
Years ago well fostering I
received an emergency placement
yes one of those short stares I
brought this child to school the
next day and the school
principal was elated to see me a
foster parent the principal told
me that the school had reported
the bio mom to see why FTE fifty
four times informants the issue
is that a well child checks
occur after three separate calls
described with new procedures in
place at CYFD for CYFD is only
taking decisions to kids in the
care who are deemed imminent and
immediate danger only.
We're child has been reported to
the school fifty four times
informants the principal shared
with me I am so excited does
this mean mom is in jail this is
my first case of actual physical
abuse it was extremely abusive
case and I had to tell the
principal now this will that New
Mexico is always about
reunification I come to find out
that child was placed back with
mom the very next weekend
removing cross reporting is
extraordinarily concerning to me
I also wanted a case worker and
investigator whose job it is at
CYFD to make the decision to
remove the child at that time I
was taking many short state so I
know the investigators well that
case worker investigator told me
she was quitting her job as a
former to go back to a former
job which was eight climber the
hours are better to pay was
better and it was a better
quality of living no to answer
questions case workers CYFD
investigators in the frontline
staff that are critical getting
tools and resources are not
licensed social workers but most
of them are not and in fact in
Bernalillo county they are not
so we keep calling them social
workers they're not social
workers their case workers and
they come from a variety of
backgrounds including Justin
GDRs are different payment we
have high turnover burnout case
workers and investigators were
not trauma informed and not
faint making school decisions on
whether to remove the kids with
outline Forsman attacks and
balances I fear the outcome I
will leave you with this in
twenty nineteen CYFD invited you
I have your of the Marshall
project the comments New Mexico
in collaboration with
searchlight New Mexico and do a
deep dive of investigative
research into why New Mexico was
such an extreme out wire in
short term foster care
placements I was an integral
engage in active part of these
interviews you I had originally
only planned a quick to try to
come to New Mexico interview
with you folks I think you
assume his answer was that New
Mexico's police were heavy
handed and roving children like
the ones the seat left in a
grocery cart and intended for
two days and that we're trying
to the parents.
That to the investigation turned
into well over seven months of a
story in which you might I'm not
speaking for him my tell you
that what he uncovered with one
of the most broken complex child
welfare and policing stories
that he has ever encountered
between the DOJ oversight of
eighty a very broken child
welfare system no oversight no
transparency no accountability
with CYFD generational poverty
generational views hi native
American population a high roll
population the list goes on our
stories compacts this most
recent summer any Casey
foundation released its
nationwide twenty twenty kids
come down at right New Mexico
dad's last breath fifty about a
fiftieth and tribal building for
the third year in a row New
Mexico has the highest
population percentage in the US
covered by Medicaid we're over
forty percent of those are
children one three Mexico child
is currently hungry poverty is
not neglect and poverty is not a
reason for native children but
as you might hear the Marshall
project's first New Mexico an ad
Williams and others have learned
this isn't a simple problem this
is a deeply complex and
systematic issue and it requires
an equally complex topple
solution to rebuild the system
removing cross according to law
enforcement without checks and
balances in oversight and CYFD
is not the answer I thank the
sponsors for the bill there's
great work done on this but as
it stands today I stand in
strong opposition thank you.
Thank you Mr Jones Jones
followed by Amanda Williams and
there's three minutes left.
This one is on children's name
in their children's.
I'm here okay.
Thank yes my name is Joe Johns
Mister chair I I thank you for
hear me today and and members of
the committee I am the former
New Mexico foster parent as well
as a former law enforcement
officer and I and the
constituents and under Gainey
goes and he and I have been
working on foster care issues or
possibly two years maybe a
little longer.
Three twenty four can be
significantly improved if the
best interest of the child is
indeed the goal as drafted is a
dangerous bill to take law
enforcement out of the process
and rely solely on the
department that has proven it is
not capable of taking care kids
their custody as of now as the
previous foster parent analog
forcing officer I cannot
understand for the life of me
why statewide here any agency
that has the duty and
responsibility to protect
children would not want train
law enforcement officers
involved in the safety and
removal of the children.
Why would I do not want any and
every agency that is training
child abuse involved with
protecting our most vulnerable
populations.
Senate bill three twenty four as
drafted seems to be a law aimed
at further protecting parents
from being charged with child
abuse and neglect first is
protecting children from child
abuse and neglect and to allows
you I need to continue to ignore
the real and serious needs of
children in their care.
To get this much power train
agency that is already staring
when it comes to protecting our
children this bill would in my
opinion be an absolute travesty
that they'll be redrafted to
make it crystal clear for law
enforcement and or CYFD to per
state when the instant mainly
for statewide do to proceed run
against evidence of abuse and
neglect or kidnapping is by.
As drafted and strongly opposed
to Senate bill three twenty four
and the further danger and
devastation it can cause are
most vulnerable the children
thank you.
Thank you Mr Jones Amanda
Williams followed by Jessica
know that it'd.
Let me yes.
Hi my name is Williams.
Foster.
Mexico and.
Opposition of the due to the
lack of transparency and.
You there are you.
Our children.
Not.
Past.
These changes in order to.
Thank you thank you miss
Williams so then we'll take
Jessica that is a very the last
one Jessica.
Are you there there will good
Judy Woodward.
If you're not there will go to
Alex Sanchez.
Your members Scott.
Angela McMillan.
I'm here thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Angela McMillan and I'm
a foster parent and child
advocates I have great concerns
regarding a bill that takes the
ability to remove a child from
an unsafe environment input that
fully into the hands of CYFD
already with the lockdown are at
risk children have far fewer
eyes on them with the absence of
teachers neighbors and friends
no longer being involved why
would we not want to report
abuse of children to law
enforcement so that there might
be another set of eyes on these
children on force make keep
great records regarding how many
times they've been called out to
a particular home see why it may
not CYFD may not know if if use
has occurred to other adults not
home or other children.
Also a great concern is that
this bill requires each child
yes yes individually.
A child must be considered as
part of a home and not only as
themselves or other children
that should be considered that
home.
I ask that you vote no against
Senate bill three twenty four.
Thank you.
I would noted Kelly Roche also
signed up to speak against it
now we'll go to the supporters
of the bill and we'll start with
six minutes for the support or
seven and a half minutes the
schools have to the other side
we'll start with the is Rebecca
Lincoln from CYFD here yes.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and so
at the is not officially
standing in support of this bill
but he does believe that it
changes the SB three twenty four
makes to place the order to
remove children from their homes
with CYFD as the child
protection agency rather than
with law enforcement it is
important from the child welfare
standpoint being removed from
the home is traumatic to
children and the trauma
associated with primal
separation and the children's
feelings of fear uncertainty and
advantage that may have long
lasting impacts their four
children should only be removed
if that's necessary to protect
their safety and so acted as the
child welfare agency is in the
best position to assess the
safety and well being of
a child and to determine if
removal is necessary
and to do that COS is developed
structure decision making tools
that guide he's workers decision
in determining whether a child
is the imminent threat of danger
and also there's interventions
that CYFD can utilize to help
prevent the removal and also
reduce the trauma to the
children thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr leader so that
it'll be a very inflation
followed by crystal bowls the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Betty I
spent time the executive
director of Pegasus legal
services for children and also a
commissioner on the children's
court improvement commission and
turning that's represented
hundreds of children and youth
in foster care and I am here
today in support of this bill
I'll be brief because the
Sanchez is senator Kerry said
many of the things I was
planning on saying but I would
just add one thing to some of
the concerns is I'm the more we
know about from of the more we
know this is really harmful for
children and when they are
pulled out inappropriate in the
numbers really speak for
themselves but additionally and
importantly there still are
checks and balances when a child
is taken into CYFD custody be a
by law enforcement always CYFD
the child gets as an attorney
the parents get an attorney and
the judge still has to sign off
on it to be a custody hearing so
this bill does not take away
that kind of oversight at all
it's much needed and I will be
brief because I know many more
once the I thank you for your
time and I urge you to support
the spell.
Thank you misstatement you just
aren't here.
Your thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my
experience is I'm a former
foster youth I aged out of care
my experience is different than
a lot of people CYFD decided to
me from my mother's song during
the families needing but they
still needed to call law
enforcement to get them to make
the decision to taken into
custody I was seventeen years
old and the police officer came
to interview me about all the
allegations it seems to me that
he was minimizing my genetic
experiences and looking at me
like I should just get over the
feelings of invalidation and
added to my travel I didn't know
what I wanted but I knew the
truth of my town.
The police officer finish
talking to me and went out of
the room to speak with CYFD I
could clearly overhear the
conversation they were talking
about
they're arguing about whether I
should be in selected yes you're
not the police officer was the
one saying he did not feel like
I needed to be in custody
because what happened happened
long ago and he wasn't aware
what was continuing to happen
this irregular Care took time to
explain to him how trauma works
and the impact that it has long
after on my health and mental
health after arguing from both
of them the police officer
eventually reluctantly agreed to
remove the grandmother's custody
I can't say that I was thrilled
at the time but as an adult I
know that this was the best
course of action for me I now
consider myself a successful
adult but I one hundred percent
believe that my outlook would
have been very grand if I would
have stayed home it's important
to look at this issue from both
sides of the spectrum police
officers probably almost always
have the best intentions but we
know that sometimes officers
don't remove children
unnecessary and even more often
as the for today remove kids
that do not need to be rid of
being removed from one family
even for just forty eight hours
because it's so much lasting
trauma for children here.
US Iraqi staff are extensively
trained in childhood fort for
care and it's important to note
that law enforcement will still
be present I support in most
cases with the children.
I strongly support this bill and
I urge you the committee members
to support this bill as well
because I want to make sure that
removals are only happening when
absolutely necessary so that
trauma is minimized thank you.
Thank you additional Andrew
Salazar followed by Lucille
Campos.
Yes thank thank you chairman of
members of the committee my name
is Angie Salazar I am I am too
and also an age of foster youth
and this bill I am strong I am
instruction for this bill
because you know being affected
by the foster care system myself
and having
a situation of where
they need to have people that
are that are properly trained in
trauma informed care and know
how and know how to be sensitive
in this situation and in my
personal experience with short
stays.
There are there are sometimes
seed phone where they are able
to work with they may put seeds
into the to read the workers
heads of like of separating
siblings and that happened to me
and it's really important we
have people and that as my
colleague Chris who said that
they are that we work that they
work together and this is still
gonna be a collaboration capsule
police will still be on the
scene and it's it's
superintendent supersport to.
To minimize the trauma that
these young people have in that
is why I am into fully support
of this bill.
Thank you and.
so then we'll go to Lucille
Campos followed by Brenda
Bozeman.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
let Campos I'm a policy
associate for bold futures
formally known as young women
United we stand in support of
this B. three twenty four.
We believe that eliminating law
enforcement interaction for
children in the foster care
system is absolutely necessary
as our State attempts to
implement trauma sensitive
practices in the process of
child separation from a care
giver unfortunately for
communities of color any police
interaction any interaction with
police will always have
collateral effects and as it has
already been stated police will
always there on the side of
removing a child from our
families please vote yes on H.
B. to.
SB three twenty four thank you.
Thank you.
Then we have Brenda boatman to
be followed by Karen quit line.
This Brenda there.
We'll go to return with large
then for the final comments.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen what walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter we stand in strong
support of this bill we believe
that it's long overdue allow the
people and this bill as we've
read it determines that
primarily an exigent
circumstances where if the
social worker were to go to get
a police order they would or the
case worker would they would
have to get a police order there
would be some plain sure that
family would disappear with the
children so this is really
important allow the people who
have the training and the
knowledge and trauma informed
and I have trauma informed
training in order to help out
the people the children who need
their help the most thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Okay senator lotus to join to
make any kind of wrap up
comments about all the public
testimony.
Mr chairman I just wanted to
point out to the committee if
you look on the bill on page
twenty.
If you go to
line I through line twelve I
know that there is concern that
if they were siblings that were
part of a family based on a
report
that the safety of the sibling
shall be assessed by the
department so that you will not
know the words if there's a
report for a child who has
Some allegations of an incident
abuse if there are siblings that
will be taken into consideration
so that we're not going to
remove one as as was described
and then also to Mr Chairman
members when you talk about the
issue on law enforcement I think
also on the same page there's
also some more language that
will describe a little bit more
about how law enforcement is
still going to be part of this
potential removal so we're not
removing law enforcement Mr
chairman members of the
committee but we're working
together what CYFD and of course
you know anyway I know they'll
be many more questions but I
just wanted to point out those
two sections of the bill.
Thank you thank you senator.
Okay let's go to the committee
then.
Senator I think Senator Gallegos
is first and then Senator
Stefanics.
Mr chairman and Senator Lopez I
appreciate the dialogue I just
for clarity understand I've got
a daughter that is an
investigator for CYFD and my
other daughters over cost so for
our our area so I do get a lot
discussion my daughter's always
claim neither confirm nor deny
but Senator Kernan I've had a
lot of discussion with Secretary
Blalock on CYFD issues and bills
the just really quickly I and I
you can you give us the page on
your bill but can you explain to
me the new process comparatively
what it currently is what it's.
The new process is gonna be for
the removal of child from the
family.
In CYFD custody.
Mr chairman if I could Erica.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee senator gave us so
under the current process.
And I'll speak briefly set a
case judge Snyder has announced
at the under the current process
CYFD and law enforcement are
higher usually on the scene
together under the current
process they have those
discussions but law enforcement
makes the decision and as we've
heard they they err on the side
of removing the child even when
connections to resources may be
with the family needs so under
the current system law
enforcement makes that decision
to remove the child then CYFD
has two days to investigate and
then decide whether they're
going to return the child to the
family or they're going to file
an abuse and neglect petition
under it this bill
There would still be that same
collaboration between CYFD and
law enforcement at the scene but
the changes that CYFD will make
the decision about whether the
child should be removed and then
they have to get the court's
authorization so there's that
oversight and if that child is
removed they will have under
this bill three days CYFD will
have three days to investigate
and then determine whether
they're going to file the
petition of return the family to
return the child to their
family.
Thank you for that anything else
Mr center for textile.
A judge Snyder you still with
us.
I'm sorry I was on mute I
apologize Mr Mr chair members of
the committee senator guy it
goes the only thing that I would
add to what Erica just said is
that under the current system
the first time that anything is
brought before a judge is after
that forty eight hour hold or
within that time frame and so
that's when that along with the
petition if the Department
elects to file the petition
based on what they've they've
determined that forty eight
hours that's they also request
and an ex parte custody order
and.
What what this bill does is it
brings out judicial oversight to
the very front end which to me
is is incredibly important for a
judge to make that probable
cause determination.
Right away when a child when the
department believes that there
are reasons to to remove the
child rather than two days later
so that that's the only thing
that I would add to that.
Mr chair and senator and judge
Snyder I appreciate I've
actually heard your name often
as we've talked to this and I
and I really liked the idea of
you being at the front part
except I've found time and time
and time again that costs and
others do not know the story
until there before a judge even
though their sport supposed to
be part of the team that's
resolve the issue so I I like
the part that you're up front
but I should also like the
discussion within law
enforcement but how good my next
question.
Mr chairman and senator is of.
Do you consider or are do we
know for a fact law
enforcement's not.
A train for because she issues.
Mr Chairman
Erica.
Mr chair Senator day goes so law
enforcement does and I'm sorry
that the tenant centered is here
to answer this more specifically
but from from prior
conversations we've had my
understanding is that that there
are about in sorry I don't know
the technical terms but that
training that law enforcement
initially goes through about
four hours of that devoted to
the child welfare issues.
where as is the way it social
workers are required to get in
addition to to their there are
Their social work license are
required to get and you will
continuing education credits and
I do want to note that Senator
Montoya Sanders.
Did say that
That officers training is vast
but because it is that there is
room for improvement that can
come from outside support like
CYFD law enforcement contacts
with that family he is limited
after removal beyond
prosecution so just that that
CYFD gets the on going
specialized training that law
enforcement does not.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
Senator and Erica few years back
when we had junior monies at the
changing your money into Lee
County because of their police
officers wanted to have a joint
meeting joint training with CYFD
and I understood that that work
really well and I guess some
puzzle I thought that was a
statewide initiative to try to
get CYFD and the law enforcement
officers be on the same page and
and and reason why Mr chairman
and senator is we've had bills
trying to protect our CYFD staff
we've had bills to try to have
the Bussmann bill last year a
transparency bills this year
percent should be a problem with
CYFD and and that's where my
fear is if we're giving CYFD the
total control without the
discussion of of police
department because I think it's
going to take both and the
judicial
proved to be able to to protect
these kids I I've managed Mr
chairman and senator I've had
people of eight statements this
press Reynolds protective
department not to children youth
and families and we had one and
and Mr Leggett it brought it up
that they have decision making
tools in Lee County we have
remaining family surely you guys
know about it there in
Albuquerque now in care we're
CYFD allow this family to have
unsupervised visitation with
their children and they left the
kicker is there there were
Rumanian so they work here
legally we didn't want to
separate family so we allow them
to leave ultimately Mona Lisa
came up blind for life because
they left her in a hospital the
only way they found out who was
was the mother left her driver's
license and so this Mr chair.
And those right center it gives
me of fear that CYFD isn't
focused enough to take the full.
White of of your decision and I
still think there needs to be a
school law enforcement and
judicial guidance in and and I
don't know if you had Mr in
center anyone else try to talk
to you about amending the bill
you know miss Jones who is
considered a line she stated
that I had made a statement
issued could not in this or in
this condition Mr chairman Sir
Lopez have you had anyone ask
you about amending then other
opportunities to this bill.
Mr chairman as is usually the
process
if if this bill does make it out
of committee you know there's
always a chance be between here
and Judiciary of where we can
always talk about you know any
changes that are necessary.
Mr chairman Senator and also
just like to say this is not
taking law enforcement out of
the picture law enforcement and
CYFD still will work I mean a
law enforcement officer will be
present at the scene it's just
CYFD needs to be part of this
discussion also and that's what
the bill is attempting to do it
we're not taking law enforcement
away there's been talk about
having just CYFD only this is
trying to work it together where
we still have again law
enforcement and CYFD working
together in the you know in in
the context of protecting our
children thank you Mr chairman
center and I appreciate that but
I understood this would give
CYFD the last king in our last
point would that not be correct.
Mr chairman again you know we're
looking for collaborations so
again it's about building
relationships is everything we
do in our communities
you know so I mean there's
there's that this is what I say
it is an opportunity for us to
begin to forge more of a
relationship
and you know we've we've all had
our cases in different counties
that have been my own county in
my own particular Senate
district and we all had
different scenarios of what has
happened but again this is an
opportunity Mr chairman to began
having both law enforcement and
CYFD and now with the courts so
that we truly have this system
beginning to work make sure that
we're protecting our children
and or offering even services or
whatever else can come out as an
outreach as we get to students.
Thank you for that center and
and I almost laughed and it
wasn't anything about you or but
our Mr chair not trying to be
disrespectful the for two years
now we tried had collaboration
with CYFD we've not gotten any
kind of assistance from them
there again I have a really good
relationship with secretary he
listened to share current myself
went through the issues all part
of the problem and that's where
judged I understand came up
because without the substance
cares committee there's no
intervenors to be able to get
the truth of the situation out
because the department can't
tell the truth not that they
don't want to but they can't
because the way they look at
their job and and protection of
the family but it's just one of
those things that I appreciate
the idea of the collaboration
someone in testimony and made
the statement that they would be
the sole decision maker and
because of that all stand in
opposition to this cause by
truly need a collaboration
between all departments my
daughter I stated work for CYFD
she's dependent on the police
force and I think the courts
need to be just as in Paul
because when our staff or staff
goes to a hearing and they have
no story from CYFD what the
actual for you put everyone in
jeopardy so with that all yield
I just want to try to get to the
details I appreciate the idea of
what what you're trying to here
think of I will visit with some
people of we get supporting on
and then what I'd love to visit
with you about it because I
think you're on the right track
but I think the.
all parties need to have an
equal voice not CYFD be the just
and only boys city and so with
that all you'll thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator
Stefanics followed by Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
I had thank you Mr chair and
thank you Senator Lopez for
bringing this forward
My question
is not similar to Senator
Gallegos but it does deal with
law enforcement in rural areas I
have been and I discuss this
with your tiny bit already in my
district which is six counties
there are not readily available
CYFD workers it could be an hour
hour two hours three hours
before somebody is available not
only because the distance
because of the lack of numbers
working in a particular County.
And this bill.
I want to be assured that this
bill would not allow.
A dangerous situation to occur
or continue if there could be no
CYFD.
Assistance and that law
enforcement could step in.
Mister chairman Senator
law enforcement can hold the
child until the CYFD
Representative case worker
remember it is that is within
the community could arrive and
you know where they could make
the official have the discussion
as to what but it doesn't mean
that the child would be left
there law enforcement can hold
until again.
You know that CYFD
representative can be there.
Well let's let's use a.
Cappy can for an example there
might be one law enforcement
person working.
The CYFD single employee might
be hours away and taking care of
another case.
And this child either it has
been abandoned because somebody
went to the hospital or because.
They've been found on the
streets.
That could go on for a period of
time.
I mean I don't think we're
talking about a quick resolution
in some of these rural areas.
Mr chairman if I may um
Sweetser.
Mr chair Senator Stefanics as
Senator Lopez mentioned this
bill allows law enforcement to
hold the child in those
situations
that need work group that worked
in this had this this specific
discussion because we know what
it's like in rural communities
and so we did it.
We didn't want to create too
restrictive of a process that
children that need to be removed
that moment from it an unsafe
situation can't be so it allows
for for law enforcement and
medical personnel to hold the
child Intel is the way if the
worker arrived which is similar
to what what that the current
situation is when suit when law
enforcement removes the child
and then they need to
Representative need to place the
child with in CYFD custody
anyway and and I I also want to
say that in these discussions
Yeah we we were just we were
just really really considerate
of those the issues that rural
communities face.
Okay thank you Senator Lopez and
and Erica but I'm gonna.
Rely on you and your expertise
in this bill as it moves forward
I just
Now it sometimes CYFD recent
resources is aren't always there
that's all I can say at this
point thank you very much Mr
chair.
Thank you Senator Stefanics
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
I think Senator Stefanics
covered it well I'm concerned
about the capacity and resources
of CYFD do to cover all of these
cases I'm just so I could get
are we confident that they they
have the resources and capacity
to cover these cases.
Mister chairman Senator I I
don't know if if miss Leggett is
still here with us.
back are you still here yes I'm
sorry Mr chair Senator Lopez and
I'm sorry Senator Sedillo Lopez
I think right now we go out on
every call discussed reported to
it because I don't ever recall
that's cost reported and
sometimes law enforcement is
there before CYFD if more for
going out and sometimes you with
is there for law enforcement so
I think it's
That this bill doesn't change
that particular situation or you
know how we respond.
I am I guess that that's
interesting because I know of
law enforcement taking kids
without CYFD involvement in the
past which I think is is
problematic but there were
exigent circumstances you know
and I understand that it can be
traumatic so I I wasn't aware
that CYFD goes out on every.
You know it is present in every
situation as I have seen law
enforcement remove the kids.
Is is that not correct.
Mr chairman Mr Leggett.
Yes Mr chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez and members of the
committee see what the so apple
every call CYFD and law
enforcement cross report on
every referral of child abuse
and neglect involving a parent
guardian or custodian and so two
FTE does responded to every to
every referral.
That is good to hear because in
the past I've seen that that
hasn't always been the case so
that's really good to hear
Mr chair Senator Lopez and
Senator Lopez was there any
discussion in the task force
which I think by the way is
amazing work and excellent and I
really compliment you but just
wondering if there were any and
then I'm not going to second
guess it I'm gonna support this
but I'm just wondering if there
was any
discussion of making it an
either or situation where
Either CYFD or the or the police
could could make that decision
to remove the child.
Mr chairman Senator of miss
Sanchez.
Mr chair Senator city or that
I'm yes we that we work group
discussed all of that that
potential frameworks and we
heard from other states about
different how frameworks work in
their state and so after
listening to all that that
information and
a lot of discussion this is that
framework that the group that
made the most sense.
Will that work when law
enforcement is going to have to
do the investigation that will
be relied on for the ultimate or
or.
Not for the prosecution of the
parents if there's a need to
prosecute.
Mister chairman Senator Erica
the centrist.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
so that the the decisions in
regard to the abuse and neglect
cases the potential children's
court case is separate from the
criminal investigation so law
enforcement will still handle
that and the way they currently
do this doesn't affect that at
all.
But there's a lot of evidence
that's overlapping.
So will will the law enforcement
get the file from CYFD or have
CYFD testified at any court
proceeding.
Mr chairman Senator ms on just.
Again Mr chair Senator this this
doesn't change anything to that
process and I don't know if
judge Schneider may have
anything to add.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee etcetera etcetera
Sedillo Lopez know that it
changes nothing and in that
process at all so the juster
tries office and law enforcement
would have access to everything
to which they have access now in
terms of investigating a
criminal side to to be somewhat
K..
Excellent and so that's really
good to know as I said I support
the bill I really respect the
enormous work of the committee
and you know just have some
questions based on on on the
experiences we've had before
with.
This page is is not fun it's not
good it's a horrible horrible
situation and.
Reducing the trauma for the
child is a positive thing is
wary of weather.
You know whether it's adequate
but I think that if if it's true
that they go out every time then
that really eases my mind about
that worry thank you thank you
Mr chair appreciate the
opportunity thank thank you
senator said the lotus Senator
smitteez.
Thank you Mr chair and etcetera
I I do echo some of the concerns
were raised about the timeliness
and we have a lot of time points
in this bill you know three days
two days eighteen hours twenty
four hours of time constraints
and as I heard another very was
senator in this body say you
know if we don't have
enforcement of that it may not
mean much and so I mean less the
I guess the attorney general's
office or somebody
it is always.
At CYFD I I I am I guess I I
still have a continued concern
about that the time frames that
all the requirements are are
they going to follow her on who
who calls that Department
countable also you're very quick
story and this is my really only
only run in with CYFD.
We were a soccer tournament for
my daughters yeah this is in
Albuquerque okay Albuquerque
proper.
And we on the way out in the
parking lot we found a child
that appear to have some.
Fairly substantial cognitive
disabilities was locked in the
back of the car.
it was crying very hysterically
which of course is very
disturbing to us so we try to
find the parent can do that we
without calling nine one one the
fire department came the police
came and it was kind of a big
deal.
and we finally you know found
the biological mother and you
know so disturbing in its seem
to met this criteria trials in
last you know without adequate
supervision.
the moment of time law
enforcement she was only gone
for for five minutes while she
was gone for more well over
forty five minutes so because of
her lying to law enforcement and
because of our to our level
disturbance because of this this
child with a disability we we
contacted CYFD that then get
back to us for four days and
they never came out
so that that's my only run in my
only experience I hope not not
every spirit is like that but my
other concerns we heard really
great bill offer to this
committee by Senator Ivy Soto
not too long ago about the
escalating law enforcement
involvement certain medical
circumstances for people when
they were transported for a
mental evaluation I thought was
great I think it I think it
reserve received unanimous do
pass but
on that sentiment was trying to
do escalate situations where law
enforcement present I still the
same concern with rural and I
have a lot of rural areas my
just district as well as
Albuquerque proper but this is
my is my question I'm going with
this.
if law enforcement has to wait a
certain amount of time.
Even under existence
circumstances for CYFD thirty in
that.
Longer than they normally one of
them if they're having to wait
on CYFD in some circumstances so
with that and I just see how
that could escalate things if if
they're waiting and they're in
the house with potentially
hopefully not to be as a parent
but let's assume it is an
abusive situation I'm.
Concern that things could
escalate during that time which
would you share my concern
Senator.
Mister chairman Senator.
There there are always concerns
that are raised when we have to
remove a child from the home.
and I am one of course here to
say that if there is an incident
that has happened and where the
child's life safety is an issue
this bill does not preclude an
officer from taking that child
what we are trying to do Mister
chairman Senator is making sure
that we actually have as I
mentioned the different entities
involved for law enforcement
CYFD are working together and
also bringing in the courts I'm
part of the issue Mister
chairman Senator has been is
that we have children who are
removed by law enforcement
they're taken placed in
different you know wherever they
may be taken and then you of it
maybe it's been eight days nine
days ten days for you have these
what we call short stays of
children but nothing actually
happened child was returned it
made whatever incident but there
is you we're trying to make sure
that there's an opportunity for
an investigation of in and we're
also involving the force which
we've not.
In my estimation Mister chairman
Senator this is still something
for us to to tread on and see
exactly where we're going to
move I think this is a perfect
opportunity for us to begin to
you change the way that we
remove our children if you go
back years years back before the
statute was changed it was CYFD
who used to remove that we went
to law enforcement now at this
point Mister chairman Senator
we're trying to figure out how
we can work this.
Process out so that we have all
of those who have some expertise
both law enforcement CYFD and of
course if there's a filing it
needs to happen again you have
to involve the court in a court
can't do this something
immediately you still have to
have facts and information of
the courthouse to review so
hopefully within that short
period of time if we can have
some information then that is
brought back in front of the
court I'm with the court can
make the decision for the child
to be removed officially and all
the other processes that are
listed in.
That legislation that we're
considering and and every
incident is is separate and
different Mr chairman there is
nothing set where every
Should say every
incident that does happen it's
unique to that that families to
what's going on.
Okay thank you question this is
so much more of all this is that
a black and white issue is the
long black and white others all
those gray area that I this is
trying to redress of that but
again Mr chairman what we're
trying to do is to make sure law
enforcement is not being removed
have CYFD and then of course
supports are involved to to
assist in this because they do
have to make issued the order to
thank you.
Okay and Mister chairman Senator
really might maybe another way
to ask this is I'm I'm flipping
between pages.
Twenty one and and
we'll just the very beginning of
the bill probably page two
No no just page one so page one
twenty one and I want to make
sure I'm reading this for that I
think this is the crux of of
what has been discussed here is
what is law enforcement's
involvement in what CYFD so the
way I read the bill and just if
you could please tell me if I'm
correct or not where would the
bill is CYFD invaded Turman
there is an existent
circumstance they can they can
take us to the child where is
law enforcement it's not
existence circumstances it it is
if a reasonable belief that a
child has been injured because
of abuse.
Or neglect or the child may be
at risk of harm.
So is that is that a proper
understanding of the listen.
Charges.
Mr chairman I need a charger to
by the way.
Mr chairman in a wooden for what
you're looking at and we are
changing that with law
enforcement officer has the sole
authority to remove a child yes
it does say the department
as you're reading I don't have
to read it we all can read Mr
chairman specifically again what
we're trying to do within this
legislation is the word that
there is a relationship because
the report goes out an officer
comes law enforcement is still
there at at at Representative
since it is taking place we're
just pass out of the law
enforcement officer can't
ordered that the trial be taken
now we're saying that the
department has to make the
decision.
they're still working together
is not law enforcement doesn't
show up at CYFD does what forces
still responds to the request
but now CYFD has to be part of
this the termination of the
child is to be removed or
children.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I
think I mean I I really have a
lot of questions about this I
make it with the sponsor offline
at there then I could probably
talk an hour on the bill
Just just other things and and I
think you're you're I similar
doctor and we can go through a
lot of specific scenarios and
I'm sure you've heard a lot of
these from for people on bill I
just I guess I have I you know
if it if it is a working
together I'd rather the law
enforcement and CYFD to be able
to make the decisions with this
and criteria and I guess that
kind of goes back to the either
or comments from Senator Lopez
instead of just like I said the
way I read the bill as CYFD
confined exited circumstances
which is a longer lasting less
restrictive law enforcement has
a list of how I read on page
twenty one to two criteria
but and then maybe I'll just
include one on one technical
thing which I don't know several
of as we help or not if this
goes the judiciary but on page
twenty one is forced or medical
personnel shall hold the child
until the department is
available to conduct an onsite
safety assessment well.
This is my big into the weeds
but because I think this is
going to be monitored maybe one
of the most sensitive parts of
your bill is how long law
enforcement is holding children
and so I think he's be crystal
clear so the part can say we're
available to conduct a study we
just haven't conducted yet so I
think maybe what he needs to say
is that the Intel that apartment
has completed an on site safety
assessment
instead of just that they're
available to do so
so that that may be a little
little clear I think that's
maybe what what the intent was.
and so so anyway for whatever
that's worth but I think I'll
I'll wrap it up there Mr chair I
I do I want to point out one
last thing is we have a hundred
and forty five people on the
zoom call right now I don't know
if that's because of this bill
or or what but that's that's
more than twice the amount that
I've ever seen for for even big
controversial partisan bills and
thanks guns and abortion and all
that stuff we we tend to have
like sixty five at least to my
knowledge I don't always check
it but I find it very profound
it is the highest I've ever seen
I'm not sure exactly what that
means but I think the next bill
house bill twenty as many as
that name is that but just want
to throw that out there is if we
can ever get to it.
Whatever doing today is is is
that we got some big bill so
yeah that's all I have Mister
chair thank you soon good thank
you senator.
Senator Gallegos are you wanting
to speak for the second time on
this bill.
Yes Sir Mr I'll be real real
brief.
Mr chair if I may yeah.
Mr Chairman representative
Lopez of Senator yes
Representative Senator Lopez
Senator Sedillo Lopez have
brought up the task force and I
was just wondering is this a
task force bill is this a part
of what came out of their
meetings this year.
Chairman Senator miss Sanchez.
Yes Mr chair Senator this bill
when it was what the children
score improvement commission put
forth to be introduced this
session and I don't know if
judge Snyder has anything to say
I'm I'm not with the court.
Mr Mr chair of Senator okay
because yes this is a that the
product of the work of the
children's court permit
commission and it has the the
support of the judiciary
we.
Period I mean it has to support
the gesture I will add that
there is an educational
component to this for the
judiciary in terms of I have
Everyone all of the all of the
members of the judiciary being
able to review these these
At applications for removal
orders so there's an educational
piece for the judiciary but the
judiciary is in support of this
thank you thank you.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and Senator Lopez I was just I
was hoping this is something
that came out of the CYFD task
force I could help with that
follows in the house made a trip
from Eunice to Mexico to
Albuquerque to be shut out
because at that time they
weren't allowing legislators be
part of the discussion so I just
want to clear that up I'm glad
the Gerald children's court is
looking at this and I hope to
have a positive vote on the
floor thank you.
Thank you senator question will
of the committee in the past Mr
Chairman.
I was seconded by Senator
Stewart thanks any other
discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator three twenty four
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am I'd like to explain my
vote
our New Mexico.
Thank all.
I've heard that story said pass.
We're.
Did you said.
Yes yes thank you.
Sermon.
Yes.
Now.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Tom I'm.
His excuse for the moment.
Is here and he.
Yes.
You know.
I just want to check with
Senator Ingle you did you go yes
Senator no.
Well I'm voting.
You know all okay it was yeah I
just finished my about ten days
ago now.
Okay.
We're GDP rose yes thank you.
What's the challenging.
Chair but I get to yes Sir thank
okay.
It's five to three Senator okay
so you have to do to us to
Senator again just wanted to
explain.
Wanted to briefly explain is
both.
Mr chairman I will try to be
brief I've got some areas in the
bill that I want to look at of
clarifying the participants in
this bill I'm hoping that
that'll be clarified and
corrected and judiciaire pour
compl four but that's my main
thing I think right now what
rates you it looks like CYFD as
the ultimate Authority I just
wanna make sure it's about also
authority thank you Mr thank you
Senator our last bill today is
going to be still twenty so if
you're here for any other bill
we're not gonna be able to get
to it today.
We have a floor session six we
can probably stretch that a
little bit.
But I want to finish house bill
twenty now.
So we'll go to the hospital
twenty.
Representative Chandler and
Rubio I hope you're here.
Mr chair I am here can you hear
and see me this is
Representative Chandler.
Great I can hear you and.
I have not done my camera let me
do that I I apologize.
start video okay.
You are still trying to learn
how to coordinate all the stuff
Mr chair very very pleased to
see you and I believe my co
sponsors on the line and and I I
would like to acknowledge
I have a very short
introduction which I'll share
with you and then be happy to
answer the questions of of the
committee so
If I may begin Mr chair yes
please.
And I do have an amendment which
I can talk about after my short
presentation.
Pleased to be here with my co
sponsor Representative Rubio two
percent house bill twenty they
healthy workplace Act it that
will insure all workers have the
right to and and paste sick
leave a right I hope we can all
agree is basic and essential
with the passage of this
legislation New Mexico will join
about a dozen other states.
Hundred and fifty countries that
recognize that mandatory sickly
sick time off promotes a healthy
workplace increases employee
productivity protects co workers
and the public it's a small ask
and we believe it is long
overdue.
In terms of of if description Mr
chair it applies to all and
private employers in the state
it allows a worker to accrue one
hour for every thirty hours
worked up to sixty four hours a
year.
Allows sick leave usage for the
employees own illness or that of
other family members doctors
appointments and another a
number of other health related
needs the act includes the usual
sorts of anti retaliation
provisions as well as
enforcement mechanisms Mr chair
with that I'm I'm happy to defer
to my Sanchez she wishes to add
a at your intelligence of course
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Chandler Representative Rubio.
Are you with this Representative
Rubio.
There's so many people in the
room I'm having a hard time.
Getting through all of the
screens.
She's.
She then at Mr chair we have a
floor session going there we've
all been juggling a few things
as all of you have that as well
sure.
Understood.
We'll just go out and you have
extremists on this I do we have
to saying you.
And
Stephanie the what.
Mr use.
At the chair or Ortiz Pino
director New good afternoon
members of the committee I
believe that that this budget
would just let me stand for
questions so I will make a
statement.
Where we have.
Really lengthy list of people
who want to speak for and
against this measure I guess I'm
going.
I do have an amendment and I
don't know how you would like to
handle that I just wanted to the
point.
Did you get to moment to just in
time for us.
Mister Mister chair I believe I
did and I and your staff houses.
Okay the amendment please.
Mr chair the amendment came in
at twelve o'clock today.
Okay well we put IT UP we'll
take a look at.
But you want to go over the
Representative I do I'm just
wondering if it's the right
amendment that's up I see a
floor amendment.
So I'm missing out Mr chair I I
see now
yes is that house House.
Okay good I see very.
Yeah yeah I was I was a little
confused myself Mr chair for a
moment there the two oh two
number is two two zero five six
seven point one.
Is that appears to be at and
what we are doing here Mister
chair is essentially two things
one we're we're changing section
six in the bill to accommodate
employers with PT policies that
those are paid time off policies
that are not specifically
identified as sick leave
policies
if those policies have health
terms and conditions.
Time available to their
employees.
We would Senator those PTO
policies in conformance with the
act that's what the what the the
amendment does and the second
amendment.
The effective date is July one
twenty twenty two and that
amendment was done in
coordination with the governor's
office and at and we were happy
to accommodate.
Her request so so
But it also strikes a couple of
other items from the house floor
amendment number one.
Well that is requiring the no
items eleven and thirteen.
You up.
The Mr.
We are go ahead those are thank
I guess I'm you might call them
clean up items in that when we
changed section six I believe
paragraph to sort of
accommodates that that provision
and subsumes what was done and
paragraph two of the amendment
that you have in front of you
and
again on page twenty three we
had an effective date and we're
adding section sixteen which
changes effective date.
About that I hope one of my
experts will correct me Mr
chair.
We're seeing the emergency
reporting intersected eight
storage.
We have a motion to consider the
amendment please.
You you can take it off now I'm.
Mr chair I didn't have the
effective date.
July one twenty twenty two okay
I'll also move.
Thank you.
Thank discussion of the
amendment Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair just it's
kind of nonsense stand of.
Question really not getting out
the the committee.
It's this is happen with
emergency clause I just want to
make sure I I understand how
this works because this bill
passed the house without the
emergency clause.
So if you're in that and all the
circumstances are are you
required to go in there and
strike the emergency calls from
the bill or is it just enacted
invalid and and it just it can
stay in the bill is that is that
why you're.
The house floor amendment
strategy.
So it's not on there this
ammendment and this ammendment
and it's a section sixteen to
make the effective date July
first twenty twenty two that's
why I understand is that correct
Representative
yes Mr chair.
Okay Mister chair so I guess I'm
actually more concerned now let
me make sure I understand this
so.
This bill before it passed the
house.
The the emergency clause was
removed.
And.
But it it did in a wooden of
past with an emergency because
now it's over here in the
purchasing Clause is back on.
No the house the house floor
amendment is the other sheet in
the back of your centered on so
yes without it so we have here
is the bill as amended by the
overseas so it's not on there I
see I see okay thanks for
clearing that up for me
appreciate it.
What this does raise the
question in my mind
Representative Chandler and I
know that that it was a
governor's office it was
suggesting.
We delay in the implementation
of what was supposed to happen
to people.
During this pandemic I mean.
This one of the main.
Sources a regency about this
bill was.
What's happening to the pandemic
and if people and take advantage
of this until maybe a year after
the pandemic what what bill does
not lose some of its
saver.
Mr chair thank you for that
question it is a it's a very
good question but
truthfully I view it as a
balancing of interests and there
have been concerns that you know
that businesses are not yet
ready to absorb the
responsibilities associated with
the bill so we are willing to
work with them in terms of the
timing and you know now since
it's a compromise Mr chair that
we are very anxious to see a
sick sick leave bill enacted and
signed this year as quickly as
we can I think we're long
overdue for that no question
about that Mr Chairman I would
request that I I take your point
it's a very good point but sick
leave is necessary what when
we're in a pandemic and when
we're out of this pandemic which
I hope will be very soon.
No there's a couple things come
to mind is all the federal money
coming in for pandemic relief.
I mean the only problem is
coming in as we're leaving so we
won't have a chance to shape any
of the have any of that money is
used but.
It does seem to me that there
ought to be some.
Maybe.
Those workers who were missing
time because of you know they've
been quarantine or they've been
in order not to come to work
they have no recourse only just
lose their salary we have some.
Some relief in in in the bill we
passed earlier this year then
we'll have a little tax relief.
But
you know in in may not be.
They're taking in the shores I
guess is what I'm saying is if
interest doesn't take effect for
another year.
Mr chair I'm I'm completely
sympathetic with your your
perspective again it's an effort
to balance competing interests
and you know we think it's fair
and we really do want to move
this bill and support of workers
across the state starting as
soon as possible which we think
is most reasonable a in within
the effective date moving
forward.
Okay.
So that we never did act on the
amendment Sir Mr so.
We had a motion on the
amendment.
Mr chair.
We can on the motion it is okay
on the amendment Senator
Schmedes on yes thank you Mr I'm
still stuck on the summer too
because the the amendment in
front of us maybe it's the wrong
about the amendment in front of
us says we're gonna strike items
eleven thirteen from the house
floor amendment.
And item thirteen is striking
the emergency clause so are we I
thought we're on striking the
strike of the merged Z. Clause
is that is that not true.
Representative Chandler.
It's not true.
If you
The stuff on this I I just part
of this year hi yes Frank.
basically the amendments kind of
a convoluted way of restoring it
back to before this the floor
amendment came on to.
And then it strikes the
emergency clause in the new
amendment puts the new July
first twenty twenty two date as
the effective date the emergency
clause is gone and it conforms
section six I think it was to
comply with the new effective
date.
Okay okay convoluted drafting
okay okay I'm happy now I'm
sorry to get stuck on that I
just make sure I understood it
no no we're gonna vote and we
are understand what we're voting
on this good senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez you income.
Yes on the amendment I'm also
very disappointed that
the workers will have to take
the the workers that are
impacted will have to take the
brunt of this of the pandemic
I but I I
A lot of small businesses in my
district and this summer when we
opened up a little bit I went to
a lot of small businesses I
tried to promote them I patriot
taking pictures of per month
basis the.
And I in connection with doing
that I talked to a lot of small
business owners and they said
after our they were angry and
upset.
And they said after our and
after that's the whole.
Everybody knows what artist but
after our and after the pandemic
they just didn't have the
resources so I drafted a bill
paid time off paid time off tax
credit that would cause that
would actually help fund this.
And I just got the F. I. R. it
would cost of forty million
dollars so what it did is it
would give a one hundred percent
tax credit to two of businesses
small businesses under fifteen
that provided people who make
under sixteen dollars an hour
with paid time off and it would
do a hundred percent the first
year seventy five percent the
next year twenty five percent
and then zero in order to help
with the transition during this
pandemic because I think now is
when we needed more than ever
and we just got the FIR need
would cost forty million in
fiscal year twenty two of twenty
three it would cost thirty
million in twenty three seven
million in twenty four and then
it would cost nothing in these
would be nonrecurring funds and
I just.
I want to suggest that we have
given small businesses a lot but
when I would raise the the loans
to the small businesses that I
went to visit this summer in my
district they got angry they
said I don't need I don't need
more more debt
what what they needed was they
wanted they said I would love to
pay for paid time off for my
employees I just can't it will
put me over the edge.
And so I did included it's it's
sitting in finance the for the
FIR took a long time to to get
even though I started drafting
it
About a month before the session
started and I I think that this
is really important I understand
that the amendment tries to
balance it but this is yet
another example where the
balance is against the workers
who are actually doing the work
get if they're the most impacted
by the virus than anyone else
and there if they are not gonna
be able to get paid off.
For their own health needs the
health needs of their children
and I think it also makes the
rest of us unsafe would people
have to go to work because they
don't have any other option and
they go to work sick so.
I understand it I'm very
disappointed.
Senator I wonder if your bill.
Be amended it want to
Representative Chandler's bill.
Which is already gone through
the house would have to go back
for concurrence for the Human
speed the process up if if if
your tax credit can be added to
the bill.
And she's proposing.
it is twenty twenty two and.
Kind of this
one this one possibility the
other thing is for us to go
ahead and fund your bill.
Because we know that there's
going to be a bunch of federal
money coming in.
R. our reserves are going to be
above thirty five forty percent
and we're not here to answer any
money any it to make any
specific decisions about the
federal money we can at least
commit enough of our reserves to
something that within being
replaced with the federal money
well my bill hasn't even gotten
one hearing implants so it's
well as I maybe we just added on
to this and this and this one of
two what is your next Judiciary.
I believe so Mister chair in it
with respect I would prefer not
to add additional complexity to
my bill I wish to be
disrespectful to you or.
Ali Senator Sedillo Lopez.
While a year okay I I I totally
respect that I understand that
you know I I understand that I'm
not in finance committees are
gonna go out that sausage making
works but I am disappointed that
Well I didn't have a group you
know I drafted this bill on my
own responding to to the the
different.
small businesses in my area and
they were and honestly they
weren't they were of.
Their their reaction was is it
more paperwork and I said well
if it's a track tax credit I
don't think it'll be more
paperwork you just have to claim
it but
Warm reaction those of the
businesses are hurting is is I
guess the point I'm trying to
make and so that's why
understands this but again it's
just the balances weight and in
favor of the businesses and and
not the workers and I wish that
we had the state could do
something for the workers and I
think helping the small
businesses with the transition
is a better way to go about this
and it just making the workers
suffered yet another year I I'm
gonna vote for well in my number
system and I don't know I mean I
have such a negative reaction to
this ammendment
but I suppose it is what's
required to make the bill go
further I don't want to stop
this bill.
Mr Senator goes to taxed
business next.
This bill goes injection
business next.
Yes.
We sure it does create.
Any other discussion on the
amendment is there any
opposition to the then let's
take a roll call vote on the
amendment the penny would you
call the roll.
I know then one for house bill
twenty.
Those.
Yes ma'am.
Well.
Yes.
Ask.
Senator Sedillo Lopez asked.
Thanks yes.
Sierra yes.
Yes.
Lopez.
Yes explain my vote.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez to
explain remote I'm the only
reason I'm voting for it is
because I don't want to stop
this bill I don't I I don't want
to put any barriers for this
it's very very important I am
disappointed that we're it's
going to be another year before
Representative relief.
Okay now let me let me just say
this this lengthy list I'm gonna
say will take ten minutes on
each side.
And thank you mind and and would
you put up the slack for us a.
so that people can can watch.
You can mine number will start
with those who are opposed to
this bill.
But keep in mind that we only
have a total of ten minutes if
you take five those that is five
million people and probably you
to say anything at all.
So we'll try to go as far as we
can on this list we'll do I'll
just take the list is the order
that was given to me.
First up is Angela Garcia
followed by Chrissy Jeter.
Is Angela Garcia here.
Missy Jeter followed by Robert
black.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Christy gener Jeter and I am
the executive director of
Westminster and center in
Albuquerque as a child care
provider I've been open through
the onset of the pandemic I want
to take this opportunity first
to thank my staff their
dedication and hard work and
resilience during the most
challenging here we have faced
recognizing the current public
health crisis there should be a
path forward towards a mandatory
paid time off program that could
work for both employers and
employees unfortunately HB
twenty is not that path my
business resides in Bernalillo
county Bernalillo county passed
an ordinance in two thousand
nineteen this ordinance takes
both the employee and employers
need into consideration a couple
of examples include an exemption
to those companies to offer
equal or greater paid time off
programs and the flexibility for
employees to use the PTO for any
purpose I strongly recommend the
committee take a closer look at
the Bernalillo county ordinance
H. B. twenty currently harms
both employees and employers
thank you.
Thank you so next is rob black
followed by Allison Smith.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is rob black
on the president and CEO of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
I'm here today to express our
deep concerns with HB twenty as
the previous speaker said we do
believe there should be a way
forward that works for both
employers and employees
I am very pleased to hear of the
amendment to both.
In the start as well as.
Recognize existing PTO it's
unfortunate we haven't seen that
we have no idea what it sets and
this being one of the most
consequential pieces of
legislation for the business
community where we are key
stakeholders it is very
challenging I mean the committee
didn't get the the moment until
noon today it's very challenging
to have a productive
conversation around important
legislation in this session
but again we do we're very
pleased to hear that that is
being recognized because every
single state for fifteen states
that have an existing PTO plan
and every single one of them
recognizes existing employer
plans so we're glad to hear that
that's there we are concerned
with the additional eighty hours
of supplemental Lee that would
be included in this bill.
and that that would be very that
accumulates immediately upon
health order so those are
another area where we're very
concerned I'll hold my comments
and so we're able to really see
what the new PTO legislation is
in in in and that recognition
because there's many others who
want to speak but we are
concerned about the process
again we would like to find a
path forward that works for both
employers and employees and are
consent willing to have that
conversation thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr black Allison Smith
followed by Carlos Sonntag.
Yes thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith I am the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
groundwater Association the New
Mexico groundwater Association
is it a trade organization
representing representing water
well drillers and owners across
the state the bill prior to the
amendment which of we we have
not seen at all at either would
result in a significant increase
in what many trade businesses
already offering paid time off
for paid sick leave we feel this
increase will translate into
higher fees that well drillers
pump service technicians
plumbers electricians or H. back
repair people must charge to all
New Mexicans even those on a
fixed income unforeseen
increases on life safety repairs
and services services seems an
unfair reality to those on a
fixed income many groundwater
Association numbers are small
businesses with small crews and
the increase in days off can
have a detrimental effect on the
work that can be done and
limiting the services that these
businesses can find for life
saving services and causing an
increase in expenses to field
more cruise or to provide more
services equipment thank you
very much for your time and we
stand in this.
Thank you Carla Sonntag's
followed by general white.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Carlos contact
the president of the New Mexico
business coalition we stand in
opposition to this bill I think
it's got multiple problems one
of them I've not seen where this
is eight funded portion of the
budget so you've got an unfunded
mandate for ten new positions at
a hundred thousand in technology
needs.
But with the bill you're talking
about this sick leave with the
supplemental at a time when
businesses are shut down in the
face of another pandemic
potentially there shut down they
have no revenue and how would
they pay for eighty hours of
paid time off that's what
unemployment insurance is for
and how it was used that's a big
problem in this bill secondly
you know this is one of the most
burdensome bills that we've seen
in the US for those that have
this type of paid sick leave
and.
If you really want to take care
of workers which we all do
consider the fact that this
burden on employers especially
here smaller ones is going to
cause them to have to cut hours
and cut jobs and that does not
help the workers I urge you to
oppose this legislation thank
you for your consideration.
Thank you.
Carol white followed by press
lately.
You.
Why there.
Let me followed by Carl Terry.
It is neither of them of their
I am the co chair eighty dollars
by Ruben Baca.
Yes thank you chair and
committee.
Carl Terry with Roosevelt County
chamber of commerce
we stand in opposition to this
bill or of the main reasons that
are mentioned previously and I
would like to add a little bit
on to the those reasons we're
going it's a bad time for this
bill it's a bad bill and we need
to the very money that what the
Carlos on Todd was just tell
telling us they're going to be
cut.
For businesses in our community
that means that our students any
and you are not going to be able
to get jobs that they rely on to
go to school.
It means that our immigrant.
Workers in the berries or gonna
get cat.
And that's that's some of the
consequences that we're facing
here this is the wrong time this
is a the wrong bill.
please.
Recorded in opposition this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Jerry Rubin Baca
fallen by Lauren Kate rate at
the Patterson.
There.
Okay Lauren Patterson followed
by Michelle frost Maynard.
Share daisy Pino members the
committee lord Patterson on
behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers association our
membership opposes H. B. twenty
in a time when just keeping the
doors open our business
employers employees on the
payroll uncertain economic
futures this bill would add
another level of employee
management costs and regulatory
requirements we understand the
pandemic is brought new
challenges to employees
employers light it is our belief
this would work against us what
a frightening of the ground are
small businesses are expanding
on and slow the economic
recovery for these reasons
another stated New Mexico cattle
growers opposes house bill
twenty thank you chairman.
Thank you Mr garrison Michelle
Ross to Maynard followed by
Julie Kennedy.
Afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee.
Our rural communities have been
hit very hard with the pandemic
and adding this on to our small
rural communities and the
restaurants and the people there
is not going to be helpful we if
you look at it and you add this
on to an employer.
Then the employees going to have
to make a decision either to
close and have no employees or
to cut that the employees so
therefore we stand in
opposition.
Thank you Mr west manager
Montoya all of a Jason Espinoza.
Jason Espinoza followed by
Stephanie Bennett the this.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza.
The state director with the
national federation of
independent business and we do
stand in opposition to the
legislation when things just
want to build out some of the
points that Senator Sedillo
Lopez and you chairman made up
talked about was there is a real
cost to small employers for
offering this benefit when we
look at the employer with fifty
employees giving minimum wage at
ten fifty an hour that's over
thirty three thousand six
hundred dollars a year annually
to cost and even of an employee
doesn't take that time it still
has to be counted as a liability
on their balance sheets I'm and
when we look at the cost and
other folks recognize when
Congress passed the family first
run a virus response act at the
onset of the pandemic and
required paid sick leave that
they created a a tax credit to
offset dollar for dollar the
cost of giving the paid time off
we've seen innovative approaches
such such as Senator Sedillo
Lopez build offer tax credits to
help small businesses offer this
benefit and the house we saw the
family friendly incentive
program that would have provided
additional financial support to
small businesses to offer family
friendly policies to their
employees so we just want to you
know let the the legislature in
the committee know there is a
true cost and we appreciate ways
to find ways to offset that
burden on employee RSVP so they
can offer these benefits to
employees thank you.
Thank you Mr.
The state any minute we just
followed by Randi Valverde.
Randy no there that followed by
Jason Weaks.
chairman members of the
committee my name is ready
already I am a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors the New
Mexico association of realtors
does not opposed mandatory paid
sick leave programs but they
cannot support each P. twenty as
drafted for many of the reasons
already stated thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Jason Weaks followed by Jason
marker you Mr chairman members
of the committee Jason Weaks on
behalf of the New Mexico
hospitality association and a
few other clients and I could
mention that but basically I
think the amendment does take
care of some of the larger of
businesses issues with the
legislation by giving them some
ability to count existing PTO
programs towards the paid sick
leave so it's a step in the
right direction the delayed
implementation certainly is also
helpful you know smaller
businesses and hotels typically
are they do have large employee
bases however their margins are
very low on that absolutely been
hammered as a result of the
pandemic I mean they're
struggling in their hang by a
thread legislation doesn't do a
whole lot are they have been
amendments made to address some
of the concerns of some of those
businesses I think they
certainly would like the
opportunity to continue
negotiating that sounds like
other will be that opportunity
hopefully during interim since
the delayed implementation is
basically a year so as for right
now we still stand in opposition
of the language very much
appreciate Sanchez willingness
to continue to work with us in
the amendments that remove today
thank you.
Thank you.
Jason Barker followed by Walter
Bradley.
Walter Bradley followed by
Justin Hayes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Walker Bradley.
Representing the dairy farmers
of America and I'm glad to hear
the to sponsor communicated with
the governor over the bill
Bennett so unfortunate that
we've been asking for an
audience for the sponsor to work
out some of the issues from the
business community so we still
like that opportunity and still
like to make this this bill be a
workable and fair for both the
employer and the employee so you
know it's not exactly for sure
that the state is exempted but
none of the small businesses are
exempted as in the other states
most actually exempt small
businesses of fifty to thirty
from this type of issue due to
the cost on top of a thousand
dollar fine fines for
bookkeeping Year this is a great
lawyer bill as it allows any
employee to sue with you without
filing an administrative
complaint that could've could
work out an issue
being filed and the employer
when it happens we lose I use
the larger fees for all these
reasons and those stated before
me.
Very farmers oppose the
legislation as it's currently
written thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Red lead to have you join us.
Now we'll goes for ten minutes
of comments by the supporters of
the bill I want to start with
the secretary mccamley is these
there and then go to Larry
parens Mr chair thank you very
much for the time my name is
bill mccamley and the secretary
The New Mexico workforce
solutions department and on this
bill I'm speaking on behalf of
the administration and we stand
to support this bill we believe
that the year long
implementation delay allows for
folks to get ready to implement
the bill frankly allows our
department to plan and train our
folks are we are still gonna
need more staff to enforce the
bill but it also allows us to go
into next year's budget session
and ask for the proper staff to
be able to do that the governor
believes very very strongly that
that not only do workers need
this directly but having sick
folks go to work is not good for
them and it's not good for the
community members surrounding
them as we seem to this pandemic
so we stand in support
appreciate the sponsors are
working with our folks to get an
amendment that puts some balance
on this on this topic thank you
Mr I do appreciate thank you Mr
secretary Larry Herman followed
by Shelly Man Lev.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee Larry R. and
registered lobbyist for put
Presbyterian health plan and
Presbyterian healthcare services
the amendment
went a long way to fixing the
concerns Presbyterian had with
the plan we had some good
discussions with the sponsor
well as this legislation has
moved and and our our personal
or our PTO policies
significantly more generous than
what's in the legislation so we
wanted to make sure that we can
still offer that in our in our
policy would qualify and we have
a we have a more technical issue
that they've delayed effective
date deals with which is health
care entities have some unique
contractual relationships with
providers that aren't
necessarily the type of part
time workers that you would be
talking about when you're
dealing about sick leave and so
this gives us the time to see if
we can address some of those
issues but with that with the
with the amendment to allow for
use of our our better policy we
appreciate the work to sponsor
the proponents of done on that
income support legislation thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr and
Shelly Man Lev followed by area
creating real.
Committee chair Ortiz economic
committee members thank you so
much my name is Shelly ma'am let
the president of the New Mexico
Public Health Association and we
stand in support of this bill
paid sick leave is a very
serious public health issue that
is important obviously for
individual workers and their
families but for the entire
public and we are grateful that
there has been movement forward
and hope to see that happen as
quickly as possible in our state
thank you.
Thank you very Griego followed
by Tessa will drum solos Aksyon.
Hi all.
With this.
The option.
Very.
Really miss more appealing from.
Yes good evening
Distinguished Senator Ortiz you
can you know and the committee
I want to again by stating that
I am here is a member today in
the New Mexico working working
families party
under honorable charities you
Pina distinguished members of
the Senate health and public
affairs committee I am elements
W. school social worker here in
the Rio Rancho area as a member
of the New Mexico working
families committee in a
concerned citizen I stand in
strong support of the paid sick
leave bill here today paid sick
leave should be a basic social
safety net rights especially
because of the pandemic we need
to finally protect all workers
across our state and we need to
do that now as a concerned
citizen I want to say speaking
for myself I think that forty
million dollars at for tax
credits as discussed by the FIR
that Senator Lopez just
presented to this committee in
her bills that seems to me like
smart legislating that would
allow this critical lifelines
workers to be available in a
much more timely manner this
summer I am sad very sad and
disappointed that New Mexico
workers are again being asked to
wait a whole another year in the
middle of the pandemic.
I also want to speak as a mental
health professional as a school
social worker and very concerned
about the families I serve and
their access to mental health
services and often unspoken
aspect of why paid sick leave is
so is also needed is the ability
for families receive mental
health services from psychiatry
and counseling psychologists and
psychiatrists office hours as
many of you now tend to be
restricted to daytime working
hours which are up in outside
the reach for hard working New
Mexican families that do not
have access to paid sick leave
when the Senate passes this bill
we will finally change the
inequity which we know
disproportionately affects low
wage workers from our immigrant
let Max African American and
native communities The New
Mexico cross the state one point
of order that I I wanted to ask
the committee if you were able
to answer is that my son as a
school social worker working for
choisissez governmental
organizations should in this
state I actually do not know if
people in my position are
covered by this proposal thank
you and thank you for your time
tonight.
This will tell us followed by a
little more than a.
When.
We know that yes.
A somewhat sexy on think we own
the state thank you very once in
all Mexico.
Yes.
Meet I can just you just may
miss out on a companion at nine
forty eight.
When you said that what are the
lead bank thank you for all that
but I have a high.
The meeting thank you so so is
that we have the numbers deputy
you can also have up on what the
what do you want my last
sentiment face yes.
The act they see it on a
provided what we.
To.
Yes with me you'll see more like
right it
was the last.
I hope you said yes.
What was the point in the past.
Do
will see you both so but what
what they have the evidence of
that but I don't.
That.
What one
We get better dealing with this
of the pro any other disposal
this this is because the solemn
useful so.
Quantico we if you have a better
understanding that the meeting.
You
know that also.
Thank you for looking nope the
state one.
This
motion thank the most economic
government thank.
When on the job.
The C. thank we look.
No.
Yes but I'm not one of the list
well you know I have to pick
those the committee.
Yes yes I will maybe call.
The I mean what are.
CBS also your we had almost in
the US than in it be sure that
the other part of the C. bus.
Economy can we just very system
the basic model is so ordered.
One of the also PCS said that
yeah well you know what but the
other.
The New Mexico.
I see people get.
What is their demo that then it.
This is the new one that gonna
Municipal me that.
That is and this is in.
It that are probably going to
one was the most.
Yeah well you know for follow.
Then a little known followed by
Eugene Hamrick followed by a
meal creation done.
G..
Followed by milking time.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Jeanne hammered a
ball into your advocate with a
A. R. P. New Mexico paid sick
leave is a priority for A. A. R.
P. New Mexico this year many
workers do not have paid sick
leave and this causes them to
choose between working sect or
losing wages if they choose to
care for themselves or their
family members according to open
a A. R. P. study from twenty
sixteen the average care givers
Spence eight thousand six
hundred sixteen dollars of
income on caregiving losing
wages compounds hardship.
We ask you to join us in
supporting New Mexico's working
family caregivers with a deep
**** but thank you.
Thank you.
Interrupting could you make a it
announcement about
interpretation services
available.
Sure you know you make it I
don't understand how it works
you John.
Well that's about it so if
anybody needs interpretation is
somebody's witnesses speaking in
Spanish and you have the
interpretation you can listen in
English this Madam as a driver.
Infect others waiting for this
makes sense.
And it's long overdue and I'm in
favor of HB twenty and I
appreciate.
Yes thank you.
Hello sorry I'm followed by rose
so those kind of you.
The one aspect of this.
I'm so you'll see level so yeah
hello this is yellow Act than we
though the Ninos my dad that I
see holes you know the central.
Is the only article you also a
this in fact the most hello this
is in C. honest Candace doubled
for entities the funding yeah
eleven and this company will
soon is gonna struggle hoping
that like on the other eight
thousand.
And I know possible one would
they they call we just you know
in the that I hold you this was
done yeah what I know for a lot
most of the Quetta going give
Landel on Maestas was we'll see
people's.
Would this that the ample less
than PLO no cover a portion of
the test files putting paid me
that fit it I lease us and all
last the Free State Land they
see see on this over the next
slide sandal people that element
that owners thus far meeting
yes.
You madam man thank they see the
renewable but also a whole
level of those most people just
cancel the compact you yeah they
must put give me the phone and
this is the Donna said Municipal
kia brought up very suddenly so
little that look as though is a
little Sandel contact concept.
You know maybe that I would also
put the imposed on extra most
finance it I mean but my stay on
you because you look for the
most total.
This is ideal again both in C.
N. act a bank that this is a
dumb also see honestly Alice
properly monthly Allison will
make you.
Iglesias.
Rose you.
Followed by if we have time
a country so in.
When the state is in a pretty in
the members take on it and when
I can approach is that the US
okay sanity the national credit
the number got your medicines
that I have I know that within
the presented insanity that you
listen to the with that it just
was deciding that there have
been a lot of some of the most
efficiency and most it is
present as many government
diffractive this evening just in
New Mexico we need food we also
look at Senator stylist of the
holidays someone that would be
domestic economy at U. S. must
read the funding Missy does your
not see it as you know we've got
a.
He says the and this mean we
that that's the government Hey
your communities in New Mexico
most nobody fecal important
going deeply into that apple
ecosystem then must be able to
cost she decided to start a
hundred and good you see nexus
for the files what impressed me
that she does you know are
coming out that are funding on
chemicals you didn't component
of a Hollywood agency and
yes I need to be ready community
input this got mostly at the
heart of pineapple Nico meeting
of missing I saw.
I bought it last settlement up
today by Jackie to get yet
continue on them according to
stand that seeming grown ups on
the I will put up with this will
to be the you'll get must imia
commodity sold data in a
confession on the economy may be
on this does make also system to
see in the would just for my
schedule that you just the
imported that that a list of the
hottest commodities Jack just
almost yes but elsewhere from me
that side by the this no so must
precede the release total so
most New Mexico we're just gonna
just use.
I'm afraid that it's
inconclusive time the time is
elapsed there were over thirty
people in that signed up to
didn't get a chance to speak in
support and another dozen or so
who is signed up will goes into
to get a chance to speak.
But at least we are.
Cross section of both groups.
So with that we'll go to the
committee said a representative
did you want to make any
concerning remarks before you go
to committee discussion.
just a couple of comments Mr Mr
chair one is I work actively
with members of the business
community and there was not one
meeting that I refuse to have
and I'm always happy to talk
with anyone in the business
community on on this item second
of all the FIR that
one of the miss Sonntag
reference is out of date and
that financial assessment is not
correct and lastly Mister chair
I would just like to point out
that this body the Senate and
the house in the governor have
been providing tremendous
support to businesses who have
been adversely impacted by the
COVID crisis and it disappoints
me that that that point is not
acknowledged when this issue is
discussed thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative let's
go to the committee senator
Antoinette Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I was getting
on the internet and and looking
at the COVID relief package and
one of the items of it is a tax
credit for paid time off.
And.
Just now wondering you know now
and I bill but if there is a
wealth I think that I'm I'm I'm
just joking I I need I think
that a state one of could also
be supplemental in the cases in
filling in gaps but this tax
credit looks pretty
comprehensive it applies to
businesses with five hundred
five thousand employees are
less.
which would probably be every
employer in New Mexico I don't
think we have employers that
have more than five thousand.
Hello in Los Alamos National has
lad has over fifteen thousand
employees Senator and and ready
by this benefit and have built
into our budget the reason I'm
doing the reason that and so.
It makes me wonder why we're
waiting a year because this tax
credit is available this year
we provided paid time off that
in Los a COVID Dio and we just
built it into our budget was not
a rich rich nonprofit at all we
built into our budget because it
was a priority and if this is a
priority for the safety of our
community and for businesses so
that they can have a happier
workers I think it should be a
priority I strongly support this
bill but I I think it's also
important to keep in mind that
in addition to all of the
benefits that the the that this
body the legislature and the
governor's office is provided to
businesses they do have the
opportunity to get federal tax
credit if they voluntarily
provide this earlier so I would
like to encourage encourage
businesses to get ready for this
and start providing paid time
off and collect on the federal
tax credit when the COVID bill I
don't imagine that's going to
change in this in this COVID
bill so thank you so much to the
sponsors for bringing this
forward it's a very important
bill long overdue thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez
Senator Schmedes you're next.
Thank you Mr chair
Thanks Representative good to
see you again
I had a quick question about.
How employers could react.
washer restrict out of business
in my district.
But
During during World War two the
government that wages are going
up so high that the government
half wages a city cannot pay
workers more than this amount.
I'm and today we talk about
minimum wage they were talking
about a maximum wage and so what
the employers did as I said well
government if you're not going
to let us Hey.
A higher wage.
We're gonna make up for that by
getting better benefits.
Okay so it can have the wages
and benefits we're gonna start
time bigger budget to try to
track workers and hire them and
compete.
And so my my question in this
bill.
Is we are mandating a budget.
Okay so so the we're mandating
higher benefit and so I'm
wondering if you think that
what under your bill would would
businesses be allowed to.
Compensate by that by
decreasing.
Wages.
Is there anything in the bill
that would prohibit that.
Mr chair and senator there's
nothing in the bill that
addresses wages businesses will
make determinations as to what
they think make the most
competitive and if they believe
lowering wages makes them more
competitive with their
competitors they may do that but
we called Mr chair and sent
Senator this place is a sick
leave requirements on all employ
all private employers in the
state which levels the playing
field for all those employers
and I do not see what the
incentive would be to lower
wages in reaction to them.
Mr chair and representative
Is not not the incentive it's
it's just a reaction to try I
guess to to stay in business and
then I can follow up with the
example from
from a business a restaurant and
in my community now obviously if
someone's getting paid minimum
wage you can't lower the the way
so I'm not talking about that
example but I have a business
where it's been purchased by
five family members.
and the reason the business was
purchased was actually just to
maintain jobs in my district and
those five owners have yet to
receive a paycheck in about five
years of ownership they have not
received a single paycheck
during during the pandemic and
all have side jobs to try to
provide for their families so
they don't even have the capital
to pay themselves although they
like to and they I just just
this year at the beginning this
year paid off some significant
debt and so I hope they'll at
some point receive a paycheck
for all the work they put in but
in a business like that and now
you you know you have business
like that where there's already
people that are working very
hard I'm getting paid and I'm
paying themselves and and then
you you have a a mandated extra
benefit is so there's got to be
you know there's got to be some
give and take there for a
business to stay in business and
so that's my concern is.
Just like we saw in wartime we
were.
Call now we're now we're
mandating of benefits and so
that we've already seen we've
already learned a big lesson
from that and I'm just worried
you know what what I'd like to
see is just a free market we're
we're employer can say Hey we've
got really great benefits over
here well our rate is maybe not
is as competitive but we have
great benefits and so for
families that.
Really value those benefits are
there to be more attracted those
jobs and then a business over
here and say well you know what
if you're just looking to get a
higher wage we're the this is
the place to work budget aren't
that aren't as good we got the
better the better wages and so I
would rather just have more
freedom of choice.
In in the market place for the
worker in the that's kind of
what I like to see but that's
why I asked that question I know
we're short on time I I want to
just be real focused and in my
questions I have the definition.
A family member.
And I'm on page four
Representative we go down all
these make sense to me a
grandchild grandparent we get to
seven it just says anybody
that's the equivalent of a
family relationship so who gets
to decide.
Under your bill who gets to
decide what is the equivalent of
the family relationship.
Mr chair Senator the individual
the individual knows home
they view as their family member
so that person and if you is our
view.
Okay
Mr Chairman representative I I
thought that was the case I just
want to be sure I have a concern
about that because.
I'm.
You know that this really leaves
it wide open and I I mean I
think it's good I mean it's it's
kind of an honor system but
By the way the real world works
I mean I I I've seen a lot of
issues where people can take
take liberties with this and
that's.
That's my.
My biggest concern with the
bill.
is that's a very very broad
It's very broad definition is
way broader than FMLA is in I
I'd rather have it a little
little more or.
also the definition section
Representative.
I was looking at
I'm sorry it's not really the
definition is on page eight.
And to get there this is the
employee may use earned sick
leave.
For the employees health
condition.
So it's really a that that I
have a concern with the other
ones make perfect sense to me.
You know taking care of a child
disability or going to get
medical care Gallegos but can
you explain what a means right
there online too because that
also seems very brought to me Mr
I'm I apologize tier could you
point me where you are again
what definitional section you
are in Senator thank you thank
you Mr Chairman representative
I'm on page eight at the very
very top.
And it says so we're talking
about.
The reasons they're allowed to
take sick leave and yes this for
the employees you know medical
mental or physical illness yes
your health condition I like B.
bee says they're going to go get
treatment are or go see it see
somebody but As seems very
brought to me so could you
explain that parks please.
Employment use earned sick leave
for the employees mental or
physical into illness injury or
health condition yes Mr chair
and senator I believe that means
if you're sick for any of those
reasons you may use a sick
leave.
Okay Mr chair and senator
Representative I just for me
that is that is too broad I mean
if if someone is just saying.
I'm.
I mean this basically says for
any reason I think in in reality
there there's there's not gonna
be any enforcement of that I is
I would I would prefer that
would that be taken out because
I think if someone is going to
be entitled to paid sick leave
like your employer's action to
pay you to take time off for
that.
I think it needs to really
justify not just maybe I you
know resting at home although
that might be under the
directive of health care
professional they may say you
have you have you to go raster
something or or take time off
but it doesn't assessor Tate
going to see somebody if it's
just because I have a physical
illness I I have a problem you
know with with that just because
it's so broad
and I go into what I like to see
that but I think it's going to
take too long how we could could
tighten that up
And then I come.
Just maybe one last question
director of.
Chair Mister chair here here's
my other concern is the ten is
the temporary part time worker.
So if you have someone that
let's just say they work Monday
and Tuesday that's the regular
work week maybe they're kind of
semi retired okay and they have
plenty of time during the rest
of the week to go see a doctor
if they need to
but your bill at the way I read
it it would still require sick
leave for basically for a person
like that is that correct.
Mr chair Senator it would
require paid sick leave for
anyone who is a part time
seasonal our to our working on a
temporary basis.
Okay
Mr Mr chair and and
Representative I just also have
a hard time with that one
because as this bill as you said
it's going to apply to everybody
every private employer I don't
know why we have to mandate
somebody in that specific
situation that's only working
part time or half time and they
have tons of time during the
week to go see a doctor it
doesn't this doesn't quite make
sense to me
I I I'd rather it not have to
apply to those folks once again
with all the concerns from the
business community and why why
why would we mandate someone
that's working you know like I
said is one is retired working
two days a week and a half three
days a week to go see the doctor
I I don't I don't know why they
can't just go in there in their
time off when they're not
working so
the concerns about the bill that
I I know it's already been
amended I don't I don't I don't
think that any of the changes I
would like would be entertained
I know we're short on time
etcetera but that's those are
probably some my main concerns I
and I also have concerns with
with the agencies you know I
don't it's unclear to me with a
staffing agency that staff
nurses in a hospital or staffs
agricultural workers and then
they they they stay in a
staffing agency for here but
they go to a different hospital
or they go to different cultural
worker.
So a lot of concerns here
Mr Chairman
By without all you thank you
senator I'm sorry cutting short
we do have the floor session is
already started their voting on
bills and so Senator well then
you're next up followed by
Senator years.
Senator Tallman.
you are muted I think senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Representative Jennifer bringing
this bill forward.
The most persuasive argument for
me on this issue is United
States the richest country in
the world is the only advanced
modern industrial economy
doesn't mandate.
Paid sick.
For maternity leave for its
workers because the real blight
on the United States doesn't
think enough about its employees
provide this benefit this is
long overdue.
Then when you're ready Mr chair.
I'm moving to pass.
Is a motion to pass is there a
second second second.
There's a motion and a second
Senator Gallegos you want to
comment on the bill.
Westerman and yes
Representative.
Just a question Senator Gallegos
two questions we have to get to
the floor.
I I will try to get to the floor
Sir.
I've been waiting for a chance
to speak so give me just a
little bit latitude my questions
happen deal with there's of
section on the Human Services
department that says this would
not report our public
documentation is on.
Page thirteen line eleven items
need documentation shall not be
required to take supplemental
paid leave provided pursuant to
this section could the Mr
Chairman representative could
you explain to me why we would
need documentation that they're
secretary there having to take
time off.
Mr chair and Representative
sorry almost call you
representatives.
Past times together I miss you.
I'm sure you do.
Mr chair and senator that
section relates is under the
emergency supplemental lease
program it's not part of the the
general paid sick leave program
and it is intended to ensure
that individuals who
who must rely on the emergency
provision are not unduly
burdened by having to provide
documentation.
So that Mr chairman and
Representative during the
pandemic because I want to comes
into play.
Mr chair Senator exactly.
Okay.
What.
I still wonder why we would need
documentation for instance are a
first line are you know doctors
nurses schoolteachers
restaurants those people there
it should be really hard to
manage a crew of staffing if you
didn't know who's coming in and
are why they're gone have you
had any discussions with
business about how are that
would make their job.
Mr chair and senator that
specific point has not been
made.
Okay well and all because I
don't want the chairman here to
let me go on to page nine line
twenty one items need Mr
Chairman representative it says
aren't sick leave may be used in
the smaller of hourly increments
or smallest increment the
employer payroll system used
account for absences or of the
other time and that would go to
the same question both of the
items need these but I could see
I've got one we are working a
construction company and we've
got obligations on jobs that
require guys don't show up and
they want to be leaving the at
one hour increments that's what
our
What does it say revenge one
hour increments that would be
really hard on a business to be
able to obligate their crews not
knowing who's gonna be there and
for how long is anyone brought
up.
Piece Mr Chairman
representative.
I'm Mr chair Senator no one has
brought that point.
Okay and Mr and.
A representative of all and with
this but it is pretty obvious
and the opponents of the bill
not having seen the amendment
that there's a lot of heartache
out there for small business and
for that reason all stand with
respect to you but in opposition
here bill I think that the
change is so rapid that I even
health for the people in in in
in the public the could look at
it that are small businesses and
they're out there to protect you
know those people in in the
restaurants association and just
other small businesses statewide
so with that I yield thank you
Mr I hope I didn't take too much
your time how you You moved
along nicely Senator thank you.
Just two quick comments one the
next movie there's still another
committee to go and the
amendment we just sent out and
will obviously be available to
anybody who wants to look at it
once is print reporter of this
committee so the funds will have
ample opportunity to look at
that and then we have another it
is through this ammendment we
have a whole another legislative
session to deal with this issue
before it gets implemented so
there's problems with any of
this we would have it into an
opportunity to deal with them
the next January.
So the secretary will call the
roll please.
Twenty years amendment amended
our guide goes.
I'm
all.
Yes.
There was no.
Sedillo Lopez to the secretary.
Yes.
A common.
Are to be no yes.
Your lotus I agree I yes three
no Senator.
Thank you Representative
Chandler and Representative
Rubio we missed seeing her here
today thank you so much
Committee and thank you chairman
members already on the evening
session on the floor we we
missed a couple of bills so
we'll have to call the roll
everything over till Wednesday
everything else on the agenda
and I apologize for getting TV
shows twenty years out here.
Close to the end of the day
before we we missed too much on
the floor so you can turn off
the webcast please.
Thank you.
Meeting.
