Senators if you know present
so we have one to three four
five six members present we have
a or an established and before
we start did you want to
introduce your guest
yes mister chair I have ever had
field here who is in the bay
master's programming UNM n very
interesting these issues has
already been helpful extremely
helpful thank you
senator bread will start with
you and your little non
controversial bill.
Members of the committee.
There are a couple little
changes to this one from past
years section b is a little bit
different
the wording in it was very
redundant so we had most of it
removed and just made it a
simple statement at the rest of
the bill is the same as you've
seen in the past it deals with
the rebuttable put presumption
against release you know that
most people call it the
revolving door
I was here when we passed a
little constitutional amendment
that I think had some unintended
consequences
at least for some of the members
voted
yes on that
and I don't think we intended
for it to be a full revolving
door which is what.
Most believe it has become.
And this bill yo.
Tries to to close that door
tries to make it where.
No let me just read the.
Will the purpose of a grainy
bell it would create a
rebuttable presumption in favor
of the prosecution and in that
anyone charge with certain
violent felonies or who commits
a drawing while charged with or
supervisorly for within five
years of conviction for one of
these violent felonies is a
threat to others and no release
conditions will be protected
against that threat so I think
it was just the burn to the deep
defence if the prosecution
recommends that the person be
kept then defense would have to
show why they shouldn't be.
That is my understanding and I
am not a lawyer.
Nor did I play one until I do
have one with me.
Mister chairman centers thank
you very much for the
opportunity but i'm going to be
extremely briefly I was before
this committee last session you
you know I support this I think
it's important and and i'll
leave it at that it's it's my
position
I feel just as strong as I did
back then maybe even all that
more so that this is something
we need to get done.
I'll i'll leave it at that for
right now answer any questions
if you have.
I'm sure when we have questions
i'll be.
Very well.
So let's go to the audience
ulasie first by a show of hands
anyone here in support of this
build.
First just because she have
hands anyone here in opposition
to this bill.
Early even never okay let's take
why don't we take five roommates
the chief let's start with you.
Mister chair members of the
committee
stay police and strong support
of this bill we appreciate the
sponsor bringing it forward my
spent a vast majority of my
career or over criminal
investigations for state police
for a various levels of of our
investigations bureau.
We'll see one of the most
recurring frustrations that you
will find
during that time was arresting
the same offenders repeatedly
often for the same types of a
violations.
I mean I can remember
I can ever time through my
officers had suspects.
Tell them.
That's obviously very
frustrating for our officers
to other issues I think that are
sometimes forgotten that I will
ring that I will quickly mention
one is.
When we have serious repeat
offenders that are not held for
significant linked time what
tends to happen in a brightman
could speak to this much more
than ebid they didn't direct a
block of cases so by the time
they finally get the court when
maybe they would have had one
fell any case to deal with now
they got seven eight nine
and so when they finally have to
deal with things it's much much
worse form
the second thing I will say what
we have seen on the law
enforcement side.
Is that.
To use the senator's words the
revolving doors situation what
what we have found is that we
quickly.
The.
What time do you we quickly
evolve our criminals to become
very good at their
craft when you get arrested for
something one day and you can be
out the day or two.
And you know what happened
yesterday why you got caught
yesterday you can immediately
take that knowledge and put into
action to prevent yourself from
getting caught the next time and
so that repeatedly happens what
happens over time is that.
A criminals
especially the ones in the metro
area that we deal with our are
are very good at their craft and
I think a lot of that is a
result of them being able to
learn.
From their mistakes but then
still continue their activity so
i'll disclose that once again
that state police we stand as
drugs for this bill we
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it forward thank you mister
chairman committee
thank you cheers.
The.
Mr bullington thank you mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is jady
ballington registered lobbyists
for the greater albuquerque
chamber commerce was strong
supports in a bill on twenty two
every day and our state violent
people commit serious crimes if
they happen to get arrested they
often face no immediate car
sequences in the albuquerque
area we have prosecutors are
moving to detain defendants and
yet even some of the most
serious cases.
Judges are releasing too many of
them pre trial our system is
turning criminals right back
into our streets they ignore
court hearings warrants pile up
and justice is delayed this is a
system that is no longer
working.
On behalf of the public interest
and it is within the perview of
the legislature to fix it and
that starts with appreciating
the gravity of the charges filed
against a person
and if it's a serious or violent
crime presuming that that person
is dangerous enough to not be
released thank you.
Thank you mister secretary
mister chairman members of
committee my name is jason boy
of the secretary for the
department public safety I would
just point out I would echo with
jetty bolting side and the chief
of police for the message they
police is that we have continual
issues with the same offenders
over and over and we're not just
talking about any felony offense
we're talking about violent film
the offenses were talking about
first or second degree human
trafficking of a child we're
talking about murder in the
first degree first degree felony
challenges social expectation of
a child.
Serious violent fell any
offences.
And most of everyone in the room
here has never committed to the
only day in their life right not
even one but certain people seem
to continue to rake up multiple
time and time and again and
we're not just talking about
again any felony we're talking
about violent felony offences
and at the end of the day we
still bare the responsibility to
make sure that there's clear
convincing evidence and it only
upon a finding a problem cause
that the people are then
detained and so i'd ask that you
have a due pass and support this
bill thank you
thank you anybody else.
Is there anybody who wants to
speak and support this.
The.
Two weeks
okay we have two online who
wants to speak in where it first
is.
Larry sontag.
The.
Go ahead mister santa.
Good afternoon mister chairman
members of the committee on
larry santa speaking on behalf
of the new mexico business
coalition.
We support senate bill one
twenty two because as it is now.
Judges are routinely forced to
choose to release individuals
back into our communities who
have been charged with by that
crimes this includes accused
perpetrators of murder rape
child abuse and more we've seen
too many times that this catch
and release system and further
crimes committed lives lost and
families destroyed from a
business perspective new
mexico's crime rate has become
nationally notable and an
embarrassment for our state.
And i'll tell you from a
personal level I have I am
retired police officers i've
been in that situation where.
People are released before the
paperwork is done I encourage
you to listen to the law
enforcement professionals in the
room and others who have
testified as to why we strongly
need senate bill on twenty two
thank you.
Thank you mister sontake next is
alicia or terrible.
Although I am one of the
coffounders that max it is a
system
I represent many families of on
the side and after almost eight
first
made some reason if entered in
that i'm even to the enemy and
they're scared the retaliated
family is the reason why we
support his bill.
Thank you so much.
Thank you mister okay now we'll
go to those in the audience who
are opposed to this bill and
will take five comments from.
Over let's start with you.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the commission my
name is bennett baron the chief
public defender i'm speaking
today uh in opposition to this
bill I will be almost as brief
as mister bregman because we
have talked about this issued
some length the were two or
three studies done by the united
school of social research they
look at data about people who
were released under the current
system and it showed that the
overwhelming of number of people
released pending trial did not
commit new offences and so if
you institute a rebuttable
presumptions you have far more
people being held in custody
which would violate their rights
many of those people would not
be convicted of those serious
crimes or any crimes and many of
them could be actually innocent
and so it would be create a much
greater cost without any
significant effect on
going violent crimes and so we
believe the current system is
being addressed is involving
district attorneys have figured
out how to use this how to file
their motions and the success
rates are going up because the
system is being used every
person accuse of a crime
deserves an individual
determination we ask the not
support this bill
thank you mister barrel
good afternoon diane cash
citizen
we have those tools in places he
are talked about to deal with
the situations where an accused
person is considered too
dangerous and what I have taken
away from committee meetings the
last couple of years when we've
had heard similar bills and
testimony during interim
meetings and from what justice
baked in a joint session of this
legislature during the twenty
twenty three session it points
to the fact that not only is it
and constitutional.
It's a necessary.
So.
I don't know what's when i'm
bernio county but it apparently
works other places in the state
thank you thank you.
Good afternoon mister chair
members of the committee my name
is january williams i'm a policy
advocate at the american civil
liberties union of new mexico it
will also attempt to be brief I
think the chief public defender
spoke very well as to the
opposition that we also have to
the spell I wanted to mention
that the cell of the mexico is
proud to work in coalition with
thirty other organizations
across the states and the new
mexico safe coalition we are and
out analyze bills believe the
criminal legal system in every
legislative session and grade
them according to rebreck on
whether those bills will keep us
safer whether they're a
political weather they're
fiscally responsible at whether
evidence based we did a report
card on this bill that I believe
has been shared with many of you
unfortunately this builded
receive an f from the new mexico
safe analysis because it fails
on all four of those categories
so we do oppose the speller and
we thank you for your time.
Mr by your house.
Just push the button
chairman committee members my
name is andrew via house and the
registered lobbyists for the
criminal defense law association
with the standard stand
opposition to this bill the
problem you know we understand
that there's a problem in it
with crime and albert right but
you cannot throw out the
constitutional protections that
have had that been persistent
from the very beginning of our
foundation
in a criminal in while you know
this while you were prosecutors
the statements of burden of
proof for a reason and that's
there's a presumption of
innocence for a reason we are
not a totalitarian state where
you have to prove your innocence
and so the burden is always on
the prosecution to do so I agree
with benefit that the the judges
are getting better making
individualized determinations on
on on release and that's the way
it should be so we again stand
in stanch opposition to this and
and the reason it fails every
year is because it is
unconstitutional thank you
anyone else is there anybody
online
okay we have room for one more
opponent that seeing none will
move to the committee then
members of the committee who
wants to speak senators said the
olympics.
Thank you mister chair.
Dear breakman
and last year I asked you about
the constitutionality this year
I know the answer it's not
constitutional however what I am
gonna say is i've gotten so many
comments from attorneys about
how much better you're offices
doing in terms of the handling
these cases I had actually
attended
some of these cases now it's
been two years I think it's
before you were there and it
seemed to me that the judges
were making good decisions I in
my mind looked at what I would
do in each of those and they
were holding
people that they should be held
of when I remember was somebody
who had molested a child and
that this person was that might
influence the child if the child
was not held and the judge held
it held the person that an each
one that we went through I
thought that's exactly right and
they mostly led out people on
like minimal drug things and
people who had even a suspicion
that it they might be.
Selling or distributing
were helped and so I sat through
that thing and then i've been
hearing from lawyer after lorry
saying you know this day's
office is really doing it right
in making it work so.
White where how do you respond
to that if you're making it
work.
Senator thank you for the kind
remarks I will tell you however
it doesn't change my position
because we're having more
successor emotions just to
for for example numbers we
filed one thousand eighty eight
of these in the last counter
year and sixty percent were
granted I would never have my
office file a single one of them
if I didn't think absolutely
that person should be held I
know that the comments on mr
chairman senator made by some
that say this is.
We know
that this is basically the same
as the federal system was what
i'm arguing for and I understand
there are some subtle
differences of course between
the new mexico constitution and
the federal system the federal
constitution however when
people's stances say that one
from the from the dawn of time
we've had this constitution
nobody feels stronger about the
the presumption of innocent
until proven guilty that I do I
practice law for thirty years in
this community I feel very
strongly about that however
nobody also has ever found a
single time that the federal law
for example is unconstitutional
to the contrary they have
they have a system in place and
let me just say the followed the
federal system which would this
would be much like okay you
don't hear about federal federal
criminals who commit violent
crimes getting out committing
additional crimes pending trial
you do hear that about that the
state and I can't speak to all
the specific studies but I can
take hen speak about what's
going on in albuquerque on a
daily basis yes my attorneys are
doing a phenomenal job and doing
a better job and presenting that
but I truly believe that this is
that this is for the safety of
the community and I don't think
we're asking for anything that
I hate to do this but you know
mister chair that we have a new
mexico constitution and let me
read it bail maybe denied by a
court of record pending trial
for a defendant charge with the
felony if the prosecuting
authority requests the hearing
and proves by clear and
convincing evidence that no
release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community
how do you think that that is
constitutional under the new
mexico constitution I agree with
you that the federal the federal
standard which looks like which
you're proposing is constitution
under the federal constitution
but I don't think I need to
remind you that it that we have
a new mexico constitution and
state law it's a waste of time
to pass state laws that we know
violate our state constitution
that's where it would be
appealed to the court was as you
know justice daniels with a big
leader in this and the supreme
court knows very well
it about this so I just can't
see this surviving any kind of
new mexico state constitutional
scrutiny and I know you know the
difference between the federal
constitution and the state
constitute.
Mister chairman sander in
response that that's what I said
that in my initial just the
remarks right before.
You spoke that I understand the
distinctions between the two but
I also recognize in this
particular proposed.
Senate bill one twenty two
section a subject to a bottle to
rebottle by the defendant of
trouble attentionary requested
by prosperity authority it shall
be presumed that the prosecution
has and I believe that the
legislature can do that presumed
by clear convince in evidence
that the defend is likely to
oppose the threat to the safety
of others and then it lists the
specific crimes that I think
does pass cases were and I will
also miss mister german and
seriously I am not I I
understand people's strong
philosophers and people have a
pains on both sides and we are
not i'm not a supreme court just
to sum a day but I can that's
what the supreme court
ultimately decides that
ultimately sides what is
constitutional what's not so I
wouldn't courage you support
this this is the same question
mrperiod cherton asked last year
what's the difference between a
presumption and clearing
convincing evidence.
Well first more in the in the
clear in the actual constitution
it says proves by clearing
convincing evidence no really
released conditions this is
specifically this bills saying
that by clear and convincing
evidence it is a
it shall be presumed that by
clear and president clear and
present dangerous
clear and convincing evidence so
they're they're used in the same
centence here but they distinct
their distinguishable and I
understand that but this statute
or this proposed bill is
suggesting that they were the
that the.
It is presumed by the nature of
the crime itself that the state
has proved by clear committee
that's what the statue does
thank you thank you mister chair
I I just again
a presumption.
A presumption clear and
convincing evidence is the
standard of proof that is
required by the prosecutor so
changing that clear and
convincing evidence standard and
saying that it shall be presumed
that clearing convincing
evidence is met because of some
crimes for me is a clear
violation of the words of of the
constitution and I do think it's
just a waste of time to to go
through this past this and have
it declared on constitutional
put the kind put these
decisions that are made during
the time that it's up on one
sir
in in jeopardy because of and
then and actually be a long time
because probably go to the court
of appeals first and the other
and then there are technical
problems reading a and c
together is extremely confusing
so miss mr chair this is the
same.
Stay more similar and
unfortunately my vote is exactly
the same I didn't see changes
that would overcome the
constitutional problem and we
can you imagine if we had to
release everybody that
all at once that was a held by
this and constitutional.
Statute I think that could be a
disaster so that's even more of
a reason that I am not able to
vote for this.
Thank you mister chairma.
This issue is.
One that goes back
a number of years maybe a decade
now and.
We've seen the results
constitutional.
The constitutional moment didn't
start necessarily
by referendum process it started
by.
A committee went through this
very process and many of the
people that are in this building
voted to move that one and we've
seen the results and it's
incumbent upon us as a
legislative body.
To recognize that we've created
not only a perceive problem.
But I would submit a real
problem.
It is caused harm to too many in
our communities and I think
it's incoming upon us to do
something.
And so I appreciate bringing
forth this bill again and
continue in the dialogue
doing it but until.
We convinced frankly the
legislators from burning of
county where the problem is to
defixit those of us in the less
populated parts of the state
recontrol ideas but
they're not going to be
successful when getting the
public policy changed and we can
argue about the constitution
factor hopefully going to hear
another provision where center
rigs and I are sponsoring a
constitutional amendment to to
address this issue as well to
get around some of the questions
that were.
And went to four and I think I
see this effort is trying to
bring it at least we have way
back
because I think all citizens in
new mexico recognize
that the.
The way the court have employed
be constitutional amendment
impossibly the way the
constitutional member was
worded.
Has caused people who should be
retained.
To be
out on the streets and to
continue there.
Violent ways even under
conditions
uh of release or or anything
else of I think it's incumbent
that we do something and I I
hope that this measure gets
further discussion and maybe its
first committee and I hope that
we get to
continue the dialogue so you
know I I think
I think for me we need to move
it on to get a broader
discussion and I I hope that
everyone appear will.
Give serious attention to the
issue and listen to the district
attorney from the most popular
district in the state the second
judicial district.
Because.
It has become.
Not only a problem in
albuquerque that it's become a
problem state wide and it's
effects have been felt statewide
and so I think he comes here
with with honest motives trying
to address an issue that he
faces probably on an hourly
basis in his office and
our citizens are demanding that
we do something so that mr chair
get off my sobox but I think we
have to do something
thank you
thank you senator neighborhood
we'll go to senator masters and
then we'll go to senator she
meets.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you center brought thank you for
being here i'll try to keep it
short
cause the judges effort my own
to the to the judiciary more
often than they were like we're
just a quick refresh or if I
mean mister chairman the young.
I think them you know our
friends in the media haven't
educated the the public on it as
well as it should and I think
it's prior we have an educated
the media as well as we should
but the constitutional amendment
doesn't.
Does it let people out the cause
you seminate keys people in
the constitutional amendment
were not long the judges would
literally have to let everyone
out with the exception of you
know capital offences because
because money bail as as the
late justice daniels taught us
money bale is unconstitutional
can't use high cash bonds to
hold people.
So if we can't use cash to hold
people in jail and we didn't
have the ability to use
prevented attention they would
all get out so so we were
correct in passing up the
constitutional memory back in
two thousand sixteen and that
voters were correct and voting
for it because the
constitutional moment allows
judges to hold people without
ball.
Now the question is are they are
they holding the right people
into the right set of certain
absences what I thought would
take.
A real short period of time took
like five years to figure out
that line up who should stay in
who should stay out and you and
the supreme court did a
fantastic job of.
Above i've been very select
about the cases that it took the
regret it's sir shory on and and
I think the last case was kind
of shocking that that that the
judge let this person out given
those allegations.
But now I think there's clear
guns from the screen court I
think the judges are are on
point and there and they're
they're getting it right this.
So I appreciate bringing this
forward and trying to.
Try and do you.
It's not even tipping the scales
mischairman it's getting the
scales even with with regards to
public safety and and the
community but I think the scales
are even now
and I think this w.
In the opposite direction so
but just also lastly mister the
keep in mind the original text
that was introduced.
Cause as you know I had the
honor of carrying it in the
house when I was a member of the
house.
And leader worth carried in and
sent at the original tech as it
as introduced was model language
from from various days
particularly new jersey it was a
mended and committee was amended
in the van house police safety
committee which is which was one
and it was and now is.
Consumer public bears committee
but away.
It was amended in that committee
and I think the wording had not
been amended it would have
taken.
Last time to find that sweets
but so in a perfect world we
would reduce the constitutional
amendment with that original
language but we'd have to have
the maturity as a state.
To do that I don't think I think
it'd be more trouble than it's
worth and more confusion than
his word so.
So anyway I appreciate the the
chair of that committee was
them.
The honourable representative a
better heral was the chair of
that committee at the time.
But anyway long story short I I
can't support this I i'm glad
that this came forward the last
couple of years cause I think it
forced the conversation and
helped our friends in the digit
find that constitutional line
but I am hoping that this is the
last time that it's brought.
Thank you mister.
Thank you senator master senator
schmedies.
Thank you mister chair sender
india brigand
so can you tell me what the
in a pre trial hearing what is
the standard that the government
must prove to detain a person.
Right now miss miss is the term
right now the standard is
basically that.
There are no conditions that the
person could be reasonably
released upon for the safety of
the community.
And mr chair
if this bill passes what would
the standard while the standard
would be at this bill passes
it's basically
based on the fence that's
charged the standard would be
that there is a rebuttable
presumption which means that the
defendant could certainly rebut
that if they want to but they
they need to rebut that
otherwise there's a presumption
that the person be detained
bending trial but mister senator
and india bragment the the
standard of the government must
overcome remains the same as
that correct and that is clear
and commencing evidence yes
so that's what I want to point
out for everybody mister the
standard does not change if this
bill passes the standard right
now is clear in commencing
evidence that the government
must prove.
In an american court you cannot
shift the burden of proof on to
a defend that does not exist in
this country thank god for that
innocent until proving guilty
what's being conflated right now
is people are I think conflating
the idea that a presumption is a
presumption of guilt we're not
talking we're not determining in
a pre trial hearing.
Missed mister bragman are are we
trying to determine if someone's
innocent are guilty in a pre
trial here mister chairman said
or no.
So mister chair and center.
Exactly we are not determining
innocence or guilt in a pre
trial hearing what is presumed
is that someone is a danger to
the community.
We're not presuming that they
are guilty okay that is the
presumption that is the standard
by clearing commencing evidence
they're a danger or or flight
risk.
So that that's the difference
III don't want the media or the
public or anyone to conflict
those two ideas and I hope i'm
being very very clear on this
this is not a presumption of
guilt it is a presumption of
danger to the community that's
why we detain people.
So for example and a fact
finding mission is done at these
at these pre trial hearings so
someone says sir you had three
dead bodies found in your house.
That is a fact we are knows by
clearing comments of evidence
when I went up presuming you're
guilty
but that that's a problem a
judge is saying that's a
problem.
And you are a danger to the
community.
Based on clear commencing
evidence and we can detain
people
so that's what we're talking
about.
And I I hope that's very clear
to everybody because whoever is
saying it's unconstitutional I
need you to show me number one.
How your somehow shifting the
burden away from the government
that they no longer need to show
by clearing commencing evidence
you can't show that.
There there's nothing that
changes the standard.
The.
At all.
So the other thing that i'd like
to just review very briefly
mister chair center is that.
I'd like to ask do we still have
capital crimes in new mexico.
Specifically what what are you
asked concerns capital crimes in
general well mr mister chairman
center.
My understanding the supreme
court and state versus the mir
they ruled that because the
death penalty was abolished in
two thousand nine that capital
crimes no longer exist in new
mexico.
So might my point is that
presumptions used to exist in
new mexico for capital crimes
they used to.
But when the death penalty went
away the new mexico supreme
court said we no longer have
capital crimes and there's two
ways to think about this and not
going to get into the weeds but
the one that the supreme court
went with is the seriousness of
your penalty defines the capital
crime and so they said well
death penalty went away and
we're definitely capital crimes
by the seriousness of the
penalty now that that
seriousness is gone because
they've panel has been abolished
would no longer have capital
crimes of course we have first
agree murder but but from from
the that's where i'm going so
yes and this chairman center if
I can just if I just may we we
deal with that we deal with
presumptions and criminal often
times even in our state for
example a dwi and others per
save violation but an o zero two
four asis is a presumption of of
not so I think I might be
getting the numbers mixed up at
warm but between four and eight
is a presumption as is no
presumption at all so there are
presumptions that are used in
criminal law.
A lot out there there's strict
liability crimes that means that
there's going to be strict
liability for if this is proven
now I will say this there is a
very big distinction and I would
never ever support anything that
in any way ever weakens the
presumption of innocence I won't
do it it would say it's not
correct it's we've found it or
criminal justice system on it
that has nothing to do with this
this is simply.
Same that with there is a
presumption when someone is
accused of these crimes and a
complaint his father indictment
is filed that if so that there's
a presumption that were bothered
by the defender if they sold
choose it's the same thing
that's done every single day and
federal court across this entire
country exactly mister chairman
the abramance underbrand
out i'll close i'll wrap it up
with this there are two
jurisdictions in the united
states.
There are very very similar to
new mexico.
And they both have presumptions.
For first agreement it's
california in dc california's
moved away from cash bale as we
have dc is moved away from cash
bells we neither jurisdictions
have the death pound.
And where do we find ourselves.
We moved away from cash bail.
No death penalty no capital
crimes and yet we have a pre
trial system that in that does
not designate.
Whether you're charged with
first degree murder or some
other lower level felony.
That makes no sense to me.
That does not sound like a
reasonable justice system that
ended the note that makes no
distinction.
Between
premeditated murder and some
lower level fellow.
I think the public.
I I really think my constituents
obviously support this and I
think the general public if they
really understood I think the
technical is on technicalities
here but I think if they
understood hay
california's systems working
well dc work you know.
It makes sense to it at least on
first reviewer and that and
that's what i'm going to wrap up
I would actually i'm and support
the bill I would actually like
to see that list shortened.
I think it's possible someone
would would give an argument or
a push back for some of these
other crimes they're all bad
but there is no way someone can
make a case that it is
unconstitutional.
For protocol the presumption.
For.
First degree murder I I just
don't see how that could be
possible because once again
the burden is not shifting here
the burden of production is
shifting the burden of proof is
not shifting and the standard of
clearing convincing evidence
remains the exact same
the exact same none of that is
changing if your bill passes so
that's why I support it but I
would like to consider
shortening that list just a bit
thank.
Senator tomorrow.
Thank you.
The.
Says a programming evaluation
found that likelihood of a new
selling arrest rose with length
of initial
jail stay detaining individuals
with we have law in a matter
risk of recivism is associated
with higher rates of new
criminal activity every citizen
when held for two or three days
lowest defendants are almost
forty percent more likely to
commit more crimes before trial
to defend its helpful no more
than twenty four hours so
according to this it is
increases the channels.
Are people there being held will
connect the new crime you know I
don't care
whether we pass this soon I
don't
is that going to make a dent in
the chrome rate as far as i.
Lol
tell me
started taking the roof causes
of high party poor schools at
the up democrat guns on the
streets and behaviour health
when I
were just kidding ourselves are
just so trying to public make
the public think we're doing
something it's just a band
date
you're a lot of people depending
on what study you look at sixty
eight percent of people who
encarcelated.
Um our need of overtreatment
need a behavior health treatment
they're not getting it the fact
that matter is new mexico forty
three percent of people who need
or want behavior health
treatment are getting it now
that was almost six hour ten
people who need it that wanted
are not getting it
right states
rate more people per carefully
any other modern industrialized
country in the world so I moved
to table.
Second
undebatable motion to table.
Secretary will call the rule.
Yes
they're too hicky was.
You wanna make your.
Thank you mister thank you for
bringing this bill forward
many ways i'm touring
no question about it the empathy
for ejected in meno health
individuals and that we can't
get him into the treatment
but I also know individuals who
have had violence committed on
their family by people who
get back out and there are
pretty bad shape to.
So it is it is difficult maybe
this is the question for a
usaver brand or maybe four
senator schmide's a do wonder.
In I think you mentioned senator
smith
california and washington dc
having implemented this
in our night I know it's tough
to count and say what the
variables are that lead to a
crime and can get crazy on that
but
they're
postpassage of a bill was there
in the assessment that there was
a decrease in crimes by
people well again how you
phrased the question the doubt
of it basically did have making
impact did it lead to decrease
violence
mr chairman I don't have the
instant I I don't know.
Please if I could brief it just
to be clear yeah I don't have
the answer either but that those
reforms were made in different
very different ways you know the
the the california put out a a
bail reform to on the ballot to
the general public for example
so and they you know they got
rid of the death penalty in a
different time so these states
have once again.
The the present day is they've
shifted away from cash bail and
they've developed their own way
of abolishing death so it's it's
been an my understanding as they
never got a they never did away
with presumptions new mexico and
that state versus in your case
we inadvertently got away from
presumptions because our
presumptions were tied to
capital crimes
you couldn't you had you you
couldn't have one or the other
and the mexican court said we
don't have capable crimes
anymore so therefore we had no
represent.
Thank you
mister chair.
And I apologize for having
mission of this debate i'm sure
that
there is a lot of.
Very insightful observations on
and both sides
and and I don't want to repeat
right but when i'm hearing
though is there there is some
constitutional question ability
about this so my question is
this mister chair may be your
would answer this so if we pass
this here
not to
wish ill and my colleagues in
the judiciary committee but
that's what they exist for
is to create those elsen and
factor of improved a number of
my bills along the way and so
there was so many for past here
that's where it goes to next
mischairman synergots correct
those are here to judiciary
where i'm sure that they would
have a very lengthy conversation
with me on the constitutionality
um I I have some.
Information that that that is
put my mind I had that same
question
when the governor asked me to
carry this bill ding a partisan
bill I don't think that's a
really good statement that was
made earlier since it's the
governor's bill and a
republicans carrying it I think
it's kind of a bipartisan bill
but
that's beside the point I had
that same question
and I I believe because the
same rule of evidence is
required that clear and
convincing evidence that this
does meet the constitutionality
of our state
but again I am not a lawyer
but I think you're fine just as
many lawyers on that side as
you'll find on the side saying
it's not constitutional and it's
one of those issues that will
probably have to be disturbed by
the courts where this
constitutional unless we change
the constitution which uh
I work
mister chairman last question I
had apologised probably was
answered before serious violent
offences does that mean a
history of or the act that the
person is currently being
detained for.
The.
Here's where my questions under
from think you're time on a
picture
under the list of of uh
if the defendant committed any
of the following fell any
offences for which the defense
is charged and one of those
would be a serious violent
felony but okay i've taken
senator and mister chair
I what is the area is that i'm
somewhat more familiar with in
terms of crime is crime against
women my wife is a matter was
medical director and sits on the
board of sane and
and has had a lot of experience
with this in her career so we we
regularly talk about that so as
i'm looking at the attachment
then
knowing that there are cereal
individuals
in those situations sexuals are
sort of
situations so i'm assuming that
either someone
who who has a history of a first
second degree.
Of sexual the basically sexual
solid leave it there would be
someone who could be kept in in
jail without rebudding the
presumption yes and I think you
find that really more under.
Okay to page three
where this is when they've
already had a felony conviction
for one of those issues so this
is someone's already been
convicted of one of these
felonies is listed here
they're pending trial
sentencing an offense
while on probation or parole and
then within the five years now I
actually have a little bit of
question within the five years
because
if you've actually committed one
of these offenses you probably
spent more to five years.
Thanks for senator and thank you
mister cha.
Yeah we still will go back to
into the to the motion to table
and the secretary will call the
rule.
The.
Senator hickey.
Senator hickey no
my stuff yes
send it to my stuff yes we want
to do.
Senator my cutting.
No center in my caten says no.
Center mechanic yes.
Center mechanic votes yes
neighbor center neighbor.
Center nightmare now centers
meetings.
Yes to table.
Centers that he allowed as yes
senator man.
Senator man yes senators if you
know yes.
Senators if you know yes.
I have voted five in the favor.
Is the chairman centers thank
you very much.
The.
Yeah.
Mr chairman members of the
committee
yesterday expert witness mr
rother sure truth are
consequenced to city
commissioner.
The.
Mr explained with the because
it's on the grid we won't take a
lot of testimony but we would
like through its about and how
much and then open it up for
questions thank you mister
chairman the city of truth or
consequences continues to
experience a water crisis forty
three percent of the water and
truth or consequences leaked out
onto the ground this has been
going on for now over three
years progressively getting
worse it's estimated that we are
losing twenty million gallons of
water every single year and for
any of you guys who are videos
to do the city you are often see
that certain roads are closed is
all due to these wider breaks to
continue the overall estimated
cost to repair the entire water
system is about a hundred and
twenty million dollars the
twenty million dollars in front
of you includes an emergency
clause because that is the
immediate need for the immediate
worst parts of it I I will say
this is that as it is a resident
seer a county this and impacts
the the county as a whole it is
put businesses in great jeopardy
when they're when the businesses
themselves are in excessible it
is on a number of occasions shut
down schools and so within any
time during the day I can get a
text to need to go pick the
girls up from both middle school
in the high school because
there's no running water some of
the most greatest concerns when
it comes to a public public
health and safety is that our
hospital has been out of water
mid surgeries they actually has
made a large investment in the
capital outlay of it of a water
tank to when for avoid these
water shortages in the future
and as you know treat their
consequences also home tour
steve veterans home and when you
go hours upon hours sometimes
days without any water it
creates a public health crisis
in addition to the environmental
crisis we have some of these
water lines are so old when they
tear into they were actually
wouldn't a number of them are
actually wouldn't pipes their
under the city that they're
replacing for the first time I
have brought the commissioner
here together we stand for
questions.
Um you may recognize the concern
here this actually got a lot of
media attention last year was on
ms nbc there was a number of
national reporters who had come
out to kinda just expose this
crisis that continues to go
ignored as you can do the fire I
do want to recognize on the back
page one.
The.
One incorrect one here is saying
that it that not in not enacted
in this bill that we are
expected to receive funding from
the water trust board in may of
twenty twenty four that was a
sixteen million dollar request
that is to pay for the one
hundred and twenty million
dollar price tag the larger
piece of the possible so we are
trying we're we're doing our due
diligence and trying to collect
money from just about any sort
of funding source that it's
available out there and in
addition to city itself has a
lot of skin in the game with the
amount of debt that they have
taken on i'll let the
commissioner speak to that if
you'd like.
Please mister chair
distinguished senators yet
addition to what center to rent
spoke of
we just recently passed in order
to where we approved a four
point eight million dollar long
for our community which comes
with the two point seven million
dark rant for a toll of seven
point five million dollars this
is on the backs of our citizens
we have a poor community
comprise mainly of seniors and
this is a debt we're going to
have to incorporate the next
forty years so with that and
looking at that dead and and and
the payments were reluctant
reluctantly looking at possibly
raising our water police water
fees over the next few months to
help us pay back this find and
with that i'll stand for any
further questions.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone in the audience and
supported this bill if you just
wait raise your end
okay did you want to say
anything about it come on up and
if or just indicate support.
The.
Very good thank you and did you
want to say anything there if
you introduce yourself.
Yeah.
Thank you is there anyone here
in opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone online members
of the committee.
Senator hiki
told me thank you mister chair
and thank you senator
just one quick question of this
doesn't sound like michigan per
se but i'm wondering if there's
any federal money I I think you
made some mention you're looking
at all the right places but if
the is there any federal money
with the the bills that not try
to make this political but biden
past
during the
end damage
that could be applied to this or
or not yes sir along with
hospital one forty eight which
is sixty million dollars we have
a one and a half million dollar
appropriations for senator so
ryan rick which is federal money
there to give us so for our
match.
We should mister chair we should
also publicly think the senator
for recognizing the direct
consequences and coming in
although it is it is small it
was it's was greatly needed
mr chair in the senator
can you go back to the till.
For more I mean i'm just
wondering I mean there's so much
federal money and especially
around out there these days no
pan intended but you have it is
there is there additional
opportunity when i'm afraid of
his that when you get to finance
a lot of these things they're
going to be.
If there are other places you
can look yesterday there may
very well be i've just heard
today that there may be some
other appropriations down the
road a federal money available
where the state could figure out
a way to match we'll certainly
look into that okay and thank
you for that and mister chair
I I think I also understand that
doing this a little allocated
doesn't really work you've got a
plan out of project he got to
get a price get it bit etc
really kind of need the money
and it does talk about going to
the the finance authority and I
know that and a lot of costs.
Certainly.
Pipe section there and hope
that's not someone's artery
court cardiac artery.
If I may center the this is
actually a five inch
pipe that was taken out of third
street which is close to one of
our of newspapers so instant
when we got some front page no
variety
incidentally the way this thing
works is that once the line is
cut and we replace it is about a
twenty foot section we put in it
increase increases the pressure
and then two weeks later we had
a break thirty feet away from
this two weeks later we had
another break thirty feet away
from that it's a constant circle
that we have to deal with all
the time and in twenty twenty
two we fixed over four hundred
leaks in our city last year in
the last six months with
a literally worked on two
hundred and sixty leaks the
problem isn't getting better
it's getting worse the longer we
wait and so we really have an
urgency.
Thank you your thank you mister
chair senator said the old
opposite thank you mister chair
I support the bill of course but
III want to clarify what I think
you said because
this consequences of notice.
Says to the consequences is
expected to rest receive funding
from the water transport in may
twenty twenty four for the same
project what you said is that is
for sixteen million and this is.
Or both I just want to clarify
is this appropriation needed as
well as the sixteen million yes
ma'am
senator city a low passing
mister chairman the overall cost
of the water repair lines is
estimated about a hundred and
twenty million dollars there is
a sixteen million dollar
application right now with the
water trust board although this
the the drafter of this a fair
may know something we don't know
there's no reason to indicate
that that has been approved or
not we certainly hope so and
that would be great news if that
was leaked on there the twenty
million dollars were asking for
today with the emergency clause
is because this is just
emergency money it really is
abandoned on these water lines
until we can get our federal
delegation to come in with the
the rest our water trust board
money are are representatives
have another meeting with the
governor coming in we're hoping
that she'll come we really are
we are grasping for any
potential money out there at all
thank you I wanted to clarify
that because that and I I know
that you responded by wanted to
clear
what was the the total amount so
thank thank you mister president
I do support this.
The furniture tomorrow to be
followed by senator mccatching
thank you mister thank you
though for it for the.
Yeah.
As the details that report with
pictures.
So what's the what's the size of
the t and c's silly budget.
And our annual but i'm sorry our
annual budget is about the sixty
one million that we actually
process throughout the year
sixty one million yes
for the city of their
consequences.
We have we have six thousand
residents.
So
I got a vote for this but could
you make an argument that the
city was delinquent and
postponing
the maintenance of this for so
many.
Yes sir I would make that
argument here's hers how would
make it I was a former a
commissioner in twenty sixteen
to twenty twenty this situation
had not presented itself at that
time had we had better vision
we should have identified it
then at that point in time of
water cheapest was about twenty
percent or less we didn't we
were able to stay ahead of the
water lines we fixed everything
it didn't exacerate itself to
the point it has now over the
last five or six years it's it's
been exponential in its growth
it seems like all these lines
are are starting to bus at the
same time I wish we would have
had better foresight I apologize
that we don't
we we do take that into
consideration now with our other
utilities and we're looking
forward and aggressively dealing
with those so I I appreciate the
comment thank you for the answer
I won't find a question that
mister chair.
The.
This is a
can I ask you a question sure
for a week establishing a
process.
Same request all I think they do
and I think we will
and they need to I mean who's
got who's got the deep pockets
these days the state and.
So I think it's realistic that
expected cities that are
struggling they don't have
access to oil and gas revenue
well I guess come to us
she got to get first in line
returning.
That's all
I will remind you senator are
approval means little or nothing
in terms of the final budget but
it is a little boost for you and
you get to your own committee
and finance.
It is and mister chairman I said
on senate finance appropriation
I I should tell you that this
twenty million dollars is not in
each between as it comes over
the argument that we are making
and front of you today as to
make sure that that are
constituents and all of new
mexico knows that we are willing
to go ask it and any potential
fund you know source funding to
fix this problem
good senate.
Senator mccutchen to be followed
by senator neighbor
thank you mister chairo and here
for the beginning of the meeting
but the microns have been acting
really good.
So it in my former life we
cleaned a lot of those.
License as well we worked a lot
of stuff we've worked with a lot
of pipes like this believe it or
not and what essentially each
section of that is as a is a
pressure reducing balcon when
you repair that section and it
increases the pressure down the
line.
So you will never actually catch
up to it without a large capital
outlay
it will be it will be extremely
tough it's just like it's just
like the rabbit that always just
gets away and so have have you
looked at and mister chairman
and center have you all looked
at obviously that one can't be
but some of those old ones have
you looked at slip lining and
and and doing a few things like
that are just full replacement
for these things.
Center there that the figures
that we came up with is for full
replacement I think that the
average line in our system is
more than sixty years old I
don't think slip lining is going
to work in a lot of the those
things so I think it the ideas
that we're basically at the
trench next to the existing
lines the three foot by four
foot deep tranche all the way
down if the new lines in in in
just follow those all around the
city.
Picture
center to appreciate like I said
I don't I that is that is my
view as well I don't think
you're fixing any of it I think
it's a complete full replacement
while you still have to maintain
water for the good citizens of
truth of consequences and boil
that uh at a real.
Thank you senator senator
neighborhood.
Thank you mister chair and my
comment was along the lines of
center tomorrow
this is one of probably a
hundred and some communist
parties and other
villages that
probably are facing the same
thing if they don't realize that
yet they will shortly because a
lot of our lines are more than
sixty years old back there many
of them approaching a hundred
years old and so uh
this this probably is going to
be something that the state
needs to really look at it and
look at how we as a state
address but I I support the bill
but it's a it's the first of
many if there for what I hear
from some of my
cities and towns rings through
their water water lines seem to
be a capital outlay request that
comes about every year and it's
only going to exasperate itself
thank you.
And I a little disappointed in
senator tollman because he is
the sponsor.
Of a memorial.
Dedicated to the national
infrastructure bank which if it
were to be created.
Would generate what's the latest
estimate three trillion
five to six five to six trillion
dollars it doesn't increase
taxes doesn't increase that see
I know he's going to use the
opportunity gave him.
But go ahead tell us all about
it.
Well there's a bill before.
Obvious cars may have literally
every week for the last three
years you were trying to get
this through we got
a dozens of nationals.
Our beds in a journal one after
we had.
Never been that many signatures
on a dead before
every two of our three congress
persons have signed down to this
bill
and you know the united states
used to be
the india the world thirty forty
years ago and infrastructure no
longer would finally behind the
rest of the world the europe is
spending five percent of their
gmps infrastructure china
spending eight percent you know
says I spending two and a half
percent so we're falling
away far behind.
The infrastructure bill that the
bid signed to me too over two
years ago
was only one trillion
and half of that was just a
reappropriation they're just to
show you how it inadequate is
note new mexico's getting all
the three hundred and fifty
million dollars for water
information structure
and if you remember the state
engineer quit two years ago and
he publicly stated it was reason
as quickly because he didn't
have he said he needs a two
billion dollars is only getting
three fifty one six of what he
needs broadband
center producer broadband are
last time I talk to two years
ago he said we need a two
billion dollars to provide board
the for everybody in the state
now it's up to three billion
guess what in the buying bill is
only hundred hundred million
dollars that's one.
You're first fraction of what we
need then yet there's there's a
article headlines in the paper
saying the feds are getting a
grant of a million they make a
bit well millions of trickle
what we need there's no money
for high speed rails or what's
the big deal about high speed
real well china's got twenty
five thousand miles a high speed
real europe's got fifteen
thousand and nothing we can't
move people and goods fast we're
not going to be competitive
we hear away
you get the drift you want me to
be quiet
so there there is
there is a national need this is
not just new mexico certainly
not just to your all we can do
is say
you're hurting we hear you and
let's see what we want was the
will of the committee.
We have a motion in the second
motion from settered a
neighborhood second from
saturday because in the
secretary will call the role.
Senator
senator hickey what's yes and my
stuff yes center masters yes
center machine
center my cut then what's yes
center mechanic yes center
mechanic votes yes center
neighbor center neighborhood yes
centers
centers meetings votes yes
center city a lot best center at
all man yes senator toll man
boats yes senators if you know
yes senate you know votes yes so
you have the vote of eighteen
year formative with one excuse
zero in the negative you have a
pass thank you mister thank you
thank you mister commission
thank you
senator gonzalez regional
planning district services two
point eight million senate bill
one eight two.
Well these are all of the
regional planning.
I just
that it's it this is the
sustained word okay
please sin thank you mister
chairman member or some very
appropriate prior to those of
the bill that was percentage to
you because some.
You know this also comes in into
assisting your not too see how
you can do some more grant
writing and with the senate bill
one eighty two appropriate two
point eight million from the
general fund to the department
of finance and administration
dear fay for the purpose of
providing grant writing
technical assistant service to
original plan industry one two
three four five six and seven
and one children I do have a
some witnesses with me that all
they can provide a little bit
more death information to the
committee we are well missing
monica better she saw the
director for excuse me nor
central economic development and
will start with her
welcome monica
thank you mr chairman good to
see you as well thank you
members of the committee for
hearing the spill today i'll
give you a little bit of history
on on the bill back in two
thousand and twenty two you all
recall the rural economic
opportunity task force that was
meeting there was an intention
of that task force to introduce
this very legislation and the
basic premise was that with the
bipartisan infrastructure law
being passed at the federal
level and then on the heels of
that the inflation reduction act
the question for rural
communities is how are these
role communities going to
possibly compete for this
funding they don't have grant
writers they don't have enough
staff and said the intention of
the of the task force was to
provide the planning districts
are the councils of government
four hundred thousand dollars
each per year so that we can do
those services for them that
proposal never meet it before
the legislature however i'm very
grateful to senator gonzalez and
are legislators in north central
who actually came up with the
house bill junior money to allow
us to start this in the north
and some of our other councils
of government have followed suit
by clobbling together other
funding sources in the past year
and a half we have secured
thirty five million dollars.
In grant funding for our
communities and that is with an
investment of about three
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars a year in june your
money so we're basically it's
like a hundred percent return on
investment we have about twenty
eight million and grants pending
right now in addition to that
thirty five million so we've had
a very good track record we've
worked with communities all
across the north central region
a local government's tribal
governments are second
some non profits that have
responseship of a local
government entity and we'd
really like to see on this
effort continue and be
established as a regular service
that all of the councils of
government can provide.
Thank you mister chairman did
you want to say something.
Good you know number so the
settle and i'm the director of
the southwest new mexico council
the government but i'm also the
chair of the state association
and for those that you who do
know you will know that i've
been around with the council of
the governments for many many
years so what I do want to say
just kind of to summarize what
monica scene and i'll take a few
of examples I have a staff or
three that includes me.
And I have sandy behind me that
director for eastern plains or
probably has a staff of four
that includes or five and
includes her in some mother and
there you have these various
capacities but the one thing I
do want to share is that as a
director i'm also doing the
grant rating and they just don't
have enough of me to be able to
assess the local governments as
I would so this is really been I
got sent to us but I also want
to say that in my region as much
as I worked in my region I have
seen some of the highest address
awards being awarded my region
that i've ever seen
doing amazing things such as
having behavior half or mental
health therapists in school
districts in every single score
those are the kinds of impacts
that we're seen animals roll
from terror communities and just
ask for consideration to
continue that effort as we try
to meet the needs and the
companies across the state of
new mexico thank you mister
chair very good thank you
anything else senator.
Let's go to the audiences or
anyone here who wants to support
this measure raise your hand
did you want to say anything
about it you just want to raise
your hand
come up and use the microsoft.
Yeah.
There mr chairman was committee
larry here in general council
and registered lobbyists for the
mid region council governments
we represent over forty
political subdivisions in the in
the area but burning a sand
above lines in torrents county
and this provides of great
resource for grant writing for
our member governments and helps
leverage a lot of federal
funding it's a good piece of
legislation urges support thank
you learn anybody else want to
speak is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill.
I don't know if anybody is
watching us today at all
they're watching okay they just
they just
members of the committee senator
speakers
we have a motion for a due past
from second advice energy
tomorrow any discussion let me
ask you wouldn't quick question
the next they'll is also going
to give the case of the
government so many is it for the
same thing or is it two
different things
you know members.
This actually mentioned got.
The next piece of legislation is
something that really got.
In this legislative session here
is so it is a new initiative
okay will he'll be here will ask
him he's up next yeah europe
next interview sit down we'll
get to the screen
and so this is it see when I saw
this as it better doing this
because of grow
chairman or tc pin of the next
door bill is this the next bill
is about grow okay now we get
secretary will call the rule.
Senator hickey center masters
yes center my establishment yes
center in my coach and center of
my catch involved yes and i'm a
cana yes center mechanic votes
yes senator neighbor
senator neighborhood yes centers
maries senators millions votes
yes center city a lot of center
tomato yes then her tall man
votes yes senators if you know
yes center to the penalty yes.
Senator by good of seven in the
affirmative zero and then they
get if you have a dupassing the
return
or mischairman thank you thank
you both for coming now you are
you gonna stay there well
senators complete represe.
Senator companies
okay I know two program we have
to amend.
We have a couple of amendments
on your bill.
Yeah.
Only one paragraph bill we have
to amendment.
So we have copies of the
amendment
okay
while she's passing those out
wanting to just tell us about
the bill and sure
thank you very much mister
chairman members of the
committee and as you all know
it's people continue to go to
work on the grow project in
essence what we're doing is were
involving if you will hear the
cards and so along with that
with the council and governments
and the increase in work and of
course the ability for us to
develop this state wide
we started with uh an amount of
a million dollars to try to help
to find if you will the work
that is going to be needed as
we've continued with further
assessment were now finding out
that we're going to need close
to the four point five million
about four point four million in
order to go ahead and get the
work done
in so that innocence is what
this particular measure would do
but if I can mister chair of
members of the committee also
defer if you work to the experts
that are here with me today so
that they can further justify
and let you know the amount of
work that is going to go to go
into the
development if you will of these
projects that would be utilised
statewide and if I may just as
anyone knows if you apply for a
grand securing the resources
it's not where all the work is
it's the work right after you
receive that a word where you
have to not only monitor and
follow exactly
what is going to be required but
ultimately come up with the uh
the outcome so that's going to
go ahead and be if you will be a
gist of what we're working with
we want to ensure that there is
going to be full compliance
transparency and accountability
by the use of the resources that
would go into this particular
fund in this particular project
thank you very much mister
chairman and if I may again
just.
Quickly go with some of the
individuals that are here with
me to help to testify in terms
of the amount of work that's
going to be required to
institute.
Mr chairman members of the
committee monica they took
executive director for the north
central new mexico economic
development district I think the
thing that I would say is all of
the cogs are quite different as
a personal server just mentioned
we have a rather large staff at
north central because we run the
area agency on aging but are
staff that actually handles
community projects is about five
people however because we do
have the non metro trouble we
have a full fledged finance
department or as many of the
other councils of government do
not and so we've all provided
estimates to senate finance of
what it will take for us to
support this work I think for
those of you who have worked
with us for a long time we do a
lot of this without having the
resources to do it and so we're
trying to provide a fair number
here as to what it would really
take to do this correctly and
have enough staff staffing
capacity to really support this
my understanding is that senate
finances concerned about
making sure these funds are
spent about metrics and
benchmarks and results for our
communities and so I think by
putting the councils of
government or the planning
districts in charge of this
you'll see a much higher level
of um
one on one interaction with the
projects and the communities and
I think you'll see a higher a
level of success for example I
want to talk about in my region
we only had a thirty grow
project that will be handling I
say only but if you look at some
of them their actually more like
five projects because for
example a senator might be
giving money to senior centers
in five different counties
that's going to mean five
different contracts some of
these are a non profit
appropriations to nine profits
that are going to require a full
rfp and procurement process and
then fiscal agency by the cogs
so there is quite a bit of work
involved in our case our
proposal was to hire a
procurement and fiscal agency
specialist who would we would
need to fill out our staff.
And then actually some cost
allocations for existing staff
um to basically cover the other
components of this so I will let
presolid talk about what it
looks like for her card
again good afternoon personal in
the settle with southwest new
mexico council and governments
and chair of the state
association of other cards so as
monica mentioned we have many
responsibilities and as we begin
to see more and more capacity
issues at the local level they
are reaching out to us more and
more and so that does take more
as I was mentioned earlier and I
speak for for myself is that not
only am I doing the grant
writing i'm doing this already
for some of the legislators in
my region to actually support
these non profits and i'm doing
that myself so so the
responsibilities continue to
grow for us which I think is
really great in the sense that
it there's nothing having those
people at the local level doing
the work with them because we're
trusted in the communities we
have institutional knowledge of
all of the projects and we have
we're able to expedite and will
things just based on straight to
certain knowledge and that's
what I record is to advantages
of cogs really understanding our
communities so we we
continue to grow in this aspect
and provide more assistance and
as we see the work first turning
over we're seeing more more
responsibility I mean till I
send we want to make sure I
think as a state chair and it's
all cogs as the group that are
ultimate goal is to be there for
all of you to be able to provide
those resources at the local
level and continue to bring
these dollars to the community
that are much needed in the most
rolling frontier communities and
without the spending some of our
programs are renon existent and
some of those problems are the
most important in our
communities so thank you for the
opportunity to speak before you
today thank you up before we go
to the audience and see if
there's a.
What's the plan for how this
money is going to be split among
the seven or more as I guess
there are some special
enumerative district yes
everybody can get a fair share
one one seven
that that's really not equitable
since not how are you going to
do it so mrperiod terry members
of the committee and working
with the legislative staff and
we have determined that pretty
much as we brought in and asked
the individual cogs to bring in
there what would be their
estimated cost for people doing
this within their own
organization when it
approximately averages out to
his about ten percent.
Of administrative fees for each
one of the councils the
governments so that's how we
made the calculations and how we
came up based on the awards that
were worth it based by each
legislator for each region and
came up with us a specific
dollar amount.
You took the amount all the
legislators have to allocate or
grow.
And you're giving each district
ten percent to the legislators
in that district that is correct
and then we also looked at as we
were working with the
legislative analyst is if there
was a council the government
that now had to ramp up even
more because they didn't have
any accounting stop they might
got a little more but on average
is about ten percent.
So and I think or my perspective
in working of my I thought it
was pretty fair cause both
average anywhere from the lowest
beginning about seven hundred
thousand although it to the
highest speaking about eleven
point six million so you can see
the variant the the variances
between the allotments and as
money come mentioned it's also
important to note that for you
to another is not just one
allocation it'll be multiple
application allocations to
various groups and we have to
monitor in serve procurement and
all of those pieces so we all
feel in the discussions that
we've had based on the
conversations with the
legislative analyst that were
all comfortable with those
dollar amounts that we've
already estimated for that
process that let me ask the
committee when one quick
question before we're going
further that two sets of
amendments one paragraph feel.
Shoot up pretty much or use a
draft.
The.
What what how is the committee
feeling about just amending this
where should we send it back for
a committee seven deal with
their own.
The.
It's pretty simple build but it
is should have drastically.
What do you think any direction
from the committee.
The.
Go ahead and just move straight
ahead
anybody disagree with them.
Okay that's good to the audience
anybody in the audience in favor
of this bill.
Council governments and the
special enumerative enumerated
districts are all in favor of it
anybody opposed.
Anybody online okay knows take
the amendments one at a time let
start with the simplest one
which is the one that adds
special districts than numerated
that's two two seven seven seven
three point one.
They just add that freeze to the
bill
we have a motion on there
with motion to adopt that is
there any discussion of it what
are these district what is this
what is the special.
Districts enumerated
so mr terroring members of the
committee
the language that I provided was
based on the state statute which
is how we're organized under
state statute which are
considered regional planning
organizations so
some a little concerned about
specifically what special
districts yeah the only one
deals with it uses a different
title but
depending on which order we
adopt him in.
So so mister chairman members of
the committee if I may in terms
of the special districts as we
go through it they're quite a
few that have been numerated
within if you will statute so
with it from the artisan
conservative districts to
ditches her sec as I was afraid
of and so what it does is it
starts to again expand in terms
of where the resources are going
to be going how they're going to
be administered and so that's
what the inclusion of that would
would mean it would be nice to
go ahead and if you don't want
take up a lot of your time as
you go forward mister chairman
members of the committee but at
least a talk to some of these
other groups that are indicating
they will be dealing directly
with some of the resources that
he operated through grow as well
so they'll be after some of this
money and
there's so many of them I mean
each of them is going to get
about seven dollars in nineteen
cents at this rate
senator neighbor.
Mr cherry your question just uh
caused me to have another
question and that was it seems
that the planning in the velvet
districts or the rpos have a
geographic area that they're
serving and so why do we need to
add these special districts if
you already serve the geographic
area so mr chairing members of
the committee of me addressed
that in the original bill it
said local counsels are
governments so when I met with
staff I asked her to strike that
out input regional planning
districts to actually coincide
what the new mexico states that
as to how we're organized so
those are the seven planning
districts so mr chair your
answer
is.
That we don't need the first
amendment
your answer evidence is we don't
need the first amendment you're
arguing against your own motion
is still going to do well yes no
you have to be right
if that's it seems to me that if
we're
providing for activities energy
a graphic area we don't we don't
need to have the amendment
any money for the sake years for
this water utility it can all
defend
mr chairman that was what we
thought we thought and I think
and in this process this year
the funds for those types of
organizations were funnelled
into our grow at
responsibilities with growth so
that's how we assume this would
send you how do you feel about
just dropping that amendment
that's fine but i'd really like
to go ahead and hopefully
there'd be someone here maybe
from some of these other special
districts just so there's an
understanding that is we're
dealing with this and these
dollars are a disseminated and
distributed that it's not going
to be
the wrong interpretation of how
those resources are going to be
used and who the dollars are
going to be going to I think
that's good in and i'll ask that
in second but keep in mind that
the money in this bill is
supposedly used to beef up the
council of government so they
can distribute the money that we
allocate to them more
efficiently so is there anyone
here from a.
Special districts enumerated in
chapter seventy three.
Okay
this this news they lose
dropped.
Did you make the motion you did
we would try that okay thank you
senator
boy removing right left now
number two
little more complicated did you
want to explain this one
getting it exactly what you said
I think
so so in essence as we go
forward with the the second one
of course the amount is going to
be increased as we deal with it
and then from there in terms of
time we're going to go ahead and
strike yours and incertainly do
their year and straight twenty
twenty five in insert in their
own subsequent fiscal years in
essence with this particular
amendment an increase in
resources as has already been
found out to be needed and then
secondly as we move forward to
open up if you will because it
would be very difficult for us
to go ahead and spend or have
these resources of fully spent
or incumbent by twenty twenty
five.
With respect to the amendment
it's.
We have a one page bill and we
have this amendment that
quadruples more than quite
rupols the amount of money and.
Have the period of time in which
that money is to be spent so I
mean that's really a pretty
entire you have five hundred
thousand a year in the in the
original bill now you have four
point four million in the for
one year in the second if we'd
take the member I just wanted to
know
why.
Do we have an amendment that's
drafted just a few days later.
Quadrupling or more than
quadrupling them the amount and
then not applying it to two
years but only applying it to
one year although we do also
take away the reversion class if
you don't spend it in the first
year
it remains there and could
remain there for a great many
years if they don't spend it
because they're standard mr
chairman senator neighbor our
understanding was that this
would be for the two year period
because the grow requests for
for two years as to the original
amount that was put in there I
really can't speak to that we
were asked last week to give our
our budgets to senate finance I
think they put a place marker in
there and then we've been
discussing throughout the day
what that amount is so I
apologize for that but I don't
want you all to think that we
started at a number and then
quadrupled it we were simply
getting our budgets to send it
finance
thank you very much mister
chairman and a course going back
to that and senator
in essence what you heard is
what's happened I was looking
for a place card because their
scroll fund is if it was
happened happening very quickly
it gave the cogs and
opportunities then to assess
what type of need they were
going to have and so this was
not by their volunteer they're
their fault it was something
that I put in place in order for
us to at least start the
conversation then as well we
ended up today with the uh the
growing need if you will to
administer these resources well
mrperiod chairman center you
know my my first impression a
million dollars wouldn't
wasn't worth our joint about but
four point four million for.
The council of governments to
perform functions that the local
governments are paying to have
performed we're in essence
paying to have the moneys were
distributing to them.
Uh
to do all the the paperwork in
stuff and I thought they were
formed to do that stuff in the
first place it just seemed like
this is a way to get more money
to the car just.
Direct appropriations instead
of.
Increasing dues or what have you
to the cities and counties that
that are members of the
respective tax I I don't know if
there's any any response to that
but they just seem to unusual so
so mister chairman and center
night with a really appreciate
that because it does look like
it's an inflated amount however
as we've dealt with is and with
local governments continuing to
rely on cars
this is going to be in a certain
soul in separate with the
additional work that's going to
be required for the resources
that were asking for these cars
to undertake and so this is the
assessment that the cogs have
come up with and again it wasn't
anything that they devised to
start with the million and then
to increase the amount and if I
could mister chairman i'd like
to at least have some of their
representation
mentioned some of the reasons
why they've come up with the
four point four million from a
mis.
So mister chair and center if we
if we pass is through we have
some commitment from the cogs
that they're not going to charge
a
fee for a processing because
i've heard from several local
governments that they thought
that the money we were getting
was going to end up costing them
maybe five percent of that
amount for the administration of
that so they're getting both i'm
not necessarily in favor of this
if they're getting this and not
charging the local governments
and maybe you're twisted by our
some commitment
so some is determined center
neighborhood I would like to
respond to that if we if we may
place.
So mister charins and our
neighborhood so I can tell you
the only time that we charge
additional fees is that the time
that we have to be a fiscal
agent and so we've seen an
increase in the number of fiscal
agents that were having to
assess now or are some of the
capital dollars another water
transport dollars are colonious
dollars but when it comes to
this project in itself even for
the ones that i've done in the
past I have never charged an
additional fee for that so it's
really just now to protest
providers additional staff
because currently as in my
example i'm doing the grant
applications i'm also doing the
administrative work i'm doing
the request for reimbursements
offer the local governments
because they don't have capacity
and I think it's really are
intent to really be able to
handle them there was some of
these processes because we know
they don't have in a more
bandwidth it's really up to us
to help them that's what we're
structured for anything that's
how we want to keep this process
is to continue to do that or
them so no sir there is no
additional fee but thank you for
being so ponders and of what the
committee needs are they can't
even afford anymore as a person
was on the colonial's board
water trustport these
communities can even afford any
more match rate or debt because
they're maxed out on their debt
so i'm right there with you so
thank you for speaking on behalf
of the communities
may I miss determined purchase
we just only through something
else out to you that I think
that the the formula using the
ten percent formula is a little
flied because not all of the
whatever it is four hundred
million dollars is going to flow
through the car some of it will
be directly spent by state
department so I I wondered if
I i'm not capable of doing the
recalculation but i'm sure in
senate finance you'll probably
get a recalculation which should
reduce that amount did you want
to respond to yes or chairman
center neighbor.
So the amounts of the ten
percent were taken off of the
specific projects that were
directed to us not the total
amount so for example if I was
assigned for a million in
projects the ten percent would
be you know four hundred
thousand so that's how it was
looked at it wasn't looked at as
the total amount from the junior
funding
I do want to see that the base
mount of funding that the state
gives the cogs is a hundred
thousand dollars a year what we
receive and based funding so
while we do a lot of work for
our communities we really don't
receive very much steep money
and that is why in the past we
have charged a fee for some
services because we simply can't
do it with the hundred thousand
dollars a year so with this like
I mentioned for my car will be
hiring a procurement and fiscal
agency officer and we can then
do that work for free right now
we do charge a small fee for
physical agencies because we
have no other way to cover that
cost.
We have an amendment we have not
taken a motion on that let's
will the committee.
Senator tom and moves the
adoption of the amendment is or
any further discussion of this
is amendment number.
Two two seven eight one four
point one
number one
secretary will call the room
and we don't even for an
amendment i'm told we don't need
one for an amendment this is new
information in my twentieth
learning cost
senator hiki
senator hicky votes yes center
my stuff yes center my
establishment yes center in my
cutchen senator my catch in
boats yes sinner mckenna yes
said a mechanic votes yes in her
neighbor
center neighborhood thoughts yes
center cities center city of
best center tomorrow
senator manwell's yes center it
is a pino
yes senators if you know what's
yes.
By a load of seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
the amendment is adopted and now
we go to the bill is amended.
What's the will of the committee
on this bill senator
neighborhood lose adoption
seconded by senator minister six
second very well called the role
senator hiking.
Senator myself yes set of my
estimates notes yes so my carton
so much involves yes center
mechanic yes senator mechanic
votes yes in our neighbor
senator neighborhoods yes
centers mideast center city of
office.
Senator man
senator manboats yes
when you go back to senator city
look this is.
Center city a lot because votes
yes center to the pinot yes
senators if you know what's yes
so now we have by a vote of aid
in the affirmative zero in the
negative one excuse you have to
do mister
members of the committee thank
you very much for your attention
and for your work on this
predictor measure thank you
great thank you senator thank
you mister and thank you and
thank all of the
regional planning council
directors thank you mister
charles we all thought you were
cargs but now we know you're
regional.
Okay let's go to senator by the
and the state fire retirement.
Thank you mr chairman and
members of the committee I have
two measures before you today
we'll yes start with senator one
twenty eight.
Excuse me the state fire
retirement plan I do have two
experts with me or state
firemartial and also mister.
Mr cherno from the public
regulation commission i'm sorry
to arrow in so okay let me reset
okay thank you mister chairman
of members of the committee
essentially this piece of
legislation fixes a big problem
that we have right now the bill
changes the name of the current
plan at para for state police
correction probation and
parallel officers too a umbrella
statement called the state
public safety plan and then it
adds state fire members the
reason that this is necessary
members of the committee mister
chairman is this is that the
state now employees fire members
didn't previously that was
municipalities and counties that
did that
essentially this replaces the
reason that the legislation is
so lengthy is it has to replace
that title in what multiple
areas of the act
I just want to let you know this
fund is actually at a at a rate
to fund it at a rate of one
hundred and twenty four point
nine percent so this is not
going to cause an issue for the
find at all so we're very
excited about that there is no
effect on the general fund and
that's why there isn't an
appropriation here that will be
a born by PE r a and they've
already agreed to do this and
make this happen as you know
they're execute during their
ceo's here right now in favor of
this the only other thing i'll
say is that again it it as it
creates a new definition
we do have to do a couple of
amendments mister chairman to
link up at the time with which
public employees that are in
this new class should we elect
it to adopt this the time that
they would have to elect to join
this new plan so we have to make
a couple of changes that way and
does it be pananic changes well
i've loved it for you to do that
if your committee is willing to
do that I can call them out for
you immediately but they're
simple we might okay so so here
again before I would you like to
hear from my experts are we
ready jump sure okay it's all as
mr here to say a few words that
all ask her farmers.
Yeah thank you mister chairman
members grector ill with pera
and I think the sponsor didn't
read job as summarizing it it
really is
now that said is recruiting
firefighters making sure that
the retirement plan they will be
joining is equal to the
retirement plan in place for our
monitors poll in a county
firefighters
how many are there
mister chairman I believe with
the same part of marshal's
office there is thirty positions
and I believe this day to energy
and minerals.
Division got funding for sixty
shop fire federal cruise or
sixty personnel and I don't
believe those employees have
been hired so when they are
hired in they will be able to
come in under this plan they
considered full time
mr chairman yes they will be
full time tell you about ninety
and all you think
mister chairman and members that
is correct and this would be
inclusive of the hot shots that
were all aware of the fight the
fires and extreme conditions
asked the state of our marshall
to be here as well
good afternoon mister chairman
members of the committee randy
where they lost the fire
marshall are this would really
support the far marshal's office
and recruitment and retention
and it bring us in line with the
public safety
and I think this would be the
beneficial for both entities and
so much for chairman where
where we'd have to make these
changes are at the bottom of
page nine simply finding that
there's about four five places
we could just have to change two
thousand twenty five we're not
quite sure why it was drafted
that way to two thousand twenty
four the bottom of page nine
line twenty five and this is the
s.
Should be two thousand twenty
four yesterday on line twenty
five.
Then on page eleven up and
online three that should read
two thousand twenty four.
Why twenty five.
Yeah.
And then second would be page
eleven line three two thousand
toward the end of the line there
changed out from two thousand
twenty five to two thousand
twenty four.
The.
Also page eleven.
The.
Wine five two thousand twenty
five to two thousand twenty four
also page eleven.
Line eight two thousand twenty
five to two thousand twenty
four.
And let me just triple check to
make sure we have.
That seems right for those
changes there's also one change
at the very end of the bill on
the temporary.
Which gives
parent until december thirty
twenty twenty four to complete
that election but obviously
that'll that'll need to be ahead
of july one twenty twenty four
so as long as that as long as
that data is before that whether
to june thirty years.
Make that thirty i'm sorry
ninety days after the bill was
signed into one.
Which would be what.
Correct.
Mister shared june thirty twenty
twenty four would work as long
as it is long as it predates the
july one twenty twenty four
changes that are occurring in
the other changes.
That would do with you.
And then as mentioned that the
fund it right now is at a
hundred and twenty four point
nine percent funded with these
additional ninety members would
not exi.
Mister chairman mr chairman
members of the were given the
opportunity a couple years ago
to join this plan they elected
not to there is a separate plan
for a cheer two members for
juvenile correctional officers
that essentially give them the
same benefit.
Since the the bill itself
doesn't include an effective
date it'll go into effect I
believe the dates may fifteen.
I may fifteen two thousand
twenty four.
The.
Thank you for doing that mister
chairman.
The.
Worth.
This bill is.
The.
I think you're my question on
but that's a week we could hear
you I think
as as well
our firefighters are taking a
lot of risk there not only
exposed to dangerous wildfire
they're breathing a lot of smoke
and so it's
really the responsible thing to
do to honour the work that they
do by providing them with the
opportunity to be part of
planned one very good thank you
anybody else when I speak on
this bill anybody opposed to it.
Nobody on some members of the
committee senator neighbored
just one question on page nine.
Were increasing the service
credit.
And my question is does it line
up with other employees or or is
it what why why are we doing
that is it the wine up with
other similarly in these
situated employees or what's the
purpose I mister chairman and
that's essentially correct
senator neighbor but i'll ask
mister true here to walk you
through more detail.
Yes mister chairman center
neighborhood I saw under a road
cheer one these two one members
they get a twenty percent
enhancement so any any state
politics police officer
they work twelve physical months
in the job we give him credit
for fourteen so anybody that was
employed as that you're one
member that joins its plan would
get that same benefit as
there'll be also.
Anybody else
senators say the old office
thank you mister chair I
generally
support the bill but I did have
a question about the fiscal
impact.
Just because the constitution
requires that that's that there
be a fiscal analysis leave in
all I see here is.
Unclear.
Be the fiscal impact is not
explained very well in the fire
and I think it should be under
public.
I thank you mister sorry thank
you mister chairman and and
senators to deal open so i've
just retrieved once to add more
to this but essentially this
plan already exists in the
previous set of employees that
are affected by it this would
simply be there they're doing
this today to add people all the
time and take people up
depending on what's going you
know a mortality and in this and
that that happens with various
members or whatever this would
be adding ninety members to the
to the topic to the new plan as
we're going to call it that's
why there's no immediate not no
fiscal impact whatsoever here
they would be doing that anyway.
Oh.
His request.
Yeah.
And mister chairman and centers
of the old opens and we have
requested that I believe we have
numbers and we will update the
FIR a but the way the bill is
drafted currently it's point
forward so the person that tired
july one they're gonna be
participating in the plan going
forward as it is now they're not
getting retroacted benefits so
they are paying the true cost up
front.
I just asked that since their
constitution requires it that
that be available I would have
all for here but by the floor
i'm going to be looking for that
fiscal analysis because it is a
requirement and the only people
that will enforce that
constitutional car mid.
And thank you mister chairman
center which will get that
before we hit the floor we have
another committee stopped before
we go to the thank you thank you
mister chair.
The secretary will call the rule
just checking senator hickey
senator hicky wrote yes center
my s yes center my estimates
votes yes then I my current
chance
that my catch involves yes
senator mechanic yes center
mechanic votes yes senator
neighbor
senator neighborhood yes
meetings center city a lot of
yes center city a lot of results
yes senator man
senator man wrotes yes centered
center it's easy to know
yes senators ipino votes yes.
By a vote of eight minutes of
zero in the negative you have as
amended this bill is passed
thank you mister chairman of
members of the committee may I
remain for my second you may
remain in your seat and do
senate bill on twenty nine
deciber security act changes.
Wait for my experts to get here
please
let me repeat anybody here for
one forty five we've rolled that
over till wednesday.
If anybody's here for one forty
five that's the detention.
Dignity not detention bill.
Thank you whenever you're ready
mister okay thank you so so I
appreciate you letting me
present my second bill to the
committee one after another this
is sent about one twenty nine as
you know we as a legislature
decided last year to create the
office of cyber security to
something i've been beating the
drama from multiple days weeks
months years you name it we did
have a severe attack on the
regulation and licensing
department and they are handing
out a substitute mister chairman
i'll get to that here in second
but as we all know that that one
attack by itself wound up
causing us dramatic effects on
about two thirds of the
businesses here in new mexico
that have some sort of a license
of some kind of operational we
were just meeting in finance
with the
the new superintendent there at
our and they've just very
grateful for the kind of work
that we're doing they did talk
about a number of things that
the office of the superintendent
insurance I mean with the
superintendent earlier today she
did say that the minimum
standards have dramatically
helped that office as well and
they are totally bought into
what we're trying to do so we
knew when we created the office
that we were going to need to
have a year too much like when I
created the earlier department
to broadband office we've got it
do some clean up and since I did
get give these offices the
authority in the stop that they
need and and and help them while
they're putting all their rules
together to clear things up but
essentially with the the
legislation does is it requires
departments to adopt an
implement implement rules that
are establishing minimum
security standards and policies
they're now with this
legislation authorized to
conduct it and security audits
they're also able to approve
agency information technology
requests for proposals and other
agency requests that are subject
to the procurement code they
also are able to with this
legislation approve agency cyber
security and information
security contracts to ensure
that those are now meeting the
debt that the minimum standards
that the officer setting
including emergency procurements
and end and they are also with
this legislation able to review
an approved all agency public
school higher education
institution county and municipal
legislative appropriation
question.
Of twenty five million dollars
or more in all of the cyber
security that's needed to
protect those dollars and then
also issues or as orders of
compliancy on a voluntary basis
and of often terry bases for
county municipal and tribal
governments and I do have an
amendment to the substitution
that we need to make to add
public schools to that the
school district several of them
came to me actually today asking
to want to be a part of this
because they're seeing the value
of this as well the bill would
also change the role of the site
security
of the security office on the
cyber security advisory
committee that we established
when we set up this offers from
a non voting member to a boating
member and that was also sort of
part of the plan who wanted them
to put the rules together the
first year and then become a
voting remember the second year
m m and beyond I have that
russians in bonding who was are
acting information i'm sorry.
Department of information
technology acting secretary and
also is our sister are cheap
information security officer
with the state of new mexico in
addition to seventeen other role
city those but i'm an asking to
say a few words before we jump
into the and he can describe why
we needed to bring you a
substitute graduate.
Charity members of the committee
thank you thank you for the
opportunity so i'll make it very
simple and.
Talked some number.
If we do not have three to ten
million dollars three and the
lower end and ten million
dollars if you have a help for
related information by that gets
compromised.
That's the mount you're looking
at for mitigate and I cannot put
and get a pulse on that time and
while didn't fixing things if a
bridge would happen
so I want that to be taken into
consideration and that's not the
type of money that we have
dedicated for cyber security so
we're doing the best impossible
work
that the least amount of money.
And the state and we have
significantly important our
cyber security posture not only
the posture but the cyber
hygiene are for state government
equal system as significantly
improved.
So
the amount of the ability that
we currently have to report on
metrics.
In some cases ahead of the
current and be very able to
identify and predict.
Malicious behavior and informed
the agencies ahead of time we
used to be very reactive now we
are with the tools available we
are more proactive so I will
pass that down.
And so with that mister chairman
we do have to bring you
unfortunately I hate to do this
but as you allowed me in the
previous we do have two
amendments that we're going to
would like to discuss with you
as i'm.
Correct correct yes.
It's been raised.
Is the committee
subsubstantially different from
the original.
When asked right at a stress
that one so will be modified
some language also for example
be.
Got this adapted and then I met
with seven some agency cios so I
got there input and based on
that input be modified the
language a little bit.
I throw out the doctor so for
example
in the substitute
could we get more than just an
example could we ship where the
changes are.
The substitute build
thunderland.
Let's have a motion to discuss
the substitute.
Dupes.
For a discussion.
And so mister chairman I and I
appreciate center nibert's
comments thank you senator city
locus relax to discuss this so
this has not been
the the original bill has not
been presented anywhere else so
essentially the substitute is
the first time we're bringing
this to anyone to look at well
the issue is or endless
analyse the original now we have
a committee sub and have we if
it hasn't been changed
substantially.
So you did do this up but the
minority analysts did you do the
stuff.
But we need to just make sure
that the minority analysts get
these committee subs.
I mean they're quiet but we
shouldn't ignor.
Yeah yeah.
Okay it was primarily just.
Legal language of year then that
another no substantial changes
so in the committee sub that we
have there's some underlined
language those changes
from the original okay so we can
use that as it absolutely thank
you
and I do have two changes to
need to be made to the
substitute if you're here but
allow me to describe those.
So so I do have two changes that
I mentioned that mister chairman
to the substitute if you'd allow
me to walk you through those
just yes that would be helpful
so so as I mentioned earlier i'm
not going to go in order a pages
but I would like you to go to
page five.
Um line twenty two on the sub.
And essentially we'd have to
have this rewritten in the you
know about but at the end of
that sentence online twenty two
I believe that would need to
read just starting at the
beginning of the line municipal
comma
tribal governments comma and
public schools the public school
several districts came to be
made total sense that this
needed to be changed this way as
we know the suit albegra public
schools dramatically affected by
cybertack lost cruises held
hostage rounding and know how
long a real rental the same and
there been others so they wanted
to be included in this language
and just make sure that they're
covered that way they can't this
they brought it to me so wanted
to bring that to you and I I
like so this would be an
amendment to the committee
correct and so that would be
that it shouldn't be or
it would be or yes.
I paid five line twenty two.
Any other changes to the yes
there's one other and i'm gonna
ask riser to explain this on but
it's it's page three of the talk
there is some debate and some
discussion that came to me just
today from the state auditors
office that we wouldn't want if
as I understood it we wouldn't
want I do it auditing themselves
otherwise why went to the audit
right so
russia can you cannot
for clarity we have not doing
added south our own work so the
office of cyber security would
like to retain the yeah ability
to trust but verify and the
agencies work on mitigating
cyber security of risks so I
will be aminable to art the
department of the office will be
available to remove the word
audit and go with assessments
assessment correct.
So that's online
five.
And I just looked back at the
out of the state auditors office
the several executives are here
from there and they're an
agreement with that move the
word substitute assessment.
Thank you and those are the only
amendments that we'd like to
bring you at this point okay
will this go through the bill
though and the substitute you
tell us of this difference from
the original version
so where I will ask you that
that is so this is right
around page two but it's still
accomplishes the one two three
seven eight eight topics that I
mention in the introduction so
that roger glad.
So chair and members of the
committee.
Which one do you want me to go
for existence yeah just let's
use for wherever you have
underlying to.
Okay the first item is on page
two.
Blind ten and levin.
The.
So it basically says applicable
to entities receiving general
fund up for operations to
protect state information
technology's systems and
infrastructure.
So.
The strength of a cyber security
program depends on how good I
want to reporting mechanism and
how strong how are the products
selections are then be used
multiple products and when
multiple ways of reporting.
It brings are dilutes our cyber
security poster so then the
agencies get different
appropriations for different
purposes you dilute the inter
operability right I may buy your
product to do xyz and senator
here can buy a product.
That does something similar but
differently so the younger
operability is the root cards of
miniable that we are currently
dealing with.
So the lack of reporting
capability so prior to me taking
on this responsibility we have
more than seventeen anti wide as
products in the state now we
have one so it improves
the difference from the original
is that you've deleted and
persons are rentities
transacting business for
correctly that's the change
you've made correct why did you
drop them so by going with
applicable entities to relieve
general fund appropriation it
covers all the folks that does
business with the state you
didn't need to say that yet you
can still
vendor who's selling something
to this correct you'll still
have authority to check to make
okay.
How about.
How about and that seemed page
line nineteen yes
the rules should include
requirements a day that entities
receive general fund
appropriation from the
legislative shell reports I was
a good office all type of
security and information
technologies security
expenditure in the farm and
manager established that by the
office right now we do not have
a mechanism to understand what
true cost of cyber security
spend it sometimes agency spend
from they are operating money is
sometimes they come for
legislature for a appropriation.
We don't have a clear
understanding of what the total
spend it so basically it's a
reporting requirement that we
are planning to work with and
will adopt an implement rules in
getting those defined so that
the agencies can report what
that true spend of cyber
security and others no change of
this one looks like it's just
the wording the next change is
actually on the
so the next page got you were
simply adding the volubility yes
so unlike number six viets are
adding the fact
security wall matter.
The.
And that moving on
to page four.
Line number nine.
Adopting implementals is what we
are adding.
So the process is pretty
transparent line number thirteen
adapting implementaries.
Line number sixteen adopted an
implementals
that's all the same only the
stuff it's different russians
okay.
No thirteen line twenty is
different yeah thirteen is it
just wording.
Apparent agency saver security
information said he requests for
proposals and invitation for
bits that are subject to
procurement called so be
modified the way it is or ten
that invitations for business
inserted yeah.
So so so similar to number
thirteen fourteen talks about
saver security information
security contracts amendments to
the contracts and sold source
contracts.
And up the item that we modified
is that to northeyest of the
procurement to the saga cyber
security office.
Yeah that that second
closer is all added okay yeah.
Yes and on the next one
of their item number fifteen we
took out the dollar amount and
said
as information security projects
that incorporate protection of
personal sense to do a
confidential information as
divine by the cyber security
regardless of how much it costs
correct because the sense that
have information that data is
what we are trying to protect
and that's what the bad guys
that after if we don't pay
attention to that then we have
once again back in the hole and
it seems like mister chairman
the smaller the procurement the
more volume but they're going to
be because it's gonna be less
eyes on it a twenty five million
dollars higher procurement is
going to have a lot of people
paying attention to that as of
the simply because of the dollar
amount but a five thousand
dollars twenty thousand dollars
I mean they're not going to be
watching those.
So see got a lot simple or no
you just broke it up as yeah yes
chair and members of the
committee are initially it was
more of a a larger paragraph of
stell be broken out into
smallers
so item number two undersea
necessary to protect states
digital assets from imminent
threats so we'll have that the
ability to inform agencies if
there is a media trap and take
it is two actions.
The.
A compliance turned into its own
subsection and then.
To have public schools there.
The.
Turn.
Do we have the authority to tell
public bodies not subject to the
jurisdiction of the security
officer how to conduct a
reference I mean as long as we
are
we are basically asking them to
use a standardized framework
which is the national institute
of standards and technology
framework.
I add an is there some penalty
if they don't
allow it could prevent us from
some funding mechanism of some
kind because we don't meet the
national standards oh yeah so
what yet when we passed this
legislation originally we did
example if I recall the sector
of state's office the department
of home out of security was
there another one because they
already had to meet higher
standards than the state does
but there's going to be
instances where.
We're going to be asthma much
like this cyber security office
at the stay level here is asking
a city of municipality there
wants to do a transaction with
the state that they need to meet
our minimum standards will now
we just thought why do we put
this in here the states can have
to meet these national standards
also so that we have no issue
with money flowing up and down.
Thank you chair and.
Um.
On page seven
v made some changes to the
committee
that chairman
chairman chairman is the chatter
of the committee saint it stays
the same to meet federal
notice of funding opportunity to
meet with the state local cyprus
security grand the northeast are
funding opportunity requires the
chat to highwarding authorities
so that's what that pattern
happened be talks about.
When we did this originally that
they didn't have they were non
voting number they were simply
advising the committee now they
would actually be a full voting
number.
I served on this committee for
the past year.
It's like watching paint dry on
top of pain but it there's but
it's very important.
The.
It's.
Anything else any other big
changes anything else major and
no sir we maintained the same
ability uhm
but the committee membership of
the constitution three members
appointed by the governor
check did you strike in the
original it had.
Three in the words
but it generally gets three
members appointed by the
governor and the following are
clearly I didn't be playing who
they would be at which agencies
they would be ref.
There's a lot more detail I see
you know public health public
education and okay because those
are driven by the funding
requirements from the federal
agency they need representation
from public education they need
representation from uh.
Uhm.
Other interest public health
institutions so will be.
So this becomes your cybersee
office of cyber security now.
I think that's it okay.
Ebay have questions on the
committee sub.
Do we amend it we have an
amended.
We have to will be still have to
adopt.
Let's let's deal with that first
those with the the the two
change three and pencil changes
the.
That's the public over them
again.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Our public.
The.
And then is there a third one
nope that's interesting
that we brought you.
You got assessments as plural
you've got that.
Any discussion of this let's
have a motion to adopt those.
Well no we haven't we have an
amended job first we have to
amend it so we we need a motion
to amend it.
The committee.
No I think center of cities up
is already dead
well discussion.
It's a remote now we did causing
then we have to take on the next
motion is when we we actually
kill it okay.
So the motion is to amend it
then we'll have a motion to kill
the original and adopt this
amended point three committees.
Yeah.
Any discussion any opposition to
amending it
seeing none welcome will
consider the committee subject
that amended and will go now to
a senator
discussion on the
service
right thank you mister
chairman's senator but my
question is because we're
dealing with cyber security and
systems do we need a specific
exemption in this.
Chairman members of the
committee senator
yeah we took out of that part a
during last session as the
disclosure of certain
information bill I can remember
that bill number but.
I worked with them
to their thank you as long as mr
chair as long as everyone's
comfortable but we have that
because we need to make sure on
everything dealing with this
that we.
For actually protect the system
and that would be an important
office with almost didn't see
the light a day until it was
simply so thought and we got a
really good bit of information
there do you go to judiciary yet
but he didn't make it as broad
as it needed to be.
The.
I think
you don't go to judiciary neck
that committee over there
well he's here so he'll hear
this issue but the double check
that it.
Keen legal beagle over here who
make sure that it and it roll it
was part of the discussion then
but both double check it for you
okay our chat and members of the
committee the security valuable
it is and assessments of related
to that exempt from good any
other discussion on this.
Amended committees a point three
committees up.
Signal will have a motion on the
mister i'll move it do not pass
on senate bill one twenty nine
and they do pass on senate
health and public affairs sub
committee substitute for senate
bill one twenty nine as amended
to
point two two seven seven four
six point three version
we got rspc team
security by senator masters any
other discussion.
Secretary will call the rule
then never hake it yes senator
hicky would say center my
center minus as well yes center
in my curtain server catch and
votes yes center mechanic yes
center mechanic votes yes sooner
neighbor senator neighborhoods
yes since mariest center city a
love is yes center city a lot as
votes yes sinner thomas center
zipino yes center to penal votes
yes.
I have voted seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
you have a due pass from this
committee thank you mister
chairman members thank you
senator
thank you thanks for keeping a
safe from those down ransomers
thank you chairman members that
the government thank you we are
doing our best
senator munius will do you next
and then we'll do senator
driving so.
So too many bill is
one sixty one acute care
facility subsidies.
I know mister chairman these two
bills I have senator woods bill
to
and so under the crowd of cyber
security we can't discuss them
with you
hospitals let's go right
there in my cutchen city.
No substitute will do that and
find it.
So which one you want for sixty
one what is that one one sixty
one is an attempt for us to fix
rural hospitals in the state in
new mexico with me I have eric
chinese.
Lfc and he has a waiver he's
state first.
You're not here supporter
even the chair no i'm not I hear
the support or
yeah either way
answer questions
when once now we don't have some
one sixty one is an attempt
throughout new mexico there's
twelve rural hospitals there in
trouble
and that is intempt in el of CNN
us to manage and save it and
rescue small hospitals from
clayton.
To gallup to the silver city.
To tear c
or tell us clovis
san rosa feneros
in there whether they are
they're listed in the union
union hospital the day if I
early listed six
I got six only listed six you
got a couple more I think that
may means one of them is rolled
with me kindly.
To our surprise lord help us
mister chairman there is a a
more up to date fire than that
has more on there as to more but
we have several more I think
it's about twelve or thirteen on
what's the other one.
All right some dancie trig in
quay county fully cross hospital
lincoln county medical center
minor school facts
are robust mckinley christian
hospital.
Saquora general hospital union
county water lupe see below
robust sierra vista me bris and
northeast so so that was that
twelve I I think so yeah
no
okay good and talk about because
I think media question because I
I don't need senators as we've
had the discussion in love see
in every hospital a little bit
different in different sheep I
can speak for mine who couldn't
meet payroll in december we had
to go to emergency running
through the city in the county
to make it through the end of
the year to make payrolls of the
hospital remain open
to the one in some old county
who insurance costs have tripled
and are now it did being into
the reserves and only have one
more year of reserves left
before they actually hit the
tipping point of the year
some of the other hospitals
we've been talking to it's a
little bit different in either
one clayton we're trying to
figure out if that host.
We can pay the debt in
case they suspended the debt to
mf cause they could not pay make
the payment.
So every hospital that santa
rosa has a same issue with
prime.
Earthing centers and so
everyone's a little bit
different and and so as we work
through this I think we're
gathering the information on all
the hospitals what they're going
to need in a three year period.
Tell me hospital tax comes
through.
What's the timing on the text
I believe it's without looking
at a believe it goes into effect
midway through twenty fifteen
twenty fifteen twenty twenty
five hundred to i'm sorry twenty
twenty five yes mister chairman
so we might only need this one
year if that comes
because that'll be bigger bucks.
What about the and that rural
fund they didn't help the
hospitals the governor's eighty
million dollars
over clearly for expansions
throughout the state new mexico
rate
and so those were new expansions
mental health I think nor lee
going to bunch of that money for
mental health issues
and didn't help these those who
are not yeah these are not to
save hospitals that was for
hospital expansion anything else
that you want to say about the
bill.
No i'll recently woods while
you're the maintenance.
Yeah he made an impassion
pleaded me on the floor today
i've got a vote for
it yeah
anybody in the audience and
support of this bill well
where to our backage of rural
hospital sticking
anybody want to speak on the
bill come up and use them.
Take you take your take line up
in in order and.
You have to hold the button down
the other way.
Thank you I appreciate you let
me talk my name is timmy chavis
I am the ceo at union county
general hospital and what
happened to us arm has been over
several years but it's really
banned the loss of some funding
and some changes and legislature
that is caused this some of it
is moving from snc which is
safety net care polling to
happen we lost over two to four
million dollars on that annually
so that's just a change in how
cms regulates the
armed dispersement of the
matching medicaid dollars then
on top of that the through
covered we lost a lot of are
expenses have gone crazy the
supplies and prescriptions and
medicines have gone up thirty
five percent salaries twenty one
percent they're not top of that
I used to pay a hundred and
eighty thousand dollars and
general in professional
liability and this year I was
only able to find two companies
willing to write up policy one
was at one point eight million
and one was for eight hundred
thousand and we have no claims
going into the sheer at all and
so these are the reasons why our
hospital is billing we are
taking care of patience in the
community we have fifty percent
of our population is medicare
and so it's ninety nine percent
of costs that we get on those so
we're already at a disadvantage
thank you I support the spill
and I hope you to to.
My name is bill patten i'm the
For seven years and holy costs
and house
hospitals like many of the
families in the country are
living paycheck to pay check and
just like many families in the
country the paychecks often
don't go for enough while the
pandemic may be over we're still
dealing with many of the
financial issues from that tare
me mentioned the cost of labor
we're still seeing nursing
salaries that are much higher
than they were pretty pandemic
supplies are much higher than
prepandemic and if that weren't
enough small hospital service of
him he mentioned seeing huge
increases in malpractice and
shots
neither medicare or medicaid
payouts are cost of providing
care how many businesses could
stay open and and think about it
in a rural community medicare
and medicaid often are our
largest payers so it for us to
try and make up the loss we have
on those two programs with
fifteen percent commercial just
is not a good good formula a few
stratistics about robert
we have lost money for the last
three years
for last year twenty three
through november we've lost
twelve million dollars the year
before twenty two we last twenty
two million dollars the year
before that we lost almost
fourteen million as a result
we've been taking out our losses
on our vendors and we have death
in excess of thirty three
million dollars right now
senator munos mentioned without
the support of the city and
county we would not have made
payroll at the end of the year
and early this year and we
measure cash in the single
digits so this build talks about
if you have more than a hundred
days cash you don't qualify we
could qualify for all the
hospitals in the state with our
low level of cash but we do have
a plan we have a plan that gives
this hope we are cutting
expenses we know that we have to
tighten her belt.
We're also looking at growing or
revenue specifically in our
surgical programs we're also
working with vendors to train
reach settlements in the last
three weeks alone i've been able
to take five hundred thousand of
debt and pay off with two
hundred thousand dollars so with
further infusions of cash it's
amazing what you can do when you
have a little bit of money in
your pocket
senate bill one sixty one would
help us provide what I think of
is the bridge to stability and I
would argue there are three
different bills that we need
pass senate bill fifty two as
the emergency bill that's good
gets cash in the door right away
said a bill one sixty one is the
intermediate solution and the
final solution is senator
seventeen that kicks in in
february of next year but we
have to be open in february of
next year for a taxi have
benefit so I would urge support
of this bill as well as senator
bill fifty two and senate bill
seventeenth thank you very much
for your time thank you mister
penn.
Greeting jason weeks registered
lobbyists on behalf of the
hospital association we stand in
support of this bill it provides
important gap funding for rural
hospitals that are facing
critical financial issues that
may continue to contract
services or close if we don't
get them infused with cash right
now i'm certainly the longer
term solution in seven bill
seventeen but this bills is a
critical need it fills that gap
provides that funding allows
them to keep their doors open
and lasting to remain solved and
healthy in the interim so for
that reasonable hospital
association stands in sport
thank you.
Thank you my.
Thank you mister chairman mike
miller I i'm a richer lobbyist
with norley and lemington and
rose about general possible when
per palace I don't want to be
redundant the reasons they have
been stated
are the reasons that we're here
supporting this bill I will tell
you that in portalist where I
live our hospital was shut down
not because the financial
reasons but because of a parent
company
so we were without a hospital
for about five years and it's
very critical in a small rural
community to have a hospital
with a few beds like that we
have in portal so urge supporter
this bill thank you.
Thank you thank you mr
members of the committee
my name is nation.
And I am a person with multiple
disabilities and i'm also a
disability advocate and acute
care is essential to
later lesser because and
preventative care can help to
create better supports i'd left
the committee room because I was
called into a consult with I
don't protective services
santander care
care facility and an individual
that was in crisis and I think
that when we advocate for many
of these issues it's
understanding how that impacts
direct support and then the
santander care case manager
whose doesn't do case management
had a caseload of seventy five
and I know that that's after
topic of the bill but anything
that we can do to support
increasing better health
outcomes and address in the cute
care so that care is less later
is the very important thank you
very much thank you net.
I'll be quicker from mister
chair members the committee when
it was claimed easily on the
commissioner union county where
you kind of general hospital is
i'm no expert at all but I just
want to say the effects if you
can kind of general does close
down would be it it would be
just terrible for our community
you know depending on where you
live in the county you'd have to
travel over a hundred miles just
to get basic health care not not
to mention life saving health
care so yeah and people price
leave the area just because
there's no no health care so
this is a this is a huge bill
like they said I think there's
three
three bills that will hopefully
help solve their sisters kind of
the intermediary one so I urge
support of SB one sixty one
thank you.
Very good is there anyone here
in opposition to this bill
we have a one comment they
didn't want to go online they
don't want to speak publicly but
they said they're from what the
lupe county hospital in santa
rosa and they are in support you
want to make a comment for there
and support
senator city all of us
thank you I of course of them in
the support of this bill are
rural hospitals are crucial but
I did when I was reading the
fire he had some questions at
that work were good and just
wondered if you want to make
these changes to make a clear
and page two they suggest
changing debt
instead of debt larger than one
million dollars they suggested
changing that to operating
losses or maybe it can be debt
or operating losses or something
because do you really want to
have to go into debt before
you're eligible
so that i'm just making
suggesting that changing i'd be
happy to make it here.
Mr chairman and senator sadiel
we're going to gather the
hospital needs in one place
write the twelve hospitals were
trying to gather that all in one
place and make sure that we
don't figure somebody out when
we'd start changing that
language of when we sub this
problem senate finance will know
that while you pay counting what
exactly their need will be for
sabola county I can say it's
it's insurance to store but
their reserves from a kind of
county.
There's a lot there in and so
each hospital is going to be a
little bit different to hospital
in guy lumpy and claim.
Mainly me needing to figure out
how we can.
Pay off the debt and met so that
means something we're trying to
gather them and each hospital is
going to be a little bit
different so that's why we
haven't handcuffed ourselves
yet.
But dead is extremely little
but we know two hospitals while
armsy h.
And we know that that county
hospital head in a mfa suspend
their payments because it could
make their payments so that's
clearly that for some older
general and grants it's not it's
operational so if you if you
clearly state one or the other
it may not work i've seen debt
or operating license or revenue
glasses I I don't know i'm just
throwing it out there to and
flagging it because the fire
reflected since it's going to
your committee
whatever but that did strike
important and then the other
suggests they were the other
question they had and I didn't I
don't know the answer to this
does the help your authority
have rule making.
Power so that they can set up
the criteria for awarding this
or how how would the mechanism
for these funds to be given to
the hospitals.
Mister terms and that is
authority that supposed to be in
place where it is in place
currently in place the authority
is in place so they can make.
So they they don't need anything
else to just be able to do this.
That's my first
we haven't heard from them
saying they need anything else
they had no comments on the bill
perfect okay thank you i'm in
support of the bill.
Uhm next to senator hiki
followed by senator neighborhood
followed by senator mccatchen.
Mister chairman for my question
still after the others yet
senator neighbor to go next
thank you mister chair
mister senator
you mentioned there were more
than the eight hospitals
whistler on the FIR and I didn't
catch all of those or could you
go for that list again.
Okay.
When I attended the rural
hospital ceo meeting the summer
there were a couple of the worn
on this worst maybe the same
girl county in the rosevelt
county are they on that other
list.
Let's figure out.
And I think mike said they're on
the list.
I think there were seven c o's
that were talking about their
direct rates and
those are at least two countings
that I didn't see on that l.
Senator composes aware of send
me yell.
Senator mentioned
I choose not to yield and choose
not to
well like legally centers just
really.
Uhm mischarge entered to
appreciate it I am sure not a
subsidy guy at all but it's
pretty apparent by all the
comments out here that all these
hospitals are doing their best
to cut.
Expenses but the state of new
mexico is not helping them at
all I mean we've got we've got
mid mail it's up ten times from
hundred eighty thousand to you
know one point eight million or
eight hundred thousand and so.
In this committee we do hold the
power to to start the ball road
and change and make this more
make new mexico a better place
for hospitals to operate I don't
see a way around not supporting
them right now because it's a
pretty big it's a pretty big
problem and and the citizens
do need to have health care but
you know we just keep thrown
money at the problem when we
could solve it on the frontier
so with that
i'm thank you mister chairman
just one response quickly nor
leave it as put on the list
because TRD did not make a
transfer of collection and
transfer to northeast leaving
them short one point eight
million in their opt.
What it was at the the northeast
that's the one I mean were they
transferring to them from the
they were they were getting
money from the property tax
billy forget what exactly it's
an excited it's not excited
because of the county hospital
and it's a county hospital they
have a hospital district
with the district money from the
county proper texas was not
collected by trd and so
therefore left.
Are they going to get it now
probably in this bill.
I mean that they kept the money
in the release and they did not
collect the money the state did
not collect the money from the
taxation it revenue department
in some of those that you.
So i'm still in a clue texting
rive didn't collect it or tax
and rebend it
in not collect.
Yeah.
They they didn't increase are
they going to do it now
yes they're aware that the taxes
in place and they have to
collect it.
Term recognition you have
anymore a bit on that
and give me some homework this
morning
mr chair
no I did talk to michael miller
and he filled me in on the on
the whole deal so we were we
went to your office.
And I got a sea text and
revenues by enlarged considered
one of our better operating
departments but this is an
enormous group
next time we see the secretary.
A bit didn't have enough man
power
that's the thing
senator hickey we've now
returned to you you can escape
making a comment any longer
thank you mister chair thank you
senator for bringing this bill
forward thank you to all the
world hospitals as if you have
showed up today I was at the
same meeting as senator nibert
this summer and and
given my forty years and the
business of I understand where
your difficulties are coming
from particularly as smaller
hospitals.
I have a couple of clarifying
questions and then I wanted to
try and get a little
perspective.
The you have listed in here
the
last biggest hospital is that
is that a community hospital
that is run by a four profit
entity or are they owned by I
think it's like point
recommunity community health
services.
Senator mister chair center.
Mr chair senator I don't have
that one with me okay I I think
you want to check that
and and again they may be on it
operating contract with
also question if they're not
owned I know that you do there
is one hospital here loveless
regional in rosswell I believe
that is holy owned by ardent and
therefore is the not for profit
and so I would suggest that you
look also
that they are sorry they are a
four profit entity
and so I the under the guys this
bill I don't think they qualify.
The so anyway I I would suggest
that you the others i'm fairly
sure all I mean there are either
their own by the county and have
consulting companies doing
operations or or purely in the
country but I that's just the
clarifying peace going forward
the
so my next question is and
assuming that the health care is
already and and during the
finance hearing you're gonna
look at this bill
seventeen and
fifty two if I get many numbers
correctly
this bill and fifty two or
two hundred million dollars at
the over two years because I
think that when is also
for fifty million dollars I have
a moment ago
so I mean it's good to have all
that pooled money but how are
the decisions going to be made
who gets alecated what none
which criteria and that'll be in
rural making but I want to be
sure that the rural hospitals
who are not for profit and
qualify under this and also I
don't know that any of you have
a hundred days cash on him
hundred and eighty is really the
standard for a not for profit
hospital and
the um
but I getting some sort of.
I don't know how we follow up
that we've done a comprehensive
look and we're looking at this
fairly among all the hospitals
there is a limitation of twenty
five million per year
and this bill so I actually i'm
sorry I didn't my math wrong
it's it's a hundred million.
Between the two bills without
without seventeen but
i'd like mister chair if we
might and lhst is summer if we
could get the health care as
already to report to us
what are their rule making
criteria how this money is
getting allocated among the
hospitals
in in a way that that you know
it's hard because some some were
maybe run a little bit better
than others maybe don't have as
much need but how are you
how is that going to be
determined I I think it's only
fair that the hospitals
understand the criteria clearly
and that we hear how that is an
oversight
that we get to add and with
hopefully some new staff who can
help us create that oversight
and do the math
and report back to us so that's
what i'm hoping will do this
summer.
That that's just that's a
question to you mister chair but
i'm not done with the the lfc
budget includes is it four three
three three new positions to be
supportive of the work of the
health and human services
interim committee and this could
be one of the tests we asked
them to tackle immediately it's
in house build one so we don't
have to wait till.
They are looking at higher
position so yeah and and dumb
some individuals who might meet
the criteria and have the data
expertise and policy help policy
expertise but it's technically
it's not for the service of lhs
I just need that that wouldn't
come under lcan so I just don't
want people to get confused and
and wonder about it it is in
last year in support of health
care and the committees that see
health care so this committee as
well as the house committee as
well as the LHS it's a round
activity I think the issue is
getting as you've got no more
than twenty five million in a
year.
You've got thirteen hospitals
twelve or thirteen that'll be
eligible if this would isn't.
How are they going to allocate
that what are the criteria those
are crucial question you can't
give more than three to anyone.
But if you gave three to six.
No I guess eight if you gave me
the eight
four are going to get left out
with nothing
and how how are they going to
decide who gets the mister
chairman
I think senator is working on to
different subjects and about one
sixty one is for nonprofit
senate bill fifty two which were
not hearing is for four profit
hospitals so that's the first
difference
but we're looking to look at the
hospitals individually
and determine what they need in
the three year period if you
take grants a bowler
their insurance is four hundred
thousand a year so if we take
that one point two million for
three years that's only one
point two minutes they don't
need anything else
other hospitals of were still
digging through the weeds a
gallop is in such a unique
situation
that no matter how much money we
put in here I don't know if we
could save them.
Well and we have the other two
we have the other two
measures that progressing so
hopefully and and the
reimbursement levels are are are
going up but we think really
we've asked for some increase in
reimbursement once again getting
it that what is it a hundred and
twenty you're stealing my
thunder mr chair
yeah go ahead can I can I was
not vendor away then render away
thank you
the heat here hate it when I dig
in like suspect it's okay the.
I don't i'm not asking that we
work this out here a night by
any stretch I mean the needs are
there I just want to have some
accountability back to us as
legislative committees to see
how this is being done
mister chair and and senator I
would also as you as you meld
these three bills and the impact
in the timing of them
and and without do a respect to
our department of health and
human services department in new
health care authority
hospital finance is not a
strong well veteran activity of
video those departments at this
time and so
and and they're gonna be busy
particularly the health care
authority doing so many other
things I am hoping that when you
figure out how this money
between the three bills get
spent that you're putting
adequate money in for
professional consultation in the
hospital finance from
well regarded outside firms
through
I mean maybe it's too short to
do an RFP and just got to be
emergency but again
you don't we undertake a lot in
this in the state that we don't
really have the extratease to be
able to carry out in way that is
done
fiscally
sound and impact effective and
so i'm asking i'm so simply
asking that this be considered
to bring in
outside expertise to look at
just how this money is allocated
and then and then as we go
forward I can almost guarantee
you this money is going to be
here and it's going to be gone
and we're gonna be right back
here
without do respect getting a lot
of surgical services that make
it labor hold if.
Is going to be of difficult
with with the cities and then
the other point I want to make
in this is that
the activities that are done in
a hospital buying larger done by
people have licenses because I
was positions advanced practice
individuals and as we now an
albuquerque can't even fill
positions and as the clinicians
continue to leave and you can
you can hear him thirty forty
percent fifty percent better
than what they're doing
definitely fifty percent better
than what they're doing here and
more importantly from their
point of view
about thirty percent less work
because they are being because
as as they leave in the groups
and in the hospital systems and
the can't replace them those who
are there are getting over work
to try to make that point in
white coat day
that that we have a real crisis
in healthcare professionals
particularly the ones who are
licensed to do the work to the
surgeries coming and staying in
the state and you can throw all
the money on the hospitals if
you don't have those fundamental
individuals who have the
licenses to do the work.
It's kind of they're not I mean
you are going to be able to to
provide services without as
individuals and I know a lot of
the hospitals employee those
individuals
so one of the points I want to
make here and again this is all
going to get worked out and
finance them I appreciate that
they're gonna trying and get it
together
but there is I believe that in
the governor's budget there is a
request to raise the medicaid
payments from a hundred and
twenty percent to a hundred and
fifty percent and I think that
people have to pay attention i'm
just saying you have to pay
attention that they are going to
come the other thing that has to
be paid attention to is is that
money actually making it to the
clinicians and i'm hearing
multiple stories and it thoughts
people called me in saying what
hell happened to that raise I
just got a ten percent cut in
one hospital system a
pediatrician a ten percent cut
this money is not getting
through now I have III have
information for the health care
authority hsd where they might
go as to how you actually track
that money that it is getting as
we intend into the conditions
pocket and i'm hoping again that
they don't try and figure it out
themselves but they in fact
reach out too.
Folks who do this routinely in
other areas of the country to
figure out that the money is
getting there so I just these
are context observations you got
to have the clinicians you got
to give the money there for them
as well as the money there for
the hospitals and a bail out and
then finally somehow we as a
state of god.
Recognize we have it rahoba's
mckennelly I mean that that's
very near during my heart has
been a life previous life and
gallop in the engine health
service them being without a
hospital i'm i'm like wow how
does that happen the I mean I
know it's the same in the other
communities I visited around the
state how are they going to
actually provide the care
without the nations and so we've
got it somehow come together and
maybe lhss is a starting point
that
this hopefully spring in that
summer
to address these issues because
we're just worth literally
trading symptoms and not going
to the disease.
And we're just going to keep
traveling money out for the
symptoms without understanding
what the disease are and how do
we look at this and a statewide
prospect of both for the
hospitals and for the clinicians
and I am hoping that as we see
this crisis and we see the money
going out the door
and and it's needed absolutely
to be there but that we are we
just don't continue to say okay
well that worked for today nice
band date but you know we're
never really going to get into
the wound and find out what's
what's causing it so we have to
keep that in mind and as you are
figured this out in finance for
the band date and in the tax
bill will be a prolonged band
date for a couple of years but
again we've got a crisis
situation in the cost of care is
going up nationally and we've
got to figure out what we're
going to do and what were
capable of doing in the state
and get a little more creative
and then finally I just I know I
beaten this one to death but i'm
going to continue to because I
don't know that it's being heard
if you don't have the clinicians
none of this works and they this
is america they get to choose
where they go this isn't coming
as china where they have to go
where the government doesn't
they can go to houston they can
go to loving they can go to
panics and they are going.
So thank you mister chair for
the opportunity for that little
soap box but I can't tell you
i've never seen health care in
my forty years in the state i've
never seen it in as much of a
crisis as it is now and I hope
that we're not just
going over the water false
willing upstream thinking that
we're actually going to get
anywhere in fact we're moving to
our doors that the cliff thank
you.
Yeah the more I was gonna ask if
there's a motion on the floor.
But the committee sell moved.
Motion paths do better emotion
for a dupass second advert
senator senator mccatch
any other discussion
secretary will call the rule
senator hickey yes senator hicky
wrote yes center my estate yes
so may
I make catching
my cut and votes yes said her
mechanic yes center mechanic
votes yes center neighbor
senator neighbor votes yes
centers meetings center city a
lot best yes center city all up
as well yes senator tomato yeah
senator men wrote yes center to
if you know yes senators have
been about yes.
I avoid a reading the
affirmative zero in the negative
you have to do pass the mister
chairman i'd also do have a
senate bill fifty two here today
no way to do that one today yeah
no the only difference is it's a
for profit and only involved in
find it sorry yeah because it'll
we don't have it
it's not on our agenda so yeah
okay I don't think we have it at
all actually.
Yeah.
We're gonna do senator I be so
to we're going to try to do
senator hope and that's it so if
you're here for
masters in the la cruise will
have to rule you over to winds
you will start with you on
wednesday
i'm sorry
okay well I mean if you want to
go beyond seven o'clock
yeah thank you
members we we need to be
cognizing of of the time frame
and and to just ramble on at
great length and these bills may
feel good but it just puts us in
a terrible
so
mischairman of the committee
thank you very much this is
federal built one ninety federal
build one ninety is otherwise
known as the dwi act said about
one ninety
is a is a small little project
that i've been working on with a
few other i'll legislators for
some years now
one thing that it does is that a
recompouse of the dwi laws which
is why it's a little
bit
before you are so that what it
does actually is it takes sixty
six eight one o two which is
why and it makes it a dwi act
that that that section by itself
becomes about fifteen different
sections of law because I was
out of control following that we
moved article thirteen of
chapter sixty six and under that
which is boating wall
intoxicated I was that we
careful given my history people
think i'm saying voting won't
get it we're not dealing with
that were delivered b w I would
just move it over from article
thirteen to article fourteen
and then following that we have
the implied consent tax
following that then we have the
ignition interlock act so that
you have a new article fourteen
you have.
All of the the the impairment
and and
an intoxicated acts in one place
we also
in this in this act
we
align some definitions are in
the act we then
so so first well pages one
through thirty eight
is everything prior to beginning
the DWI act though dwi
activities at the bottom page
thirty nine
so everything before then is
primarily references that are
being changed
and end and clean up that we're
doing the and then
we do do what is called what a
berchfield fix the birchfield
fix is where a court ruled that
pursuit to mexico law you can
get a blood from a motorist for
one of only five reasons they
concerned to it under the pike
of sent act they are they are
not conscious on the plate
concentrated they they're
concept was not withdrawn so
therefore use just to canada
before they they wake up and you
take their blood or you'd get a
warrant for one or three reasons
for our home aside great by the
harm or it's a felony
however what happens then is
that you can't get them sanity w
and
m in particularly with the
legalization and greater use of
certain drugs
we have people who are we're
driving either without a call
without a lot of uncle and so
am they don't want to give up
their blood.
I can't believe them necessarily
but the cops would like to be
able to have a warrant to be
able to get the blood under
appropriate circumstances the
appropriate circumstances that
we do in this bill is if someone
gives a breaths breath
participants that are breathtest
and the score of the breathtest
shows that they are not presumed
not intoxicated by apple.
If they come back presumptively
not in talks get about the hole
but the impairment.
They show clear impairment that
is inconsistent with someone who
was not intoxicated then they
can seek a warrant to get the
blood.
And that circumstance.
In other circumstances they
don't need the work.
Because of the boring gotta be
appointed later above the out of
the conclusive level what they
can still get a
a conviction if they refuse read
their automatically aggregated
you don't need to get the war
for the blood so where do you
need it you need to get where
someone is presumptively not
intoxicate about all you've you
were moved alcohol from the from
the equation and but you got
clear in parameter so you have
to explain that impairment they
refuse to give voluntarily the
blood then therefore you can
get.
These cases other than berlio
and
donate counties we have them go
to district work because you're
doing them and when you go to
trial you're dealing with the
tax colleges for witnesses we do
allow them to testify by video
if it's if it is
further way than the same county
or a joint encountered from
where the laps located
so they don't spend all day
having to drive to where the lab
is say in eddie county or or
chavis county and then and then
two thousand times the the case
gets continued that drop all the
way back and they weren't doing
the work and so and so we do let
them actually test by that way
under those circumstances by
motion they can do emotion the
judge outside makes the decision
on
and then we we do clarify that
driving means driving we do
provide
protection for the police
officers on the circumstances if
they come across some of the
interest in community turkick
taking situation and and then we
do also
we we do ask a mbd to look into
the situation of an also
whenever they do take blood
whether it's voluntarily or or
underwarrant they we have them
take a sufficient temple that
goes to sld thought the defence
can do their own analysis so
they don't have to rely upon the
states analysis of the blood a
hundred percent of the time
and then and then we do though
the final thing is that we do
then also ask for a traffic save
to be able to do a couple
studies for us with them
I agree to do an exchange for
most of my grammary which was
that
which is
look at the insurance levels for
people who are under the.
The.
What to have and and tax leisure
in the car to make sure that
they maintain their insurance
the hybrid drivers as well as
also to try to reduce the
paperwork that law enforcement
has to do when they have a
dwithers there are more forms
that that fill out for a dwied
that that thought for homicide.
For that that that police in
order to reduce paperwork not
simpl.
Actually do the dwi and have
less paperwork to do so with
that mischairman I do have when
I went over this built with
frank he as he sorted the bill
ab and so your analyst actually
found a number of these are all
there there's an amendment these
are all tactical issues that he
found and and and and if I could
just take it through the
brooklyn age
on page forty three
here's what happened is so this
section section nineteen
of the bill used to be which
goes a through h used to be one
paragraph and six six eight one
o two one paragraph am now that
we broke it up in the
subsections we realized that the
subsection one it says a fine of
five hundred dollars and it's
subsection see it said a fine of
three hundred dollars
that's a conflict that is
existed in existing law I didn't
create the complicated existing
law so what we do here what he
does is that he says i'm line
eleven strike five hundred make
that three hundred and then
strike subsections the and
relater the rest so that we
don't have that conflict on page
forty four.
We he has strike f and insert in
leader of e
that's online fourteen well
no no
you already have any.
No absolutely but we just
relettered we just related so
he's fixed in the relationing
yeah doesn't work.
I mean you you your letter
you're not you haven't changed
any earlier numbers we did we we
struck subsection seat.
So dears now see so you
structure we struck see which
said three hundred dollars and
in a we move the five hundred to
three hundred.
Yes.
If you re letter under three yes
then you already have
paragraph gb f and then if you
strike a an insert in lou there
you already have any of above
correct but the older so you got
two ease no normal we're not
making g into its actually on
line fourteen read to the end of
the line a gel certain simplest
person to subsection.
That's now a jealous pressure to
subsection then then you need to
clarify the f after.
After a subsection because if
you strike out you just created
two ease you you are correct
frank if you would make sure the
packets
as this comes from you
so h forty four line fourteen
we're not talking the subsection
designation we're talking
subsection f making it
subsection e at the end of the
light.
That
yes
right yeah then on that on the
next page we found exact same
thing we found
where it said and again
a three.
E
was one paragraph in six six
eight one o two.
And so.
On page eight are limit of forty
five that should be five hundred
dollars.
And then and then we strike the
five hundred dollars online
seventeen eighteen
and so that's just cleaning that
up and then the page forty seven
we have a summer thing between
the thousand and seventy fifty.
Where we do the same thing when
you go to
page sixty one.
Where we're dealing with
boating well intoxicated all
we're doing here is creating
subsection a.
For regular butting one
taxicated and online eleven I
think it is no line fourteen.
White fourteen.
Think it is we are creating.
They say they got the line
correct subsection b
line fourteen.
And line eighteen subsection c
so that it breaks up correctly
and line twenty three subsection
d.
Because right and so they're
just breaking it up there.
And then the same thing online
sixty eight the next page
i'm as they're making you your
which one of your amendments
which number of your amendments
are you on right now i'm one
number twelve.
Twelve or thirteen yes.
Right amp sixty one.
One line twenty three becomes d
debt thirteen on page sixty two
line one before the a
becomes e.
Because all the stuff was run on
is run on.
We're trying to make it illendor
being easier to read at the end.
And then sixty eight.
The.
I paid sixty eight.
Strike line sixteen through
nineteen
because neither frank nor I
understood what that meant.
Being basicall.
And their capacity right.
And then
and then i'm paid seventy five.
I talked about the laboratory
tech but I left out taxi
colleges and that takes care of
number fifteen through number
twenty.
You just insert tax colleges
door because we have to include
the toxicologist build the
tastified in addition to the
laptop.
So it really it seems like a lot
but those are very tactical
small th.
And I was asked if I wanted to
bring in a committee sub and I
said no because people wouldn't
believe me that there were small
tactical things and I was
vindicated by some.
Up without this tremendous
happen for questions if if
someone would like.
The.
And that's pleased with that
remember.
After.
Subsection.
Is there any opposition to a
doctoring the amendment with
that one little change.
Yes
mr chairman senator
when we look at the amendment
you opted to put the minimum
amount not the greater amount
there are reason for that i've
missed their there is a reason
for that the reason for that is
is actually that is the amount
that is actually charged.
And if there's there's a
conflict between the two the
courts go for the lower amount
when the two are reflected and
so we're not so we're not
actually trying to lorent amount
that's the mark that's actually
that's actually used importance
so yes
we're not lowering
by this action we're not
lowering the
penalty
even though we're lowering the
language in the statute that
provides for the penalty correct
okay long as that's clear as
some of my constituents are
course don't want penalties
lowered but that's correct
thank you clarifying that thank
you mastercard so is there any
any opposition to the amendment.
Seeing done will consider the
the built of the amended and now
let's go to the audience and see
is there anyone here was to
speak in support of this.
Yes both of you come on.
Use the mike
identify yourselves.
And give your serial number in
rank.
I think it's
you don't have to hold it and
push it okay mrperiod chairman
members the committee my name is
jd bullington speaking on behalf
of the greater ability to change
commerce supporting one bill
ninety
one ninety it's no secret that
we have a problem in the state
with people driving while under
the influence of something and
senate bill one ninety has
impressive by partisan support
to address this problem this
legislation is going to update
our DWI laws to include driving
as well as boating while under
the influence of drugs as well
as alcohol so not only does this
bill address core issues the
penalties repeat violations
blood screening etc it also
widely wisely provides for
treatment if approved by the
court and counseling and
treatment to those who are in
custody it also includes the
penalty for driving under the
influence with a minor in the
vehicle which further helps
protect our children our
department and transportation
says it last year thirty percent
thirty seven percent of deadly
crashes were alcohol related and
there's just no telling how many
were drug related so the greater
probably chamber of commerce
urges your support for this
legislation thank you.
The.
Yeah
depletion of map room to mescal
state police we appreciate this
legislation it's it's everybody
knows we have a problem with you
to be in the state so we
appreciate the legislation that
they bring forward to help us in
forces loss
we asked that we do do pass of
this legislation so we can keep
working with him to get a final
bill that would work for all
thank you.
Thank you mr chairman members of
the committee jason weeks and
before burning a county speaking
and supported the bill for
burley canny and early
accounting sheriff obviously we
think this bill hope promote
public safety but it also
hopefully lead to the quicker
resolution of cases by allowing
evidence to be gathered and more
streamlined and efficient way
the benefit of that is also that
people spend less time awaiting
resolution of their case their
case is resolved more quickly
berlin county once that happened
and we also want to promote
publicity public safety where we
can it's worth standard support
of the spell thank you senator
bringing.
This.
It's chair members of the
committee my name is bennett
power
i'm a cheap public offender
is as you see their number of
moving parts on this bill and it
says i'd be sold as been working
on it for a couple of years and
there are a lot of defense
attorneys who've looked at the
different provisions of this
unlike it some don't buy a tower
in the end I think that they're
enough good things in this that
we see that we can show up and
enthusiastically and strongly
take no position
for this you waited all those
apparently to her but I was I be
sold it into doing it
thank you mister
anybody of those to this bill
members of the common.
Senator most is going to start
with you and thank you mister
chairman center every so though
the same
and was dropped a tear just now
mister chairman
I result that I were were baby
prosecutors way back in the day
proscuiting debate cases and
biting through these.
The state story framework
because every single legislative
session it would change and
we always thought to ourselves
god why don't they just write a
cleaner statute so here we are
twenty years later writing a
cleaner statute so so this is
fantastic the
um
and so mister chairman say we
thought the so when it says new
language
instead of.
You know having a twice as long
bill crossing out sixty you know
showing sixty six eight one or
two and just crossing it out you
just decided to just present a
cleaner fashion.
Mister chairman and senator
masters that is somewhere
correct
it is so what it says new
language part of the problem is
that when you take one section
of law and break it up fifteen
ways.
Unless you lay it out fifteen
different times.
And strike out.
All but one fifteenth of at each
time
it's going to save new language
every single time so so yeah so
that's so that's where although
it says do language it is
exactly what six six eight one o
two seven so for example if you
are just just to give a very
quick example if you look at
the section that becomes the
part that now becomes
at the top of a page forty sixty
six fourteen two which is
driving wall under the influence
of intoxicating liquor
if you look in sixty six eight
one o two.
The portion of it that talks
about what is the crime is page
forty what is the crime that
deals with driving under the
influence of a toxic liquor.
It starts off with the exact
words driving under the
influence of a taxi electrical
system person was under the
influence of a taxi licker
driving within the state and
then it goes on sites on awful
for a person to drive if you
have eight one hundred some more
within three hours a commercial
motor vehicle for one hundred or
more aggravating consists of
sixteen one hundred or more or
causing bodily injury or
refusing to submit that is exact
as it that is word for work what
is it expected one or two
as it applies to driving well
under the influence of
intoxicate a liquor but but it
just didn't make sense to lay
out.
The next twenty six pages of six
six one o two and have more
cruster so we just put it
thank you mister chairman
service hotel in their number.
And then one one like.
More than a pet people one one
one bad public policy.
And i'd ask you to put your
thinking up on is this wind its
way through the legislature is
that if I wanted to balance
terribly.
Get an ignition interlock
license embedded wouldn't sell
me one.
Um so
someone struggling with their
substance abuse whatever and
they want to simply essentially
self impose they want to put
ignition interluck in their car.
I'll get the license they can
put the have you go to the
interlock company they'll ask
you can I see the court order.
No no I wanted ignition
interluck in my car what I know
but what what's your case number
I get hold that that then you
got mister I was up there you
think I want to ignition
interlocked license why need to
see a receipt that you put
ignition or device in your car
so like if if a defence lawyer
mischairman I was able to claim
comes in and the lawyer knows
this guy needs an ignition
interlock but his license is not
revoked yet.
He can't instruct him to go get
an interlock and get a license
because they won't.
It is it's like a it's like up
bureaucratic nightmare anyway if
there's a way to put in statute
a person does not have to be
revoked.
Two be eligible for a ignition
interluck license if you could
squeeze that and that be awesome
if not you know still us thank
you mister chairman no thank you
very much
massive you know it's very
straight thing and I won't
believe it's quite but the other
version thing is several years
ago be up before they kind of
crack down on on a lot of people
to get the machine and the car.
Is that I have a client got the
machine in the car right away
because they thought they were
doing the right thing but they
had not been ordered yet to get
it in their car
they have in their car date so
that their contract was happened
in the car for a year.
Seven months later they were
ordered to put it in and they
got no credit for the previous
seven months so that their
contract ran out they could only
get a contract for another year
but then there were only
supposed to have it in for the
and then and then they were
there off the sink.
Right with it with what they're
ordered to do by the by the
judge and what that it created a
nightmare yeah that person yep
so mister
was hope that they do get credit
and currently paragraph oh I
don't know where it is to hear
but they do get credit from the
date they get the ignition or
like a license.
But if they're not revoked they
can put even if they struggle
with the company and recognition
interrupt device they can't get
the license but they should get
credit because it's good public
policy for them to get the
credit because we want them as
citizens for them to have it in
the should interrupt in their
car as quickly as possible
that's right thank you mister
and bother mister I am I am
informed that miss ali sort this
was the head of the traffic save
to be a former head of engineer
where she's now the head of
three fifty two birthday
transportation was trying to
test fight in support.
Well I forgot to even ask yeah.
If you own there.
Okay
mister thank you center one.
She said support yes
your t and traffic said
she's on any anybody else.
Oh yes I have to mechanic and is
the deal office senator mckenna.
I resold to and you actually
admitted it you've been ivy so
to I happen that's the first
time it was shocking to me
good okay thank you chairman and
senator you may have said this
already but
it's it is
it's a clips me right now what
was the you've been working on
this for two years what is the
impetus of this bill besides
clean up for
mischairman and senator mechanic
so actually the clear part of it
senator branch and I have been
working on often offer by ten
years and and wanting to do it
for ten years not actively but
one to do it the the birch built
fix
has been around for about seven
years or so several years and
the governor's office
has asked the last year asked me
to work at it and asked
representative to work at it as
well we had a couple of
households last year and they
asked us if we collaborate this
year over the interim to work
together in order to be able to
to get a participant fixed done
so that was the that was the the
immediate impetus and that is
also look at us the message on
the bill.
Okay very good thank you
chairman thank you senator i've
noticed in the analysis
department of safety has not
submitted an it its review.
Is that accurate mister chairman
and senate they cannot they have
there they're in the process of
finalizing the review because of
correctly how quickly the bill
was scheduled thank very much
for chairman
do your tease formal analysis
have not arrived nor
department of public safety and
actually were having I think we
have a meeting for later on this
week to category over some
things.
Okay
to pass today that that was the
deputy.
On behalf of the departme.
The.
Also in the analysis
taxation revenue department
reports a high impact to
implement this bill.
Do you have.
Chairman for like company
yes thank you for the round so
yes I do
and and that is
this will not cost three point
five million dollars to
implement
tax and rev what I discovered
after looking into this.
Is they came to estimate high on
every single one of the bills
where there's going to be some
kind of change to tapestry just
because they have trouble when
they get to finance because
finance doesn't provide them the
resource that they felt like
they need so therefore they just
end the estimate really high on
everything
there's absolutely no way that
this would go to that level
the
I will also note that well it
was you may have some other
questions about their analysis
okay thank you chairman and
senator and I do it guarding the
fees i'm curious why are the
fees being reduced and a couple
of them are being omitted.
Yes so this chairman and making
so
last year we struck.
Be twenty five dollar
reinstatement fee for a driver's
licenses.
Pretty much ever also the motor
vehicle.
We missed this one
and so we're doing this one then
in addition there's a special
seventy five dollars
a fee
that is particular to this in
addition to twenty five dollars.
That actually those a t o d got
it wrong it doesn't go to the
state road but it goes to local
government
at the local government road
fund is actually about a twenty
twenty twenty five million
dollar road fund every year only
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars comes from this so it
has a very minor impact to that
I will also note from trds
analysis that there's suspense
bond is actually not a thunder
their suspense find as a past
through fund so it's really not
a fund that that they need money
to hold him it's a fund that
they that they put the that's
the nature of a suspense but
write you through money and a
suspense fund with the
negotiation
so when they say this could
reduce the suspense fund over
all.
That's that's almost in a
logical statement they also got
the math wrong because they
double counted the seventy five
dollars when they if you if you
if you look at the at the in the
in the fire they have.
One point four two million
dollars is actually seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
that actually gets to.
To to department transportation
but nonetheless.
They've got one point four two
million dollars for the seventy
five dollars.
But and then they they said
there's an additional twenty
seven dollars but then they for
the list of twenty seven dollars
they said one point two six five
million dollars there's no way
that math makes sense unless
they're double counting the
seventy five dollars sold their
math actually doesn't make it a
sense there but also that road
fund is not it your derot fund
it's a dot road and and again
it's only seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars out of it what
is twenty five million dollars
road fund where they provide
matching funds for opera
governments
and and the suspense fund is not
a fund that they actually were
live on for operational expenses
so so that's actually i'm not
really sure that I understand
that part of their analysis I
will also know by the way in
their analysis unfortunately
they indicate that they are
concerned that they say other
spell also places boating while
drunk or drugs squarely within
the motor vehicle code.
But it seems to ignore other
rules related to actually
boating wallen taxicated as
already in the motor vehicle
code it's already article
thirteen we're just moving it
from thirteen to fourteen so I
don't understand the criticism
of putting it in the motor
vehicle when it's in the motor
vehicle.
And I could go on with the rest
of the analysis when they're
criticising existing law and I
think part of it is just like
with center masters when asked
the question it says new
material but it's not really no
material I think whoever read
this but I was making the stuff
up as new as opposed to
restating existing law but
breaking it up and so therefore
when they say that there's an
issue with this or with that
that's all existing law.
That they're criticising and
that has been in fact for thirty
or forty years so I don't really
understand the concern.
Yes
okay so it
did away without twenty five
dollar renewal fee so if we go
to page three of their analysis
under significant issues
they're concerned and so am I
because there's a weakening of a
deterrent because of these
change in fees do you have a
response for that I I do
actually and that is mister and
we cannot the fee is not part of
the sentence
are a fine as part of the
sentence the fee is not part of
the sentence.
And so whoever did that analysis
does not understand the
difference in a fee and a fine
just like the brain injury fee
that we repealed last year was
not part of the deterrence for
people who are speeding.
It's a fee not a fine all the
fines continue in place in this
bill that's the deterrence we
don't we don't touch any of the
penalties we don't change into
the penalties in this bill.
Senator and okay.
Yeah it's so it's concerning
that there's some
inconsistencies with what
they've submitted and your
opinion of them and then I
really wish we had
the dps I I know that he stood
up secretary but just be nice to
have something written in front
of us shortly no I understand
that when to put but they did
ask breed about the past yeah I
heard that thank you center
thank you chairman thank you
senators of the olives thank you
and I think senator kinnock has
raised the issue because when
you talked to me today about it
today I said I am going to be
looking for if this produces
consequences for alcohol in any
way shape reform and so when I
read eliminating the
reinstatement fees.
Um
diminishes the consequences of
drinking and driving and the
fees are part of the overall dwi
deter it
was I put a star on it I circled
I was like I think that it's
really important where do those
fee okay.
You they you said they go to a
suspense fund and where do they
go from there totally so this
was chairman and center city
look at the seventy five dollars
goes to the local government
road fund right right so we are
we're paying for.
We're paying for.
Seven hundred thousand.
But again that's not a fine.
The other twenty five dollars.
The other trip twenty five
dollars goes to the general fund
as as as most of the peace I
have done and in terms of.
We we got rid of all the other
reason
last year.
And and again will be going to
the right be a statement fees
last year everybody said right
we should focus on fines not
fees
right and that and all we're
doing is extending the exact
same thing we did last year I
think I mean that stuff yeah no
I I agreed with doing it
then yeah and but one of the
other things that worries me
that's why elsewhere it goes is
i'm carrying a bill for the
brain injury fund because that
relied on fees and
the way in and I really
appreciate what you said about
the calculations being wrong the
way that was calculated for the
budget dist some of their
sources of income being the fees
and they miscalculated it so
they didn't get enough so i'm
trying to carry a bill to get
that put in
and so I understand that
mistakes can be made
the other thing about this build
is one of the i'm doing a bill
has you know to try to clean up
and update and modernize and I
do more than you're trying to do
you're just trying to put it
together but the family violence
protection act which by the way
mister and center city office
having prosecuted that many
times along with center masters
as well
for you to for the work that you
don't well hopefully you'll get
a committee into this year I
mean hearing introduced but all
of that to say is one of the
things I did as I brought
together well enforcement
judges advocates I got everybody
that I could think of and the.
Cbrc.
Um
what is at this.
Commission.
The crime victims reparation
commission the cbrc organized
and they had meetings for like a
year and a half
and there was a lot of right by
line and policy discussions it
was really really great I don't
see
an end the other thing that i'm
doing is the alcohol tax and in
connection with doing that a
middle heart of the advocates
that have to deal with the
consequences of DWI and it
bothers me that I don't see him
here
did you consult with them or let
them know that this is.
Mister and
in the in the process of working
on the spell we met with the
day's association we got very
good feedback from the
association packed on surprising
they're out here tonight tedro
are recalled their association
has indicated support for the
bell I suited up to the the the
lead prosecutor in the fiftieth
district was you know is down
there there are no slouches our
prosecution as she's like it's
about time someone do that does
the stuff that you're working on
diamond loose
we also
also are as you saw spoke with
the public federal's office and
we've had conversations with
with the current defense where
association we had conversations
with with a folks from
tax and rev
we have we also have.
We also did reach out to the
find the fees
resource center
we we are did have a
conversation with
with several people in
we we talked to folks in the
program upon fifty we talked
people and stay police we talked
people are in in several folks
with local governments
a local government
enforcement
we we've had conversations with
people
with in general department of
transportation and that's
nothing by the way in the in the
tirdi announces they said that
we got the definition of
commercial modern vehicle wrong
that's actually under dealt view
tea gave me the definition of
commercial motor vehicle and
they said this is the one we
need to use
and
we we also
within beauty generally had
their comment of those
conversations we also then had
conversations with the people in
traffic safety bureau we had
cover six with people at motor
vehicle we had so we have we had
a whole long series of meetings
with folks while putting this
build together there were some
areas that we are planning to
deliver to that folks said yes
please proceed others cannot be
cautious about what the what are
the two studies that is being
done is because of a whole area
that we're planning to go into
and they said we don't think
you're quite ready and we said
great to what how bout we do a
study of it without suggesting
the result of the study and
let's take a look at it and
let's make sure that we get it.
And so until and so we have so
yes we have worked on on all of
these all of these different
holders on something thank you
mister chair something I really
like about the bill is there's
screening because that's new my
understanding right not
mandatory screening notes that's
that's that should not know I
mischairman of us that's
actually not new that's in six
six eight one o two it's laid
out has been material because
we're breaking out part of six
well.
The.
I really like that I was like
okay new material so really
you're saying that there's there
is not limited so in a way this
is kind of a
he to see that this was an
opportunity to do things that
might be helpful in that's why I
ask about the advocates
which you know I don't see mad I
don't you know the many or
there's one
so
you know cause this is an
opportunity to.
Look at what's new and modern is
just like what we did with the
family blinds protection what's
new and modern are there new
things that we can we can try
with this i'm gonna vote for it
but I just really wanted to.
The and it was a challenge to
understand it because of this
new new material mistake or
whatever it was because casap
through me a little bit
so yeah like I said i'm gonna
vote for it and.
I do think that consequences it
would have been good for example
to raise the fines to take into
account that they won't be
paying fees just as an example
of not having any conscious i'm
not going to ask you to make
that amendment or anything but
because what we're asking for is
the consequences to be serious
takes you know they notice that
a hundred dollars less that
they'll have to pay
so thank you mr chair
appreciated the opportunity as
his questions.
Um.
And and and mister
alway actually had windows
questions.
No I was I was gonna just also
the what the one I think with
regard to that fee is that
that's a fee that was paid.
The year and a half later.
Right what again what are things
about punishments particularly
fine.
The.
That people pay or start paying.
That that's that's where people
get the relevance to it and
that's where finds our
thank you in it it turns out I
did have one other note
convictions from other
jurisdictions including tribes
are included in counting
offences and that's is it
true that they're now it's not a
change that including tribes.
Or our counted mischairman and a
certain office I tried to
are actually we we do give
phothetic reddit to travel
convictions.
Presuming that tribes to have a
modern court system so some
tribes have a competition court
system and some tribes don't
have a competition
and so where a tribe still uses
the council system where person
goes in on the room they don't
get to have an advocate
and it would not those actually
don't get counted as priors and
that's existing that's existing
that is correct but but the
tribes that have a confidential
system
those those those under existing
want those to this I know it's
it's a field from the bill since
that is existing law but
a professor by repril has
written a brilliant article
about native americans.
Tribal judgements and how and
the counting of them
it goes into more depth than you
describe it sounds like you tick
into account one of her issues
but it got have just recommended
you thank you thank you very
much i'll look for it thank you.
As amended.
Senator hickey yes senator he
give out center masters yes
center masters votes yes center
more cution.
Votes yes center mechanic yes
center mckenna votes yes sinner
neighbor
center neighbors bolts yes
centers meetings center city of
office yes and instead of up as
well yes since all men
sent our man votes yes signal to
the penalty yes senators appear
no votes yes and a center
speakers deliver he wanted to
rate
he didn't however
but you do you came very close
to an animals because he was
excuse eight to zero mister
chairman of members of the
committee thank you so much for
the for the regretting our last
bill of the night
or less building it senator
folk.
He was just clarifying what we.
Really good.
Thank you
unless you
finish your pope center bill one
sixty six
thank you mister chair and
thanks for the prime time slot
tonight on committee we always
swept through these last ones
yeah I like to go first or last
such mr chair members senate
bill one sixty six addresses
or pressing issue that requires
our collective attention and
compassion as homelessness this
is a crisis that affects
individuals and families
challenging the very fabric of
our society and the face of this
challenge programs like built
for zero heavy merged aspeakens
of hope showcasing a path way
towards eradicating homelessness
go for zero operates on the
belief that is solvable and by
leveraging doubted driven
strategies communities can
achieve functional zero a state
were homelessnesses rare brief
and non recurring this program
emphasises collaboration
efficiency and accountability
ringing together stake holders
to create targeted solutions
that shreally make a difference
in the lives of those
experiencing homelessness this
bill establishes the
homelessness reduction division
within the health care authority
department which will lead the
state's efforts and homelessness
prevention the divisions duties
include developing and
implementing a state wife's
strategic plan creating a
homeless data integration system
identifying resources for
preventing homelessness and
coordinating efforts across
state agencies this legislation
also proposes the creation of a
state why data system the
homeless data system integration
system to collect and match data
on homelessness to programs
impacting homeless individuals
the system aims to enhance
coordination and efficiency and
addressing homelessness
it's also going to establish an
inner agency task worse composed
of various state agencies and
departments to advise in a
collaborate on initiatives
related to two decreasing
homelessness.
Improving outcomes and
straightening the safety nets
finally this legislation creates
an advisory council to provide
recommendations to the task
force and division focusing on
reducing and preventing
homelessness improving outcomes
and achieving the goals of a
statewide strategic plan.
And closing centerville one
sixty six performance proposes a
comprehensive framework to
address homelessness through out
new mexico emphasising a
strategic planning part of it
daddy integration enter agency
collaboration and community
involvement in order to create
lasting solutions with that
mister chairman I am ready for
any questions or comments from
the committee that's good the
audience first is or anyone in
the audience for us to speak in
support of this bill.
Net you got a speaker just want
to indicate support.
This indicates.
Anybody else anybody in
opposition to this bill.
Anybody online still awake
no not yet
their videos are off over.
Do they want to speak
okay.
Who are they.
Hello there
good evening mister chair
members of the committee my name
is beach speech and I mean ab
submarine veteran in a member of
the veterans and military
families caucus here in new
mexico we are caught this
boasting and more than five
hundred members I rise in
support absolute bill one six
six i'm a personal
representative of homeless
mentally ill veterans say by
bills like this would our clock
is believed this bill is worth
the passage and benefits
veterans are families at our
local communities in the great
state of new mexico.
The.
Thank you very much.
Who else you work.
The.
No one else okay well thank you
very much mister beach him
members of the committee.
Senators the deal office
thank you of course this is what
this is a huge problem in our
state and i'm really happy that
this is here I just have some
technical things that I don't
know if you've already thought
about correcting them
just the analysis from the
authority says that.
There it refers to health care
authority department to the
correct term is a health care.
And then the bill refers to
a homeless data integration
system but in hmis homeless
management system.
The.
Um
and so duplication you might not
wanna.
And then.
And I I guess I want to make
that make that point is.
Tried to avoid.
Has have the the members of the
new mexico coalit.
Mister chair center city lopez
they are looking at it now and
so these are some comments that
i'm working with them on
especially the make up of the
council and trying to figure out
how we involve them
with.
Dance your first question you're
right there already is a system
but there has been conversations
on is that.
I hear different things from
what happens on the outside to
are no.
I agree with you we don't want
duplication but we also want to
have a s.
Absolutely into the need to
agree with those the reason I
asked is I worked with.
Because.
Domestic violence victims
because they're at very high
risk of homelessness when they
leave and they were extremely
impressive to me it's the way
they gather data and their wrap
around services and just the
their approach so I just wanted
to make sure they were involved
thank you mister chair I support
the deal and so mister chair
center cial opens I don't wanna
use this me.
So their reviewing this and i'm
trying to get.
The.
Thank you mister cha.
Sanctuary neighborhood
thank you mister
senator
I too
with when I read this I was a
big concerned with the issue of
duplication because it seems
that the mortgage finance
authority.
It was already
at least doing some things in
this regard and i'm wondering if
if they've had the time to
complete whatever studies and
reports that they were going to
do.
And if this effort which creates
an entirely new department
within the executive branch
is
timely because that the mortgage
finance authority stuff
you know gets to use
gives us the blue print for
moving forward.
Maybe maybe poor that blueprint
is to create a
department for something but i'm
wondering if we're getting a
head of ourselves and if we're
duplicating the effort and you
know I just throw that out I
think everybody here recognizes
that we have an issue that needs
to be addressed I just don't
want to be
seen different things from from
different
agencies or what happened it
seems like if we do this it may
be d.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you senator and I think you're
right I think that the mortgage
authority and there's been
discussions on other bills as
far as housing but I think where
this is really different is
bringing in all the agencies you
know veteran services indian
affairs and really also dealing
with
issues that cause a person to be
homeless when we talk about
issues of behavioral health
issues veterans deal with issues
of substance abuse and I think
those are some areas where I
think that this task force in
this council would may be able
to make the addresses issue
where maybe the mortgage
authority as far as funding in
ensuring that we have an
increase in homes I think it's
an area where may they might not
be.
That people are facing
mr chairman centered her on page
one of the bill it says the
health care authority department
is created in the executive
branch in this morning in rules
we spent
a significant amount of time on
a very large bill that uh uh
right under one umbrella if you
will be health care authority
and so my question is is this a
separate entity from the health
care authority or is this a
or is this part of the health
care authority that is trying to
bring the
several departments together
that deal with health issues
under one umbrella
mister chairman the senator
nibert this would become a new
division the homeless reduction
division within the health care
authority.
Well it says it online mr center
on line twenty two the
department is a cabinet
department so it's a cabinet
level department and.
The way I read this as it's
another department.
Yeah now
and so and so mister chair
center nightmare I will confirm
from my understanding they they
pulled that section one of from
the health care authority
department that they had to lay
that out and so when you look on
page two
line eleven and you kind of see
starting from one you see the
different divisions with in that
new department and line eleven
would be a new division and so
that's the intent and so if we
need to clean this up a little
bit but that's this was how
really the draft was put
together okay
and so the intent is it would be
a new division within the
morning
what whatever it may be.
Anybody else with the community
oh so sorry senator tom and you
asked for.
The.
A mister chairman senator was
home and I believe the driving
force is really to have
I must look at look at added you
know she'll look at it from a
business standpoint or military
standpoint.
There is not really one agency
that's really kind of leading on
this
we have so many people working
in this area to deal with folks
that are on house
and and state government
we really don't have a division
or so at something at that level
department that specifically
deals with their own house and a
lot of cases and you you know
even an album right we have so
many
in the nonprofit world that are
addressing this issue and so
this was an idea of how we can
from a state government
standpoint here new mexico come
up with a state wide strategy
and plan to address the issue.
I want.
Yeah.
Well I think.
You know that's where we come
together as a states you know
you mention they're not working
together but you know we're
trying to work together here in
the legislature right send her
but but I I guess I I understand
your concern
but I just want to emphasize
that.
This is really a statewide issue
I know a lot of times we hear
about albuquerque and with the
reality is at folks are dealing
with this issue although about
the state and sometimes it comes
out we're kirky because that's
where a lot of the support
systems and the resources are
so.
Hmm.
Well thank you senator I
appreciate it that's probably
because we're friends right
thank you mr chair and thank you
sir pope for bringing this issue
to the four
via you know we we spend a lot
and education and other things
in the state but we all forget
massive higher archie
food and shelter
and health care come before any
of the other wonderful things
that we'd like to do
i'd mentioned earlier that
health care is falling apart in
the state november.
Not using hyperbole that
literally is
an and housing has fallen apart.
I don't know what the best
solution is but I want to
commend you and bringing a focus
to it and it will probably be a
start understand that there may
be another bill that creates a
housing department I don't i'm
not sure
but
that may get.
May not make it out of the
crossfire going on but
I I really would like to see
this start I mean it's in our in
behavioral health.
Trying to get coordination
and in addiction anywhere is
next to impossible and
so that that doesn't mean we can
say our world's new mexico and
give up we have to somehow
figure out how to get there and
so this may be a good start but
yeah you don't even have health
care if you.
So and obviously food.
All the best with a good start
on this hope you make it through
finance
that's a little nebulous you're
going to get picked on if i'm
sure you know that i'm not but
we we we've got to start
coordinating some of these
saying somehow some way and
hopefully this will have some
minutes.
Senator for appreciate the all
the work and try and address
this issue this is probably the
most difficult issue to.
We did something similar in
carls bad and and and i'm
in little bit opposition i'm i'm
kind of go along with senator
talman on this you know people
are the ones that need to get
things done and and so so in
cross bed what they did was
create a they built a a whole
housing facility there's area in
town there's a lot of homes
people that live there and they
they create a housing.
What kind of bunkhouse deal down
their news had to follow a
couple.
And what it's just crickets and
and and and the homeless people
wouldn't show up and fathers
those little rules and so I know
that between eighty eighty five
percent of the people who there
is a visit home a shelter or
they're just one time you know
they're the domestic bonds like
we were talking about or you
know that there's something
happened so they just they go
there once or twice and then
they kind of get back on the.
Placed to go and so I am
concerned with creating other
another agency here and
separating further the giver
from the gift to the receiver of
the gift and so I i'm not not a
hundred percent sure where I met
I know this is an extremely
difficult issue and maybe I
don't have my head wrapped
around exactly
exactly what we're
what this bill does because in
my mind it was green estate
agency but you said it doesn't
it falls under another agency
and so could you speak just a
little bit more to that and and
and what I don't want to do is.
Trade and other state agency
that doesn't actually get
anything done.
So assure mr chair center my
kitchen so what this does is set
up a new division
within the health care authority
department.
Um and it would be called.
The homeless reduction division
and really what we're trying to
do here because it actuality
right when we look at even our
state agencies you could argue
that probably all of them play a
little bit.
With what folks are dealing with
who are on house.
In your work if someone's
working and veteran services
you're dealing with they're
dealing with folks that are you
know have you to go to the
veterans home
homeless veterans and so what
this bill will do is set up that
division set up that task force
that is made up of
representatives of all our state
agencies and we all know that
they're kind of playing when i'm
not when he's a we're playing
with their all involved with
this issue and so I I just want
to say understand folks are
worried about additional
bureaucracy in and more work and
I know there's always opposition
to more commissions and more
but I think in a way this might
actually work out better because
if they're all working together
in a task for us in the council
maybe we can avoid a lot of the
duplication that could you
actually be happening now.
And so that's really what this
is here to set up
and this council and task forces
how do we decrease home was us
how do we make sure folks not
fault into that
what can we do from a human
service established a support
family so they don't end up
homeless so that's really what
the.
Mister chairs and her pope thank
you.
Senator mckinner
thank you chairman thank.
Bringing this very important
bill to us I really believe to
see it because as many folks
know there were five such bills
that were trying to tackle the.
Growing problem of.
Rents there have gotten out of
control in this state we are
trying to do rent control we are
trying to rent a stabilization
and every single one of those
five bills were tabled so until
we can get our arms around that
and passing legislation for rent
control this is a good stable
lies you're a few will
and the reason I say that is
because folks are being evicted
and become homeless because they
can't afford these rents people
are have disabilities and
because there are hiccups in
either a federal or state system
they are addicted
they don't want to be homeless.
None of us in this room or folks
watching want to
live in a car which was one of
my consists consist constituents
had to do because of
a really bad scenario.
With his landlord and a state
and federal agency.
Yeah.
I think.
Having shelter.
As senator he keep responded
with dr maslows needs.
And we need that before we can
tackle anything else whether be
trauma mental illness substance
abuse we all need warms and
cover and privacy and safety
that is primary before we can do
anything else to help ourselves
so i'm a really strong
proponent.
A chairman and senator pope and
who wrote to you.
Thank you mister chair if I just
make a comment thank you for
talking about that you know I
had the opportunity during last
session.
Me and michael sponsor
representative elementary
travels we actually spent
tonight on the streets of
albuquerque and.
We actually met with folks were
run housed.
Talk with them went to the under
passes and just to understand
what brought them there why they
were there the trauma they were
dealing with addiction.
And there.
Just confirmed what i've always
start.
None of this is a choice
and so I just want to reiterate.
You know this isn't the plan
that's going to fix everything.
That's not what this is for as a
matter of fact I didn't even
think this would even get a
message to get this far but I
think this is a start of the
conversation and what I want to
have is if folks are watching
this are listening.
Is we have to continue to work
and see how we can make this
better and involve all the
stakeholders.
But I just want to emphasize
that there's people out there
hurting.
They need help it's not by
choice.
And i'll give you an example
albuquerque public schools I
heard numbers that there's
probably about three thousand
kids that are one house that
spend the night in vehicles and
cars so if we're talking about
how we're going to increase our
education and we look at numbers
if you're worried about where
you're going to spend the night.
What makes you think you're
going to do well on an
assessment test in the morning
and you how your reading is
going to.
So this is something we have to
deal with it's not going away.
I I just hope this is a start
and if someone has a better idea
that's let's work on it but.
I just want to come with some
solutions thank you mr chair.
I would suggest whatever happens
in the session with your bill.
That you plan on put it making a
presentation to the interim
committee.
You we had one series of
presentations up in las vegas
in.
So this early account in the
city and then the state health
department was there to talk
about boarding homes and weight
there in such a.
A dilemma with boarding homes
and and all the all the aspects
is as the alcohol treatment all
of those things and it would be
good to have another one this.
If your bill goes through you
can talk about it how it's being
implemented if it doesn't go
through how we can strengthen
it.
What's the world.
We have a motion for a due pass
seconded by senator mckenna.
And the secretary will call the
role
senator hickey senator hicky
votes yes than her masters
center in my curtain service and
both yes senator mechanic yes
center mckenna votes yes center
neighbor.
Yeah.
Senator neighborhoods know
senator smith is center city of
office yes center city look as
well yes senator talman
sinner thoman world's yes
centers is a pinner.
Yes center it is if you know
it's yes and to explain his vote
senator neighbor thank you
mister chair
I know we have to do something
and we recognize it i've worried
about the duplication and i'll
check in with the mortgage
finance to see what they're
thing is but and i'd really like
to make sure that it's given
it's under one house and
somebody does something but i'm
concerned about the
duplication of of effort within
the state and I don't want that
so for now I voted now but i'd
like to make sure we're headed
down this path and I certainly
appreciate you bring in this
forward and I I think you know
that's a really good point of I
would spur you include mortgage
finance authority.
Cause they do control an awful
lot of.
What are the linked the linkages
program for example goes up
a support of housing that's
because you know the counseling
in the and the assistance to
people in the.
So by a vote of fixing the
affirmative to one in the
negative and too excuse you have
a dupess all right thank you
mister and with that members
will roll over senator masters
bill will start with that on
wednesday we have a couple of
other topics on wednesday and we
will adjourn the meeting as of
seven forty.
This the.
Four short hours have to
restart.
