Where to buy in and stay there
the rest of your life and so
he's asked that we not hear that
today he's working on an
amendment.
Anybody here for that one.
Enjoy your free time.
So we'll go notice Senators
renewable with Senate bill one
thirty six and so you Senator
thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman you know that we passed
constitutional amendment senator
Wirth and myself and senator
Payne in the olden days we
passed of an amendment to
constitution the voters approved
it and we came up with three of
PRC commissioners who by
definition are supposed to be
and actually ended up being very
highly qualified people and very
impressed with the credentials
of the of the folks that we've
we've got appointed to the
process one thing that was not
in statute was not provided for
it at any point was what with
the salary do I think it's
picking him up if this.
The fix Mike but.
Papen.
I think it's on it's on.
We can't hear well right okay
well try this and if it helps
anyway we were trying to we
we've got to looking we found
out there is no provision in
statute for what salary should
be the governor authorized I
found a a range of one eighty to
one night I just found that out
as we walked into the room and
apparently the governor set the
salary for the newly appointed
officials to be one hundred
ninety thousand dollars regional
number I have a problem with
that but again it's not statute
units in statute is that the PRC
commissioners will earn ninety
thousand dollars that's what the
elected folks world that's the
old and that's showing since
statute this would put in
statute the provision that they
would earn the same thing as a
district judge pretty simple of
the what isn't simple as the
district judges have a neck
convoluted formula on how
they're going to get paid it's
it's based on what a federal
judge earns an a magistrate
judge earns is ninety five
percent of that and then we set
the Supreme Court folks would be
the same as a magistrate and
then the ninety five factor
comes down a couple notches and
it would put him in a little
more than one ninety.
One hundred ninety thousand
dollars but it would give us
something in statute that is
Farman and would track and we
don't have to come back to the
legislature and readjust that
with inflation so for the
whatever the federal judges.
There's a formula that comes
down the steps and these guys
would be the same as and as a
district judge in the state of
New Mexico whether you're
district one or district to or
where I'm at district eleven
they all learned currently they
are in
I've got the number here
something like a hundred and
sixty three thousand dollars as
well below one ninety but the
new formula is going to put them
back in the one ninety two
hundred range so this with the.
The amendment I ask for and you
have an amendment to look at in
a minute is
the one hundred and we're gonna
changes as one eighty but we're
gonna change to one ninety four
for the math formula number
whichever is greater so that in
case there's something falls
apart in the budget process
we're not gonna give these guys
a reduced salary want to make
sure that the state what they
were all what they were offered
when they Kate took the job and
but this does put in statute a
formula and a process by which
the salaries will be retained.
I think that so so I'll move
that we adopt your your.
Amendment with the with the
pencil change of of making one
hundred and eighty thousand one
hundred ninety right all of the
one hundred and eighty
references should change to one
ninety and if you have a copy
that.
So that is the amendment that I
need to make to make sure that
this tractor.
Is there a second to the
amendment.
Senator Committee seconds it.
The first time I did that.
Any discussion of that
amendment.
I see none.
Will it accept the amendment is
as presented and to anything
else you wanna say should we go
to the audience and I think
that's it the bill just a such a
formula by we are we can always
have a set salary for newly
appointed PRC folks right and
I'm glad you said it high enough
that it'll attract people that
do that otherwise.
With the order for the soak up
in the private sector is much
more than that so thank you okay
is there anyone in the audience
wants to speak in support of
this bill.
Anyone in the audience who wants
to oppose this bill.
Anybody on zoom who wants to
speak at all members of the
committee.
Any discussion.
I see none secretary will call
the roll so we don't have a
motion.
We have a motion.
Yep.
Mr chair why your Mike please
Senator can you put it up I just
leave the.
Chair why why this amount I mean
I know tying it to district
courts and then and then you
changed it and I'm just ugh
questioning why the amount
because I believe they're making
a hundred ninety thousand now so
it seems like a cut and I'm just
curious the amendment assures
that it is not a cut make sure
that they will get one ninety
and at a minimum the new judges
formula is tied to the U. S.
federal judge numbers and it
will put them at somebody new
one ninety five or something
like that pushing two hundred so
they'll actually get a raise
under this bill if the budget
stays intact as it's proposed
House Bill to if it doesn't stay
intact the state there one
ninety they're already earning
if this bill passes in the
budget goes as proposed they'll
get a small race.
The greater of one hundred
eighty thousand dollars this is
for two hundred we change that
to one ninety okay I apologize
as of.
Instead of one hundred.
Ninety thousand whichever is
greater.
The number of the Russian out in
the intention of the bill just
to be totally clear is to give
them a raise.
The intention is not so much
give a raise but to put it in
statute there's nothing in
statute says what they get paid
and as we heard this morning and
there was a lot of discussion on
the floor about the PRC is now
is a because I judicial body
that works on a very narrow
field but still makes judgments
and that's seems like a logical
ties for sellers.
Thank you thank you Mr Mr chair
the.
Probably no I voted against
having the PRC be appointed
last time but I think it's a
very difficult job I think that
the criteria to be appointed are
very high very specialized and I
think that they should be paid
even though I think they should
be elected.
Thank you Mr chair.
Any other discussion so we got a
motion to get a second their
second from Senator committees.
Any other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll did
you did you get the amendment
Senator Gallegos.
Yeah it's it's picks it up to
one ninety which is what they
get paid and it has a pencil on
it to make it one ninety as
opposed to one eighty if you
have the paper coming.
This is crucial because you're
gonna be the first one devoted
you'll set the tone for all the
rest.
Senator gave us.
Let me think.
Yes.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
Vicky is here as of.
It is taking here he hasn't been
let into the meeting they will
let him in.
He is not here.
Not yet okay thank you yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes.
This.
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle
always votes for models and this
is the renewable built the.
Okay
Senator Ortiz Pena yes so you
have a do pass by a vote of.
Six seven.
Seven zero two absent.
Now we'll move your second thank
you Mr chairman second bill I
don't know if it's Senate bill
one thirty eight is
Then acting provisions to the
Medicaid false claims act and it
is essentially to make us in
conformity with a bunch of a the
federal rules and so forth and
I'm not an expert in this but
this is an LESC committee bill
and I have to expert witnesses
if I might Mr chairman and they
are any are massages at how you
pronounce that and RubyAnn
Esquibel that we all know so if
we could have them join me and
recognize you with your mask.
And I'm sure that they are
experts and I'll turn it over to
RubyAnn or or any.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator I'll try and speak loud
loudly so Senate bill one thirty
eight would amend the Medicaid
false claims act to comply with
the federal false claims act and
the whole purpose we're trying
to do this is really two fold Mr
chairman and members of the
committee all one we want to
comply with what the federal
federal government is asking us
to do right now and make sure we
align second it helps us to get
more money back into the state
if we comply with the federal
false claims act we get that up
by ten percent the amount of of
return we get for the state on
these recoveries and then really
the third reason we've worked in
collaboration with the federal
health and Human Services
department to draft this bill
because we have to closely
aligned with them and we've also
worked with the New Mexico
attorney general's office on
this so they all help distracted
and we're trying to make sure
that they have all the tools in
their tool kit at the AG's
office to proceed in working in
tandem with the Human Services
department's Medicaid program
two of be sure to move forward
in a prosecuting any these
Medicaid false claims or just
doing all the recovery so that's
what we're trying to do this is
something that we've been
looking at miss Armitage she
worked on and LFC program
evaluation this fall that looked
at all of these claims and what
we could have been doing to
align more closely and basically
we've left over the years quite
a bit of money on the table
because we haven't been up to
speed with where we need to have
our false claims act in the
state so we left about anywhere
from one to four million dollars
on the table so that's what
we're trying to do Mr chairman
and we'd be happy to answer any
more do.
Health professionals the
committee has thank you thank
you RubyAnn did you want to say
anything about this.
You get into the hand held Mike
that maybe the total but.
Sure so New Mexico's presently
will continue to do so yes sorry
I'm any armor Taj I'm a program
evaluator with the legislative
finance committee.
And right now New Mexico as one
of just seven states just not
compliant so just basically for
statute matches the federal
statute and that's primarily at
ties these Medicaid fraud
recoveries of the state gets to
inflation so that will increase
recovers recoveries we get it
also increases protections for
whistleblowers which also has
the potential to increase
recoveries and itself and then
as RubyAnn said you know when
the Medicaid fraud goes under
this act the recoveries are
shared with the federal
government and the state
government and are a percentage
that New Mexico gets to keep
increases by ten percent if we
meet the Senator requirements
right okay.
anything else and this I think
we're ready for questions Mr.
We'll go to the audience is
there anyone in the audience is
here to support this bill.
Or to oppose this bill.
Anybody zoom is Senator Hickey
on soon by now.
Still not okay
a committee member's questions
from the committee.
Look at looking at the a chart
we got from the F. I. R. it
looks like there is.
Something like use anywhere
between the two is two point
five to.
Because there's always something
collected in Medicaid the the
false claims but some years it's
as high as the.
Three point eight million so so
we're not talking about it's
insignificant some Senator.
Is there a pattern to the suit
to.
And who is the Attorney General
investigates them right.
You guys turn you see what
something looks suspicious you
turn it over to them I
investigated of course Mr
Chairman the it it's primarily
field a lot believe it or not by
then Medicaid managed care
organizations the NCOs and
intent working in tandem with
the Medicaid oversight and Human
Services Department so and
Medicaid's ally G. there they
have an internal I need function
as well so then these issues
will rise up it looks like
there's these patterns of fraud
or some sort that alerts the
department then they work agency
works in tandem with the AG's
office that Medicaid fraud
control unit you probably have
heard people use that term at
the go so that at the attorney
general's office and then the
attorney general's office
proceeds with the the
investigations and the
prosecutions when needed and
that we regarding the question
Mr chairman about patterns the
there is not necessarily set
patterns it just depends on any
given year what might arise Mr
chair that's correct so there it
it's pretty very able what
Medicaid fraud recoveries happen
but one pattern that has
developed over the prior years
is that the federal share has
increased the federal share
recoveries under under this act
have increased year over year so
New Mexico misses out more and
more on these recovery so it's
it's a lot more important now
than in the past to reach
compliance if you I believe this
is in that fire it is.
There's a chart a tabled skews
me that lists how much the state
could have recovered have been
compliant and you can see that
in twenty twenty one New Mexico
missed out underestimated just
under one million dollars that
you're just for non compliance
so it might have been lasts ten
years ago but it's it's been
more recently.
And so since two thousand eleven
the state's missed out on almost
five million dollars simply for
being out of compliance and what
was the big barrier what what
were we missing that the fed
said you gotta changes Mr chair
so there were a number of kind
of substantial recoveries
primarily will to lower at
protections the recoveries
weren't tied to inflation which
is required they're kind of I
mean areas but there are
actually hundreds of very small
technical language changes the
definitions have to match the
federal act it's a pretty
substantial review process in
this act will do that that's
right it's been approved by the
feds already members of the
committee what's rules
committee.
We have a motion for a due pass
from senator Tom and seconded by
Senator committees any other
discussion about this or
questions for the expert
witnesses for the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator they're close business.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
center my yes this Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Six February six in the
affirmative zero in the negative
you too fast thank you to the
state.
Three the state state thank you
very much.
Now we'll go to Senator souls
he's here right
now.
Senate bill one seventeen.
The driving psychologist
practice act we have a committee
set up to yes Sir this is the
same bill that you all heard the
for we made the modifications to
the changes were appreciate very
much.
Giving us a couple of days to do
it of.
Sabina who was the drafters been
out sick for a while which cause
some delays and trying to get
drafted and other kinds of
things we've made those changes
they got to be a bit more
onerous to do on an individual
basis so we came back with the
committee sub so that it's clean
and and clear as to what we're
trying to do and I think with
that if I can have Linda very
quickly summarize the couple of
changes that we talked about
last time and made and then we'd
be open for any questions.
Right Linda yes yep you might
use the handheld just be.
Mr chair members the committee
Linda Siegel for the are
prescribing psychologists so we
did in four places throughout
the bill remove the practice of
psychiatry and replaced it with
the practice for clinical
psycho pharmacology and we have
a real prescribing psychologist
here who can explain that if you
if you want to know the details
we did that in four places we
change dates we had some cleanup
we added the council the the
Advisory Council we included a
sixth member and to must be
physicians at the request of
Santa Senator Hickey yes and so
position on the Advisory Council
right and and then we re
numbered a lot of things we
cleaned up a couple definitions
and so it's essentially the same
intent our our repeal dates are
are a little different to
accommodate with the board of
medicine wanted so they had time
to write the rules so that
people could prescribing
psychologist could move from the
psychology Act only after the
board of Medicine Hat develop
the rules so that they would be
ready to issue licenses so this
goes away and when you're we
have it now it actually the that
is one thing we have to change
the very last date on
The page thirty eight says July
twenty twenty four it's actually
July to July one twenty twenty
three that's the only change we
have to make the the repeal
takes effect on the previous
page of right that's okay that's
okay March one the psychology
the prescribing psychologists in
the psychology Act that part is
repealed and they will be
totally under the Board
medicine.
And the and the psychologists
are fine with this rate we're
not gonna have any opposition
from any psychologists.
Mr chair The New Mexico
psychological association
psychology Association which I
also represent is supportive of
this as well as we have the
board of medicine we have Sandra
Frank here today okay psychology
board is fine and I think those
people from the medical society
who can speak got else to speak
to you want to introduce your
expert witness in origin the
chance to speak push that button
I'm doctor Robert may full of
the I'm a rural really
practicing secretary described
as a call just and I'd be happy
to answer any questions you have
okay great.
And we already took the comment
from the audience less time so
we're not gonna do that again
Senator Hickey is on board this
time and if he has a question at
just bring it to my attention
please members of the committee
what is your well we we need a
motion on this committee so by
the way.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez has
got this down Pat I don't I
don't know about that but I'll
try thank you Mr chair I move a
do not pass on Senate bill one
seventeen and a do pass on
spat Committee substitute one
seventeen for discussion only.
Did it will in a second from
Senator McKenna.
Senator thank you have a
question.
You will come.
Members of the committee any
questions.
No questions.
Okay Senator Sedillo Lopez I
haven't formulated them quite.
But I'm in the actually at my I
I guess I'll just start by
saying Mr chair of with with
your permission that I'm really
impressed that you were able to
work with the various organised
the various groups and to get
this done I I think given our
shortage of medical personally
think it's really important that
we find creative ways to to get
this done I was joking with the
chair last week that when you
come from a family use Vicks for
everything.
Of the you you definitely want
to see some kind of assistance
and can help but I think that
you did a really great job of
getting everybody together to
resolve the the issue thank you
Mr chair thank you senator I'm
gonna give you all a chance to
think about a little bit because
we have three people on soon
wanted to make public comment
and that we had already had full
public comment before but if you
could keep your comments to of
one or two minutes and we would
love to hear from you first
we'll start with.
I think we heard from him last
we heard from most people last
that's alright we'll give we'll
hear from them again Steve
juncos.
Dr Jim because he.
If.
There we go can you hear me yes.
Great all right yet Mr chairman
and and centers all save you
time just a reminder I'm a
psychiatrist I've worked very
closely with the prescribing
psychologists to try to help
bring the money to the medical
board I'm also a member of the
Medical Board and I'm basically
here if you have any questions
about the process I am I am The
Medical Board is unanimously in
favor of this bill.
Thank you doctor then we'll go
to the John Courtney.
Apologies chair I I don't have
any committee.
Okay thank you Sir Brock frost.
Thank zoom.
Still in the bill we're having
computer difficulties all right
let's go back to the committees
and.
anybody else on the committee to
comment or question your
discussion.
Senator it is back Mr chair I'm
sure if you wanted us to make
that amendment.
That is that's right we have to
do changing that date so we do
have to do that.
That was more of a table or a
list of.
Somebody want to amend the the
the sub.
The movie this is a change of
date on that last this page yep.
Their second second seconded any
opposition to making this a.
Change of one year.
I see none will consider the
committee subdivision meant it
that way.
I guess I have a whole other one
prepared and.
Visit become a point to.
Okay yeah all right.
Okay what's the will of the
committee then we don't have any
discussion Senator Jay.
Just a couple questions and I Mr
chair Senator Dr if I ask you a
couple questions will you be
only.
Okay.
In just because I was looking I
didn't get and I know that real
brief on the change in the sub
on the original of the F. R.
brings up question it just the
act does not clarify the
prescribing psychologists will
be required to maintain a
license with the board of
psychology psychologist and a
second license with the can am
am be for prescribing authority
and I don't know enough about
that Mr chair Senator if you'd
be able to explain some of that.
Dr maples.
Mr chair
Senator I do believe that is one
of the things that was corrected
in this draft is that it is
clarified that we will go up
under the medical board for the
licensure and that would be the
only licensure that be required
once we've completed all of our
a condition practice and are are
fully licensed you can maintain
it but you do not have to.
Okay and the appreciate that Mr
and etcetera I
Not knowing the flex said the
sub I try to look through
briefly and I didn't see
anything that highlighted that
specifically and change so with
that that's my only question
thank you for that and thank you
for not billing for the
district.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator souls and the single for
being with us today
my
I just have a comment chairman
and is to bring a microscope
to page twelve page I lines five
and six.
especially for those on the
webcast.
I think this is really important
that it's in there and I can see
what how chairman and senator
you were able to get so many
stakeholders on board with this
bill and that is
Provides written notice of the
prescription to the health care
professionals practitioner
within twenty four hours of its
issuance to such patient I think
that's
some really good checks and
balances
and gives physicians comfort
with with working with our
colleagues in the medical field
so I just want to bring that to
the attention of the public
thank you chairman thank you
senator good thanks.
Thanks committee on actually on
on that
I do have a quick question on
that the just the very next line
subsection up they shall not
delegate prescriptive authority.
that means and no one else can
call it in.
it's the the actual psychologist
has to if it's a call and they
have to call in or how how would
that work what is that
delegation mean there Mr center
adds.
Defer to my experts who deals
with this daily drive Mr chair
Senator what it really means is
that we will not.
Sign blank prescriptions for
other people to carry forth with
I'm our nurses can called and if
we give them a verbal but we do
have to dock and that with with
within the record okay R. thank
you for that same thing.
An additional.
Any other questions.
We have a motion we have a
motion we don't have a motion.
Your motion for discussion but
you want to make the full more I
would like to to move it to pass
on Senate Bill.
Under committee so that are
complete thank you on our
committee on this the staff
committee substitute
for.
Yes he.
One seventeen one seventeen as
amended as as amended and is
there a second Senator McKenna
seconds at.
Any other discussion did Senator
Hickey ever get on.
Yes I'm not questions you a
question Senator you're okay
with this I'm time as there and
about the changes and I'm very
pleased that they were able to
make thank you.
Thank J. Mr chair okay secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos is bent.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ortiz Pena yes.
Seventy two oh seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
you have in the past thank you
and thank you for your patience
as we're getting the changes
made right good to see.
Okay now we'll go to Senate bill
one fifty Senator Kernan.
Your members of the committee
let me introduce Jason Espinoza
and on my ride I have to win
ruby she is a neonatal intensive
care works and thank you and
she'll have a few statements in
just a minute the Mr chair
Senate bill one fifty as you all
know this is the plan of care
bill and current statutes
requires hospital in person is
to create a plan of care for all
substance exposed newborns
according to state statute.
The plan of care is intended to
ensure the safety and well being
of the substance exposed
newborns addressing the
treatment needs of the child in
any of the child's parents
relatives guardians family
members or caregivers to the
extent those treatment needs are
relevant to the safety of the
child.
Additionally under current
contract if the parents
relatives guardians or
caretakers of a child released
from a hospital.
Are very things Senator percent
to a plan of care fail to comply
with that plan the department
shall be notified.
What Senate bill one fifty
attempts to address is an
identified gap in the system by
ensuring a strong safety net is
required to protect the well
being of substance exposed
newborns the mother and other
family members.
This is important because
according to the New Mexico
department of health care
evaluation reports published in
the fall of twenty twenty one
plan of care data shows that a
high percentage of families are
declining Services when
referred.
Additionally according to the
report the survey was conducted
with families who received a
plan of care between April and
September of twenty twenty in
the report states that forty one
percent of families did not know
what plan of care well us or had
no we are no one had talked to
them about it in the hospital.
So I'm basically
what this means they are not
receiving the services that are
critical especially because we
know that babies do well when
they're with their mothers
especially when their mothers
are doing well as well however
we also know too many families
declined the services.
So what this bill does the end
of the day it mandates that we
continue to support these
families even when they declined
services.
When a family does not comply
with the plan of care the
legislation basically shifts
them into a process very similar
to the multi level responsive
differential response pathway
that the legislature passed in
twenty nineteen.
First if the department is
notified of non compliance with
the plan of care which is an
existing statute the bill
requires first we change made to
show the department to conduct a
family assessment and that is
not an investigation that's just
checking to see what the
situation is within the home
it's a tool that so we CYFD
already utilizes in their multi
level response pathway to assess
the likelihood of imminent
danger to the child.
So then based on that assessment
the department shall offer.
Or provide referrals for
counseling training and other
services aimed at addressing the
underlying causative factors
that may jeopardize the safety
or well being of the child so
basically they're basically to
pathways when a baby is born
exposed there are certain
requirements in place where do
O. H. is notified CYFD is
notified the NCOs are to provide
with the with the navigators are
the plan of care coordinators
the opportunity for those
families members to receive
services when that doesn't
happen when they decline of
services they don't fulfill that
agreement that's when we are
asking that CYFD shelf do a
family assessment we're not
asking for an investigation at
that point just a family
assessment I'm gonna let and
Jason say a few more words and
then I'm gonna turn to mystery
B. and have her just share very
briefly one particular example.
I'm Mr chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists within
Mexico child first network I I
don't really have anything that
I think the senator explained
the the current existing
statutes and what's required and
we're we feel there is a gap in
providing and ensuring that
these families receive the
services needed
based on that planet Kerr so
happy to answer any technical
questions throughout the
hearing.
Thank you.
Mr chair I'm Joanna ruby and I
have been a neonatal nurse for
I've been a nurse for almost
thirty three AM held Mike it
just it it picks it up so much
better.
Thank you.
Hear me better yes okay so I'm
going to be and I have been a
nurse for almost thirty three
years I've twenty eight years I
spent in the new when I see you
and pediatric ICU and that adult
ICU and so I've had a lot of
experience I'm also going to
foster parents since nineteen
ninety two.
And so I've kind of played a
little role as both nurse and
foster parent and have often
gone to work and then taking the
baby home from work
what we have seen and I'm I want
to also just like help my friend
Jennifer she is also need on
neonatal nurse is that when
there there has been confusion
about sometimes the
what kind of care is and and
it's it's confusing to to nurses
we had a baby recently who was
discharged to the mom instead of
the grandfather because they
CYFD there wasn't a good
communication between CYFD in
the hospital the baby went home
with the mother and stat and
three days later came back
overdosed she was dipping the.
The fire in that now and the
baby was and so there wasn't at
it like there wasn't like
grandfather didn't know or
didn't they didn't know the
grandfather didn't have the
baby.
And so you know we have seen
like so many kids I have as a
nurse and the foster parent
gotten so many kids with health
safety plans I'm in my home and
and they come in and you know I
I don't.
They come in and they are
failure to thrive they are
traumatized I had kids with
broken bones and
You know I think the we are
always looking at what is and
what we always in the best
interest that AB it is hard as
nurses to heal these babies from
being premature and turning them
over into an environment that
there's really no oversight.
And you know we spent a lot of
money the state of New Mexico
spends a lot of money on a
premature baby hundreds of
thousands of dollars to heal
them only to turn over to the
home that may not take them and
and they come back failure to
thrive to come back overdosed
and I mean I can't tell you how
many kids of money that we take
care of any of our I see you who
have been shaken and then shaken
to death and we kind of wonder
what happened to the plan of
care.
What happened.
So I think at this point Mr
chair we will just be ready to
answer any questions or clarify
and and and of course we always
appreciate the work at CYFD in
so many areas and we feel like
as we pass this bill several
years ago maybe as legislators
we're the ones who maybe fail to
cover this so thank you and it
CYFD would you like to comment
on the bill.
Mr chair committees in my
computer yeah.
That.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director
protective services that CYFD I
don't know if you do want to
wait until we go over to up
who's in favor or opposition.
Your feedback on it now that we
could go ahead okay problems
with this we like to hear
absolutely Mr chair but yet yes
at this point CYFD is opposed to
the bill as written we feel that
a lot some of the cleanup in the
language needs to be directed
towards two areas one is the
reporting
reporting and the definitions
what those definitions mean such
as what does failure to comply a
mean who does the follow up the
second is is the follow up of
now the the way the
The way the program has been
developed and set up is the NCOs
are are supposed to be working
with the families right now we
have a collaboration between at
multi disciplinary team working
on care at that includes not
only CYFD but the department of
health the early childhood an
education department who is also
here today and then we all
developed this program with.
Experts within the community and
are continuously assessing where
the where the gaps are and
determining where we need to
address those gaps to ensure
that.
The spirit of the Care Act and
that it is a public health our
public health intervention and
that it is not a.
Sorry I lost my thought for a
second it is not an approach
that is punitive because the
last thing we want is that
mothers do not go to a hospital
to give birth in so we
continuously work with each
other to develop it continuously
monitor as best we can to
address the issues.
So so those are the main
objections the.
I know it's in your FIR comments
you also said you just don't
have the staff to do this you
have to.
If you currently only have to
Representative called
state agency care coordinators.
Sure.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes when this bill was
passed it was passed as a
unfunded mandate and with the
resources the positions that
were were in necessary to fully
grow at the program that were
not provided we we would need
additional resources to conduct
investigations for every single
plan of care and and I did I
hear and understand that the
intention of this bill is not
that an investigation is
conducted for every single
family however we do note that
we believe that it could be
interpreted that way and not
every single family that ex that
has a plan to care would be
appropriate for an investigation
such as
any a baby exposed to any type
of substance which could mean a
prescribed medication that a
doctor prescribed wallet child
for a heart condition ADHD or
any other type of mental health
diagnosis that the mother had
while she was pregnant could be
The tobacco use and in the plan
of care can contain multiple
levels of a response it could be
what we all refer to going to
that far end of what is.
Substance abuse treatment sub
inpatient treatment to address
that methamphetamine use or it
could be that that family what
the they're already attached to
services and that family is
being referred to what or to
snap and so what we we don't
want to an intentionally bring
families into a system that do
not need to come in thank you.
Okay.
Okay well let's go to the
audience and we'll go to the it
would have a early childhood
they here do they want to speak
early childhood department.
You said there is somebody here
doctor Gonzalez.
Following directions those did
you want to speak on this.
The state.
Range.
You know just trying to
figure assistant and trying to.
The only that CYFD definitely
needs to be sources of.
Thank very good thank you the
doctor's office okay how many in
the audience are here in support
of this bill.
How many in opposition to the
bill.
We'll hear from all of you it's
okay what will give you all a
chance to speak is there anybody
on zoom for against okay of
those in favor of the bill.
What you come up and if you want
to say anything come up and just
in one or two minutes tell us
why.
Thank you my name is Jennifer no
we have to push the button down
have to keep it down.
My name is Jenna well I've been
in a universe for seventeen
years now I just want to give
kind of a scope about what I've
seen as indicators when I first
started on our units we would
have maybe one or two of these
babies that are withdrawing from
drugs or complex social issue
that needs to be resolved to
CYFD and that was sixteen years
ago now on the unit we have
anywhere from ten to twelve of
these babies at any given time
and so the scope of the problem
is just exploded
methamphetamines federal has
changed this greatly
we are seeing these babies come
back and our motion our nurses
are as emotionally broken as
these babies are coming back
physically broken the baby that
she just referred to about the
federal overdose with the mom
dipping the past of higher was
just the most recent of these it
was not by far the worst that
I've seen.
these babies.
We we as nurses never see a
carrot plan we don't know in
writing what the plan that so it
CYFD the social workers in the
hospital have set up for these
families this mom needed support
she came in and visited this
baby she learned how to take
care of this baby we don't see
that with our patients so she
was kind of a non on only
and so we were willing to
support her because she was at a
higher risk of success but we
didn't know what the plan was
through the grapevine at the
beginning of the week our social
discard discharge planner told
us that the care plan was that
she was going to go home with
the grandfather and that she was
going to go into rehab.
And the grandfather was gonna
take care of the baby while in
rehab.
but the mother disagreed with
that when she came in because we
wanted the grandfather to come
in and learn how to care for
this baby.
They're hard to care for you
have to cuddle them you have to
wrap in a certain way you have
to feed him a certain way they
scream constantly so we wanted
to make sure that he had the
support and the necessary skills
to take care of these babies.
She did not want the grandfather
to come into the hospital and
sees it again all of these
excuses so by the end so we've
turned it back to CYFD and said
that's not the plan the mom.
agree to see saying some she
agreed to something different so
by the end of the week it was a
different yes charge planner
different nurse and with a bad
game of telephone somehow the
car a plan which we've never
have in writing was that she was
going to go home with her
friends and her friend was going
to take care of the baby while
she was in rehab.
And so that was on a Thursday.
This baby came back to our unit
Sunday afternoon so and I
thought it was a completely
different baby.
She had been dipping the
pacifier in federal because she
could not get him to stop crying
and the grandfather never knew
about this baby it would have
taken one phone call from CYFD
on Friday Saturday or Sunday to
the grandfather and said Hey you
discharge this baby who's a very
hard baby to console how's it
going.
Grandfather would have said what
baby I don't have a baby would
be just as your question.
That that is a really
unfortunate situation with this
bill of affected that yes it's
still have that same agency
communicate this this bill could
into this bill says that it
shell there shall be a follow up
and set of there may be a follow
up so you're now holding CYFD
you're holding somebody
accountable to follow up when a
baby is being discharged from
the hall of a hospital it is I'm
guess I'm really fuzzy on how
this is supposed to work is how
would CYFD is even known about
this they are they're notified
the day of this chart.
The hospital notifies them we do
not release a baby from are you
in it until we have notified
CYFD and told them that we are
discharging this baby and
there's a care plan the plan of
care and please we are told
there's a car plan in place but
we never see it written it's not
in the baby's chart the nurses
never see it with CYFD see it
either CYFD makes the they they
could they help create it.
This said.
To the.
We are fighting we are fighting
on that issue and I don't know
why we don't get that because
there's a lack of communication.
Family assessments of.
Okay good right that thank you
for your free yes running on a
little long so let me let me
give other people a chance to
take.
yes Maryland there.
Here thank you senator and
committee members if you are
confused about the plan of care
so are we this bill came before
you as a CYFD bill in twenty
nineteen CYFD asked you to carry
this bill the very questions
that miss Martin asked to define
other questions that we
especially you provided here in
twenty nineteen brought before
the committees have questions
and concerns saying this bill
has not been priced out we still
have questions we pass this bill
this amendment that we're
looking forward is is one
loophole of many and I I'm
already hearing CYFD say no no
no them COS right the care plans
no they don't CYFD rates the
care plan to let me tell you one
incident it's well known in the
circle that I get a lot of phone
calls hashtag we need an
ombudsman I got a call two
months ago from a senator who
sent me and and the head of MCO
who's in charge of the plan of
care is now this is interesting
because the MCO contracts have
been that everyone who's
interested in the Medicaid
contract is very engaged on this
but specifically the plan of
care is as written in law.
It's not.
Right here I'm gonna let Jason
explained.
But chairman members the
committee just to add some
clarity just going back to the
original care statute that was
passed
it's a volunteer contractor or
staff of a hospital or
freestanding birthing center
shall complete a ram plan to
care for the sept six that was
usually I thought that was the
hospital that divide devise the
care plan the plan of care that
Mr chair they may write the plan
but they also required to notify
CYFD and department of health so
notification is been made when a
plan of care is been developed
the problem is when the plane of
Kerr's not followed follow
through by the of the family the
mother whatever then it's
required at that point to notify
CYFD but then CYFD has the
option may or may not follow up
with a family assessment that's
where the breakdown is so in my
view yeah so this is where I got
the idea for this for this
report from the U. H. and it
says the essential components of
a car of program design.
R. one hospitals create and
report plans of care for all
substance exposed newborns.
Federally required data around
prenatal substance exposure are
tracked and reported I guess to
see where do.
Care coordination is provided
through the family's insurance
provider the NCO.
In order to facilitate access
it's it we made it too
complicated to I think it just
sounds too complex but maybe I
mean I don't deal with this
every day so what do you think
so I think Mr chair you're
correct the NCOs to responsible
for the plan of care but when
it's not followed in in when
they did the plan of care
they're obligated to notify both
CYFD India H. they have a family
that has developed with the have
a plan to care for when they're
not follow when the the mom
leaves it is appalling and
taking advantage of the services
that have been included in that
plan of care that's when it got
kind of goes to the other other
side in and I got this from
Emily the other that we have a
long visit and I wanted to
trying to understand but then at
that point when it's not being
followed that that's kind of
what we're trying to take care
of where what is responsibility
to see what do have at that
point well they they certainly
have every opportunity to go
ahead and do the family
assessment but it's optional so
if they did the family
assessment and find out things
aren't going well then they can
report to Skyrim not that they
can take care of it they know
and then something can happen
that you know somebody has to be
responsible in in CYFD you know
they have a mandate whether it's
funded or unfunded to take care
of these babies we're just
trying to make sure we in in I
support totally trying to fund
at a level where they can
actually do their job which I
know they want to do but we have
got to figure out for the the
issue is to move that forward
and and and have that family a
sense I'm not asking for an
investigation I'm just asking
for them to be required to go in
and just look at the family
situation that's that's all the
status did you have other things
you want to add Merioles.
Sorry about the MC other was one
thing I wanted to say in that I
got a call from the MCO
supervisor two months ago there
was a baby in thank you at U. N.
NH that had to reports the
nurses had called to reports two
separate times the parents have
been smoking fence and all in
the hospital room both reports
were unsubstantiated by CYFD
because and this goes into a
really deep question that we
should be looking at is what
substantiates our on
substantiates report that child
was safe in the hospital so the
report was unsubstantiated the
MCO said you can't release that
baby to us because the nurses
are saying don't let that baby
go home don't let that PED go
home the parents were homeless
they were actively costs will
conventional.
The nurses again the nurses
called BMC Ellen said this baby
can go home this baby can go
home please help us to separate
reports two separate times.
The baby was released the MCO
within twenty four hours lost
track of that child so it's
incumbent upon the as written
the the Carolinas as NCOs are
are in charge of these track to
open post release the MCO
supervisor said we can't find
this child and we don't know how
it comes to us because the
hospital reported two separate
times can't find the child how
is this how is this a lot I'm
getting calls two times a week
these children are dying no one
is looking for these children
there is no follow up we have to
fix this law thank you.
It's just.
anybody else wants to speak in
support of this bill we have
somebody on zoom who does
and McKinney.
Good.
this is a mechanism in top offer
advocate I would just it's speak
in strong support of this bill
I'm supporting as I've heard
I've read the department of
health
summary and research on kera and
on plans of care.
And all up we see how high the
incident rate is of the families
who are declining their plans of
care.
And.
It's since it's not mandatory we
can write paper all day long
about what these people need
these families say is what would
help these children but if a
family to clients that then that
child is at risk and without
this follow up then we are not
doing our best to keep these
children safe.
Thank you for your time thank
you to the sponsor thank you to
the committee.
Thank you.
is there anyone here in
opposition to the bill.
We're we're we're do you work at
U. N. M. Nick you African you
and make it connect you and also
levels thank you.
I'm.
Because doctor she is come
before as many times as the
current plan the current program
that they have at UNM right.
They don't have this problem how
did they handle it why don't
they have this problem they do
have this problem I mean they
just Mr chair yes this is Mike
yes they do have this problem I
think it's in every hospital
that they have from I wanted to
go back a little bit and talk
about the plan of care the
hospital and does have a plan to
care for the baby upon discharge
we have a plan to care from the
time they're born and then upon
discharge we just can't
implemented that they are going
to to to to do the fact that we
can set up you know we can give
give them with farms and set up
post discharge appointments but
there's no guarantee that
they're going to go to those
appointments or or WIC or
whatever it is but we're what we
want is that there will be
follow up with these babies and
that's and not not may be follow
up.
The whole idea behind car was to
not automatically criminalize
people what is essentially a an
addiction.
And and to take their kids away
just because they're addicted
yes so with that Mr chair I
think the the difference is that
the shell just requires a family
assessment which is not an
investigation and I think that's
the difference if you do an
investigation then they come
under a different I think it's a
different system tomorrow night
okay because it didn't the the
assessment is just checking
things out doing what she's
asking in the state that could
lead to a scholar report it
could lead to an investigation
we but but you have to figure
out what's more important
the safety of this baby or we
gonna try to make everybody feel
good that we're not trying to
criminalize them maybe I'm not
either I want them to
participate but if there's a
refusal there to participate for
no follow up then we're not
putting the safety that baby
first to me that's the number
one thing we need to be looking
at I would like to say that you
know in assessment would only be
Mr chairman sorry for where I am
I would like to say that you
know in assessment would only be
to see you know sometimes a
picture's worth a thousand words
and sometimes when you go into
someone are you do an assessment
you can see what their needs are
I can tell you as a foster
parent.
Who is educated and on the ball
and have connections it is the
but I have taken these babies
home or they've come to my home
it is really hard sometimes to
get their services to get them
in place and I wonder how I
wonder how these moms do it
maybe without the support and I
think that's really what we're
looking at is you know an
assessment that might trigger
more support for these bombs for
marks for a successful outcome
without ever having to take
their kids I don't think that's
what the the goal is to have the
kids committee because the that
more to see what they might need
at home and
I think that you know putting
that baby.
You know to Erin favor of that
the health of the baby to help
him out for the baby.
Should always come first
This chart in this report about
services that were offered I
have no I'm not clear these were
this is as proportion of plans
of care.
By service so that does mean
they were actually provided I
just means the hospital said the
should be in the plan of care
well I look at that over and we
don't we don't address all of
those certainly when the baby
goes home we make sure that with
his that they have with
important because the baby might
be a special formula they might
have transportation issues which
we can give them like taxi
vouchers but there we don't know
what happens after they leave
the home visiting home visiting
offered to seventy three seventy
two seventy three percent or
certain of the set up for it's
in the plan of care that they
could decline seems like that's
will they can decline or maybe
nobody ever offers it.
I mean it just because you write
it into the hospital writes a
plan of care and turns it over
to the NCO.
They have a discharge they have
a discharge plan that everybody
and actually every patient in
the hospital with a discharge
plan and they can turn it over
with the recommendations of what
they're recommending be done
with this baby but I mean it's
really in the early months of
like just a maybe immunizations
and formula and follow ups with
any kind of specialists but you
know if you're.
In the thing is these kids are
hard the really hard they go
home and just because that would
have left that neonatal unit and
they have withdrawn doesn't mean
they are so they aren't done
with drawing.
And so they go home and they
have still have really high
needs and these parents a lot of
times our young they don't have
a lot of family support and you
know how is it that we are going
to support them and to
successfully without dipping the
past fire in the fennel just so
they can help them out that is a
good.
If they're having an assessment.
I think it is seven years and
I'm working on to thank your
your bill would automatically
trigger if they turn down the
plan and say for example you say
the client the client if they
decline but who is offering any
of the services rural and is it
any of the services what if they
accepted the week vouchers.
And they accepted
Substance abuse counseling for
themselves but they declined the
home visitation it was in the
plan does that mean you'd refer
them automatically to CYFD
ordered what percentages of
what's in the plan has to be
decline before it's considered
declined Mr chair all it done
the stress knows a chairman
members of the committee so
currently the care coordinators
whether they're in the NCOs are
private insurance or within the
department of health or CYFD
monitoring sort of
implementation encouraging them
to to follow up with referrals
and comply with the plan so
those plans to my understanding
and looking at the CYFD
regulations around current
implementation but those plans
got involved they're gonna
change based on time based on
the needs of the family and the
new board.
So it's you know what I think
they just want to put in here to
that a CYFD brought up was the
need to define non compliance
one of the guys want to stay I
mean not that statute currently
exists that statute was put into
place by the legislature and the
governor two years ago there is
already a requirement for the
NCOs and the care coordinators
to report to CYFD in the event
of non compliance that exists
today you just never decline
defined on comply but it was
never defined and and right now
it's just then up to the
discretion of the department to
decide if they want to continue
with her do a family assessment
and so what we're saying as
those plans and them CEOs in the
care coordinators are working
with those families if they see
non compliance with those plans
in on follow through to repeat
again that's thirty dot in the
distance that you to report it
all we're asking now is CYFD to
conduct the family assessment
and again just to clarify that
is not an investigation.
That is just a purely a family
assessment to look at the
likelihood of imminent danger to
the child well being to look at
the likelihood of the child
becoming an abused child or
neglected child and three the
likelihood or the strength the
needs of the child family
members and caretakers with
respect to providing health and
safety if that that they if CYFD
conducts that family assessment
and there's nothing.
You know they don't.
See any issues then we move on
our way.
Not there's not an investigation
that happens with that they look
at that and if they do see
additional needs then they
provide additional resources and
services to the family.
On that point
You're my air Mike sent.
Mr Mr that didn't go on.
Missed Mr chair
I appreciate that explanation
but that's not what this is the
statute says on page two it says
if the court the relative
parents relatives guardians or
caretakers declined those
services or programs the
department shall proceed with an
investigation.
And and that you know I
understand the other shell shell
pride refer to provide referrals
and then the other shall shall
conduct a family assessment that
seems to be what you're talking
about but this shall proceed
with an investigation is it is a
different shall and and a
different question.
Then you're answering Mr chair
for the that is being answered
Mr chair.
Chairman
Senator Sedillo Lopez the
correct so yeah my explanation
is on the first sort of trigger
right on the second one happy to
sort of talk and talk about that
in terms of our perspective
again if that family assessment
is made and so say that you know
again it looks at the imminent
danger see the state likely you
know like a high likelihood of
imminent danger to the child
they're going to then recommend
services based on that at that
point we do state of you know
CYFD sees a high likelihood of
imminent danger.
And that those parents due to
provide those services the
statute per per what you were
saying does require at that
point that they shall proceed
with an investigation because
based on that family assessment
they're seeing a high likelihood
of something the services are
still being declined then the
the legislation does trigger an
investigation at that point.
Mr chair wait till it's my turn
to ask questions but I just
wanted to clarify that are here
right those systems that you're
you're right on that was that
was a question thanks chair on
the other hang on let let me
just say I'll look I have never
officially gone to the committee
I just want to figure out what
we're doing here so let's go to
the committee then we got the
support of points there were no
opponents the S. proponents of
renewable yes opponents okay.
We do have an ability to come up
and use a Mike please.
No Representative told them that
afternoon chairman members of
the committee my name is Lucy
let them plus they work with
gold futures New Mexico and we
work a lot with families that
are unfortunately going to the
personal system and that you
know have substance dependence I
myself have been a foster I have
Health kinship of my two nieces
for ten years because my sister
has been medically I'm available
to take care of them due to her
substance dependence and I can
tell you that the assessments
that CYFD does invoke on our
family continuously are very
happy they're very invasive they
walked into our homes they look
at our paychecks they look at
our refrigerators they look at
every choice that we make on our
lives and that is very
challenging yes my sister
struggled with substance
dependence yes our family was
there ready to take on the
responsibility of caring for my
two nieces.
And my biggest concern our
biggest concern with this bill
is that it will put other
families were going through the
same situation trying to care
for their loved ones and our
children will be taken away and
given to foster parents who
later will want to take over the
parenting and so for us that is
the biggest concern so for those
reasons we do stand in
opposition of this bill we do
work with echo at UNM doing
training for medical providers
who are dealing with mothers who
are giving birth and they also
struggle with substance
dependence on.
Thank you I give my time thank
you.
Thank you so Senator is here
I would consider I think we
would consider on page two line
nine to strike showing return to
may so that we don't trigger the
investigation but we at least
have a family assessment.
And I wonder if the committee
would be interested in looking
at that I would make the most
motion to do that seconded by
Senator Schmedes any.
On page two line nine.
Strike shell.
And replace with may.
The other shell would remain the
yeah.
Any further discussion in any
questions in senators for the.
Thank you I already went through
like my major thing with this Mr
chair of with the other bill
Newman over in a minute okay
never mind we have an adoptive
just check okay I'm sorry there
is any other discussion of the
amendment any opposition how
does Mister chair I was going
off into the any other any
opposition seeing none will
adopt that amendment.
And since Senator Sedillo Lopez
go ahead and then Senator gave
us.
Thank you Mr chair and I try to
gather all my thoughts with this
this is just the hardest most
heartbreaking situation.
That we as legislators here
about and I really commend you
for trying to do something about
it I I think that
We need we need to.
We need to try to support these
families and I really appreciate
that you took off the maybe
because I think this automatic
investigations can be huge
burden to CYFD and also.
Two years ago I'm forty whenever
this is passed in two thousand
nineteen and may have been a
different bill I don't know but
I remembered a long discussion
about the difference between may
and shall in a bill something
like this and this is about
discretion to the agency.
And what I remember from it and
again it was a while ago so
maybe remember wrong but that we
need to trust these agencies to
to make these kinds of very
difficult decision because they
have the expertise and and the
information about the family and
whatever so I very much
appreciated that you change that
triggering investigation to make
but then it in and so that was
kind of my big thing and I I
appreciate it.
Within these definitions of that
are described in in the in the
comments.
It removes it with what was
described in in the analysis
that it removes parental.
Discretion from the calculus of
what services are necessary
desired desired.
Parents are required to accept
the seat the services CYFD
refers them to.
I know that now now it's going
to be made but we're not giving
the department any kind of
guidance are we just going to
let the department do whatever
things it things it takes
necessary my my concern is
You know as we heard the
testimony these situations are
always very very complex and and
I had my share of seeing some of
these situations when I was the
executive director of New Mexico
and I you and I always felt and
maybe it was because that was
where clients were is that we
needed to support.
The mother.
That you know the caretaker that
we needed to support.
Whoever was going to be the
caretaker of that child and
this.
And that I think should be our
primary focus is supporting the
baby by supporting the people
who care about the baby and that
that that at least in my
experience was the most
effective way of doing it
because when the baby was
removed a lot of times the the
addicted mom lost all hope.
a lot of times they they tried.
To kick their addiction for the
child and so when the child was
in a lot of their compliance was
for the child and when the baby
was taken away.
What we saw was hope was lost
of and that is my my worry
about removing the discretion
from CYFD.
Who presumably knows whether the
mothers trying whether the
mothers in a treatment program
whether there's backsliding
whether you know and and is in a
position to support.
Whoever is the caretaker whether
it's a grandma and auntie at the
at you know whoever it is
And and that.
That's the the thing that
worries me a second to what we
just did did and then the third
of.
Well I guess that kind of.
The second one is another point
they they raced
If the family what's the
consequence of is there some
kind of escalating consequence
for or what so I'll I'll let you
spell that a let.
Let the Sanchez addressed my
concerns Mr chair and senator I
think the I think the department
always has the discretion
because when a report is made it
goes to sky and then they
determined from that point so
we're not taking away their
discretion they will continue to
have that discretion in figuring
out whether they're going to do
an investigation or not based on
the report they get so that what
we're doing has nothing to do
with taking away their
discretion we're just asking for
an assessment and after they do
the assessment it's up to them
to move forward all we're doing
is asking for advice on the
situation as a child leaves the
hospital in as far as
definitions we're not changing
any definitions in the original
acts so nothing there is
changing correct I mean all
we're doing is just asking.
For the department to to do an
assessment and then that's the
end of it and then from there
they decide after the reports
made to Scott if there is a
report.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator there is that all
senators to the look all.
At this time yes thank you
Senator Gallegos and then
Senator Schmedes.
Mr Chairman center thank you for
this I just couple questions if
you don't mind adjacent do you
remember was this not a CYFD
bill one is brought in twenty
nineteen.
Chairman members of the
committee Senator Gallegos the
secretary that at the time
Secretary Blalock was intimately
involved in in pushing
legislation just.
Mr chair Senator chase and then
and and understanding what the
amendment and then I'm gonna
CYFD if they like with the
amendment in there just
but I'm trying to figure out Mr
chair Senator and Jason what the
uproar is because to me it's
still giving them a guidance I'm
actually in favor Mister
chair and etcetera except I did
this the other night cost me a
hundred thousand but
I do believe Mr chair Senator in
addition that we all C. Y. P.
I'd love to be able to fund some
of this I put all my money into
educating them but it it goes to
the point that I think they
still have capabilities with the
bill I'm just wondering if
there's something Mr chair
Senator in case and I'm not
saying on why the confusion now
compared to twenty nineteen.
But chairman Senator Gallegos
I I agree with you what one of
the things that did confuse me
in the fiscal impact report
because again we're it's
existing statute that a
notification of noncompliance is
made to the department and it
was it did surprise me a little
bit and the FIR that one of the
for the costs that the
department said they would have
to anchor this is a develop a
system to track non compliance.
I'm a little confused on on how
that's not already or building
work that are implemented given
that's an existing statue all we
changed was the discretion on
the family assessment on site at
I agree with Senator.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
center being on probation or
finance I like the idea that in
case we have any extra money
this year we might build on this
but Mr chair Senator the the
next question I have course for
miss Martin and Mr center I was
just wondering Mr Martin with
the amendment is that anything
that you can think through would
be more acceptable to CYFD on
how this bill goes forward.
Excuse me Mr chair Senator
Gallegos I would I want to first
before a fully answer that
question I want to say we we
very much I've are I want to
make sure it's very clear that
we do not want babies to be in
unsafe situations that
That we.
In order to investigate we must
get our call from the hospital
not a notification not a care
plan was completed and that the
baby was born substance
substance exposed but that
everyone within that hospital is
a mandated reporter so if they
have concerns that that child is
abused or neglected or donor
conceived concerns in addition
to being born substance exposed
that that call comes into our
statewide central intake and we
are conducting an investigation.
So I want to make sure that
that's that's clear in the
investigation includes assessing
the family assessing risk
assessing safety and when
necessary potentially creating a
safety plan or.
A different type of intervention
which could be custody of that
child coming into foster care
maintain at home per situation
that the child may maintain at
home
with their parents but under the
custody of CYFD there are those
options but first and foremost
that report has to come into our
statewide central intake but
there's a concern that is
substance exposed and concerns
of for safety of that child.
I said that and now I'm gonna
ask you could you please repeat
your question.
Mr chair Senator and miss Martin
I guess my thought is with the
amendment that we just did on
the taking that shell out does
that make it more tolerable to
CYFD.
Mr chair Senator guy Ecosse if
we take out the shell that would
leave the bill as it currently
is with the word may we could
the second shot.
This is the third.
You
do an assessment but not this.
At your discretion it's
official.
Nine.
Yeah thank Mr chair Senator I.
The discretion yes.
A couple points yes the
discussion would stay with the
CYFD we would have the
discretion to conduct that
family assessment however.
Additional resources would be
needed and to ensure that we
have the ability to do that
that we have the ability and the
programs and the procedures set
up to conduct those assessments
for contracts set up I do want
to want to also say that are we
it and consider that this would
be duplicative of what is being
done with the NCOs and the care
coordinators in addition to the
hot when those plans of care
initially being created.
Of Madam should stay there for
just a second Mr chair Senator
miss more so in in just talking
it through you talked about it
yet the hospital should already
reported there's no issue but I
think my difference in what this
bill does and what they happens
when it's called because I
wanted to call you we'll do an
investigation what I see here is
giving you some subjective
options only if you see it deem
necessary and and I'm wondering
and I understand totally
understand the lack of resources
but would it be a better call Mr
chair Senator that they call
from the hospital and also and
you will do an investigation.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos are if
I'm following following that
thought correctly
based the hospital shall
they are required mandated to
report child abuse and neglect
and that what then.
I just the information we need
to conduct an investigation that
doesn't mean whether that that
could be from anyone hospital
staff a teacher grandparent then
anybody any and all mandated
reporters.
But Mr chairman turned gentle
lady is that makes it a we'll do
an investigation correct.
When that call comes in then you
all automatic automatically do
an investigation.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos no
that is still a may because it
goes it depends on the
information that is provided to
us by the reporting source okay
and that I need clarification
for me so thank you Mr chairman
centering just last it them
Budman bills brought up in this
year's jacketed under the office
of child advocate have not
dropped yet but I think that
give some clarity to this but I
appreciate the dialogue Mr
center just thank you for
bringing this for.
Thank you Senator Gallegos
sanitation committee and then
Senator Hickey will follow you
he has a question to.
Thank you Mr chair real quick I
would like to move another
amendment to the bill.
I move that on page one line
twelve we strike the COVID.
In afterward insert the word
and.
And then on line thirteen that
we strike the words and conduct
an investigation.
The second one is on line
thirteen page one strike the
words and conduct an
investigation all this does
members of the committee is the
the minute we already adopted is
changing the title of the bill
now we need to appropriately
just include the change of the
title because we're no longer
discussing an investigation with
the bill.
A second.
Well like I Turkey's idea.
We consider that from the men's.
To get the amendment.
so on on page one line twelve we
strike the comma in influencer
the word end right there.
In a line thirteen we strike the
words and conduct an
investigation.
Should read to conduct
assessments and provide services
upon a failure to comply with
Parker.
On that amendment no secondly it
is second in them okay we've
already done that the I I
hope you one of the third no
objection later to be on.
Over the second to okay but back
on the bill not and yes is there
any discussion of the amendment.
You accepted as a friendly
amendment just missed seeing no
discussion no opposition will
consider that amendment adopted.
And we go back to you Senator
thank you very much Mr etcetera
so I would like to point out now
what we're kind of debating
discussing we're no longer
talking about investigation
we've changed how the bill the
the other shall I I don't think
is controversial not known on
this committee or in this room
is going to say that upon the
CYFD doing assessments that
they want to withhold services
from a kid I mean that these are
all fed most of these federally
funded so no one's going to
debate that so so we're down to
one last shall in its whether
whether this committee thinks we
need to change this the current
acts to shall conduct a family
assessment so I think we should
all be agreeing with that just a
narrow it in here.
and I I would say that my at my
one of my initial comments is
that.
You know the the executive
branch as the enforcer of the
law right we're not advocating
NCOs to be enforcers of the law
they may report for they they
don't enforce the law is
everyone remembers you remember
the the the cards that you get
when you have a baby and they
they stick their heel or their
and then we do the screening why
do we go through the trouble of
those if it is so so rare Tay
Sachs disease and gastric
disease and all these other
things
new nailed that can gentle
deafness you know these things
are incredibly rare why we go to
the trouble of looking for those
things with the reason is
because if they're not detected
when the baby is born or there's
a ticking clock tonight to take
a very very early you you
essentially lose that life then
that and when I say lose that
life it may mean death it may
mean the child and never ever
develop speech it may mean that
the child is completely
incapacitated for a lifetime
your reversible is so I think
that's why we are having this
debate and that's why we have
this special law because
if we miss something.
You only got one chance.
And it's over.
So that that's why I the I'm I'm
gonna say that I I'm so I'm
supporting shifting this one
made to a shop online twenty
five
And and and the reason I have a
question Mr chair center for
miss miss Martin CPS if that's
okay.
Mr okay yes Sir but I think you
so much for being here you're
doing a lot of hard work it's
incredibly valuable this
committee that you're here
because a lot of some other
agencies don't take the time to
come down here and you are
showing us a lot of commitment
so thank you I had a question
with the family assessment
there's a definition here now
this is changing obviously and
it says they're going to
determine if there's imminent
danger to a child's well being.
do you know what if if in the
assessment someone comes back
and says we have determined
there's imminent danger.
What with the next step be
within the age.
Mr chair Senator smitteez at the
next step if it is not called in
for an investigation the if the
child was determined to be.
In immediate danger imminent
danger it could be a.
A call back to statewide central
intake so that investigation is
complete or an immediate call
the law enforcement because
right now law enforcement's the
only entity that can provide
capacity to to the Department so
if that it assessment whether
it's the MCO CYFD doing not
family assessment and as this
bill as written then that would
have to go back through either
of on Forsman or statewide
central intake for an
investigation to be commenced
okay thank you Mr chairman
centers and and as Martin thank
you that that's helpful because
you know I I think that.
That this bill if if it's a may
and and we're we're denying that
child just just an assessment
there.
It sounds like at least I'm I'm
hearing your answer that the the
department still has discretion
if they even if it's a real
image of all that we need to
know about it and I think if if
it's if the assessment leads us
to knowing whether or not the
child is in imminent danger I
think that may need to be a
show.
I I really do I think that's
very reasonable to ask because
of what I brought back to these
new nail screening forms and
because we're it's it's like I
said you get one shot.
And so if the family assessment
is an entry point I know this is
not changed in the bill now or
or ever was but if that is an
intraparty determining imminent
danger I I I think I shall is is
reasonable and so I I think the
bill is is better now I think it
takes away a little bit of that
whatever want to call little
more that that harshness that
we're going to force the
department because they still do
you can you can you know proceed
with an investigation if you
want to or not and and current
law and with could they've kind
of backed off on that
I I think I think it's
reasonable now I really do so
thank you very much for the
information thank you Mr thank
you Senator Schmedes Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair up my
questions are primarily for
Martin just trying to get some
clarification on it what is the
education level requirements for
people who are making those who
go out and make the assessment
at the hospital is called of
what happened.
Thank you to repeat that.
Mr chair Senator Hickey I'm very
sorry I was in transition from
one chair to another would you
mind repeating your question.
Yes Mr chair Senator and miss
Martin what is the educational
level are requirements for
individuals who makes the
assessments of the potential
risks with the baby and the
family.
Mr chair and members of the
committee Senator Hickey
current we it currently as the
as the program currently runs
through the through legislation
is that the MCO care
coordinators are those that are
creating the plan of care with
the family I believe and and.
I believe that the MCO care
coordinators require level of
educational requirements are
licensed social workers.
The assessment could see with
the with the what is it it's
just.
Mr chair Senator Hickey so as
this bill as written the level
of we we would have to determine
what those positions would be
that would do those assessments
I can't tell you what the what
they are I can tell you
currently are investigators that
go out and conduct
investigations the the the
minimum level of education is
that
High school diploma and a number
of years of experience in that
in this field
for a degree in social work
social work or other related to
Greece.
Thank you very much for that
answering that question the
reason I ask up Mr chair Senator
Kernan and fellow senators this
what I'm hearing is Martin St is
that part of the the rate
limiting step and see if they'll
ability of people to actually
make those assessments that
they're asked to go and make
additional assessments little
kind of making interventions and
I know I can't just your opinion
of this this Martin but
we would we be better off if we
were to compensate individuals
what their level of education
that was added to the level of
education similar to other
states would we be able to fill
some of those.
Mr chair Senator Hickey I think
I think also show workers all
workers case managers within
social services definitely at
CYFD and throughout New Mexico
need to be paid
equitably and fairly for the
jobs that they do
that could be different pay
levels for different
For different levels of
education but overall our our
staff are under under paid for
the amount of secondary trauma
and the amount of responsibility
that they get on a daily basis.
Mr chairman senators and as
Martin thank you just you you
you make my point my point is
this this is got to be this jobs
are being able to earn some
trust with and right that's just
gone through potentially trauma
of the birth of the addicted
child and addicted family and
having the temperament training
is something I mean it is it's
it's I'm a significant
post graduate level to be able
to do this skillfully and
accurately and my sense is that
we're going to continue to run
into this pop up all over and
over again week back here next
year argue about two thousand
may and we won't be able to meet
the needs that dollars trying to
attempt to get to and that's to
go back to the fundamental it
these are very highly skilled
and potentially experience
positions that need to be
compensated at a very
substantial not all in order to
be able to build the work and
everywhere I look around the
state we are down in our
compensation of these folks
might we see by at the
department of health and what
have you at somewhere between
thirty and fifty percent
vacancies because we don't
addressed those fundamental
issues and stopped at this bill
is not going to address that I
understand it but I would ask my
colleagues this week here other
details of the late yes we have
to get over ourselves of this
sense that we're status scarcity
and we can't eight you're not
going to get the level of
accounts need to be able to make
the impacts we're sorry that a
lot of the people that even to
the amount of work that's being
cop or this bill and lest we
comp.
State appropriately and so I
hope we we have other
opportunities to look at
compensation for these
individuals again I want to tell
you this this is this is just
going to medical school this is
very top work huge emotional
right.
Need for incredible amount of
experience well we need to
recognize staff the education
training and that the
compensation stop our side to
get on that soapbox we're gonna
be right back next year exactly
where we are we have got no
better as we don't speak the
fundamental issue this is a
highly skilled position that has
to be highly compensated thank
you very much thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator Hickey Senator
McKenna your neck.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Kernan and I think your
subject matter experts for being
with us this afternoon
Yes hearing the stories it takes
me back to when I first learned
what FAD.
Is it fetal alcohol effect fetal
alcohol syndrome is and now I
can only imagine
What the effect on the brain is
with fennel and methamphetamine.
because alcohol is.
Is devastating as it as it is I
can I can only imagine
so it is really this is really
urgent
that really resonates with me
so I have a question chairman
and senator of for miss Martin.
At yes I am my my comment
question
Mr chairman and senator miss
Martin.
Really echoes what Senator
Hickey was talking about on
always got this need and then
we've got this gap of services
and how do we know that together
and I'm curious
chairman and senator miss
Martin.
If the bill as amended passes.
Howell CFT meet the requirements
because I'm hearing you need
human capacity.
and maybe some other things that
is not in the FIR and I'm
wondering.
If the effective date got moved
right now it's sixteen June of
this year if the effective date
got moved would that help any.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator McKenna thank
you for your question I would at
one thing I would say
potentially the date could move
however
What the shells in may's don't
do is create additional support
services for families it does
not create additional substance
abuse treatment or or counseling
it that is that is where we are
working to put our effort and
our money into so that a mother
and a baby that are living
Gallup don't have to drive all
the way and we move to Santa Fe
outside of their community
outside of the state their
family connections to ensure
that they're getting the support
in the services the mom needs
for her as well as the baby
needs and for his or her Care in
so I we could potentially push
that out in addition we need to
ensure that our efforts in
funding and money and time is
also going to build those
support services in every
community within the state and
we are working on that with the
O. H. ECECD and
HSD to built this thank you.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator and miss Martin.
And so what I'm hearing is.
For instance for your budget for
FY twenty four did you.
More funding to hire more
personnel.
Mr chair Senator McKenna I think
we're just going to be we're
just going through our path for
LFC.
here are Senate and house
finance hearings later this
week.
We did ask for additional
funding for and F. T. E. for for
protective services behavioral
health services and for program
support services throughout CYFD
as well as additional funding to
continue to build that the
prevention continuum so that
we're we're getting further
upstream working with families
to ensure that we don't even get
to the point and needed for
interventions so yes our budget
request was increased to address
prevention and a on staffing
that we need to currently do
what we are are required to do.
chairman and senator and so miss
Martin.
With the request for FY twenty
four.
That was submitted to meet your
current.
mission
But it would not include what
this bill is asking you to do is
that accurate.
Mr chair Senator you are correct
it does not include what this
bill would be requiring us to
do.
Okay so chairman and senator and
miss Martin so then if this bill
passes and you get funded to
your request level.
What happens to what's mandated
in the proposed statute.
Mr chair Senator McKenna we
would then require it if this
bill passed we would then put
that workload on our existing
workforce with no additional
resources.
Four go for a supplemental it
you know I started hire some
people and then come back for
supplemental later in the year I
guess Mr chair that is correct
it if that way we could ask for
that.
Thank you chairman thank you
center and thank you miss Martin
okay so take care the
supplemental then how about the
effective date right now it's
sixteen June twenty three.
What ideally if you could.
If you could possibly estimate
to us what would be an ideal.
The fact of date.
Mr chair Senator McKenna I don't
feel comfortable answering that
on the spot with a comfortable
date is I'd be happy to work
with the sponsor to look at what
a potential further out data is
and these additional changes
I I can't answer that question
right now without.
Further digging into it.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator and thank you miss
Martin that this is a really
tough vote.
but.
I I think you being
Truthful with us as we.
Move ahead thank you very much
thank you senator Senator
Gallegos for the second time.
Mr chair thank you miss Martin I
just to want to get relaxed me
call you back so.
The Mr center miss more just
some of the same topics Center
Hickey brought up some really
unique ideas for me
In his discussion his talking
would be back here in the year.
just through the conversation
we've had here today Mr chair
Senator Mr Martin what would it
take for us not to be back here
next year knowing that the bill
has changed considerably.
And we only have that one shall
in their as the department and
and talk we talked funding
talked about the needs to be
wife do it has we talked about
the date in your mind what would
it take to get this to the point
that CYFD would be completely.
happy maybe not happy but will
in the compromise our compromise
will give up something you'd be
comfortable with this building
the right thing first for
children.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos what I
what I would say to that is I
would very much
Like to go to work with the
Sanchez on this to determine
what that compromises the
department also is working on
addressing through legislation
this year and will be introduced
this week that includes changes
to care where we see those
changes actually filling the
gaps doing what it needs to do
and so at this point in time I I
don't I can't answer your
question at this moment but do
think that we could go back
communicate and work together on
what that where that.
Gap really needs to be filled to
ensure that that that.
Babies and newborns are not left
or not in situations that they
are
They're unsafe and not mandated
reporting and then the
continuous followed her but I
appreciate that Mr Chairman
centers and miss Martin but was
there any not know that you have
a bill coming was there any of
discussion the intro there any
studies done on this
I'm glad you guys have a bill to
fill those gaps but as just one
answer dialogue statewide all
agency or if it was just
departmental.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos I will
absolutely get back to you with
that with that answer to that
this afternoon or by tomorrow
morning at the latest on the
statewide collaboration so I can
give you as much information as
possible good deal thank you
miss Mr chair Senator as part of
if it wasn't
just thing and through that it
might have been really good for
us to have discussions out in
the in the state just order to
get clarification on this I do
have just two more.
and and I don't want to just
beat up on C. Y. P. no you're
welcome because it there because
my next question is do we have
anyone from Human Services
Department I'm trying to figure
out what their role is in care.
And you may know that.
Mr chair Senator guy a ghosts we
I I don't believe members from
department of health were able
to make it today however we do
have Melissa Soto here with us
from CYFD she is has run the
care program since the beginning
and knows a great deal about how
the work
in not just in theory not big
picture but in the weeds how we
work with the O. H. and ECECD
both Mr chair Senator would you
mind if we trade expert
witnesses Senator here
Minnesota.
Please.
Mr chair Senator movie mistletoe
we're gonna give her some time
to relax but it's it's a real
basic question so I'm trying to
figure out what part HSD does to
ensure compliance I know they've
got some oversight but I don't
know how they actually react
with.
CYFD.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator guy a ghosts
what happens is is that once a
plan of care is offered and it
is done at the hospital with the
family and the nurse social
worker at the hospital it gets
entered into the portal at the
same time a plan to care is
offered if the mother is a
Medicaid member a care
coordinator is reaching out so
care coordinator has to reach
out regardless of a plan to care
or not and they offer care
coordination services so in
conjunction of the plan of care
being developed they're also
being offered care coordination
services from the MCO if they
are a Medicaid member
if they accept care coordination
and the plan of care than what
this Care it does is it elevates
the baby and mother as
Specialized clients or members
so they're not waiting thirty
forty five days for intervention
so the care coordinator reaches
out they do two types of
assessments with the family
they're pretty lengthy they go
through the planet Kerr with the
mother care taker because it
could be a relative or it could
be a foster parent and then they
start to talk about how they can
help set up well child checks or
checks with the primary care
physician or if they need
transportation they can arrange
transportation so they're really
facilitating
with that assistance to get to
those appointments that are
offered that go back to the
planet Kerr the planet Kerr is
really a set of services that
are available to the newborn and
the mother care taker in order
to get early intervention our
wraparound services in place.
Mr chair Senator Kernan and I
appreciate that and that in a
lot of information detail but I
think we needed that and and
both you all thank you for being
here because it's one of those
things for us to understand CYFD
we don't it's really hard to
look into all we're hoping for
clarification on that later in
life but that's what I was
looking I just want to see that
there's actually not not that I
don't believe you guys have
thought in it but in the process
Mr Chairman center if I can
change expert witnesses one more
time I will be done.
Thomas they think I'm preacher
Morgan and three times but
If if you wouldn't mind if I
have a mistress minnows I've got
one question for him and then I
will be totally done.
Less a thought comes up the.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
mission as punishment
Just wondering can and I know
you you know I've worked before
on CYFD stuff could you explain
me why the assessment the family
assessment so important to the
process a German Senator yes
certainly I think one of the
things that we're all trying to
accomplish here I think
especially with the amendment
is.
That these families and children
don't result in investigation
that that's what we're trying to
do is multiple layers of
services multiple layers of ice
in the form of the NCOs the care
coordinators and then in the
plan according to the bill of
non compliance and CYFD
in the report I believe you guys
all have it on the dust from the
department health on the care of
valuation one of the things
that's noted is that currently
forty two point six percent of
families with the planet care
and twenty twenty had at least
one subsequent investigation and
almost half forty eight point
eight percent of those
subsequent investigations were
substantiated compared to a
substantiation rate of twenty
eight point six percent for the
same age group without a plan to
care.
That is what we don't want to
see.
That is what we don't want to
get to and so really what the
family the the family assessment
tries to do is in the care
coordinators with the NCOs.
They can't require family to
engage they can try as hard as
they want and they can talk with
the family but they can't
require it so which means we
can't just let them fall through
our fingers right there then and
there because then we see these
numbers this adds an additional
layer that gets CYFD involved.
In the form of a family
testament to then have them
provide additional services and
offer additional services so I
think that's what we're getting
this is an additional layer so
that we set eyes on the family
eyes on the kids so that we
don't get to an investigation we
don't get to a substantiation I
think we're all on the same page
this just adds one more layer so
that if the care corner care
coordinators can't get
engagement.
Then we have CYFD attempt to get
engagement thank you.
Thank you for that Mr I feel for
the.
Thank you senator.
Anybody else before Senator did
you want to make some comments
just a comment on on the the
cost to do this and certainly as
a member of LFC understand the
process where these many
departments come before us and
make the request and and I know
that CYFD I guess is going to
present this week to House
Appropriations or Senate finance
I'm not sure which but that's
the opportunity when you go when
you said this is what we need
and Bobby need.
My my point is if we do not do
the family assessment the cost
is going to be much greater
because those kiddos are going
to require much more than what's
required right now and again
it's an assessment it's not an
investigation it is costly but
the department has a duty if we
have a duty to report if you
have a duty to report they have
a duty to make sure these kids
are sent and so we have got to
make sure that cost is
considered cost is just for
through the CYFD going to LFC in
making that request in the end
recognizing whatever money they
get the cost is gonna be far
greater if they don't catch the
situations before they get much
further down the road thank you
Mr chair.
Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr chairman gesture
just a comment or two I've been
the legislature here few years
and I've heard these things in
my thirty nine years here
several different times in a
million different ways and it
always amazes me that we never
can seem to write a bill right
because you can't read or write
one right when you're talking
about circumstance.
And children all you can do is
write something and hopefully it
will help solve whatever problem
you're confronting at the time
that it's not anything that you
can ever ride a perfect piece of
legislation on we have to rely
on these folks that are in this
type of government service of
Human Services and children
youth and family and I was in
the legislature before the
children youth and family was
finally half of passed and
adopted several years and
finance in our member governor
came calling me to his office
and the he said in his
wonderfully countrywide he said
one money or do to get your
vote.
And anyway we discussed it for a
while nations third are governed
K. you will never have worn
thirty or forty employees over
there many employees we have you
if the fifteen hundred.
Pretty close you don't have
pants you know more than that
okay anyway Bruce Mr just a
little but the thing of it is is
is in all my years here there
are definitely problems that
unfortunately so much of our
government folks are.
R. S. to solve and
I admire you so much for doing
what you do because I have no.
I just yeah I just can't imagine
how that is day after day and
calls at night and on weekends
and things like that that can
happen the kids and I don't have
great answers but I do know this
we have to keep after the best
we can we have to write a bill
that hopefully helps the best we
can but we still have to rely on
the judgment of the folks in
these agencies of what they're
try to try to do their best job
is and the problem is you have a
hell of a turnover in the same
this is not a fun that's not a
fun were working.
And it's I'd more if the folks
for doing this and I think
Senator Kernan for Kerry and
just and I I think the
committees have some you know
some excellent discussions on
this and I wish I could write a
bill that would fix everything
but it never will we'll be back
here she may not be every year
but ever at least every other
year trying to make some little
corrections on things no one
anticipated workforce all and
that's the best we can do on
this show Mr chairman I
appreciate the discussion here
and Preciado the folks that
testified on this because it is
a really really hard world of
the thank you.
Thank you senator I've got it
just a few things to.
Do do we know how many.
Of these babies were born here
let me what what's the what's
the universe I am looking for
this report I could assign half
of the year twenty twenty there
were ninety one born in half of
the year between April and
September
right I I don't know if we have
a looking Mr chair it seems like
in the Republican analysis she
did to have pretty good.
I don't know if it's the number
that were born in the year but
if at I think Miss Martin knows
even she she's offered to a
number of these.
Mr chair at roughly it since the
inception we've received over
three thousand plans of care
that that service for the last
three years and that was about a
thousand a year which is.
Correct yes and we can provide
up.
We could find ex exact numbers
through our data what data we
are collecting with the
department of health and ECECD
but I would say roughly around
three thousand over the life of
the over the life correct.
That I bring that up because on
on page five of this route
what was it called the
evaluation report to the
department of health in the
program.
They said only.
During the first six months of
twenty twenty.
And that was right after it
started so I guess it's you know
we've had another two years
since and so maybe things are
better the during those first
six months only sixty three
percent.
Of the neonatal alcohol syndrome
babies were.
We're referred to I got a got a
got a plan of care only sixty
three percent of them do this.
This is.
Yeah no that's what I'm saying
is the the and then
And then of the cases identified
in the state's birth defect
registry.
Only so I don't know then this
is literally Sixtyeight percent.
Of the newborns affected by
opioids received the plan of
care.
And it just seems to me maybe
it's better to have that is
realized as we as we as I
started reading that we're
talking about this report was
based on twenty twenty figures.
But I think we.
I'm gonna absolutely vote for
this bill because I think as
amended it it it helps but to me
the key thing is we need
somebody.
Assigned to those families
working with those families.
The day they leave the hospital
there's somebody who's already
built a relationship with the
the forty three percent of them
or some similar numbers that
they didn't remember anybody
ever talking about a plan of
care when they left the
hospital.
I mean so if half of them are
even don't even remember anybody
talking them it's not surprising
that the that the that the
percent that are you know
falling following through on
these refer.
I I think I have the model we
have no involves to me it's like
a relay team.
We've got the hospital
developing the plan of care
handing it off to the care
coordinator who's handing it off
to see why it do and it is too
many ways of dropping the baton
to many opportunities for that
for the family to fall through
the cracks and even if it all
goes smoothly you're talking
about probably several days or
weeks before somebody makes
personal the personal contact is
is going to make this work if
it's going to work that's what
happens with IT she's program
were used to be anti she's
program it was that personal
contact that somebody had with
the families right off the bat
now that doesn't necessarily
have to be a highly trained
masters in social worker nurse I
mean it could be of a very well
trained community health worker
or peer counselor the key thing
there I think is the
relationship.
The somebody else can do in the
assessment and evaluation of the
family and their needs but but
somebody that they'll trust
enough to go with them to the
wick office or to the whatever
they have.
So that's what I hope in the
long run we could get at.
I know three thousand so like a
lot of kids but I mean we're.
If that's a that's a thousand a
year that's you know this
I don't know it just seems like
we don't need a whole lot of new
staff to be able to do this well
if we had the right staff and if
they were at the hospitals
working there and following the
family's home with you working
with them right off the bat
Senator so so I think Mr chair
what what I think I hear you
saying is the responsibility of
HSD and the managed care
organizations and what they
should be required to do prior
to this ever being moved over to
requesting a a family assessment
that needs to be strengthened as
well and maybe not in this bill
but as we move forward as in C.
O. contracts are are now under
consideration they've not been
let somehow those contracts need
to include a piece that really
focus on the care coordinators
that I think with the MCS and my
credit and that will be crucial
yeah that is so important I mean
we have this care coordination
system is to me crazy from day
one because I've never seen into
care coordination resulting from
I mean it it seem like it was a
it was I wish they did that but
I didn't see any but you're
absolutely right that would be
the okay I've I've vented enough
that that's all I have to set.
On that point senator Tom and
then we go to take a motion move
on.
The lower.
You too here you get a very
lower than six percent of all
its substance exposed babies are
that I don't know that's true.
Thank you there's too many
places for to fall through we
have a motion for depression
Senator Ingle seconded by.
Senator committees.
Any of the discussion have we be
in this into a total this
initiatives here.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gehrels.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Senator Maestas Senator McKenna
yes centers committee yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator to the building yes.
Within eight in favor zero
against here your L. yes hello
he moved did you move in well
I will refrain the amendment
the with the amendment I mean
will read referring to move the
motion with the amendment thank
thank you very much appreciated
thank you.
Senator Stefanics welcome.
This is Senate bill one sixty
eight.
We have an image.
It is.
Okay.
This presentation here now we
have to is that Meghan with your
Megan.
And you are passed.
Okay.
Are you let me know.
You see.
So.
Okay we're gonna move on to the
next bill now.
Thank and we have two senators
who left because it built in
Judiciary they can both be at
the same time but one of them
will be coming back very soon I
think so Senator if you we could
go on to Senate bill one sixty
eight the death pronouncements
binders thank you very much Mr
chair I'd like to explain the
bill and then there's a simple
mammoth the changes one word.
right now Mr chair members of
the committee Senate bill sixty
eight addresses the issue that
currently the death
pronouncement statute only
allows a nurse employed by
nursing home to pronounce the
death of a nursing home
residents.
Authorizing a hospice nurse to
pronounce the death of a
resident preserves the
continuity of care that the
hospice resident is receiving
which includes alleviating the
emotional stress of the family
of a nursing home resident is
experiencing the amendment that
I have proposed would change the
word contracted to employee so
it would be an employee of
hospice care not a contractor
and that's the only suggested
change to the bill I had to have
some experts with the so it is
not meant just gonna be a fan of
fame now we provided it to the
committee yes we can we got here
the sensors did give a signed
copy.
I don't think I'll sign it is a
sign.
We have a motion and a second
to.
Got the amendment.
Okay so Mister chair to see if
we have any specific do you want
to explain what the differences
are delivery ready to vote on it
up on the amendment on the
amendment of I'm ready for a
vote on the amendment.
And then I go to my experts is
there any opposition to the
immense carriers.
it's of Mr chair Senator an
employee of a hospice agency
would have the continuity of
care a contractor might not.
That's the purpose.
Thank you.
Okay so tell us about the bill
now that we've amended it so Mr
chair today and members of the
committee I have with me as
expert witnesses Pat Woods occur
of the New Mexico health care
association and New Mexico
Center for assisted living on my
far left and Megan Lorino of The
New Mexico Association for Home
in hospice care right next to me
and wanted to make a few
comments yes I we have been as
the hand held Mike it will pick
it up for you and you have to
hold it down the whole time
right there yeah.
Mr chair we've been we're very
happy to to be before you all
today to try and get this
amendment passed
We believe that are in hospice
nurses should be able to be able
to pronounce their own patients
in the nursing home
and when there is not an are in
in the nursing home our state
especially in the rural areas in
the two o'clock in the morning
the hospice nurse and the agency
is called the hospice nurse
comes out and is already there
to do make it medication
reconciliation with families and
to be with the families yet they
can't pronounce the death of
their own patients we have to
have an R. and that is employed
by the nursing home facility so
that's why we were requesting
and asking that this be passed
so that Haas are in hospice
nurses can go ahead and
pronounce death on their
patients in the nursing home.
So thank you.
More.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
The only thing I would add is
that my name is Megan Lorino and
I'm from the New Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care the only thing I would like
to add is just that hospice
nurses do already pronounced at
in the home it's only and
skilled nursing facilities that
they do that they don't have the
right the ability to do so so
our hospices are in support of
this ammendment they see this as
giving them more quality and
more economy with their patients
in a way that supports that that
theory and and and the values of
hospice and I think also it's
worth noting that we have
staffing shortages in skilled
nursing facilities this will not
by any means but use solvent all
of those problems but it is at
least a stab and helping to make
sure that the right care is
provided at the right time by
the right provider.
They're very good.
Let's just go see if there any
just to show has anybody here in
support of this measure yes did
you want to say something.
One of.
Yeah come on up the use of Mike
so the zoom will pick it up.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Carmen
bliss in the long term care
ombudsman for the state of New
Mexico and with aging long term
services department we're here
speaking in favor of this
legislation in addition to what
you're expert witness of already
testified to we believe that
delays and death pronouncement
pose challenges to dignity not
only the dying process but after
death for residents of long term
care facilities so we believe
this but amend or mitigate those
barriers thank you right thank
you very much.
Anybody else yes you want to
speak in support of this bill.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee Linda Siegel for the
New Mexico nurses association
and and we support this bill
obviously I mean we've been
going through the statute year
after year trying to find the
appropriate places where we
should change the language to
include nurse practitioners
nurses nurse midwives X. cetera
and this is just another one of
those places that was years ago
that nurses were allowed by
statute to declare death in
nursing homes and then then a
few years later they could to
declare the death in the
hospitals and my god nurses can
declare death anywhere and we
need to do is clean the statutes
up and and make access even in
death a little easier thank you
thank you into.
Anybody in opposition to this
bill anybody on zoom either way
members of the committee.
We have a motion for a do pass
seconded by Senator committees.
City any discussion this seems
like a.
The very clear cut case thank
you so secretary call the roll.
Senator Gehrels Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey on some stuff.
Senator Hickey.
If I may let me in.
yes yes yes.
Senator Ingle center Matt my
assess Senator McKenna yes
centers committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman center to the
piano yes.
Six of six to zero vote you have
to do press with the.
Three three.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you senator Now Senator souls.
This is for Senate bill one
seventy one and I've gotten a
few emails on this I don't know.
Did you get sent to the governor
to.
No I'm not going to.
Million call they okay.
Thank.
Really Sir we are ready Senator
Senate bill one seventy one
thank you Mr chair and first let
me explain very carefully so
when here's this does not ban
these.
They do not take anything away
from anyone they do not prevent
per present the
owning or having any of these
types of weapons so it does not
do any of those things it didn't
take anything away from anyone
or prevent possession of other
than what this does it is model
after the law in Hawaii that is
been there for a while being
quite successful that Hawaii has
very low incidents of assault
with a style economic use but
what it does is it prevents the
sale trading partner at cetera
of any of these types of things
and that is found on page three
section B. is the main thing
that it prohibits the
manufacture sale barter trade
give transfer or acquisition of
any of the following of assault
pistols the most of it is
definitions of these up if Mr
chair automatic firearms rifles
with barrel lengths shot guns
with barrel lengths less than
eighteen inches mufflers
silencers and devices for
Denning and muffling the sound
of firearms and ammunition that
have the express purpose of
trying to go through
protective capabilities like
bullet proof vests and things of
that sort.
Thank sep of Bill.
Is there anyone in the audience
to the support of the bill.
Yes ma'am would you like to come
up and speak use the might come
up and use my.
well if you don't want to the
okay
all the button down.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Paul McLean
I'm a resident of Santa Fe and
vice president of New Mexicans
to prevent gun violence and we
stand in support of this bill.
Thank you Mr green anybody else
want to speak in support of the
bill.
That those in opposition for
anybody on the here again.
What the.
Approve
very good this is so is is there
anyone.
What is this all of this has
been a question about the
statement here no no this at the
time Sir I'm sorry yeah.
okay
now is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill.
Okay we'll take a.
Are you in opposition what what
we start with U. K. if it will
it will take maybe.
Six or seven try to say
something different on all say
the same thing.
Mr Chairman just to see you as
members the committee thank you
card number Sir lobbyist with
the national speed shooting
sports foundation we represent
the manufactures and of and many
of the federal firearms
licensees who on the data front
lines of making sure that people
who receive these firearms to
receive arms and do so under the
guise of law we have a couple
concerns with this bill the
first is these weapons and
frankly that are highly highly
regulated most of things
especially in subsection B. of
this piece of legislation are
already highly highly regulated
by the federal government we
don't see those issues at these
items being used typically to
commit crimes.
And so at this point it's it do
we think that there's a lot of
things already there that that
provide protection to the public
I know others are missed because
some of the other issues with
the bill but the other part that
is particularly concerning to me
on page three if you look lines
eleven through thirteen as it
relates to bullets and
ammunition the the way that this
is currently written would ban
on most modern bullets and
ammunition because especially
for hunting bullets fragment in
so if it bullet is prohibited
from fragmenting as stated in
the language that would actually
stop the sale of almost every
hunting and piece of hunting
ammo and and other ammunition
that used for target practice on
a daily basis I don't think
that's an intended consequence I
think that could be a drafting
issue that needs to be resolved
if this bill moves forward
Mr Chairman so with that we
stand strong opposition of this
piece legislation and and if
it's to move forward like to
work with you and the sponsor to
be able to get some of those
things resolved thank you Mr
chairman thank you Keith.
Yes.
Thank you Sir.
Mr Chairman
On that on a program thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Knox
Williams on the president of a
group called the American
suppressor association
We're here today to talk about
what this bill would do to
suppressors and I think we need
to be clear on the fact that
balance oppressors New Mexico
did nothing to deter crime but
rather would deprive New
Mexicans from one of the most
effective tools available to
help protect their hearing
specials don't sound anything
there's nothing that can ever
silence the noise of a gunshot
except in Hollywood in reality
they reduce it was a gunshot to
a less dangerous sound up that's
why the CDC the National
Institute for occupational
safety and health the national
hearing conservation association
all support suppressors as a
tool to mitigate otherwise
preventable hearing damage for
law abiding gun owners hunters
and their dogs.
Into the national hearing
conservation association and
this is a direct quote although
firearm suppressors do not
completely eliminate the risk of
noise induced hearing loss from
fire noise the risk can be
significantly reduced that's
because even suppress gunshots
are loud recommendation to wear
him protection should express
farms more than one or two shots
is much like the national
highway traffic safety
administration's recommendation
to wear seat belt while driving
a car with air bags.
The NHC it goes on to state
quote persons were commission
here protection are not without
risk of noise induced hearing
loss we using firearms to
paraphrase your plugs and
earmuffs on their own are not
sufficient they conclude by
stating and I quote using
conventional protection
conjunction with the suppressor
can significantly reduce the
risk of noise induced hearing
loss more than either device
alone.
To put it plainly the more
safety years that you have the
state for that you will be aside
from hearing damage I have a
question.
How can the noise is loud enough
to warrant the use of
traditional hearing protection
devices somehow pose a threat to
public safety.
At the end of twenty nineteen
there were nearly twenty
thousand suppressors in
circulation in the state of New
Mexico based on nationwide
growth over the past two years
we estimate that they're now
somewhere in the neighborhood of
forty thousand suppressors in
circulation and the state
already there are also two
hundred and thirteen federally
licensed businesses in New
Mexico all of which would be
impacted directly by this
legislation.
Suppressors are among the most
heavily regulated items in
existence and have been since
the passage and enactment of the
national firearms act of
nineteen thirty four
every single item that's a part
of the national firearms act is
controlled at every step from
manufacture to sale by the
federal government in order to
make a suppressor you have to be
federally licensed in order to
sell to pressure you have to be
federally licensed in order to
purchase is a pressure you have
to first receive approval from
the a TF before you can take
possession.
Would you buy suppressor you
apply to the a TF with what's
called a form for application
this application includes
fingerprint cards passport style
pictures in the two hundred
dollar transfer tax per item a
TF then takes your your
information transmitted to the
FBI where they conduct a
background check.
Only after you pass a background
check and ATF physically it
here's a stamp to application
mailed that back to your
licensed dealer are you then
able to take possession this is
a very able process with wait
times ranging anywhere from
between about six to eighteen
months on average.
Even after knowledges that
suppressors are not a threat to
public safety they've gone on
record stating and I quote
centers are very rarely used in
criminal shootings given the
lack of criminality associated
with silencers it is reasonable
to conclude they should not be
viewed as a threat to public
safety that is from a TF the
organization that has regulated
suppressors since their
inception.
Although rarely using crimes the
criminal use does carry stiff
federal penalties already using
suppression the commission of a
crime carries a thirty year
federal sentence even a simple
possession of an unregistered
suppressor carries a ten year
sentence any two hundred fifty
thousand dollar federal penalty.
Ask you what problem exactly
would this fix.
It seems to me to be a solution
in search of a problem with does
not exist.
If this legislation were enacted
it would disproportionately
affect law abiding gun owners
are here thumbs slipped off of
the thing I think pardon I'm
sorry thank you Sir.
And I'll be I'll be quick I'm
I'm nearly finished.
If this legislation were enacted
it would disproportionately
affect law abiding gun owners
including hunters and guide to
rely on suppressors to protect
their hearing we know from peer
reviewed studies and research
that nearly seventy to eighty
percent of hunters never we're
here protection out sometimes
but never.
That's because they want to be
able to hear their surroundings
as a direct result for every
five years of hunting has become
seven percent more likely to
experience high frequency
hearing loss and four of
amplified over a lifetime it's
no surprise that most hunters
wind up and hearing aids.
I spent three years working for
admitted research the company to
make some of the best electronic
hearing protection devices in
the world I use them every time
I shoot but no electronic
hearing protection will ever be
able to replicate open your
conditions because they cannot
localize sounds as well as an
undeclared or unobstructed here.
Boenning suppressors and telling
hunters use your project moss on
the field is akin to preaching
abstinence as the only way to
prevent unwanted pregnancies
sure your point in your mouth to
help prevent hearing damage and
they should be used based on the
science and the scientific
experts.
At the national hearing
conservation association we know
the traditional here protection
on its own is insufficient and
we know that they're rarely use
in the field thank you welcome
to answer any questions.
Serve.
No no no next expect.
Yeah.
Yes that we okay Asian gentleman
my name is Lawrence of the month
on the qualification of of my
County here in New Mexico.
by county state fifty two
hundred square miles we have a
population of forty five hundred
where democratic county we're
not into all this other who plus
stuff but reading of.
This bill one seventy one have
all of you seen the fiscal
impact report on this.
This what I'm going off on the
fiscal impact.
Is a a lot of these issues here
on this bill we don't have those
here in New Mexico majority of
the people like I devised in my
County we're not you know we
don't have big time big city
crime we don't have major issues
like in other cities I will
pretty does have some but it
doesn't have.
That course amount of this kind
of legislation to make regular
people because they give you see
them the impacting you're gonna
turn regular citizens into
criminals I don't see how a
piece of metal a piece of
plastic or some can ruin
somebody's life verses drugs if
we're I'll tell you I'm working
sure if I were this stuff other
sure if you'll see him come in
suit tie whatever I'm not that
way I worked the I have to be
working share some up there on
the trenches every day I have I
don't have the jail so I have to
transport to eight different
counties to house prisoners I
talked to these guys and I pick
their brain all the time for
motorcycle gangs to cartel guys
to everything you name it and
this for everything uptick to
bring all time you know what
they always tell me they like a
here because the laws are easy
that nothing happens from slap
on the hand I can't even tell
you how many times I've arrested
people filling positional
farms and their plea bargain
right away nothing happens to if
we had if we enforce the law
more on the criminal then.
Stuff will get done I guarantee
I would put my whole career
twenty seven years on the line
is that if you would stiff in
the crimes the or the penalties
on the felons we wouldn't have
gotten problems we hadn't have
done but it's we wouldn't have
problems it it's not the guns
that are doing anything to
people or suppressors or
anything like that it's the
people it's in our nature we're
humans we're they picks predator
we're gonna do what we do but
what works for California what
works for Hawaii doesn't work
for New Mexico because a lot of
these people Republican Democrat
doesn't matter what you are it's
what your beliefs are like you
know some people believe in
women's rights some people don't
back and forth but like in my
County we believe in what's fair
for everybody that's why we're
democratic we're democratic
county and we believe in
people's rights no matter what
they do if it's women's rights
LGBT rights or even gun rights
we we believe everybody should
have their say and have their
rights so a lot of my people in
my County like I said they are
Democrats the are gun owners
they do have all kinds of
weapons and shotguns for hunting
for target shooting
semiautomatic shotguns full
nobody has fully automatic and
we agree on that bill shouldn't
have a stuff like that or
whatever but semiautomatic
rifles high capacity magazines
shotgun suppressor I own for
suppressors and I push him in my
County because we always have
fights for neighbors they hear
gunshots they can handle it we
have one of my sergeants is his
neighbor the kid had a has up
the the child next door has
autism so when he hears the
gunshots he reacts to it so
recommend my sergeant by
suppressor so it eliminates the
noise that he says it's not if
you do this assistance and you
look can you check all this
assistance for the state of New
Mexico no where else the state
of New Mexico you're not gonna
final problems that other
account other states in other
places have New Mexico doesn't
have that we're not there yet
but.
We need to be tougher on crime
if we're tougher on crime yes
well I say to like you want a
gun magazine crime okay a felon
in possession of a ten rounds or
less eighteen months thirty
round mag enhancement you get a
three year sentence in prison if
end you need to take the teeth
away from the the dust and
letting them play board it's
always P. Guard plea bargain
plea bargain now let them be
accountable for it and they'll
stop and that's the problem is
all right like I said I talked
to all these guys all the time
and they say is because the laws
are easier.
So or if the laws are any easier
they can be let down from the
exactly and that's what the plea
bargain is and I don't like that
because people do belong in
prison some people deserve to be
there and some don't.
And and I I think we shouldn't
back in on the COVID outdoors
then get a felony charge for
something like this I just I I
missed your County what kind
what a loop is so I cover center
rules on political one part the
lunar new creek where full of
that hello yes all that area and
it's beautiful and we don't have
problems like that and I'm
pretty sure the whole state
don't have that heart of
problems yet but you know but I
I just want to let you know
because I'm active in my
community my County I'm in the
forty additional district which
covers more SME Gail the guy in
the suit there was the more I
share of he had to go to another
place but it's the same thing is
all the forty additional we
talked amongst each other we we
cross Commission each other and
we help out each other and we
don't have those problems we're
not there yet because remembered
in nineteen ninety the first
came out with a semiautomatic
handgun so the criminals no
matter what drugs you're never
going to stop at the same with
farms they're going to get him I
really you know I mean they're
going to get on the matter what
but pretty soon who knows we
might get lasers we went from
revolvers to semiautomatic might
be leaders now thank you Sir
okay any questions for me Jr.
Yep that's great thank thank you
they they also speak against
this bill
You could if you could kind of
keep your remarks.
will be concise.
I don't read this like Richard
claimed Senator of that decision
but can you just search if you
could introduce yourself and
then ask your make your comment
okay yeah my name's Ron Hammond
I'm seventy seven years old I've
lived here all my life I
graduated from Senator high in
nineteen sixty three when it was
still downtown we're defending
offices are now.
And I want to the call you Santa
Fe graduated with honors
And I taught social studies here
for nine years and then I worked
for twenty five years in Los
Alamos with a top security where
do I some workers because when
and if they weapons.
The and so anyway of.
One of the.
The.
Well the the government's
approach as described going
through all of keep the Mike up
to us so we can hear you yeah.
Of which is especially important
to me when someone else starts
because.
I did we're suppressant or use
suppresses all my life.
Dio duel in now but anyway
Here in Santa Fe you have to go
to the state.
The department of public safety
you have to get a fingerprinted.
Background check and then the
the chief place or his
assistant.
All signs off on and M. as
against right to go to senator
check and get investigators are
again well yes beyond.
I just don't
and I still.
I would like somebody to answer
if you want Representative to do
it now.
Will really do he claims doesn't
do with the services well the
Mike up yet we we keep losing
your faith it is not us so much
we can do but the zoom people
just won't be able okay here
I just I still would like to
know why the Senator is claiming
that this bill does not prohibit
you to present solutions which
says that as far as I'm
concerned I mean.
We're we got a lawyer in New.
If you have anything else to add
we'll get into committee
discussion I'm sure that that
issue will be raised up okay
thank you.
Thank you yes.
We'll take two more of a two
more present okay but you come
up Sir your very next or
whoever's next come on up all
right.
Hello my name is Keith shape and
I've lived in the state my whole
life sixty four years if that
matters any anyway of.
I don't know everything about
the bill just took part the
covers full autos I have no idea
why there's anything in there
about that they've been
regulated for ninety years
they've only been used in a
crime once and that was by a
police officer that own one
legally Lee I'm talking to
legally own I.
Fully out of weapons
he legally owned ones are
already of federal crime like
the gentleman to talk about
suppressors ten years and two
hundred thousand dollars I have
no idea why we're even talking
about the things that the not a
try not a prime problem they've
never have been I think in
ninety years has been use one
time legally own fire the legal
for a lot of for a crime of and
it what in New Mexico but anyway
Hargrove
so just let me ask you about
that the the school shootings
that involve automatic rifles
those were the young men went
out and bought one legally came
back in and shot at the school
that wasn't to use of the
legally purchased automatic
weapon in a school shooting.
Please please not sure that all
of those and I'm sorry that
happening.
And then we still need to get to
the root problem about not the
weapons but the roof crossing
that but the.
None of those are legally own
automatic weapons those are semi
automatic a fully automatic
weapon you pull the trigger and
it discharged several rounds of
the long haul to trigger finger
on the trigger a semi automatic.
Let's one round go for each time
you pull the trigger.
And it's no different than the
fire of the stillness Karen here
hit the semi automatic pistol
you pull the trigger each time
you want something to block off
fully automatic police are going
to discuss often Health makes to
the purest lot of terror the two
different things like that I
don't understand why this is in
the bill thank you
Of I'm guessing because people
that are reading this bill don't
understand firearms the anyway
of the New Mexico there's a
hundred one hundred twenty three
thousand.
Of weapons of effective.
The NFA repertoire consider be
affected us please fallout rose
suppressors short barreled
shotguns and other things that
fall at category with the two
hundred dollars that the full
background check Senator twenty
three thousand those in New
Mexico I found today I don't
have no idea how meals for fully
automatic weapons.
What else if.
Somehow this is somebody's
trying to make this to be like a
crime bill there is this not a
Ag issue that's.
There is there was I bills
presented in the house and I
know you guys Senate that would
have to actually done something
with prime Madam got past the
first session this is a bottle
to think that guns are the
problem it's that weapons of
problem anyway and just one more
thing I want to cover just
remember that I guess that
that's part of the term thank
you for your time thank you Sir.
And finally.
You settled on you being the
last one.
Mr chairman I think we've been
here since like one this
afternoon I believe the
gentleman who actually owned
businesses in the area should
warrant sometime as well I will
make my comments this is just I
can't to allow them some time
okay.
good afternoon out Mr chairman
and distinguished senators my
name is Wilfredo Rivera a brand
new resident to New Mexico I
moved here about a year and a
half ago moved into the lovely
city of Rio Rancho and like many
citizens I started coming here
twenty eighteen following my
sister who moved here to the
lovely city of Santa Fe I became
enchanted by the siren that is
New Mexico and as an avid
motorcyclist as an avid
snowboarder and is an avid gun
enthusiast I couldn't find a
better place to live in right
here in New Mexico all of a
sudden I now find myself
deciding if having moved here
coming across the country it's
gonna turn out to be one of the
most costly biggest mistakes in
my life because of some of these
bills are starting to come down
the pike and while I now have to
move to a different state
originally come from Illinois
thirty five years of living in
Illinois I am a retired state
trooper out of Illinois twenty
six years of service
distinguished and I retired and
the end of twenty fifteen.
I have done just about every
imaginable law enforcement job
you can do that with a patrol
trooper for almost ten years how
is an undercover narcotics agent
for fifteen years I was a
criminal investigator and
investigated rape murders
robberies car go fast.
You name it I've done it in the
entire time going to be a part
of my life and began part of my
life when I was eighteen years
old as a midshipman with the
United States Naval Reserve
and I have used them to defend
the citizens of Illinois to
support my family to pay taxes
and now I come here and and and
this will push across America to
blame guns to blame magazines to
blame a certain type of assault
weapon for the failings of law
enforcement for the failings of
court systems for the failings
of prosecutors to actually hold
those people that are truly
accountable for the crimes these
types of bills do absolutely
nothing what they do is they
make law abiding citizens into
criminals they take three
hundred and thirty million
Americans half of which own guns
to the tune of maybe mill
billions of guns in America an
overnight make them felons this
will not resolve trying these
types of instruments suppressors
are not widely seen in
criminology I can attest to that
from twenty five twenty six plus
years of of intense criminal
investigating and at the end of
the day without a respective
Senator for him to sit here and
say Hey I'm introducing this
bill doesn't really do anything
the why are we wasting our time
it actually does it does a lot
so I'm asking you to do the
research I'm asking you not to
turn law abiding citizens into
criminals and to begin to
actually address those things
that actually result in crime
suppressors are not it thank you
thank you Mr and one of you want
to speak on this coming up.
Thanks.
Mr Chairman centers thank you my
name is Tom KA I'm currently a
manager right to bear arms in
Albuquerque we sell firearms we
sell parts and we sell NFA items
which are the things proposed
here in this bill
the bill does not restrict
people from owning these items
that is true however.
Within about two generations
these items will all be extinct
from New Mexico nobody will be
able to own the reason for that
is.
When you go through the process
is explained by the other
presenters back here you wait
your eight nine ten months to
get the item it comes assigned
to you.
And you own it if you can't
transfer it if it can't be
transferred when you die it goes
away.
So intentional or not this will
eventually ban these items in
the state of New Mexico.
additionally our wrap up your
real quick pass off to my boss
if anyone would like to come out
and look at any of these weapons
look at suppressors fire them
ask us we're willing to take
anybody out that wants to see
these see how they operate and
see how they're not the big bad
evil things the people think
they are thanks thank you Sir
and finally.
Will that.
Okay.
Good afternoon chairman Senators
up guess here in the room of
money Mr Krauss missin the owner
of right to bear arms I wanted
to touch I know time is of the
essence here wanted to touch on
a couple of items one is the
assault pistol that is described
in this bill I'm not really sure
where it's going for that maybe
it's speaking to the what is
already being addressed by the
ATF which is the A. R. style
pistol with a brace on it
perhaps that's what it's talking
about but these don't function
in any way to separate than what
any other pistol to a semi
automatic pistol the function in
the exact same way this law as
it is written over this proposed
bill as it is written could
effectively eliminate every semi
automatic pistol in the state of
New Mexico including the pistols
that the police are caring
secondly it talks about
automatic weapon tonight I
believe the gentleman back here
briefly touched on that
automatic weapons have been
outlawed since nineteen eighty
six
If if there was if that weapon
was not manufactured before
nineteen eighty six it cannot be
possessed and owned by an
individual you can
you can buy with any for any
fully automatic weapon which
means machine gun.
Prior to that date and I can
guarantee you the criminals are
not one they're not gonna be
able to possess them there too
much money the cheapest what
I've seen is about fourteen
thousand dollars.
Not to mention the twelve
fourteen eighteen month wait
period and a criminal is not
going to one way to time to do
that too is not gonna be able to
take possession of that it is
already outlawed for citizen to
be making fully automatic
weapons as it's such as
manufacturing a suppressor the
penalties are extreme.
So I I'm I'm not even sure why
this is even addressed in the
bill as it's already been well
addressed well regulated and
well penalized at the federal
level let me ask you a question
about the semi automatic
automatic issue.
It was my understanding that
there is a switch on the on the
on a on a automat a semi
automatic if you flip the switch
you can fire by simply holding
the trigger down ten more
bullets with that's incorrect
Sir.
You semiautomatic what weapon by
definition one one Pulitzer one
bullet comes out a fully
automatic weapon which is what a
true assault weapon is and I'm
also Sir I've also served twenty
four years in the military use
these for many many years.
Would you hold the trigger down
it'll fired a three round burst
or it'll fire continuously until
the barrel melts down to the
right handed out ammunition or
you take your finger off the
trigger yep it's been whatever
fifty years fifty five years
since I was going through basic
training so sixty years those
going through basically and and
I is I remember on the M. one
which is what we used to.
There was a switch and if you
flip the switch and you held the
trigger that it would fire
repeatedly that is correction at
the fire individually so those
are select fire weapons and
those weapons are outlawed if it
was manufactured and registered
with the ATF prior to nineteen
eighty six they could be
transferred from one person to
another person but only after
the background check is done
just like with the suppressor
and a form for has to be filed
but on a normal modern firearm
whether B. and A. R. fifteen and
A. K. forty seven I am for what
ever it is you have to positions
on that so it's on that selector
lever safe and semi automatic
safe and fire that's it there is
no that switch does exist on
military weapons but not on
civilian weapons thank you.
Senator so did you want to add
it I'm not gonna take any of the
one hundred and seventeen people
who have signed up on zoom.
Of we just don't have time and I
it and even in this small group
we we start hearing the same
arguments are good arguments we
we heard over and over again so.
I think will move now to the
committee to give you a chance
to respond to some of the
comments made thank you the
depth the difference between
semi automatic and automatic in
this particular bill semi
automatic pistols but that have
the capability of having large
magazines are then classified as
one of the things that is banned
for sale manufacture etcetera in
this and there's a number of
things where two or more of
those would classified into that
group that would be banned under
the on page three the
manufacture sale barter trade
give transfer acquisition
etcetera etcetera that this does
not ban semi automatic rifles as
was indicated however it would
be and things like what have
been referred to as bump stocks
that were used during the Las
Vegas shooting that took a
regular one and using the the
gases to expel would put the
next one in and with a bump
stock type of thing holding the
trigger down doesn't that cause
it to fire each time the last
one and so it's not probably as
fast as a fully automatic but it
does make it effectively an
automatic weapon that would be
banned under this also I very
clear fully listen to the the
comments about the silencers and
suppressors and might yell and I
would not be opposed based on
the very strict requirements of
that to potentially remove those
however I do have a little bit
concerned about the transfer and
others if that does not require
going back through that long
lengthy process for oversight
clearly ATF believes that those
have some danger they would not
require such extensive
background in order to to have
those included but I understand
what he was saying about the
hearing etcetera we ask him.
Let's testament from the
suppressor Association which is
kind of an interesting name for
any group.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Sir to answer that
question it's a little bit multi
faceted any transfer of a
suppressor does have to go
through the a TF process there
is no individual to individual
sale every step of the way it
has to go through a to offer
proof and well you're up there
is is a muffler or silencer or
devices for dating or muffling
the sound all of those reserves
that's that would all fall into
that same.
Umbrella term yes Sir it's
anything that diminishes the
noise of a portable firearm
under federal law basically so
we call them suppressors are
awesome silencers mufflers in
the U. K. they called the
moderators colloquially in the
industry we call them cans but
it's anything that just makes a
gone quieter so you would move
then so you would you be
comfortable deleting that
section of the bill Mr chair I'd
be comfortable removing that
provide there are not loopholes
like we have heard with the gun
show loopholes or other ways of
transferring where they are not
registered and and to ATF in law
enforcement and so if in fact I
can be assured that that is the
case I don't have a problem with
removing those from the list yes
Sir we can make that assurance
I'd be more than happy to chat
offline with.
So of who would like to move the
amendment.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I would be happy to make that
amendment
I think that.
The only thing in this state I
think there are other amendments
necessary will it that's a
different that's a different
thing but the.
This is the only one he said
he's willing to to to to take a
look at.
Yes Mr chair.
That we.
Fund K. three.
Six you turn your microphone
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair I remove that
on page three aft online six
after the semi colon we remove
mufflers comma silencers are
devices for Denning or muffling
the sound of discharge firearms
and the semicolon.
Is there a second for that.
I'll second that.
You got it.
That's a friendly amendment that
would be a friendly amendment
again yeah provided that there
are ways that people can buy
their own kids without going
through the process but that's
where the concern would be.
On the matter kids.
They were clear but just make
sure yes Sir so saben traps our
kids the ATF has moved recently
to basically in that you can
make a suppressor as a non
license business you do have to
file what's called a form one
which is effectively the same
thing it's just a non licensed
entity or individual is making
that and you have to go through
the same process in order to do
it legally regardless of whether
individuals making it for a
businesses making it you do have
to go through and receive
approval from a to F. prior to
doing that again and the law
offices.
So is there any opposition to
adopting that amendment.
Okay we'll just take a let's
take a recorded vote then
secretary will call the roll on
the amendment to delete.
No on page three line six the
whole section about mufflers
silencers or devices for
deadening a muffling the sound
of discharge project firearms.
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Ingle center my ask
Senator McKenna now.
Senator Schmedes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Graham.
Senator Smith yes.
Senator Ortiz Pena yes.
Six yes one half.
By a vote of six in the
affirmative one and negative
with a couple of a Mexicans to
excuse of the amendment is
adopted.
And we're back on the bill
Senators comments gestiones
further amendment Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
The.
Thank you Mr chair as you know
I've I've worked on a good bills
and what I've learned is very
very difficult to thread the
needle of what is now what is
constitutionally permissible and
and what is not
it used to be that you looked at
what you're trying to accomplish
what is the goal of the then
what's the problem and then you
would look at what that means
for and you would look to see
the connection between the goal
of the means that used to be the
law.
And you and you would look at
the in New Mexico at least you
still look for whether it's
whether that connection is tight
with it is a tight connections
however there was a recent of a
recent decision by the Supreme
court that says an individual
when you're talking about an
individual's conduct.
Of the constitution
presumptively protects that
conduct and then the government
must stand justified to
regulation by demonstrating that
is consistent with the nation's
historical tradition of firearm
regulation sometimes I laugh
about that because we talk about
muscle you know those lotus you
know those what are they called
must get was given much thought
it was a mess of those must is
lotus that's yeah whatever the
whatever and you know are we
talking about that because we're
talking about that then we
should be able to regulate
everything but we're not under
the supreme court's analysis
so.
I have a feeling that this of.
And and are you know the limited
and I thought that was a good
thing that you that you limited
but I am worried that this of
particular legislation and and I
apologize I meant to call you
and I the day got by is is
extremely broad
Eight MLS's question Mr chair is
present position is not
penalized that is an is that
correct Mr chairman Senator no
that was specifically left out
of this that possession is not
part of this
in in any way there's no taking
away people already have it this
is just going forward sales of
these types of things okay so
the conduct we're dealing with
is sales so
My question about seals.
About the breast tissue is what
about military or law
enforcement who need to acquire
this type of weapons.
I didn't see that that was
addressed in the bill Mr chair
is that correct Mr chairman
Senator you're right it it's not
and as I was reviewing it I read
through the the F. I. R. I guess
is I was initially looking that
I assumed.
But we are certainly incorrectly
that military and law
enforcement are sort of outside
regulation of these because they
do have access to fully
automatic weapons and other
things and I think shut
and so I didn't consider that as
I was looking at this and the
manufacture sale and such that
those really you know I might
you are way outside what this is
but they're maybe ought to be a
paragraph for a cabbie ought
that specifically excludes them
from this legislation thank you
Mr chair that was with us talk
about it about other kinds of
things that would make this less
subject to constitutional
challenge and then I was of.
I I think that the bump stock
issue is an is an important
issue and that that they have
dem dem thank you we have we
know that bump stocks are are
dangerous and we also know that
they've been used by individuals
to to conduct may him
Mike my concern is is that the
list although you you did take
off mufflers
yes thank you for thank you bye
you did take off mufflers
whatever my concern is is that
the.
That the list of.
And again I may be thinking
about.
The the the listening issue
the the harm that we're trying
to prevent is.
Is these kinds of shootings that
have been so devastating to our
to our community and I was
worried that the list might be
too long in terms of creating
that listening now.
That's out the window and now
we're we're looking at this
presumptive I don't even
understand this that the supreme
court's opinion but it's
presumptively okay.
I need individuals actions and
and manufactures noted
individual action but the sale
barter trade give transfer
acquisition is individual action
and the question I have is how
is how is that related to the
historical regulation of
firearms and so I am worried
that that section may be subject
to to challenge has being too
broad
and.
But I love to this subsection C.
any person who installs removes
or alters a farm that's that's
perfect
I think with with what I've I've
read and studied so my
suggestion is because I don't I
don't have the where with all at
all right now to go through and
try to try to make this
constitutional in given that the
last
The last print court decision
but my suggestion is because we
don't want these things struck
down
Immediately you know that that's
not helpful is is to is to write
a law that flies in the face of
of the constitution
and like I said believe me I
have the scars to prove it I
have tried to to work on this
kind of legislation read the
cases follows what happens and I
just am very worried about this
legislation and my suggestion
would be to try to make it fit
the constitution better
I don't know whether I'm gonna
vote for it because I support
the policy of
of trying to reduce gun violence
in our state
and so I think the policy is
excellent I'm just concerned
about this legislation.
If that makes sense Mr chair and
so I just wanted to share that
with you and I apologize I meant
to call you today and the day
got by me.
Thank you senator Senator trees.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
I don't know if I've ever heard
more thoughtful debate either in
the house or the Senate than
what I just heard and for you in
the room people in the room
they're watching as I guess is a
hundred two hundred people
online if you have been provided
let me just tell you what what
what what you've heard.
these really divisive issues
like gun sent a portion and
immigration we have lost any
sort of new wants or ability to
think through these issues
there's there's no nuance it's
kind of like if you're
Republican you fit in it's a gun
bill gun control you feel it's
is the gunman also are going
against it and if you're
Democrat especially from
Bernalillo county let me tell
you.
Gun bill gun control bill I just
have to just have to vote for it
no new ones.
But we just heard a lot of new
wants and I think that are
really really really is is a
good thing and I think it needs
to go both ways
and I think that's a really neat
thing because you know and and
what was just said just just
read from the analysis on that
very recent decision the quote
here is is that these laws have
to be consistent with the
nation's historical tradition of
firearm regulation and I also
noted what it's like to kind of
disagree with the the Supreme
Court decision and argues that a
constitutional right or not all
that sort of stuff so
but I think it takes a lot of I
don't know just a lot of
experience and expertise to to
recognize and put all that
together so
I I I like that in and I've been
really impressed by this
committee thinking through
really thoughtfully in these
bills I did have a couple of
almost just kind of piggy backs
to what is been said I want a
big Senator souls I like to put
together
This is some of the some of the
issues I see it in and around
law enforcement you're you're
sensitive to that do we know the
is far as as interstate sale and
and shipment of these weapons
and is there a way to stop the
sale to the the civilian that I
think you're intending to but
not stop the sale two police
officers is there an actual
Interstate Commerce.
Way to do that or is there a way
to actually allow firearms
purchased and brought into the
state that are only earmarked
for law enforcement.
Mister chairman Senator I don't
know and you know as I sit here
thinking we start getting into
the constitutional the the
second amendment actually talks
about as part of the well
regulated militia and then the
other clause after that and I'm
a teacher every English teacher
will tell you the second clause
is subordinate to the first
clause and so.
The police
National Guard service people I
would consider kind of part of
that well regulated militia that
would allow these sorts of
things rather than the other and
I'm not sure it's exactly your
question because I thought about
this and people have asked their
there's nothing in this that
would stop down in my part of
the the state somebody going del
Paso buying one of bringing it
in we're not going to require
the state police to stop
everybody injected they're not
bringing in something they
brought Texas doesn't do that at
all that would be very difficult
to enforce I don't know about
four police or military that and
I think that would be something
that you know if this committee
chose for me to go away and fix
to put a paragraph in there to
exempt law enforcement and
military as such very explicitly
so that that's clear I thank you
Mr and etcetera I I may just it
I I won't keep going with that
line of questioning I think it
is really really complicated I
just I I encourage you to look
into it if it's even possible to
restrict the sale in that way
that are just you know I mean
like the the whole you know the
people that are.
Kind of whole selling the stuff
in the the there's gonna be some
kind of middle man to to to
bring in those those gone so I
just I just wonder if it's if
it's possible and maybe with
your legislative intent to I
would propose that may not be I
really don't know.
but all all kind of on I I I did
want to talk about the word
acquisition.
and you brought up the out of
state and and I'm glad you
because that's where I was going
to go.
This says you cannot acquire in
into these items and so.
If you have acquired one of
these in el Paso.
Have I mean I is that it's
outside of New Mexico right I
mean there's a reason these are
federally regulated but but your
your legislative intent is that
if it's if it's acquired in el
Paso brought back to Los crucis
that's not a problem is that
correct Mr chair I'm not saying
it's not a problem but that
would not well dressed by this
thank you the some of the same
concern about the the readily
access but I'm not sure that I
I'm quite sure that as a state
senator there's no way I can
bring legislation that would be
would put a kind of re
restrictions on a possible okay
and Mr chair Senator at one talk
about the ammunition so your
intent is to ban so I I I own
some hollow point ammunition my
understanding is that would that
would certainly fit the bill
here is that correct Mr chairman
Senator yes in most cases good
hunters and stuff don't require
those in order to make a clean
kill thank you Mr chair Senator
I'm a well just you have to I
get a long force wants to make
comment but
Hi the reason I per in I I
probably I'm not gonna get into
all of my personal stuff but
I have a major concern with
banning the hollow point the
reason I I purchased and I own
hollow point is for close range
self defense especially when I'm
with my wife somewhere that's
the only time I would ever have
hollow point in a in a gun is is
really with my wife and kids
that's just me personally people
can disagree with me or whatever
but that is meant to if the
hippie and and and heaven forbid
if I ever had to use it and I
hope I never ever have to and I
and I haven't.
I have never used it I have any
shot at a at the range
but to to ban that I I have a
truce I know we've we've kind of
disagree ideologically on things
but I really have a safety
concern for me personally on a
personal level to protect my
wife and children if I am not
allowed to have haul point in in
my fire because it is designed
to add a short range get the job
done and I think N. and once
again I hope I never have to but
that's a tool that I would like
access to as a as a husband
father I really what I I know
we're gonna disagree probably
but I'm I'm just telling you.
Major concern their major
concern.
and I I did have a question on
the hollow point.
Mr because it does entry my
because I it's like I don't own
you know I don't own a bit you
know I don't have a automatic
firearm or anything like that
how constituents is.
Mr Mr chair Senator hollowpoint
so let's let's say the I've I've
purchased a hollow point
ammunition am I am I allowed
under this bill would allow we
could it's it seems like I can't
Give that to my wife is is that
correct for her far.
Mr chairman and senator out
first if you already own them I
hope you never have to buy
additional ones because that
would mean you had to use them
but I think the way this is is
that such that in less she owns
them
that that would not that would
be a problem or concern now if
she has a gun and has those as
part of her gun then she already
has acquired them.
That's not a problem I couldn't
imagine any circumstance where
somebody is going to come in
charge you with a felony as a
result of your wife putting
hello points that you've already
purchased in her got right and
Mr chair so I I totally agree
with you I I think that
realistically who would do that
but it it does seem to be kind
of an unenforceable part of of
the bill I think there's many
others that would fall in line
with that but I do I'll move on
from the hall of point but yes
certainly not use I I don't know
I I people do use them for
hunting
and so I I I'm not a hunter I
don't intend on getting into the
technical aspects but you know
we we do have I talked as well
let people time it's it's a
shame when you when you injure
animal and it gets off I mean
there's a problem there there's
a suffering animal for a long
time but I I can't like I said I
don't have a great insight in
that because I'm I'm not a
hundred
a at one more line of
questioning if I could Mister
chairman Senator is the the
ability to to get after
transfer.
now once again I guess this
could all be done out of state
so if you want to get her
transferred Drago Paso do that
do the gun deal right and then
kind of go back at once again I
I feel like we're regulating
interstate commerce somehow but
If if if someone has a gun trust
and they want to leave their
firearms to to their family
members
in this bill are are they
allowed to do that.
The Mr chair and senator now.
Okay Mister chairman Senator I
have another concern that for
you to to take down there there
are irrevocable gun trusts.
That can be set up so they're
they're they're not revoke
herbal they're very contract
that are set up to to transfer
these firearms in these items to
your family members and.
Let's say there's an existing
gun trust your vocal right now
and we pass this bill we have
not interfered retroactively
with that existing contract and
and it's another constitutional
concern that I have that I I
would suggest taking a look at
because we we really can is I
mean I'm not a judge of this is
in the judicial branch but I
just kinda plain reading I don't
understand how we could
interfere with an existing
contract in so that that could
potentially you know Senator
Lopez is looking for reasons of
of constitutional concern I
think that would be added to the
list there.
I think that's all the the
questions I have center Mr chair
I would I would close with this
and and the the the chair from
wealthy county brought this up I
really appreciate his comments
he talked about felon in
possession and it seems to that
we have this kind of unchecked
in an under utilized under
enforced felon in possession
promisee lot of nodding heads
for law enforcement we have wide
bipartisan consensus why can we
not get a grip on on a gun
control measure that has
probably you unanimous can you
support in this chamber why are
why are we as legislative branch
not able to to go after that it
just seems crazy to me and we
see a lot of kind of partisan
gun bills.
But but we have this elephant in
the room that that seems like
this low hanging fruit we can
kind of go after so when we when
we do that.
But thank you for the discussion
and thank you Mr.
Thank you senator committees
Senator drugs let me ask if
you'd be willing to to wait just
a second apparently a number of
people online have just that one
person of the they've identified
sheriff Shane Ferrari.
Of San Juan County as somebody
that they would like to hear
from and that they think has
something.
New and different to to share
with us so I will give him a
chance to speak the sure Ferrari
are you there.
I am Mr chair thank you can you
hear me OK.
Please speak up and hold the
Mike is close to your mouth as
you can because it's hard to
hear this is to.
Yes Sir all all surgeries is
this better that's better.
Okay very good Mr chair members
of the committee money machine
for our sure from San Juan
County I'm also the president of
the New Mexico sheriff's
Association and were opposition
of this bill as many have talked
about there are some issues and
I want to speak as far as of law
enforcement and I I I do
understand the pressure that our
legislators are on in with the
growing crime crisis so we do
have in the state of New Mexico
what what we need is law
enforcement is tougher laws to
go after criminals not law to go
after law abiding citizens a lot
of times we start focusing on
the tool rather than the act so
one thing I want to talk about
right now is you know this is a
bill that came out a whole why
why is surrounded by water it
may be easier to control in
Hawaii having limitations on
these firearms we're surrounded
by Texas Arizona Utah and
Colorado again as the senator
talked about just a while ago
what is to prevent these guns
coming into our state as long
fortunate we have no way of
identifying so even if so that
the position was allowed and
transfer or sale is not allowed
we have no way to find out of of
of of of of firearms purchased
in Arizona and brought into our
state it's enforceable and
because of the issue another
thing I want to talk about was
transfer issues and that that's
been talked about as far as
wheels what's to happen when an
individual passes away and has a
firearm in a will or trust will
the state
have some type of mechanism in
place where those guns are
turned over and destroyed who
will do that will there be any
type of reimbursement to the
family for the government taking
their property these are
concerns we have I was also
brought up the issue that law
enforcement is not a and
involved or or given any type of
authority in the bill as far as
our position of I just issued
suppressors to my swat team last
week for the purposes of their
hearing protection and plan to
do so with our deputies as we
move forward this is on those
continents going across the
United States because again
hearing issues are.
nominally becoming a problem
with law enforcement officers
and so with those things in mind
and I'd like you to consider
those I think these are valid
points a lot of our centers
brought up again this is gonna
be extremely difficult law for
law enforcement to enforce I
appreciate your time thank you.
Thank you senator for our
Senator guy as they share a
furry in sorry.
Senator Gallegos.
It goes Mr chair a unlike the
share of cables.
Mr chair Senator thank you and
his station on voting on the
amendment I just to like making
that built better and I truly
believe this only helps the
criminals but of Mr etcetera if
you'd little Mr chair of allow
me the gentleman in the back and
I apologize I wasn't here when
he spoke I had a question are
her rages and earlier not
curious to what is comments was
is during of search committee
which gentleman who talked to
the sheriff sure.
What would you mind coming up
and give me your detail your.
I was interested in your
interaction I apologize I didn't
hear you earlier.
Okay we need
Senator was talking about
firearms
with the magazine capacities
some of these farms are built
with like what I'm caring it's a
Glock seventeen L. only work
with seventeen round magazines
Glock nineteen nineteen round
magazines so the manufacture of
the farm only operates of what
the capacity of the farmers
farm is and then it goes on to
ammunition law enforcement we
don't use of full metal jackets
which is called a solid round we
use ballistic tip soft point or
hollowpoint because we're there
to stop the action now we're
accountable for every round
wherever you shoot of of hard
bone but what he's talking about
it goes through so if you shoot
somebody with it can go right
through them or you should add
an object the wall it can go
right through him so you don't
that as far as hunting a monster
safety instructor state of New
Mexico it's illegal to use
hardball as well like he was
talking about so ballistic tips
off point and hollow points are
the only things you can do order
point ballistic tip in order
point.
For I mean I'll place my bet so
those are the only three that
you can use for hunting in the
state New Mexico but as far as
law enforcement we don't Kerry
we use the hardball for practice
out on the range but for duty
use we use hollow point.
And for home defense like
Senator Schmedes says that is
what we recommend is hollow
point because he and his wife
for accountable for that round
if he's out some more and he
gets into an active shooter
situation he's responsible for
that round so he takes a shot me
Mrs he wants that round to
fragment and stay where it's at
instead of penetrating hit a
bystander what's beyond him is
that what you teach as well as
we teach is know what your
target is no was beyond it so
this is what I'm saying is that.
He has his views we have ours
but in all reality there's been
all these legislation laws that
were trying to recreate they're
already in place there's already
federal law as a criminal I'd be
more afraid of the Feds and I
would the state because I know
I'm gonna get pleading court
anyone again misstep and and
verses I'm going to prison for
ten years with the feds I don't
want to go to fits in yes the
most major the criminal element
out there don't even tell you
they're more afraid to go
federal then the our state.
Thank thank you thank you for Mr
Chairman serica us one more just
to up to I'm gonna describe
situations of Mr and etcetera I
was because I carry conceal so I
was in a of fair parade and I
was waving someone saw my farm
site or at the fair they're
pretty upset is a husband wife
about my care in a large group
of in the explanation I gave to
him they actually came out and
asked them to wait to my wife
got there so she could explain
to them her job if so we're
shooting and crowd and when they
came out and and my pistols
multi shot so when they came out
when she came out they after the
why did and she's as well they
will tell us where to go hide
sure that way he can go to stop
shooter in the disbarment cell
so that weight law enforcement
can come and assess the
situation in in in the training
for conceal carry that's what I
was taught eliminate the problem
you disarm yourself and put your
hands on your head nail down
legs crossed is that a
correction here you of for law
enforcement verses conceal carry
if we were there to protect the
public.
If you have a conceal carry.
It's good that you do because
you have to meet the
qualifications by the state
you're trained you taking
classes they do paperwork back
on you as to clear through GPS
for him to get a clearance to
carry that far my wife has a
conceal carry as well but the
thing is you got to remember
what it up occurred you say it
took an hour and a half response
time down to forty five minutes
depending on the area you're at.
Good luck you know I'm saying is
law enforcement we have a big
shortage in the state it's hard
to recruit it's hard to retain
and then like I said if by the
time we get there you know
that's why we do on the active
shooter training constantly is
whatever officers there first
they go in there they don't wait
for back up they go in on an
active shooter situation is
we're trained to stop the action
now he was there at a grocery
store and some went down and he
could prevent it been close to
him I've I applaud him for doing
it but you gotta remember when
that expires he has to go back
through the process to get
reinstated again he's still got
to go through the whole thing
you're getting fingerprint you
getting checked by the fed
you're getting checked by the
state he's got to go through the
classes and then he has to re
qualify but not every law
enforcement like you saying is
only law enforcement only law
enforcers okay we're not
enforcement we retire there's
people that come after us
there's a under cover agents
that did buys against cartel and
vice versa so what are they
supposed to do they're no longer
law enforcement so how the
protective their friends and
family because they do come
after families they do come
after their kids like a lot of
Representative X. console me.
Rents are going to pay for their
kids are going to pay for what
their kids their their parents
do so they're doing their job so
now they can't get to him
because he's law enforcement but
they're going after their
children.
Okay thank you sure effective
systems have anything about the
build out into that because that
goes back to the whole point
discussion you you have to have
something that's going to do the
job at the point time you need
it so.
I appreciate your comments on
that Mr and Santo back to the
bill
And this just question Mr center
because currently we don't have
of these crimes don't exist with
this bill creates new state
statutory scheme for first
degree felony have you talked to
any of the the judiciary on what
this does going forward if this
bill were to pass.
Mr chair and senator I don't
know what your question is
asking so we show that that
since since right now the the
private sector have fourth
degree building is yes for three
but we don't have those for
this.
For this bill you're creating
and basically a different
segment of fourth degree felony
is that not right Mr Senator
thank you Mr chairman Senator
yes I believe that's correct so
just wondering what the
judiciary thinks about that New
or as we go if he gets out here
that's really goes next.
Well we're not but yes I and I I
guess shows my concern that
we're seeing we seem to be
putting things out there they're
gonna make the law abiding
citizen the criminal
in in not doing anything to the
criminals they are going to give
up their silencers their pistols
are how are we we amended that a
there's no muffler yes I do
remember that silencers so I
think that's the.
Good part and bad bill us care
center the the other questions
the I don't think the criminals
are going to be willing to give
theirs up Mr chair Senator it
doesn't require anyone to give
up anything well just stop
purchasing and even the transfer
we talked about you know the
federal laws on this in Mr
Senator how do you propose to
balance the federal state I know
that we're not required to do
this are recovering federal
federal statute of are you doing
anything to look at minimizing
the problems that you have he
brought up the trust when you
already have people in a a trust
for that farm also needs a
revoke herbal I just don't know
how we we cover some of these
these issues that have already
been brought up
I'll go back to the
constitutional issue that of
Sir Sedillo Lopez product.
I guess I'll look into it Mr
chair Senator that there's so
many problems here but I just
don't know where to go to first
because if you look
constitutionality of it we've
already brought up for others
product so many small issues
that become large issues I just.
I guess I'm speechless for for
how bad this bill really is I
know we had multiple people
hundred hundred thirty eight on
zoom wanted to call in and talk
about why this is bad we've had
law enforcement come in and say
how it's going to affect them
I'm just wondering if if you've
done any kind of
Meetings outside the capital
with anyone to see if there's a
better mechanism in doing this
there building conversation
during the intro of I guess
which which brought this bill to
this point Mr and etcetera Mr
chair and senator the what
precipitated this was what
happened down into all the Texas
where the children were so shut
up that they could only be
identified by their DNA records.
As an educator that's right now.
The police were afraid to go in
for more than ninety minutes
that's frightening well we've
got weapons of this sort that
are available in many places.
That's a concern and so this is
a reaction to those particular
things to try and limit the
number of these weapons that are
out in our society whether they
get stolen from someone who
already has it whether they are
buying them whether they're
modifying the ones that they
currently have this is directly
related to reducing the number
of firearms that are out in our
community because the power
proliferation of firearms is
directly related to gun deaths
in the United States and if you
look at the international
records we've got a problem if
you look at our state records by
capita New Mexico's got a
problem and this is directly and
revel in relation to that and as
I indicated earlier if you read
the second amendment the second
clause about firearm shall not
be
to be infringed relates directly
in every English teacher I'll
tell you really to directly to
the first clause about a well
regulated militia not an
individual ownership and that'd
been the law up until about the
nineteen sixties when it started
to shift over to a personal
right rather than a militia
right and so when the Supreme
Court talks about the historical
gun laws they are not looking
back historically they're
looking back over maybe the last
twenty years when there is
benefit in a major shift in the
gun laws towards individual
rights and ownership rather than
a more restricted and was as was
indicated we already have large
areas of guns including the
silencers and suppressors I was
not aware of the extensive
regulations or only one of those
and the requirements and
registration that people rail
against all the time and so I do
not see this and we regulate all
kinds of other arms that most
people would think are less
dangerous than guns and we make
them illegal such as brass
knuckles chains knives of long.
Thanks crossbows all kinds of
other things that are banned in
fully regulated yet we seem to
think that this is somehow a
protected area compared to those
other areas that's why this bill
came forward well thank you for
that Mister chairman Senator and
and I guess of you being
educator me being on school
board we do care about our
students but I I think the of
all the thing well I'm just back
up I think if you look at it
nationally and statewide
Albuquerque has problem here in
New Mexico I just don't know
it's everywhere Mr sheriff
Eugene told me one more time for
my expert witness no no no let's
all keep it to the if we're that
part of the book meeting Mister
chair Mister chair he was
talking about you Baldy he's a
law enforcement officer would
have interest in what request
we're trying to act as chair I
can bring that up he brought up
his loyalty now I'd like to find
out what the sheriff has been
if it's in conjunction with the
discussion in just that.
I would chair I was entry
response aware that why I
brought this bill forward not
trying to bring that into a
separate peace but what I and I
think that Mr chairman Charlie
of all the issue was not where I
was going with this I talked to
what is that have to do with the
bill Senator what I was asking
him if we had discussions in the
intro are you there you brought
it up and he did he you asked
him why did you do that he said
because the rebels and now but
that's what he brought this but
at that point in time the bill
this gentleman raised his hand
to have some unity are fine it's
fine he's spoken twice to us
already we usually let people
speak once so I'm not gonna let
him speak a third time Senator
the sheriff here your voice not
thank you so with that all yield
thank you.
Is there a motion yes have a
motion for a due pass from
Senator McKenna alternative
motion to table from Senator
degree a guy goes into a motion
to table is non debatable
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos yes.
Senator Hickey.
Help.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Senator my S. Senator McKenna
no.
Senate committees yes it's one
of the.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Tallman.
Correct.
If you.
Thank you lost to report is
enough
notes Senators committee to
explain his vote thank you
tensing's share I was provided
we were asking about that can
you go to el Paso also provides
new information that changed
really fundamentally my idea of
the bill
you can't go out of state to
purchase a federally federally
regulated item because they keep
sending you all the stuff in
your mail they they need you at
your residence so you the feds
won't let you do all this cross
lines so this completely bands
getting getting any of this if
you keep your residency in New
Mexico bans all of it so that
that really fundamentally change
my do the bill thank you Mr so
the motion to table Senator
Gallegos fails are three in
favor five against with two.
One of one at one just wanted to
what it is.
Up and so we'll go for will
recognize Senator McKenna for
alternative motion.
Yeah hi.
What you're motion chairman I
vote a do pass as amended.
Second seconded by Senator
Tallman.
Any further discussion.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Ingle no.
Center mass Senator McKenna yes
Senate committee so Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez to explain
her vote.
I believe yes but I.
Violence which is.
Thank you your Mike Senator.
I voted yes because I think
reducing gun violence in our
state is an important policy
were seven now pre in gun
violence but I really encourage
you to work on it before you get
to do sherry so the have
smoother sailing there thank you
Mr chair thank you senator
Senator Thomas.
Thank you sure.
That this is what we pass this
bill or not is that no offense
is no income make much of a
change of our second have mass
killing physical to have
millions of people killed by
guns and the big elephant in the
room is there's way too way too
many
guns country is going crazy this
country is obsessed with guns
there's a direct correlation
between the number of guns and
the number of gun killings
Canada.
We have six times more killings
in Canada we have sixteen times
more gun killings in Germany and
we intelligentsia the December
of guns.
Is that going to these kind of
bills are really going to make
that much difference
And I can bring it up on my
phone but there was a study that
done by Harvard that's why this
is why we why do we have so many
more killings than other
countries is the answer is very
simple because we have more guns
per capita than any other any
other modern industrialized
country in the world we have
more guns than people so tell
you reduce the number of guns
these kind of the laws really
are going to.
Make that much it can maybe put
a dent in it but the fact
remains a big elephant in the
room and we just got way too
many gun two one of only two
countries in the world we have a
constitutional right to own a
gun so that's my explanation
thank you thank you senator
thank you senator by a vote of
five in the in the affirmative
three in the negative with the
one exception exemptions with
excuse if you are reading the
action figure out what it means
thank you for the discuss like
you have a new path Now Senator
committees your bills Senate
bill one seventy four.
Mr chair.
First one is here.
Thank you have a set up for us I
do have a sub we've been taking
in the attorney general's.
because some of some of his
comments and things like that we
did make a small change.
We're going just to first degree
murder now with last year when I
brought this bill passes
committee last year twenty
twenty two and but but my list
had I had a list of basically
violent felonies it's so this
year we're only talking for
stream order on that list.
What
do you want to move yourself.
yes yes Mister chair I would
like to move so sue for US
Senate bill one seventy four and
that's eight seven one point one
do not pass
Senate bill one seventy four and
a do pass on Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
seventy four for discussion
purposes of Mr chair okay is
there a second second the
Senator great.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee what what this bill
does is yes it slows down the
the revolving door one of the
problems that we've had.
Is we have people that let's say
they get caught up in the wrong
crowd some of them will some
change in their family or
whatever it is and they go out
and and commit a felony lot of
times they're they're released
in there they're going back to
this same same community same
bad crowd right and they rack up
felony after felony after felony
before the the even have a
you know to a trial and end up
with a big consolidated plea
they end up in in federal into
the federal system.
And there's really really no
check on on what happens in that
case and so I think this
proposals very defendant centric
because it gives the judiciary a
time to step in and say whoa
let's let's slow down let's
intervene we can give you some
conditions of release or
whatever it is and these people
won't rack up these massive
consolidated please so so the
the first part is Hey if you've
been released on your own
recognizance or you know no
conditions of release
and you rack up another felony
charge.
We're gonna have a presumption
to go to a pre trial hearing.
Okay and then and then the the
only other thing the bill does
is similarly if you are on a
condition of release and then
you're picked up again and
you're charged with first degree
murder we're gonna have a a
presumption toward that pre
trial hearing K. to create that
hearing only there are a couple
things to that are critical to
understand about this bill
because if we don't know how
these hearings worker has you're
sure to think oh it's a
presumption toward guilt or
something that is absolutely not
how it works and I would not be
sponsoring the bill that's how
it works
the the evidentiary standard to
hold someone in pre trial
detention even on a first degree
murder charge is clear and
convincing evidence that does
not change that's in the
constitution so if we have a
presumption to go to a pre trial
hearing the judge can the judge
can really some the judge says
prosecution you have to give me
clear and convincing evidence to
hold this person pre trial
detention yeah that is the
standard it's a very very high
standard is taken very seriously
it has been ruled constitutional
and every single federal
jurisdiction and and if you have
a I do we pass these out with
yes so if if you look at this is
this is written by the
Albuquerque journal editorial
board I highlighted just a
couple of things on the inside
for for the committee seventy
seven percent of voters want to
change laws to make it easier to
keep these violent criminals
behind bars pending trial okay
and then it is Albuquerque
Attorney General Torres says
that no court has held these
rebuttable presumptions
unconstitutional every federal
appellate court has dealt with
this and they've they've they
said it's fine and then finally
every federal circuit has
addressed the issue that's from
centered just to bring court
justice Bryer.
So we we don't have a
constitutional problem the
reason is because we're not
changing the clear and
convincing evidence standard
all we're doing is asking that
there can be a presumption to
allow this hearing and the judge
can say doesn't take any
Judiciary discretion away by the
way because the judge
can just say OK were into income
under.
The burden of persuasion is
always always always on the
prosecution so this does not
change any sort of burden of
proof Bernalillo persuasion
that's always on the prosecution
And then finally Mr chair and
and in closing I'd like to the a
very brief snippet from a New
Mexico law review article we are
now I believe or not what I like
to do is bring us closer to what
Washington DC in California are
doing they are very similar
jurisdictions because of two
reasons one is we've we've we're
going away from cash bail right
California within cash building
within cash bill Washington DC
when way from cast a long time
ago they also have abolished the
death penalty and that's that's
very very cute understand this
because our Supreme Court has
ruled that we no longer have
capital crimes in New Mexico.
What happened with that is we we
kind of.
as a as a after thought we got
away from presumptions kinda
accidentally by banning the
death penalty and then with a
Supreme Court ruling the Supreme
Court so we no longer have
capital offenses and that
disallowed presumptions we just
need to get it back in state
statute just like once again
this is I'm trying to bring us
to a system like California DC.
I'll close with this Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
just the conclusion from this
Larco the states are states
system of pre trial release
stands out among jurisdictions
that embrace bill or important
because of its absence of
presumptions of dangerous miss
or flight risk against
defendants charged with first
degree murder.
Deficiencies like this have led
a lot through the bank the
state's approach a fix.
Could be to add a rebuttable
presumption against defendants
charged with first degree murder
without on doing the progress
the state has made in its shift
toward a fair system of release.
Thank you Mr chair with that
it's been for COVID question.
Okay
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone in the audience who
wants to speak in support of
this bill.
Is the right.
One.
When propose.
One in favor
Okay.
Anybody here opposed to this
measure yes please both of you
come up and use the Mike.
We have.
So okay we'll give them a
chance.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barron Jones I'm the senior
policy strategist ACLU of New
Mexico the ACLU of New Mexico is
a proud member of the eight PD
for coalition we stand in
opposition to this bill we
appreciate the Sanchez efforts
but we believe that is totally
unnecessary there's already
provisions in law to keep a
person on a house violate their
conditions of release and we
believe our jails and prisons
are strangely unsafe these days
with due to understaffing and
and and poor medical care and we
should be looking for creative
ways to reduce the number of
people one into those
institutions thank you much for.
Thank you thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee listing the
combos with gold futures as
mentioned earlier we work with
current and formerly
incarcerated folks
I grew up in Espanola and I know
what in over policed community
looks like we respectfully
oppose SB one seventy four this
bill would disproportionately
affect communities of color that
are not only over police but
directly targeted by police at a
fundamental level we believe
that we can not violate people's
constitutional rights by denying
them bail imprisoning them
guilty at an investigative and
pre trial phase even if they are
on pre trial release for other
charges.
this would mean that individuals
could be incarcerated for months
waiting to see if the FDA finds
evidence or decides to press
charges or ma'am.
New Mexico does not need to
prohibit pre trial release but
instead better use the systems
that we already have in place
and we ask that you please vote
against SB one seventy four
thank you thank you then we have
two people funds zoom who are
opposed is it right up so first
Diane Mick cash.
Yes.
Right.
Are you are you there Diane.
I'm trying yes are can you hear
me now yes.
Okay great I'm asking you to
vote no I'm sorry thank you
chair this is Diane the cash I
ask you to vote no on SB one
seventy four our current system
is working.
County seems to be the only
hearing the state that's having
an issue with pre trial remains
according to the expert
testimony heard in the house
Judiciary Committee presentation
next session in Bernalillo
county cases where the public
safety assessment tool Brady
people bias risk the D. on the
side of the tension motions and
twenty percent of those cases.
Eighty percent of those motions
being fair and and.
The people were for.
In oceans filed and they were
forced released if there's a
recall our problem Mr trial
detention it doesn't appear to
be the fault of the tools that
are currently in place think
should be done within the
context of existing law and our
constitution thank you so much
thank you a diet and then Kim
cook.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you to the sponsor for bringing
this legislation we all are very
focused the session and last
session on trying to get to the
bottom of how we can improve the
criminal legal system to keep
our communities safer I have not
seen the substitute bill so I
think I I'm not sure that I
understood from that
presentation quite what changed
from the bill as written so I'll
I'll do my best to address what
that is before the committee I
can tell you that having
rebuttable presumptions of held
by federal courts has no
influence or persuasive value
over whether at such an idea
would be constitutional under
the New Mexico constitution
because there is a
constitutional right to bail in
the federal system at all so
having it up how there does not
have to give us any indication
of whether it is constitutional
for New Mexico that being said
as the sponsor described the
substitute rather than creating
a presumption of detention it's
creating a presumption for a
hearing if I understand that
correctly my primary role
assessment of that would be that
it's just unnecessary because
the state already has an
automatic right to a hearing for
pre trial detention all they
have to do is ask for it if
that's not what it does and if
it does actually create some
sort of evidentiary presumption
based on the charges then I
think it most certainly would be
unconstitutional under article
two section thirteen my last
remark on on that issue is that
if a person has picked up a new
charge while they're already on
conditions of release there is
no need to request pre trial
detention they just have to
request under rule five four
three the prosecution revocation
of the released in the first
case so we don't need to worry
about the real five four nine
standard and the constitutional
standard if they violated
conditions of release it's very
it's a simpler process to get
them held on revocation I'm not.
Sure if this substitute
addresses the indigents the
hearings but I wanted to quickly
just note if it does that that
that provision would duplicate
administrative interagency
determinations that we already
do what the public defender and
would clog the courts with
really redundant hearings and so
I would would recommend removing
that if it has not been already
thank you good thank you can
okay let's go to the committee
then.
anybody have a question Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you Mr chair and I'm
glad you appreciated the nuance
of the constitutional analysis
because again I have
constitutional says before
before I go into the
constitutional analysis I am
after last session when we were
dealing with all these bills of
just looking at the constitution
right so I decided to attend by
zoom if they were it was by zoom
these hearings these the.
Judiciary Committee didn't no no
the the bail hearing certain
we'd really since can you know
and so I just sat there for a
for a full morning in
Albuquerque in Albuquerque in
Albuquerque District Court and
so I sat there for a full
morning and in each case I
thought the judge was absolutely
thoughtful and made decisions of
that that really did protect the
community and there was one case
involving I think you'll
appreciate sexual exploitation
of a child where the judge did
not release the defendant
because the defendant there was
a risk that the defendant would
try to influence the child and
so the court did not release
that defended under under any
circumstances and so I was
impressed I was impressed I
thought this system is working
of yes there are times that the
judge will exercise their
discretion and and illness.
and and that happens in in it's
unfortunate because nobody's
perfect no pool no Arnold tool
or any other tool or they are
judicial discretion is perfect
and neither is holding money the
other story and I believe I told
the story last time was when I
worked at the clinic and we
would go down for maintenance
and find people who'd been in
jail for a lot longer than the
sentence would have been on the
underlying crime because they
were poor people they didn't
they didn't they just got lost
in the cracks and people didn't
notice they were there so if
that was horrifying to me
because people shouldn't be
serving it and so they would
just get released for time
served release for time served
over and over again and I found
that for rific so when justice
Daniels championed the
constitutional change which is
section thirteen of of our
constitution.
It it says that bill may they
did baby denied by quarter
record pending trial for
defendants charged with a felony
if the prosecuting authority
request a hearing and prove by
clear and convincing evidence
that no release conditions were
recently protect the safety of
any other person in the
community.
That's exactly what happened in
that in those cases the the
burden was on the prosecutor to
prove that no conditions would
be doing it and in the case
where the individual was was
retained the prosecution was
able at and these are
evidentiary hearings the
prosecution was to see was able
to state as an officer of the
court that they had spoken with
the family members of this
individual had been trying to
communicate with the victims and
the court said no that you're
not going to be released because
I we have no confidence that you
won't try to communicate with
the victims and that individual
was retained which I thought was
excellent
and then and then it goes on to
talk about big otherwise
eligible for bill should not be
detained solely because of
financial inability to post so
going through your work through
this through Senate bill one
seventy four Mr chair is the
presumptions.
The this idea of a rebuttable
presumption completely reverses
the standard the burden of proof
which is on the prosecution to
prove by clear and convincing
evidence that no release
conditions were recently protect
the safety of any other person
that's just a direct
contradiction
Of of what the constitution
requires and I understand that
you limited to murder in the
first degree but again that's
taking away if that that's
inconsistent with the
constitution provision because
it doesn't have any limitation
on on what would be considered
and and finally it limits the
judge's discretion.
And and and.
I think that we have to be very
careful when we limit judicial
discretion because the whole
point of having to to judges
review these cases case by case
is for them to look at the
circumstances and the facts and
the circumstances of the
particular case I know that the
individual who was shooting up
of.
Our colleagues homes is is still
in prison and has has he should
be so and I also know although I
didn't attend any that because I
mean this committee but I know
that judiciary has been working
on this and of getting
presentations on it and so for
that reasons for those reasons
again I I
I'm concerned about your
billable have to vote against Mr
chair thank you letters funded
insurance etcetera I I thought I
I'm gonna still work on here
because I I agree with so much
of what you said and I and I
want the committee to understand
how this works this.
Senator Lopez said that the
judge did a great job right
that's what I'm trying to do
with this bill these people are
caught up once again imagine a
young young man and I knew one
of these and then the just got
caught up in the wrong crowd and
they get caught in our catch and
release system is wise persons
of the opposite of hate is
apathy and I think we're
treating these people we're
treating these people that are
racking up their felonies and
apathetic way we need to get
them in front of a judge
flexibility is a saying and let
this judge step in and do a good
job and help this person it
increases judicial discretion
because it actually kids these
people in front of a judge the
presumption has nothing to do
with the judge's decision the
burden is on the prosecution a
lot of the the blame here is on
the prosecution all this is
doing is getting the prosecution
in the room when they're not
doing you know not not bring
these these or may not motioning
for hearing so the intent of
this is to do exactly what what
you're saying is to to get them
from the judge to stop allowing
these people to rack up these
massive massive you know just
felony after felony after felony
and then when they finally get
in front of a judge they've been
in the wrong crowd for two years
or whatever it is and then they
they're in a world of hurt.
So this this does nothing to
limit it increases discretion
because all we're doing is
getting them into a pre trial
detention hearing the judge can
do what ever they want this bill
does nothing nothing at all to
change what the the judge is it
is doing it just gets them in
front of the judge and give them
a chance to get justice and to
slow down the revolving door
that's all it does.
The clear commencing is still
there.
Thank you for rebuttable
presumption.
On the process of the process
that's correct however that the
judge had to determine whether
that level of evidence there's
been huge and that way changes
the the present the burden of
proof that is required under our
New Mexico constitution
I noticed in the journal article
Mr chair that of miss or.
If there's no court is held
liable presumptions in the
federal bail Reform Act of
nineteen eighty four.
Those were federal.
Of.
Federal presumptions under the
federal constitution we have to
New Mexico clear and convincing
evidence standard in the New
Mexico constitution which is it
has nothing to do have a New
Mexico.
Is the final decider of state
well so so that language that
the that the journal really
wasn't relevant tech issue
I think with Mr Fotis or now a
need for this was trying to do
is to try to get a change in the
law in the constitution that.
That where we are right now Mr
chair Senator he does not change
burden proof H. it shifts what's
called the burden of production
which is different okay so the
burden of proof is the sum total
of of the burden of persuasion
the burden of production so what
it does is it is it is it gives
us burden of production to the
prosecution there is evidence is
a presumption so we're gonna get
a hearing which is great because
this person's going to get
justice either justice one way
to slow them down to stop felt
felony charges or if the judge
shows clear and convincing
evidence they're gonna say in
the rare cases they're gonna say
well because of public safety
we're going to keep you in
detention but it only shifts the
burden of production this is
another key element to to to see
how this these actually work.
How this would work and I think
I think what this is getting at
City of Lopez's kind of
heartburn over this this is what
would happen to to actually tip
the scales of justice away from
the defense.
We get the hearing now because
of this bill the burden of
production has been shifted not
the burden of proof and now the
defendant has to show something
okay literally the only way it's
going to tip the scales of
justice literally is this the
defendant shows up and the
defendant's attorney says judge.
I have nothing to say I have no
reason that I can give you that
this person should be can
detained I have nothing.
And that's the only way would be
shifted because now the
prosecution has presented some
evidence and the judge says
really you have nothing you you
you're not going to tell me
you've never had a traffic
violation you've you never had
an arrest record you don't have
a of the the family on the job
at the United employers says you
should approved for your work
you know you don't have anything
you literally have nothing those
are all very common a reasons
for the defendants to to give to
show these judgments pre trial
detention hearings so so it's
the burden of production and
then the last the last concern
was on the New Mexico
constitution we had presumptions
we've had presumptions what when
we had capital offenses but then
the Supreme Court ruled very
recently with state versus a
mere that when we did with the
death penalty we no longer have
capital offenses in the
presumptions all went out the
door so we we've had these
before I'm just asking that we
go back to where we were before
that before that ruling we need
to legislative fix to bring us
once again back into where do
you see in California are very
similar jurisdictions we're not
where we really.
Mr chair.
Madam is a.
You that there are three year
Mike is a okay.
Thank you Mr chair commonly or
the way you teach this is bears
the burden of production because
it which is the initial burden
there is then the burden of
proof which is the evidentiary
standard clear and convincing
and then there's the burden of
persuasion so they're all three
things your statute does not say
that we're just talking about
the burden of initial production
in fact rebuttable presumptions
usually refer to the burden of
proof which is it of of of where
the judge has to analyze the
evidence and figure out is is
beyond a reasonable doubt or is
this clear and convincing they
have to they have to thank you
of they also so the judge has to
determine whether the level of
edit evidence presented not the
additional burden of of just
showing something up but whether
the evidence meets the standard
and and this statute Russ make
clear that what we're talking
about what you're talking about
issued prove you can't produce I
funding I believe that Senator
Hickey it's really the song you
just.
thanks so so if that if that is
what your intent is
unfortunately this statute does
not does not do that and even
the burden of production I think
because because of the way the
constitution is written it would
still be coming.
If not violating the kinds or
are inconsistent the
constitution least very close so
it so thank you but thank you Mr
chair appreciate the the can the
discussion we've had over time
on this and I've I've learned a
lot so thank you but thank you
for the discussion Mister Rogers
it's impossible that you can't
shift the burden of persuasion
that's the most unamerican
impossible thing to do that's
the way the courts work this
bill has nothing to do with that
it's just asking for hearing it
doesn't change anyway the court
how the court operates there
there's no there's there's no
language in the bill changing
how court operates you cannot
change burden of persuasion in
the United States America or The
New Mexico or New Mexico this is
how the courts were.
The burden the burdens on the
prosecution here no that's not
gonna change that's.
That's true but it doesn't
specify this is just a burden of
production but all of that to
say I appreciate the.
The attempt
I just I just don't think it it
is consistent with the
constitution provision thank you
thank.
Senator Gallegos.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you
for your bill your dialogue I
was gonna tell you I I and just
listening to what you guys went
through bird proof from
Bernalillo production I was
going to here article G. again
in is talking about of the
shooting there in Albuquerque at
university and even the mom
talking about up to the Senate
it that general been monitor
detained her someone still be
alive but doubt further it talks
about the journal poll that
found seventy seven percent of
likely voters supporting
changing law making sure to keep
violent criminals behind bars
pending trial
in that you know if they had
those just in Albuquerque point
those statewide I don't know if
you had a cell page two.
Mr chair and senator I actually
don't know it was conducted by
the by the journal and I don't
know how how far they reached
out I mean I would take a guess
that it was in their
distribution area but I I don't
know.
Hi Mister chairman Senator at in
reading that I was pretty
impressed I would love to sing
that as a statewide poll because
those are pretty high numbers
and as a city voters.
Well it does on I miss that
thank you Mr
but I just up to me would be
nice to be able to see a
statewide look at this because I
think you've got the same issue
Mr chair Senator throughout the
state I think the courts do the
same thing over process does so
I just want to clarify that I
like the article
so I I feel for the model would
you say that you know her son
would still be alive I think
those are things Mr center we
need to look at on how we
Protect our kids here in New
Mexico and and I think your bill
starts a dialogue and I posted
in support of thank you.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator metes.
Fascinating discussion
But I'm gonna I'm gonna refer
offer something that was set on
the floor by our chairman of the
Judiciary Senator serve on this
and Senator Sedillo Lopez and
mention that a few moments ago.
In that the judge that is
that I guess indicted Mr Solomon
Pena.
He's holding them.
So.
What we have and I don't have
the legal background what we
have.
The judge has the discretion.
To hold someone dangerous like
Mr Pena.
I feel fine what he did is just
absolutely
Horrific and terrifying but I'll
just remind the group about that
and then number two is I'm
looking at the.
The analysis.
That was done on.
On the bills chairman and
senator
And perhaps
If Senator Sedillo Lopez
chairman and senator.
Could offer us the the.
When judges use the risk
assessments that according to
this assessment the bill would
ban the use of these risk
assessments and to replace them
with cost assessment never can
amount of money chairman Senator
and and then Mr Chairman Senator
I took that out of the bill so
okay last year this bill this
bill with the server through
committee went to Judiciary we
got a big discussion with all of
them with Senator Sanchez
everybody took the Iraqis and so
this is been massaged and
narrowed and so I took that out
of the bill because of those
concerns okay you there go okay
so that's contained in the
committee substitute okay and
then one more thing
Chairman and senator is.
I believe the analysis is still
fighting.
Some tension our constitution.
and so that's given me pause.
Article two section thirteen of
the constitution.
Bail may be denied by quarter of
record pending trial for
defendants charged with the
felony of the prosecuting
authority request a hearing
improves by clear and convincing
evidence that no release
conditions will reasonably
protect the safety of any other
person or community and so we.
When constitution matters come
up by are fine analysts here at
that the the roundhouse I pay
attention to those things and so
chairman and senator if you want
to come comment on that thank
you Mr chair and senator
absolutely that the key phrases
if the prosecution request a
hearing and so in in the and I'm
not gonna say that cowards name
in this room because it doesn't
deserve it but in that case the
just mentioned the prosecution
did their job they filed for
pretense Rep patrolled tension
hearing.
Once again this doesn't affect
anything with the judge
I'm just trying to get I'm
trying to get this
constitutional
language enacted because the
prosecution is sometimes not
doing their job they're not
motion for hearing but with the
presumption for first degree
murder.
There it is.
So when the prosecution's not
doing their job that it worked
out in that case once again
nothing do with judges this is
not change anything with the
judge we're just getting them in
front of a judge when the
prosecution isn't getting the
the hearing to that's it.
So
yes so so so once again there
there there are cases where it
works but it's only when the
prosecution's doing doing their
job and getting them in front of
a judge and and that's why this
this actually helps with the
high level crime because it gets
those people in front of a judge
but also helps reduce the low
level lower level felons because
they're caught up racking up all
these families we can just get
them in front of a judge they
can slow down and so it's going
to help the the violent people
stayed behind bars and it's
going to reduce people getting
these low level felony racked
up.
Guard is wrecked.
Chairman and senator and thank
you for that and so.
Citing that its the prosecutor's
duty how do we put their
behavior in statute I have no
idea well I mean
we do have a presumption.
So with that I'm I have to.
This that's where my my mind is
going I'm just muddling through
especially without a legal
background I'm I'm a little.
takes awhile to digest this on
the thank you chairman thank you
senator thank you Mr things.
Senator Tallman you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill for was.
What is your bill differ from
Representative Matthews.
There's a big difference thank
you for asking a question Mr
chair Senator I look at that
bill now now last year
I I had a I was tiptoeing around
the other bill I didn't say
anything bad about it
but I have major concerns with
that other bill.
the other bill it's very it's
very
very plain that it says they're
using a probable cause standard.
To equate that to a the clear
and convincing evidence standard
and then that has to be overcome
that that that to me is is
pretty wild I think that that
language is very strong so that
bill is actually trying to say
that this level of evidence
exists just because some was
charged with the crime.
I mean that's that's pretty wild
to me all this does is it's it's
triggering this hearing so the
get from a judge that's the
that's the main difference.
So.
This.
Thank you for that answer in
this chair.
With the.
How does your.
Bill differ from what we're
doing now.
Mr chair Senator what we're
doing now is unlike a DC in
California we have no
presumption and this goes back
to a Supreme Court case where
there was a there was a motion
filed for pre trial detention
hearing and it was based on the
fact that there is a capital
offense committed a a a murder
that could have led to the death
penalty.
And when there is an appeal they
said you you can't do that in
the Supreme Court agreed because
they said we no longer have
capital offenses in New Mexico.
And the prosecution basically
tried to say that that they
could get a presumption.
For this hearing based on just
the the charge.
which is what I'm trying to do
but the Supreme Court said with
existing legislation we just
can't do that because we did
away with the death penalty and
there's no capital offenses
anymore now we have a potential
life sentences that's why
restricted to just a first
degree murder because based on
the advice from this from the
New Mexico law review journal
article in from that court case
this would really bring us still
in congruence with that Supreme
Court ruling in state or summer
however coming very clear on
that it's it's because.
Presumptions do not exist
anymore and that was based on a
case law on on case law after we
abolish the death penalty I
believe it was an oversight and
I and I I think we just need to
put this in for first degree
murder only.
Yes in your regional bill you
have five or six different
defenses if taken.
So this.
Would only apply to first
degree.
Mr chair Senator yes that's
correct.
So.
this this is this was under
Judiciary right.
Mr center yes yeah and then
finance I guess care providers
here there may be.
Fiscal implications of holding
people in jail I just having
fun.
Representative disarray.
It's all I have thank you for
bringing this for them things
that that Mr chair so at the end
and because of our the one thing
that your bill seems to do is
save that this rebuttable
presumption would apply and in
cases of first degree murder.
But have we had any instances
where dust didn't file to detain
somebody for first degree
murder.
Mr Mr yes we have in fact we had
a multiple murder in kind of the
only where I think is Rio Rancho
Bernalillo area and the the
stories that's why I have this
article for these stories are
the stories and and this is the
problem with we've heard bills
about how didn't why didn't the
DA I.
Mr chair I don't know.
I don't know.
Maybe they thought they couldn't
get it I I'm not sure.
But what it's setting the these
crimes are sending a chilling
effect not just our state but
but out of state UNM baseball
player I mean you know that it's
starting to become a defining
things that help because we're
not able to now they didn't
hold.
These are the the the stories
list in this article are the
ones that could have been
prevented hit the shot.
The baseball player wasn't
health.
Not according this article I
thought with the he wasn't
health sorry wasn't held before
hells we had pending he had
before so he he could have had a
chance he could have had a
chance to be held before well
but I mean who could predict
wasn't our the.
It was a roller because he had
been convicted of a.
First degree murder Health for
first degree murder.
Correct but there were and I'm
sorry don't have the yield
Mister chair center but there is
a there's a multiple homicide
somewhere I I believe it was in
Santa Fe County very recently
the person was not held.
I can get you that we remember
that thank you myself that the
I'd like to get that the two.
Details of the it's amazing I
don't I don't understand it
either.
Okay what's will the committee.
We have a motion and a second
from Senator
Ingle and seconded by Senator
Gallegos is there any further
debate.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Guerreros yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Yes yes yes
why.
Senator Ingle yes yes.
Senator my S. Senator McKenna
no.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I'm bill.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Pena no.
Two three and one excuse so I so
by a vote of five in the favor
in favor and three against you
have a and one excuse you have a
due process Mr members of the
committee.
Done the committee so yes.
And with that we will call in in
