Um, before we get going, I'll
have our secretary, Ms. Torres,
please call roll.
Center block.
Here Senator Boone
Senator Charlie.
Senor Gallegosen Nova.
And our Pinto
Scott.
Serio Lopez.
And her hickey.
Senor Lopez.
Right? We have established our
quorum.
For for the audience, Senate
Bill 46 will not be heard today?
So if you are here for Senate
Bill 46 on compacts, we will not
hear that.
Um, there were some amendments
that were brought late, and of
course the committees um role is
24 hours in advance.
So that will be carried over,
rolled over until Senator.
You're here for Senate Bill 53.
Prescribing psychologist.
Psychotropics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, this
bill is really some clean up
from what we passed last year
and that it was found that in
the.
Definitions of independently
licensed clinicians.
That it had been left off in
that particular piece of the
definitions to include
prescribing psychologists who
have at least 4 years of
independent experience in
prescribing psychotropic
medications to treat behavioral
and emotional conditions, it
needs to be in that definition
in this section, uh, last year
we had, was it last year, 2
years ago, 2 years ago, um, but
it passed that prescribing
psychologists are able to
supervise their own with
extensive training and
background. It was left off the
definitions.
That's all this bill does.
Thank you very much
and your witness to add any? No?
Just here for questions.
OK. I appreciate.
said her to Lopez.
I'm a do pass
2. OK, but I, I appreciate that.
So, but I have to go to the
audience first.
So duly noted, there's a motion
in a second.
Senator Charlie, but let's go
back to the process. Is there
anyone in the audience in
support of this measure?
Yes, would you like to stand and
Um
State your name and
Make your statement
and uh Senator Souls, I want to
thank you for uh hearing this
bill and correcting this
oversight. Um, this is very
important that we remedy it and
I hope that it's very
expeditiously passed, so thank
you.
And I'm speaking on behalf of
the American Association of
University Women and the
National Organization for Women.
Thank you. Thank you. Is there
anyone else in support in the
audience? Is there anyone in
opposition?
See none. Is there anyone on
Zoom?
Oh, I'm sorry.
get in the mode here, um,
Gabriel Dietrich.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich. I am
the executive director of Nami
New Mexico, Nain in New Mexico
supports this bill and we look
forward to experiencing the
benefits for our uh for the for
the people we serve in terms of
the availability of prescribers.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Um, and now we'll go to
committee members if there are
any questions or comments.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, madam chair
Senator. I have just one
question.
If it's currently illegal.
For one of these folks.
To prescribe this medication.
How did they get 4 years of
experience.
Madam Chair, Senator, it is
legal for them to prescribe
prescribing psychologists have
been out in practice since 20.
Oh my gosh, since 2004, they've
been out there prescribing.
What, what we did with this bill
and the bill in 23 was help
them, it was getting very hard
to find nurse practitioners.
or physicians to be their
supervisors during the 400 hours
and the period of training that
they have.
So all this bill does is puts
them in the category which the
medical society and everybody
agreed with in 2023, put them in
the category where if they have
4 years of practice, they can
supervise their own during that
training period.
Their own, you know, group
that's trying to become
prescribed.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions, Senator Block. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um,
First, I, I would just, uh,
Madam Chair, just like to uh
tell the committee here that we
lost one of our analysts, I'm
sorry, she's not here today. Um,
Um, Elene gross klutz. She's a
registered nurse and she works
on the minority side. Uh, her
husband passed away unexpectedly
this morning. Um,
Jay, uh, gross klutz, who I, I
knew very well, so, um, just uh
keep um
Gross gluts is in your um
thoughts and prayers, please.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
uh, Senator and
I'm sorry, what was your name?
Miss Siegel
OK, Ms. Siegel. So real quick,
just a couple of quick things
here. Um, it looks like the only
thing that changed here was
section.
See, I'm sorry, section one.
Um, section C and section 1, is
that, is that correct? Yes.
Um, just try not, Madam Chair,
yes. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Senator.
It has here the words on line 6.
And 7
Four years of independent
experience.
What if they worked it, so what
does that mean independent? They
have their own practice or they
worked for a hospital? Tell me
what that means.
Madam Chair and Senator, it
could be any of those, but it
doesn't, it means that they do
not work directly under a doctor
like a nurse would. They are
able to independently.
tropics.
Thank you. uh, thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So,
What type of risk do we have,
um, with this bill because it
looks like they, I'm sorry, did
I not hear they're not?
Supervisor independent, is that
correct in their prescribing
medication.
Madam Chair, and Senator, all of
that was passed in 2023. This is
just making sure that in the
definitions, it includes them as
it does the um let me see,
clinician uh physicians and
osteopathic physicians, it just
includes them all of what you're
describing was passed in 2023.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. So this
How would our neighboring
states, is that pretty similar
to or is it because we have such
a medical shortage.
Of providers here, is that why
we're doing this?
New Mexico was the first state
to allow prescribing
psychologists. There are about 7
or 8 states that do this. There
are many others, California and
some others are looking at it,
but again, that is beyond the
scope of what this particular
bill is doing. I understand.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair, just trying to get
a, a feel of where New Mexico
stands in relation to
Other states, so um I, I get
that.
Um
And looking at, obviously no
fiscal impact, is that correct?
Madam Chair, uh, and Senator,
uh, there's no significant
fiscal impact as I look through,
I think one of them indicated it
was gonna cost $40,000 for one
of the agencies to go through
and update the definition here.
I don't know what somebody for a
half time for a year is gonna do
spending, doing all of that, but
that's what they asked for.
Thank you, sir, and thank you,
Madam Chair, in our New Mexico,
um.
Medical, I guess board or
association, whatever they are,
um, are they in support of this
bill?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Black,
yes, the New Mexico Medical
Society supported this bill and
they said just tell everyone we
supported this in 23 and we
still support it.
It was accidentally left out.
That's what I wanted to hear.
Thank you so much. Appreciate
it, senator. Uh, thank you, Ms.
Siegel. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I yield.
Thank you. Are there any other
questions?
We are on a 00.
We did that, you know, we.
Save it for the next.
I was just.
It's OK.
We are you pass motion from
Senator, uh, Serio Lopez with a
second from Senator.
Charlie, right? OK, if you could
call the roll, please.
Senator
Senator Boone. Yes, Senator
Charlie, yes, Senator Gallegos.
And her nova.
And our Pinto
And Scott
Yeah
And our Serio Lopez, yes,
Senator Hickey. Yes. Senator
Lopez.
Yes.
By a vote of 9 to 0, you have a
due pass recommendation.
Thank you. Thank you. I
appreciate you getting us in
nice and early today. Thank you.
Senator Pope, would you join us
up front on Senate Bill 77?
Are you ready, madam, sir?
right.
All right, Madam Chair,
committee members.
Today we face a growing crisis
in our housing market. Across
the nation, millions of
Americans are struggling to find
affordable homes.
Not because of lack of supply
because Wall Street has turned
single-family homes into a
lucrative investment strategy.
Hedge funds and private equity
firms are purchasing these homes
in bulk pricing out families.
Driving up on prices and
increasing rent.
The time has come for decisive
legislative actions.
For decades, the American dream
has centered around home
ownership.
a chance for financial
stability, wealth building, and
a sense of community.
However, corporate investors
have disrupted this balance.
Instead of buying homes to live
in,
They buy them to profit from.
Turning neighborhoods into
rental empires.
This practice has driven up home
prices, making it nearly
impossible for first-time home
buyer, home buyers to compete.
Consider states like Texas,
Georgia, and Arizona.
Where hedge funds have acquired
tens of thousands of homes.
Studies showed that in, in
Atlanta.
Institutional investors
investors on nearly 1/3 of
available single-family homes.
This has led to skyrocketing
property values, forcing
potential buyers into a
permanent state of renting.
In turn, rental costs have
surged.
Disproportionately
disproportionately impacting
working class.
And minority communities.
states are taking notice and
taking action.
California lawmakers have
proposed bills restricting
corporate ownership of
residential properties.
Minnesota is exploring tax
penalties for institutional
investors holding large real
estate portfolios.
Congress is also looking at this
issue.
Now New Mexico, we have a chance
to be at the forefront of this.
Senate Bill 77.
Then a bill 77 aims to restore
fairness in the housing market.
This bill prohibits hedge funds,
private equity firms, and large
corporations from purchasing
single-family homes.
By enacting this legislation, we
ensure that homes remain
unavailable.
Remain available
For families, not financial
institutions seeking profits.
This bill isn't about stifling
investment.
It's about protecting the
fundamental right.
Of affordable
Homeownership.
Housing should not be an asset
class for Wall Street?
It should be a foundation for
stable communities.
Banning hedge funds and private
equity from buying up single
family homes. I believe would
have some immediate and some
long-term benefits.
For example,
We would have an increase in
access to housing.
fewer corporate buyers, everyday
consumers would have better
opportunities to purchase these
homes.
We could see lower home prices
possibly.
By reducing competition from
institutional investors, it
would stabilize housing costs
and make home ownership
attainable.
And possibly we could slow down
the increase in rent.
Your corporate landlords,
landlords with slow slow the
rapid increase in rent prices,
giving tenants.
Fair market.
That's all I have for now, um,
Madam Chair. I'm ready for
public comment or any. Thank you
very much Senator.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support of Senate Bill 77?
Yes, ma'am, if you'd like to
stand.
Mm
Introduce yourself and make your
statement, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, Senator Pope, um,
I'm Meredith's matron speaking
on behalf of the American
Association of University Women
and the National Organization
for Women and we really
appreciate this bill and urge
you to support it. It's common
sense. Thank you.
Mm
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
Anyone in opposition?
Please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors. We stand in
opposition to the bill. We stand
in opposition to the bill
because the bill would impede
investment in housing and
investment can come from many
places, but I would simply point
you to the FIR. The FAR has some
interesting points that are uh
that you should take note of.
The first would be on page 2.
Currently no other state has
enacted such a ban, and you
would be
treading into waters that
haven't haven't been entered by
other states and then more
specifically, I would point you
to page 3 where you have uh
notations from the attorney
General's analysis. The bill is
very short and the bill doesn't
have a lot of parameters and the
attorney general noted that the
bill does not provide any
direction, guidance, or
consequence. It simply has the
prohibition contained within it
and it doesn't specify who's
responsible for monitoring these
provisions. It doesn't specify
who's
responsible for enforcing these
provisions. It leaves the
definitions of the terms in
doubt. And so you have a
proposal and a concept that is
not well defined, and the
realtors believed that it would
impede investment in housing and
housing projects. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. Anyone else in
opposition?
And from Zoom.
We do have Joshua Price.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, members of the
committee. My name is Josh
Price. Um, I am, uh, I am a
realtor in New Mexico. I have
worked as a property manager in
Albuquerque. Um, I actually
represent somewhere near 400
different clients, um, on none
of them are huge equity firms or
hedge funds, um, they are all
mom and pop, uh, operations that
most of them own less than 4
units. Um, what I can say is
that um this, this bill, I
would, I would
ask for you to be in opposition,
uh, for one, it reduces housing
market liquidity and investment,
um, private investment is
crucial and housing markets
stability, prohibiting hedge
funds, private equity firms and
corporations for purchasing
single-family homes will reduce
liquidity and limit investment
in housing.
It harms our housing supply and
affordability. This bill could
worsen New Mexico's housing
shortage, both by discouraging
investment, fewer homes may be
built or renovated, leading to
decreased housing supply and
driving up home prices.
It'll have a negative impact on
homeowners and sellers.
Homeowners rely on diverse
buyers and to maximize property
values, removing institutional
buyers could lower home values
and limit sellers' ability to
get competitive offers. It has
unintended consequences for
small landlords and local
investors. Small landlords and
real estate investors will be
disproportionately affected. The
band will make it harder for
them to compete in the market,
reducing their ability to
acquire properties and provide
rental housing.
And it has legal and
constitutional concerns,
restricting property sales may
violate property rights.
Homeowners should have the right
to sell their properties to any
willing buyer, including
corporations and investment
firms.
Better alternatives do do exist.
Um, we can encourage new home
construction instead of banning
buyers. Um, the real estate
industry supports policies that
expand housing supply, such tax
incentives for home builders and
streamlining zoning regulations,
um, and really,
There's a lot of small-time
investors that due to tax
implications and mortgages and
different, different rules
automatically put their
investments or their homes that
they purchase into LLCs. This
makes it so vague that you don't
know whether that would be
allowed or not.
Again, my name is Josh Price,
and I ask you to vote in
opposition.
Thank you.
Next is Teo Venturi.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Tigo Venturi. I'm a real estate
broker here in the Albuquerque
market and a longtime observer
of the housing trends in
Albuquerque.
I tracked the housing data
closely and really share it with
real estate professionals as
well as home buyers and sellers.
I'm here to oppose 7 Senate Bill
77, not because of the premise
of it, but because it really is
fixing a non-existent problem or
it's addressing a problem that
does not exist in New Mexico.
Corporate ownership specifically
large institutional ownership is
not a factor in the greater
Albuquerque market. There's
roughly 300,000.
Single family homes in metro
Albuquerque only about 7, about
7.5% of those are owned by
investors. However, the vast
majority, as Josh mentioned, our
own by what we call the mom and
pop investors. These are local
people, local families that own
homes and provide housing for
people, for homes for rent.
There are about 1500 homes, so
less than 0.5% of all the homes
in the Albuquerque area that are
owned by so-called institutional
investors.
However, you have to break that
down because most of those were
purchased during 2013 to about
2017 during a housing supply
glut, not a housing supply
shortage. A bunch of those other
homes were purchased by a
company that would purchase
those homes, help people by
putting them on a lease to own
program, and so it was basically
a program that allowed people to
go from a renter to ownership
that weren't available to buy at
that moment and
Actually I strongly believe that
is a, a pro-consumer pro
homeowner program even though it
just happened to be funded by
one of these institutional
investors. Um, regarding
availability of single family
homes for rent, not everyone.
is in a position to rent in a in
a well functioning housing
market requires a balance of
rental properties that are both
single family, multifamily, and
in fact Albuquerque of the 61
largest housing markets in the
country, Albuquerque ranked 61
in the supply of single family
homes for rent. We are the dead
last in that particular
category, um, you know, we need
rental properties for families,
for people.
relocating for in and, and just
restricting investments in
rentals will shrink supply, I
believe, as opposed to help and
possibly drive up rent, um, I, I
just wanted to state one thing
cause there's a fundamental
misrepresentation in your fiscal
impact report. It's, it has, it
has some data, quote some data
that says in the 1st 3 months of
2023, it shows that trends, uh,
hedge funds purchased 27% of the
homes.
Well, first off, that is not
true, that is factually not
true. That actually comes from a
report from CoreLogic. It was
published on August 2023, and
what it said was in March
2023s, investors all investors,
not institutional or hedge fund
investors purchased some single
family homes, and that was the
peak of the kind of, you know,
investor buying at that time.
Anyway, New Mexico does face
some
Significant housing challenge
and, and I know Senator, Senator
Pope is really trying to address
this, and and I agree that we we
do have some challenges, and I
get this, this is a
well-intentioned bill, but it
does not address the real
factors that are driving
affordability issues in our
market. Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
We'll go to questions or
comments from committee members.
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
I can't say any way.
That this could possibly be
constitutional.
Because
I own my home.
In a limited liability company.
I live in it.
But if I wanted to buy a second
home.
Either in the name of that
company.
Or is me and an individual.
would be treated.
Differently
Can you, could you address those
concerns?
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
the way the bill was written and
um
It was
Kind of tough to how to how to
navigate it because the
Really, the approach was to
really stop private equity and
hedge funds from purchasing
single-family homes.
But they aren't necessarily
called hedge funds or private
equity. They're, they're
corporations.
And so the intent.
was not to stop an individual
that sets up an LLC that owns 3
homes.
Um, and I'm still trying to
figure out how to navigate that
because that's, that is not the
intent.
But
Um
This is kind of how we had to
kind of
Write the bill to kind of
address the hedge funds in the
private equity.
Well, Madam Chair, and Senator,
I
Failed to see how
That's going to be accomplished
again.
Constitutionally and, and then
has there been any
Has there been any?
A peer reviewed study or
Or real estate study or
documentation.
The
would say
That would predict what this is
going to do.
To the
Equity
Of existing homeowners in their
properties.
I mean, it looks to me like.
Madam Chair and Senator limiting
who.
Might be able
To to buy that house.
You
Another end of it severely
limits.
The pool of fires that would be
available in significantly.
Negatively impact.
The price of that home.
Which is
What most people have their life
savings.
Could you address those
concerns?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
don't have any.
peer reviewed scholarly articles
on that specific question.
Um, while this might limit hedge
funds and private equity.
I think as we see here in New
Mexico.
There are plenty of people.
Making offers and plenty of
buyers.
And so
I think it would just provide
more access to consumers.
Well, Madam Chair and Senator, I
am also aware.
Of the number of folks in my
community that are small-time.
Real estate investors that are
That that my own a few duplexes.
Or a couple of single family
homes in a duplex.
And
A chair and senator.
And these folks rely on this.
Or their retirement income.
And it looks like
That could
Impact
Those operations also.
Any studies or
Or
Predictions as to.
How that would be impacted.
Madam Chair Senator, I don't
have.
Articles here or studies or
predictions on what's gonna
happen there. I will say that.
This bill only deals with single
family homes, duplexes,
apartment complexes.
Corporations, hedge funds,
private equities that want to
invest in developing new homes
and tracts of homes, um, this
would not impact.
Once again, the intent is not to
Arm the individual that sets up
an LLC and owns 2 or 3 homes.
Um, and I'm willing to.
Work on this bill.
Make sure those folks.
Aren't being harmed.
Because that's not the intent?
Um, but that's, that's where
we're at, Madam Chair, Senator.
And Madam Chair and Senator,
would you agree with me?
Its state regulatory environment
instruction industries division.
The mandates that are being
placed on
Uh, developers of these single
family home projects.
Orcreasing substantially.
The cost of housing in New
Mexico.
At a rate that is uh.
That is not comparable.
To other states.
With more lenient.
Regulations.
With regards to construction.
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
know if I would agree with that.
I, I believe it's probably a
factor.
But I think we're dealing with
several factors and, and I don't
believe this bill.
You know, addresses everything
in the issue. I think this is
one tool.
Thank you, sir, for your
answers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I yield.
Thank you, Senator Siio Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
It's just been such a struggle
because it's been um, I think a
perfect storm of things that
have been happening.
Um, in this state that has
caused um.
Rents to go up, housing costs to
go up and, and this is one of
them, um.
I know that that's been true. I,
this is about um.
It, I understand this is about
individual houses.
But I've been seeing that a lot
with regard to uh apartment
complexes.
We have these out of equity
funds, it's not even a person
that comes in.
Lies up the apartment complexes
backs up the rents.
Evicts people so that they can
jack up the rent, and then they
don't put any once they have
higher rents coming in, they
flip it.
Because the higher rents mean
it's worth more even though they
haven't done anything to fix it
up, and then they sell it.
Um, and so, so that has been
happening, of course, COVID is
COVID assistance, um, uh,
doesn't.
Uh, going away hasn't helped,
and then, um,
This
Um, has yet another problem.
I was wondering because the PERA
is saying, well, does this mean
we couldn't invest or or
whatever. I didn't know that the
PEA, the PERA invests in private
housing. That was a surprise to
me.
Um, that
Reminds me of the, that was kind
of weird. Um, would you accept a
friendly amendment an out of
state?
Hedge fund just to make sure
that the PERA.
If they do it, I mean, I don't,
I don't, um.
I don't know, uh, so it just
struck me.
And then, um,
It doesn't have enforceability,
and you know you're gonna get
killed in judiciary for that.
Um, well, and I'm just thinking
out loud, Madam Chair.
Tidal companies, um.
And I don't know whether they,
they could do it, but requiring
title title companies to check.
Um
To do something, you know, I
just, the bill.
Deeds um
And you know that this is gonna
happen in judiciary, it just
needs a little bit more work.
Um, and I think
I know judiciary doesn't like
it, but I think it's really
important to build like this to
identify the problem we're
trying to address.
And the problem we're trying to
address is
That these companies are not
adding value.
When they come here,
people out
And uh don't maintain the
properties.
And then, um,
Jack up the rents.
So that would be, those are some
suggestions I would make.
I
And for anything that will give
some relief to relief to New
Mexicans.
There are so many people on the
streets of of uh.
In my area.
And I've taken to stopping and
talking to them if they're
willing to talk to me.
And um the stories are really
sad. They just can't.
For many of them. There's mental
health issues, there's drug
issues, there's a lot of
problems.
But the especially the couples
and the families.
Simply cannot afford to pay more
than $1000 of rent.
Even if both of them are
employed in a minimum wage job.
Um, so it's just, it's, it's
such a huge problem. So, Madam
Chair, I, I would just, uh,
suggest.
And I don't know whether you
want to do it, start that
process in this committee or
whether
You want to start that process
on the way to judiciary should
this.
Did this go pass?
But I'm so frustrated by the
housing problem that I'm looking
for anything.
And I think this is an idea. I
think it should.
Um
These out of state corporations
that are coming in, cause to me
that's the.
That's what I've seen, and I've
represented people in housing
complexes, when you call the uh
the number to try to negotiate
some kind of.
problem, some kind of uh
Resolution
They don't, they don't even know
where you are, what state are
you in?
Um, and then they have no
interest. All they want to do is
get your client out. They, I
mean, it's sort of easy suits to
win.
Lawsuits to win because they're
they're not licensed here, so
they have to find somebody, it's
just.
I was successful in the suits
that I've, I've, I've brought.
Um, but it shouldn't take that.
It should not take that.
Um, and I just think that it's
abusive or these out of state
companies to come in.
Um, have no connection.
Uh, no interest in the property
other than what they can pull
out of it. So I think you've
really hit on a problem, Madam
Chair.
And um I'd be happy to.
Work on this if you want to work
on it on the way to judiciary
should it passed, or if you want
to start that process here then
to.
Madam Chair, thank you for Madam
Chair, Senatorcia Lopez, thank
you for the comments and the
help.
I think I wanna hear some more
comments, um, you, you brought
up an issue with apartment
complexes.
Uh, mobile home parks, um, we're
seeing those issues there. I've
gotten calls on this bills to
this bill to address that as
well. Unfortunately, this
doesn't.
But I think it's been, it's a
huge problem.
That's going on.
And you're right, uh, folks.
In some cases or one check away
from being evicted. I get emails
all the time and I'm sure many
of you get emails that say my
rent was raised $300. What am I
gonna do? I don't have any
options.
And so that's really what I'm
trying to do and.
What I'm trying to help. You
mentioned the amendment on.
Um
Maybe making it out of state.
Hedge funds and, and private
equity.
Um
I may be supportive of that, but
my only resistance would be.
Are there in state that are
still causing that problem. I
don't know, unfortunately, it's
hard to get the data.
And 2, if I did do that, I, I
would probably want parameters
of where it was an in-state
private equity hedge fund that
was like centrally located here
with employees to make sure it
was at least New Mexicans.
And so, um, I wouldn't want to
rush that or make a decision
here on the fly or something
like that, um, just like
I want to also look at
When we're talking about.
Corporations not being able to
purchase single family
residencies.
How do we make sure that that
person that says something an
LLC.
That owns 3 homes now.
We might have someone that has
an LLC that owns 100 homes to
where I'm like, do I need to be
protecting that, right? And are
they impacting just as much as
the private equity or a hedge
fund.
And so,
Those are things that I'd be
willing to look at.
Do we need to look at, they can
do that, but we put a cap.
I don't know, but I just don't
want to rush that and, but I'm
willing to have that
conversation to make this.
Thank you, Senator Block. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Senator Pope, for
bringing this forward because I
think like you and Senator Cedil
Lopez.
Um, very well.
Articulated, we do have a
problem here in New Mexico.
Um
So on the bill, Senator Pope,
there's no, uh, is there, I
don't see a start date, is
there? What do you have an
intention of a start date? Is it
90 days after it passed? Is that
what it would be Madam Madam
Chair, Senator, um, that's
correct. I think what we usually
do start at.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So
Um
With this
Would, would companies be
grandfathered?
Into this cause you know you
have oil and gas companies that
buy houses up to cause they have
workers that come and go, come
and go, and, and by the way, um,
you know, during COVID we had
nurses and doctors coming and
going and, you know, hospitals.
Um, potentially buying homes or
not.
So what would they, would they
be grandfathered into this, or
would they have to sell their
homes.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
um,
The way this bill is written and
the intent, um, they would not
have to. This would be from the
moment this became law, they
would not be able to purchase
any anymore.
I know there's a congressional
bill that they're looking at.
Um, to ban it and they would
ask, they would actually give 10
years for divestment, so that's
not something I'm talking about.
I'm not putting in the bill.
that's something that maybe we
will need to look at later, um,
but that's not the intent if you
are already uh owning the home.
You own the home.
And I, and I just want to make
one more comment, Madam Chair,
Senator.
Um, you know, there were
comments about
Is it really impacting New
Mexico and maybe somewhere we're
claiming it isn't.
Um, I would also say that we've
seen the impact in other states.
And so in a way this is also
Preventative, so that just
doesn't happen in New Mexico
like it's happening in other
places. Thank you, sir. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
So, um,
Let's look at Rio Rancho for a
second.
Um, intel.
I have 2 homes in Rio Ranch. I'm
getting ready to sell one after
the session if anybody's
interested, Madam Chair.
In the audience, I got a great
home.
Say for instance,
That um
Intel.
Well, let's just say I put it on
the market.
And I'm asking
$575,000.
for the home.
Well, I get offers and this bill
is in effect, by the way, now.
So I get offers from
Families or whatever, couples,
doesn't matter and they come in,
they say, all right, Jay, we'll
give you.
We'll give you 575. We'll give
you the full price for the home.
And then Intel comes in and
says, hold on.
We're gonna give you.
625
So now
When I bought that house when I
moved here from Germany in 2015.
I took the risk as the
homeowner.
Of buying the house.
Putting investment in the house,
doing the upgrade to the house,
paying the property taxes on the
house.
I want to make sure I understand
this, so are you telling me?
That I cannot accept the
$625,000 from Intel, I have to
accept a lower offer.
Because of this bill, because
it's a corporation.
Madam Chair Senator, you
would not be able to sell the
Intel, but
You could use that offer from
Intel and raise the price on the
folks that made you an offer.
So I could not, thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I
could not sell the house to
Intel.
I'd have to take the lower.
A lower price
I couldn't take the 6:25 from
Intel.
I would have to take the 575, so
I'm out $50,000.
You would, you would, you would
take less if you, if you chose
not to raise your offer.
Right.
OK, thank you, Senator Pope.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair
So again,
I want to make sure I clearly
understand because this is
important.
Me as a
Citizen
As a property owner.
I feel that this would violate
my private property rights where
I, I now don't have the choice.
Of who I can sell from, and now
I have to take lesser amount
because.
I'm getting 575 from one offer.
From a couple and I'm getting
625 from Intel who would like
the house for their employees
because Intel is expanding in
Rio Rancho.
I am now out $50,000 after
owning the house for almost 10
years.
Of myself taking the risk on the
mortgage.
I would not be able to have that
choice, that freedom.
To take the higher because it's
a corporation.
Madam Senator, I've already
answered your question.
OK, so the answer would be I'm,
I'm taking the 575.
All right.
Um
I want to just
Quickly ask you
You mentioned corporation, and
it's very easy for anybody to
apply in the corporation to do,
you know, some type of
Side gig like, you know,
consulting you and I are both
consultants, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Pope.
I'm not. Uh, OK, well.
You and I have been in that
business where we could easily
go do consulting.
Uh, and if we decided to do
that.
And do the paperwork to um
Get our
Corporation, um, licensed, so to
speak, uh through the Secretary
of State, I believe.
Um, according to what the
internet says, but you can't
always believe that.
Would, would I be inhibited?
Because I have a corporation
listed next to my name, doing
consulting work.
Maybe with only 1 or 2
employees.
And I wanted to invest in a
house somewhere, would I be
prohibited, sir? Madam Chair,
Senator, if you bought this
under the auspices of your
corporation.
OK.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I yield
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you, Senator Pope for bringing
this bill.
Uh, certainly points to, I
think, uh, a significant issue
in there.
However, you kind of, there is a
shortage here. I, I don't know
how much of it is driven.
I the
a corporate approach to buying
lots of householding and moving
him and trying to get the cars.
That got us into the
Mhm.
Back in 2008. And so I think the
idea is uh
The right way, it's, it's, I
think we need to do something
like this. I do think that
though that there are a lot.
Um, and like last year, you may
or may not remember when.
The bill came up to
Get rid of prior authorization
for any drug.
And I
And I stood up and said, the
concept is right, but boy, this
needs a lot of research because
you
Someone who isn't well schooled
or competent in an area can't.
And uh and I I did go back and
do some research and I am
expanding that list this year.
Um
But my sense is that that as we
look at maybe something
happening on the federal level
where they will do ifs ands or
buts, or if we, you could get
our one of our congressional
delegations to look into.
Whoever is writing the bill or
wherever the bill is and what
committee and I think we might
be able to cover all of those.
But um I
I think again, the direction is
right.
And we need to do something
about it. I just want to be sure
we're very careful. I do
empathize with.
Uh, in my neighborhood, I think
some
Movie
Production companies buy houses
where.
You know stars or semi-stars
come in hide or there are a lot
of other situations like that
that think.
We need to give them the room to
be able to do what it is,
however, legally.
legally structured to to do
that. So I just, I wanted to
point it out, I probably, I
won't vote for this bill because
uh I want to see a bill that
comes back with a lot of thought
in it because I think it's the
right thing to do.
And I'm, I'm hoping that he's
But thank you very much for
bringing.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator, for bringing
the bill forward.
Um, I really appreciate, uh, the
premise of the bill, Madam
Chair, um, and I just, I have to
point out as someone who just
left the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
This was sort of.
Exactly the work that I dealt
with day to day, but nationally.
And coming back home, uh.
Madam Chair, I think it's.
It's an enormous opportunity to
see what we can do as a state to
ensure that we address the
housing issues that we have.
Um
But Miss, uh, Madam Chair and a
senator, I have a few questions
regarding your bill, um, in
terms of
The lack of interpretation for
hedge funds, private equity
firm, corporate or other
business in the bill, um, that's
concerning to me.
Especially when I think of
folks.
Who are in New Mexico who are
purchasing in New Mexico we're
contributing to our economy.
Um, housing is an absolute
issue. We all know it.
But it is not an easy fix. This
has to be comprehensive. I
deeply believe it. Um, and I
also and just seeing the FIR and
looking into some of this stuff.
Um, I, there's also on the FIR
notes that there's no other
state that has enacted such a
ban.
Which is a bit concerning as
well.
I certainly believe we need to
have restrictions and
enforcement to ensure that we as
the state of New Mexico are not
being utilized.
But I believe that if we have
folks investing in our state
that we should continue, uh, to
provide that ability, um.
And we know there's a healthy
housing stock issue.
But I really do think we need
data on specifically New Mexico
corporate ownership.
Um, which has not been provided.
And out of state data
specifically. Who are these
corporations that are
purchasing, um, and I think
having those exact numbers would
be extremely beneficial. I would
like to point out I'm very happy
to be a co-sponsor with Senator
Padilla on the housing bill, um,
which it's set of Bill 205 to
enact the Office of Housing. I
think a lot of these things need
to be studied, looked at
throughout a long term sort of
uh time span, addressing the
needs of our community, but
doing it strategically, and
doing it, um.
In a collaborative format that
makes sense for our state. So
I just wanted to make sure that
I provided some insight and from
seeing it at a national level, I
know it cannot be as easy as,
uh, you know, one simple bill in
terms of fixing the issues that
we have, but I would appreciate
ensuring that we have an
interpretation for those words.
What does a business mean to
ensure that we understand that,
um, and that we do have
enforcement and I would 2 the uh
Madam Chair.
The suggestion that Senator Sio
Lopez uh brought to the table,
um, as a potential idea to also
look at.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Senator Pope, did
you?
Have a response? No? OK. No, I'm
good. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. OK. Any
other questions or comments from
committee members?
Um, I wanted to mention Senator
Pope. I appreciate you bringing
this forward.
We heard some testimony during
the interim, if I remember
correctly, it was in Socorro.
Uh, where we had um some
information that was shared with
us with regards to the issue of
housing.
He has a single family.
But a lot of it goes back for
those.
Live in an apartment.
Or also live in a mobile home.
And some other
Ares, places where um persons in
our communities live.
And
Somehow we have to get our hands
around this other issue about
where.
And how, um,
Private equity firms are coming
in, and they are purchasing.
Places where people live, and
it, it's, it's a sundry of
different areas.
For me, in my community.
Um
On, on the west southwest side
of Albuquerque.
We have many homes that are
being bought up, not by local
persons but from out of state.
Um, because it's an easy fix,
and easy investment.
And they do come as senators
toil Lopez has mentioned a
purchase.
Flip it and make a profit
because of the the cost and
prices that are in the market at
this point.
The other issue, of course, too,
is around apartments.
The larger apartment complexes
are being bought up by entities
from out of state. We don't know
who they are.
I too have received phone calls,
emails.
From persons who are concerned.
Many of them are women, um.
You know, as women grow older,
of course, it just depending as
to what our livelihood has been
for the support.
Financial support and such, but
if you're in an apartment
complex.
Being bought out and the cost
goes up.
And you're on a limited income,
what do you do?
You can't always go live with
your family. Maybe you don't
have a family.
So I believe um senator, this is
an important discussion that we
have to have at the legislature.
Is it couples with what Senator
Nava has said, um.
And I know in MFA is trying to
work on this issue.
But
We also have to take into
context some of the other.
Um
Living arrangements, places
where people find shelter. It's
not just a home.
There are many others who can't
afford a home anymore.
For whatever their living
arrangements are, so I
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
Um
And I know there's a few other
bills out there someplace.
That may come across from the
other chamber that are important
for us to consider also.
Because it does, it does affect
our communities.
Yes thank you.
Yes, Madam Chair, we've had some
great conversations about this
in the interim.
Um
And this isn't gonna be a fix to
solve all the issues.
And the way this is written, uh,
Um
It was just really we, we could
have done it another way, but.
We chose to do it this way to
really make this part of
property law and just um.
Really push the issue.
But I also
Understood going in.
That we were gonna have to make
some adjustments and
See what we can do to make this
better.
But
I just feel this is one of the
issues.
What MFA is doing, what
everybody else is doing, it's
not gonna be one policy that's
going to fix the issue.
I think there's gonna be state
level.
It's quite honestly, Madam
Chair.
Nothing's happening in in
Washington. And if it is, it's
actually.
For
I understand the concerns. I'm
willing to work with folks on
this issue.
Going forward, whether this bill
passes committee or not.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you.
What's the wish of the
committee?
There's a motion for a due pass
from Senator Pinto.
With the second from Senator
Sedia Lopez.
Senator Block.
Then
No.
Senator Charlie, yes.
Senor Gallegos
In her nova
No.
Pinto.
And Scott.
Center Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez
Yes.
Um, Senator, you know.
You don't have a recommendation
to move forward.
But if I could
Oh, darn.
If I could suggest is um.
We're on a memorial?
That could put some of the
comments that were made by
different committee members.
Maybe this is something that we
can look at and study during the
interim.
And gather some of the data
needed, um, so that.
Um, we can come back with
another, um,
Another piece of legislation
that will have some of the data
that has been suggested for
members here.
I, I'll take that suggestion,
Madam Chair, and also how we um
make sure we're not uh limiting
individual.
Thank you Senator. Thank you.
Senator Scherer.
You are here?
With Senate Bill 88, Medicaid
Trust Fund and state-supported
fund.
So, uh, thank you Madam Chair.
So Senate Bill 88 uh sets up
another one of these trust funds
like we've done for some other
things here.
And it's ultimately
Um, a $2 billion trust fund, but
it grows over some time.
And so where the money comes
from is from 5.
Separate places which I'm
looking for in my paper here
because everybody ask me a
question.
I found different papers.
So, uh, we set up the trust
fund.
Money will come from specials,
uh, special appropriations that
weren't spent or encumbered,
that's the first step.
So, uh, money that's reverted.
Certainly it comes from the
interest.
Earns cause this money will be
invested.
Uh, the next one is unspent
recurring appropriation. So if
an agency doesn't spend money,
that money then flows back into
this.
Non-recurring.
Uh, money, so we put money in
for a one time thing. It doesn't
all get spent. It moves into
there.
And then finally the last one is
capital outlay money. It's not
spent.
So, uh, if you take those 5
funding sources.
And you put them into this, this
fund.
Uh, and that's, that's estimated
by the way, the.
The lowest number of of
Reversions was $81 million in
the last five years.
The largest was 379 million.
So if you have a big year, well,
funded.
Um
Pretty quickly, but that's the
whole idea is that we would put
the build the Medicaid trust
fund.
Put money into it.
When it hits the $2 billion
mark, that's when money stops
flowing.
And this really comes from
recognize what we did with the
Early childhood trust fund.
Which is at 9 billion now and
going to go to 12 and
We didn't put any brakes in it
anywhere.
So this gets to that fund.
Uh, once it hits the $500
million mark.
That's when you can start
drawing off of it.
And you draw 5%.
But it's invested
So
The investments that we've had.
Really grow at about 5.5 to 7.5%
every year.
So it should grow every year.
And then you draw it off when it
gets to the $2 billion mark, and
you pull off that 5%.
That's $100 million.
You do that with the federal
match 3 to 1.
All of a sudden you have $400
million.
That, that, uh
Because that we use for
Medicaid?
Be.
It's pretty simple. The funding
is not.
Coming out of new taxes or
anything like that, it's coming
out of money that we.
We just didn't spend.
No
There you go.
OK. Thank you, Senator. We'll go
to the audience. Is there anyone
here in support?
Of Senate Bill 88.
And if so, if you would mind um.
Yeah I mean and.
Introduce yourself.
Short statement, please.
Uh, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Carry
Robin Bruder, I'm the registered
lobbyist with the New Mexico
Medical Society, Medicaid is now
the 2nd largest budget
responsibility that we have for
state dollars in this state,
that budget is incredibly
important to our physicians
because more than half of our
population are Medicaid clients.
We really envision this as a
stable way for us to be able to
fund Medicaid in future years.
So that we can ensure we don't
have to take steps back to the
great work that we've done to
increase Medicaid reimbursement
rates for physicians, if we end
up having a bad budget year,
this money could be used to
supplement the Medicaid program,
and we think that for the
stability of our independent and
are, you know, all of our
physician practices and other
providers who are accepting
Medicaid. This is a really smart
investment for the state to
make.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the League of voters of New
Mexico, American Association of
University Women and now
National Organization for Women
Local, and uh we're in strong
support for this. I don't want
to repeat what the previous
speaker just said, um, this, I
think this is actually very
brilliant, and I, I think we
need this kind of investment,
especially because we may be
facing a lot of um healthcare.
Cuts from the federal
government, um, and we do have a
huge need in our state, um, and
I want to thank Senator Sheriff
for bringing it forward and um
urge or do fast. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee Troy
Clark from the New Mexico
Hospital Association, we applaud
the sponsor for bringing this uh
bill. If you look back over the
last 20 or more years with our
Medicaid funding, it goes like a
roller coaster.
In bad years we have to take
cuts which impacts not only our
providers and our hospitals, all
of our healthcare, and then in
good years we restore those
cuts, but we have not kept up
with inflation, uh, especially
for our providers and as we're
in a health care crisis trying
to recruit and increase the
number of providers in this
state. We think this is an
excellent option to take the,
take it in a time where we have
funds available to set aside in
the good years so that in the
bad years we don't have to
offset all the other efforts
that you and your colleagues are
making to try and improve the uh
recruitment.
physicians to our state. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman
Lopez, members of the committee.
My name is Fred Nathan. I'm the
executive director and founder
of Think New Mexico. We
enthusiastically support this
bill, and we commend all the
sponsors of the bill, Senator
Munoz, Senator Scherer, and
Senator Woods for bringing it
forward.
New Mexico is the only state
that lost doctors over the last
5 years between 2019 and 2024.
And there's 3 reasons. We, we
did a report that you might have
seen, uh, this fall that we sent
to all of you.
And there's 3 reasons why
doctors retire early or leave
the state.
The first is our very high
medical malpractice premiums,
which are narrowly double our
surrounding states. The second
reason is we're one of only 2
states that continues to tax
medical services.
And the third reason is our very
low Medicaid reimbursement rates
in many cases, doctors are
losing money on every procedure
they perform on a Medicaid
patient.
So what makes this bill so
impressive and why we supported
so strongly is this addresses
that third issue. How do we
raise Medicaid reimbursement
rates across the board, and this
bill basically takes that 5%
draw, which is $100 million a
year and turns it into $400
million which is an enormous
return on investment.
Now some people, some people
have raised the point. Well,
what happens if the federal
government reduces the match.
And that makes this bill even
more urgent, so that we have a
backstop.
So I don't want to oversell it,
but I think this may be one of
the most important bills.
This session and we hope you
will pass it. Many thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Linda Siegel,
representing the Greater
Albuquerque Medical Association,
the nurse practitioner council,
the nurse midwives, the
occupational therapist
organization and other, and the
prescribing psychologists and we
stand in strong support of this
bill because of of the very
things that have been said were
particularly concerned about
what will happen to Medicaid in
New Mexico and this could be
our, our saving grace. So thank
you for bringing it in. We stand
in strong support.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for
pediatrics.
Pediatrics is the neonatal
provider of press. I also feel
like I need to say that Linda
needs a little bit of help
representing all the clients she
listed, um, but, you know, that
long list is very apt. The
reality is that pediatrics has
been the beneficiary of some
recent increases in the Medicaid
rates.
Uh, they've tried to maternal
and child health, and so they've
gone from about 80 to 90% of
Medicaid or Medicare up to about
150, and it's well needed
because that's a specialty uh
practice. The reality of the
situation though is if we
experience lean times in our
budget.
They're gonna have to pull those
rates back.
This bill will create stability
in those rates, create a
perpetual source of funding for
those rates, and as we increase
rates, we can increase physician
compensation, which will allow
us to attract and retain
positions in the state. So
that's what we need. We would
urge that the committee move it
forward. It's a very important
bill and I want to thank Senator
Sheriff for bringing it forward.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
none will go to Zoom.
And we have Enrique Quill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Enrique and
Nell here, appearing on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, improving
healthcare is a primary goal for
chamber members this legislative
session. It helps put New Mexico
on the proper footing to be
competitive with all of our
neighboring states. Adequate
funding for Medicaid and
provider reimbursement rates is
really
Incredibly important to
attracting and keeping
healthcare professionals in New
Mexico. Without access to
quality health care. Our state
is less competitive from an
economic development standpoint.
This is a win-win proposition,
and we thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward.
Better health care and a
stronger economy. That's what
we're looking for. Thank you and
we ask for your support of
Senate Bill 88.
Thank you and my apologies for
botching your name.
Um, next is Rick.
Hi, this is Rick Madden. Can you
hear me all right?
Yes.
I'm representing the Academy of
American Academy of Family
Physicians in New Mexico. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. We strongly support
this bill for all the reasons
that have been presented by the
prior speakers. Needless to say,
for primary care, we need
Medicaid payment to allow our
patients to get in and see us to
lower costs and improve value.
So I appreciate your support.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Thank you, Erica Sanchez.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Erica Sanchez. I'm with
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and we stand in support
of Senate Bill 88 and thanked
the sponsors for bringing it
forward. We believe all New
Mexicans deserve access to
quality affordable healthcare
and Medicaid is a trusted
quality and valuable source of
health coverage in New Mexico.
And for all of the reasons
already stated, we support
Senate Bill 88. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, so with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Senator,
You want to go first, right?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Hm
Madam chair and senator, this
would be
Uh
The enabling legislation to set
this Medicaid fund up.
What is the vision for
Of funding over the next.
4 years, for example.
So, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
So
What we're looking at, um,
We're looking at $300 million
seed money from this budget.
But beyond that, then we're
looking at the
The reversions uh coming in.
Which
At the low end, we're putting it
$100 million a year at the low
end.
We know that the range has been
from 81 to 379 million in
reversion.
So we were trying to be
conservative when we were doing
this. OK, so it's gonna grow by
whatever the interest is.
Plus $100 million.
Now, if it, if it grows at that
slow rate.
It'll take about 6 years to hit
the $2 billion mark.
If it grows at the rate that
people are telling me that it
can grow.
3 years.
And it'll be $2 billion.
And that's based on
That growth rate is based on
what happened with the early
childhood, which went from $300
million by the way.
to 9 billion.
very short.
This one does have the brakes.
It's not gonna go that big.
Madam Chair and senator, so when
it gets to the 2.
The
Is that the end of the increase.
That's the end of the.
Uh, reversion money.
Investments can continue to go.
The the interest earned can
continue to grow but deep.
But the
Influx of reversion money stops.
So, Madam Chair and senator.
We would be relying on growth
above.
5% for any additional increases.
Yes, madam.
That's exactly right. And
We would be
Capturing
5% of that.
Fond
Value
Or $100 million.
A year.
To be then
I guess leverage is the right.
Uh, with federal dollars to.
$400 million.
Yeah, if, if I, if I understand
you're right, it won't be the
400 until it hits that 2
million, 2 billion.
And that's when it'll be the
steady 400 million after that,
Madam Chair and Senator, can you
tell me what?
The budget for Medicaid was last
year.
I believe it was 1.1.
Billion, I believe.
And the year before.
I was in that neighborhood for
the last.
6 or 7 years, a little over a
billion dollars and next year.
Yes
Though it's not, Madam Chair,
Senator.
It's not
Increasing
the Medicaid budget has been
increasing.
OK. Uh, yes, Madam Senator,
that's what I was trying to get.
So 1.1 billion.
Is being leveraged to now.
Oh
Roughly 4.
4 billion
By the time we get federal
match. Yes, madam, madam chair
and uh senator.
All in
Our Medicaid budget's bigger
than our budget.
all of the matching funds.
Madam chair and senator, it's
over.
And 10 billion, yes.
And
Increasing rapidly.
Uh yes, and and it's because of
we're trying to
For the reimbursements of the
doctors and hospitals and so
forth.
So that we can keep the doctors
and hospitals. Madam Chair, I'm,
I'm likely to vote for this.
But I do have some concerns
about the trajectory.
Of that Medicaid budget.
And what we need to be looking
at.
Going forward
Mm
Try to bend that curve.
In a manner that keeps
Our doctors and hospitals.
As whole as we can.
Make
So
Well, I guess the last question
with respect to all of the
funds.
That we've set up in the last
5 years, 6 years or so since the
oil boom.
Uh
Really showered all of this.
All of these funds on us.
If the state really needs the
money.
If we start sweeping out
corners.
To to maintain an operating
budget.
All of these funds.
That we have
Built over the last 5 years.
Or
Fair game.
Is that an accurate statement?
Um, that is an accurate
statement, Madam Chair.
Uh, but what we have.
Done in the last
4 years, I think.
is
When you count the early
childhood.
Fund, which was the
Start of this and then the
various other funds that we've
done.
We, we're going to be in the
neighborhood of
$18 billion.
That we could draw from.
If necessary by sticking it in
all of these funds.
I would hope that we never get
to that point, but it is there.
Unlike the permanent fund, uh,
you don't have to go to the to
the voters to get into it. We
can get into it if we need to.
OK
Thank you.
Senator, thank you, Madam Chair,
for your.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator chair.
Munoz, uh.
This very clever way to use the
ver sion funds and the need is.
Um
We know it's high now because
the budgets are going up.
There's no question, but
I think it was the day before
yesterday.
That the
Uh, House Budget Committee.
In Washington, voted for 880.
Billion
Dollars cut
In Medicaid program.
One way or the other, plus.
Their access to other funds.
Favors
Do think
That this is so timely because
we are gonna get stressed. Don't
see that changing going forward
in the future, so, again, thank
you for doing this.
Um, I, I would like just to take
a moment to point out that
we've, we've, we've got to start
on paying.
Clinicians in the state.
Um, the movement to 150% for
primary care and behavioral
health of maternal child is
wonderful. I think it's making a
difference for those who were in
the state.
Unfortunately, it's still not
enough for those who are outside
of the state because of the
deficit and and the loss.
We're gonna have to get that up
even further in time.
The other area that we haven't
taken care of is our specialty.
Uh
Folks, and there's a huge gap.
Between what other states can
pay.
And what New Mexico pays people
in specialty services.
I think the, the 3 or 4 major
single specialty groups in
Albuquerque.
have had no success in hiring.
From out of state for almost 2
years.
And um,
So one of the next things and I
have a memorial and to study,
what do we need to do to be
competitive because they're,
there still is a small
commercial component, only 25%
of healthcare dollars come
through commercial, uh, and most
other states, that's 50 to 75%,
so we're really kind of
backwards. So doing the
Medicaid, doing the leveraging
is really the way that we need
to go.
Um, and again, I
Want to take the time to just
explain to the committee that we
still have so much more work to
do, and if, uh,
The Senate Bill 17 from last
year.
Yes, encumbered.
Uh, the OMB.
Um, we're gonna have to find
more money take it again, the
vision is very clear-eyed, very.
Thank you.
Oops.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator Chae.
For bringing this forward, I
think it's a great idea and.
Um, I have a couple of questions
about.
The reversions and
reauthorizations and where some
of this is coming from. Do we
know who will be impacted by
using re um
Um
Thank you, reversions, um.
To go toward this. So,
Madam Chair, I don't think I can
give you specifics, but, but
every year, uh, our various.
apartments.
Uh
Almost every year there is some
level of reversion in every
department.
Sometimes it's a little bit,
sometimes it's a lot.
And so some of the things that
we've run into in the last few
years.
Is uh the departments come in
here.
And then they say, hey, we're
doing a great job, give us more
money.
And so we give them more money
and then they, they're their
actual spending stays flat, so
whatever we gave them.
This reverts back.
And so what this is really
designed to do is capture money
that's already in the budget.
But wasn't spent
And, and, and so it'll come from
the agencies themselves, but
also we have a lot of specials
out there, so we're gonna give
money to
Uh, program.
Uh, and most of the specials
never get fully spent.
Uh, they may get spent at 90
98%.
But there's almost always some
reversion from the specials,
because they always ask for $100
and they really only need 75.
Um
So that's where the, the bulk of
this money will come from.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, I'm thinking
particularly about those
projects in Navajo country and
then tribal and rural
communities.
Um, that never make it to
fruition. A lot of times for
reasons beyond their control,
there's no system inequity that
we should name and be aware of,
um, but very in particular, I'm
thinking about a domestic
violent shelter that exists
right now in Gran, New Mexico.
They were right out, they're out
right outside of my district,
um, but they were appropriated
$5 million.02 months ago. They
were given 2 months to spend
that $5 million.
Which is just
Impossible.
Um
And so I, I think it's important
for us to just name.
That, um,
Well, this is a good idea. And
while we need it, and while I
will support it.
Um, that some of this funding is
coming at the expense of.
programs and projects.
That don't make it because of
our own failure within the
government, help them get these
things done.
And, um.
It would be, um.
A disservice to not name that on
behalf of the constituents.
community
Though I understand this is also
going to benefit them.
Um, and two things can be true
at the same time.
Um
That, that's all I have, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Thank you
then.
Thank you, Senator Silo Lopez.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Um, this is a really creative um
idea and a really good idea for
something that's that's really
needed.
But it does not it cause I know
a lot of the speakers um spoke
about uh the increase in the
reimbursement rate, which
absolutely needs to happen. This
bill doesn't require that at
all.
Madam Chair, no, this.
This is just the
The trust fund
And then, of course, how you get
the reimbursements raised
because now you have an extra
$400 million that you didn't
have a couple of years ago.
Um, and that, um, the behavioral
health trust fund had all kinds
of guardrails, and it was the
appropriation then then we have
monetary contributions for the
next 4 years until the
appropriation.
Uh, ripened, I guess, and then
we had a, a, a 3rd bill that was
all about the guardrails and you
recall it was a lot of work.
Um, and this is the opposite
approach. Instead of money with
guardrails, it's money with
limitations.
And it's a huge limitation. It's
the limitation is.
Um, where is it.
Money in the trust fund may be
appropriated.
For any purpose.
If in the fiscal year federal
matching funds for the state
medication program.
Decrease
Or less than 1 to 1 match,
whatever, um, the way
But that is
Well, and I guess that's why I
wanted to ask you.
Um
And in the
Um
Hypothetically,
Let's say, um, the match, the
federal match does go down.
How does this work? How does it,
it, it's just the discretion is
up to the legislature at that
time.
Or how what would happen?
So Madam Madam Chair and
senator.
So while we're putting this
money away in in growth, we do
understand that there may be
Other issues out there.
And so in this particular case,
if the match gets down to 7.5%.
Then
I'm
Decrease at at least 7.5%.
Then we can actually start
drawing off the corpus of this
if we need to.
But
The idea
And the belief is that this will
continue to grow because of the
investment.
And therefore, the, the need to
draw off that, but this does
give you
Uh, uh, an out.
And again, this comes from the
early childhood trust fund.
we said you couldn't pull
anything out. I mean, there were
all kinds of restrictions to
pull that money out.
And so here we have a $9 billion
trust fund that we can barely
use.
This was to make sure that that
didn't happen.
Um, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, cuz it also says that in
F.
Uh, but it, it asked that all
that.
Money from the other funds.
In that event, if we don't, if,
if basically we're looking for
money because there was a huge
downturn in that event in order
to avoid an unconstitutional
deficit.
The legislature may be
appropriate from the trust fund
to the general fund only in the
amount necessary to meet general
fund appropriations.
And only if the legislature has
authorized transfers from the
appropriation contingency fund.
That's that our tax funds, you
know that.
Um
The tax stabilization fund.
The general fund operating
reserve.
And we know what that is, that
varies every year, but it's
about 30%.
The tax stabilization reserve in
early childhood education and
care fund that exhaust those
fund balances. So it gives a
roadmap that requires that the
money come from the other funds
first.
Um
Manager, why is that?
Well, so, Madam Chair,
Because we want this to be a
stable fund and growth, because
this is an important one to
grow.
And so we have the
The revenue stabilization fund
or the Larry La Jaga Fund.
Uh, that is the really the rainy
day fund, but we also go through
these other funds to say, before
you hit the Medicaid fund.
We've got all of these other
funds have, and that's only if
we don't have enough money to
pay our bills, the
unconstitutional part is we have
to have a balanced budget.
So if we can't achieve a
balanced budget.
you go through all these other
funds before you hit this one.
Thank you Madam Chair. I am.
Like I said, I think this is
really uh creative.
Um
And important as we have these,
you know, the people's money.
To, to think about the future of
the state and has um, I guess.
The only
Substantive issue I have.
Other than just understanding
the bill, but um
Is the limitation that I
described, it's just.
Thus to medicate.
The Medicaid trust fund.
And um I guess I would, I know
then we'd have to have other
guard rails, I guess I feel more
comfortable if it was a Medicaid
and low income.
Um
Low-income medical care trust
fund, because there are people
who are not eligible for
Medicaid.
Who, um,
Then we're kind of left out of
this pot of money and
presumably.
And you're always making these
choices, right? You're always
making these choices, and I
guess I would like to see.
Medicaid Grove, the, the, and,
and it's great because exactly
as you said.
The match makes this a no
brainer. We, we really want to
put resources into Medicaid and
And multiply the services.
Um, that people in our state can
can reach and but we have so
many Medicaid people.
And then we have people who just
exceed the cutoff and can't pay
their their medical.
I don't know, not getting the
care or also uh maybe hospital
funds, I, it's just really hard
on them who just.
are above the cutoff and then of
course, undocumented people in
this state aren't eligible for
Medicaid at all.
And, and that seems really
unfair, um.
Because then they have, they
then they just can't get
services at all, and that's not
healthy, not only for them, but
it's not healthy for us.
If we have a population not
getting medical services, that
means they're gonna be sicker,
which means we're gonna be
sicker because we're not getting
care. So I would.
And I don't know if you think it
was friendly because it it
probably would require more a
more complex thing, but
If the idea was Medicaid trust
fund plus.
Medical care, I would be so more
enthusiastic about it.
Because then I just feel we're
reaching the people, all of the
people who need this in our
state.
Not just those who are eligible
for Medicare.
Is that something
So
Madam Chair, of course,
everything is a trade-off. If
you do something you, you do
something else.
And at least the the focus of
this one.
Right now it's just the Medicaid
because that's what.
That's what's driving our
doctors away, hardly.
Um, so can we do it for
everybody? Not under this
mechanism.
This is a step toward.
More people having access to
more.
More medical care.
Because they have doctors that
are staying here.
Would it be possible in a future
allocation because it does give
discretion to the legis for any
purpose, no.
I guess I, because I, I.
It would require another
provision saying money and maybe
you could limit it to a
percentage.
Of the income.
But a percentage, whatever
percentage.
We currently spend on uninsured
people.
Um, would be available.
In the same way, and I don't
know if on the floor cause this
is I I'm gonna vote yes. I'm not
gonna.
you know, hold this bill hostage
or try to even.
But I might try to make this
suggestion.
I guess you go to, no, you go to
finance next.
Yes, Ma'am. I, I mean, I think
it's probably way too late to
make it on the floor.
But it's just, it bothers me
about this, I probably will make
that statement on the floor. I
am not interested in holding it
hostage.
But it does, it is a concern I
have about.
How narrow this is considering
all of the healthcare, all of
the people in our state who need
healthcare.
Uh, thank you, thank you,
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, Senator Char. I've
heard some interesting words
today to describe this bill of
clever.
Brilliant
And then I see you sitting
there.
Um
Senator, I'm sorry, did that
come off wrong? I'm sorry. I
wanna just thank you for uh the
the bill. I, I just have one.
question on here, if you can
help me out with section 3 and 5
to help me out with the wording
here.
Um
On Section 3 starting line 15.
I don't know if you have it in
front of you, sir.
It says, uh, except as provided
in subsection B of this section.
All unreserved undesignated fund
balances in reverting funds and
accounts.
As reflected in the central
financial reporting and
accounting system as of June
30th.
revert by September 30th to the
Medicaid Trust Fund.
Provided that once the balance
of the Medicaid trust fund at
the end of the fiscal year
reaches $2 billion. Balances
shall revert to the general
fund.
OK. I, I understand that.
And then in section 5,
We're talking about a percentage
here.
Online
5
I can start there.
Except as provided in subsection
B of this section.
Unless otherwise
Provided by law, the legislature
shall provide that the following
shall be transferred to the
Medicaid Trust Fund.
At the end of each fiscal year,
1%.
Of the unexpended or
unencumbered.
Balances of the appropriations
made.
In Section 4
But it talks about all of them
in section 3 of the prior year's
general.
Appropriation Act
Then it says the unexpended or
unencumbered balances of all
other appropriations made from
the general fund in the prior
years general appropriation Act.
Not including appropriations
made to non-reverting funds.
And then it says reversion of
the unexpended balances of
appropriations made from the
general fund for the capital
outlay projects.
And then lastly, it just says
once the balance of the Medicaid
trust fund uh reaches $2 billion
like you said, sir, a transfer
pursuant to subsection A.
Of this section shall not be
made.
Can, can you tell me, Senator
Sherrod, um,
The, the difference there with
the 1% versus the language in
section 3, please.
So, uh, Madam Chair and senator,
so it talks about the 1%.
Um
In section 4.
Section 4
Uh, so section 4 is the state
treasury earnings.
So
What's being invested.
Or you can take 1% of
that amount.
It's
It is not otherwise.
We're trying to
You have this uh is a separate
flow of money.
Without harming the other
investments that are out there.
This is, this is from other
investments. OK,
thank you so much, that, that
clears it up a lot. I appreciate
that and uh I wanna thank you
and the sponsors for this bill.
I think it's a, it's a huge
help.
And um I looked to support this,
so thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions,
Senator Pinto?
Madam
Lady.
Um
Yes, madam Chair, so.
Uh, reversions from specials or
agencies.
Uh, and then some capital
outlay.
That is yet to be determined
though, because right now.
Um
In Senate Finance today, there's
all these negotiations about,
OK, where do we draw the line?
You draw the line
At you get to uh reauthorize it
one time, you get to reis for
one year and if they still can't
get it done, does that
Become this. That is not yet
determined, but those, those
conversations are deep right
now. So Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
I understand they want to do
this, then it should just be a
one time allocation.
Feel like you're putting it's a
risk in the sense that we were,
I mean the fun will.
Generate, but also another risk
because we don't know.
How much is gonna go in.
So remembers it.
So
Madam chair
All of this money is money
that's already out there. Our
capital, I can't remember the
exact dollars, but I think we
have something like $6 billion
in capital outlay money.
It is not, and that's the
problem. It's sitting there
doing nothing.
So the idea we can't even spend
it.
Let's invested
That's, that's really where this
is coming from.
that dollar amount.
is absolutely undetermined at
this moment. It might be
nothing.
But it's because we've got lots
of money.
Billions of dollars not moving.
And it's because the projects
aren't ready or whatever. I
mean, there's a lot of reasons
for that.
Most of it's also old money.
It's been reauthorized at least
once in many cases, twice.
Which means it's a decade old
money.
OK, thank you, Senator. Any
other questions, Senator Serio
Lopez for a second time.
Thank you. I was just trying to
look this up and try to figure
it out. Medicaid money, the
federal match cannot go.
Sure, I don't know.
Uh, right, I'm, I'm pretty sure
that the answer is, um,
Actually, I'm positive. Federal,
the Hyde Amendment um is a
statute, a federal statute that
does not permit federal funds to
go for abortion.
So I asked the question, but I
know that that's true.
So, um,
Right now, New Mexico is a state
that funds abortions for people
who would otherwise be eligible
for abortions under Medicaid.
Using state funds.
Madam Chair, how would that
work?
With this
With this bill, cause it's
silent about.
About procedures.
That the federal government
won't cover that the state ends
up covering an abortion is one
of them.
So, Madam Chair, this doesn't
change anything that's in
current law.
Regarding any procedure.
Uh, Mad, Madam Chair, what it
does though is it doesn't.
Create a fund.
Like I don't, I actually don't
know what funds the state is
using now to provide.
This service, but I know it is
because I know about the Supreme
Court case that requires the
state under our equal protection
law.
To cover this procedure.
Um
So
I'm not sure what funds are used
for that.
But I, I think we should look at
that as well as some of the
questions I asked like where do
the funds come that that cover
people.
Who are not eligible for, for
Medicaid and where the funds
come from.
For services that are not, not
paid for with federal dollars.
Um, I, I would like to know the
answers to this question and how
that's gonna work.
Because again, limiting this
fund only to Medicaid means we
sign on to all of the
limitations of Medicaid as well.
And I'm a little bit worried.
In the current environment that
there may be even more
limitations, um.
Medicaid funds.
And, and that I think would be
problematic and unfair to the
women in our.
So anyway, I, I was.
I just wanted to make sure that
that's correct and I'm pretty
sure it is.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Um
Senator, I, I appreciate this
bill coming forward and
It's insightful. I don't know if
that language has been used.
But
Um
I do have some concerns and I
appreciate Senator Pinto
pointing it out with regards to
capital outlay.
Um, and, and it goes back also
to what Senator Sidil Lopez
mentioned and others, you know,
about guard rails.
This is a pretty open-ended bill
at this point that doesn't have
any specific direction.
Um, especially when we talk
about capital outlay, that's so
important for many communities
in our state.
I have some concerns on it.
And I'm hoping that we'll hear
some more information from
Senate Finance.
As, as this bill continues to
move forward, especially since
the budget.
The House bill too is getting
close to being finalized,
whatever that is, cause it still
comes to us.
Um
The, my other question, of
course, is, and thank you,
Senator Sadil Lopez because
there's, there's always a
concern about what um
What can happen from the federal
level when we talk about
restrictions on monies that we
have and there are other bills
in this, in this legislative
session that could also have
some restrictions on reproduct
um.
But you know, for me is why
didn't you all put a billion
dollars to start this off like
we did for the behavioral health
trust fund.
Why don't we put in, we have
some chunk of change there, um,
senator. We should have put a
billion dollars in to start
instead of waiting.
Because my anticipation from,
you know, and I'm tracking all
this stuff on budget.
Be the z.
Um, those cuts are coming.
We know it is, and so how are we
going to address this
immediately?
Um, we can't wait, wait because
Thank God for the stock market
in some respects, but it's gonna
take a while to build the the
corpus.
We can draw down from.
Um, Medicaid is important to.
Many constituents in our state.
It's important to the doctors,
the reimbursement rates and
everything else that we've done.
But even to keep the the level
of service that we have right
now.
Um, I would ask why can we not
put a billion dollars in.
Star it up now, especially um
the 2 billion, I mean, we have a
chunk of change.
Senator and
Adrian and others on the finance
committee, it's, it's just.
Um, it's anticipating because
we've, some of us have lived
through those two downturns.
And Senator, you've been here
also where we had to make cuts,
which hurt.
And Senator Smith, um.
Rest in peace, but he let us
down that road, which was
hurtful in so many ways.
Um, and I'd hate for us to have
to go down that road because of
the chunk of change that we have
with in the budget of Medicaid.
Medicare is another one coming,
but that's not state funded, but
that's still hurts and cuts into
everything else that we have
about healthcare in the state of
New Mexico.
So it's just a question.
Um, I don't expect an answer
unless you only have a good one
as to why y'all didn't do it.
I'll let you see if you have
that, um, senator.
Well, uh, Madam Chair, I do not
have Donald's cell phone number
so I can't call him and ask him.
Um, but when it comes to the
capital outlay, certainly recent
capital outlay has been cash.
Just coming straight out of our
general fund.
It's not been the bonding that.
Most of us remember. So
recently,
That money
Is general fund money, and if we
move it around.
We have the authority to do
that. That's not any different.
And moving it from
one department to another.
For that capital outlay money
that we could potentially touch.
Again, that's potentially.
Because there's all kinds of
other things going on in there.
The uh
I think that they
Potential for federal.
I think simply putting this
money away now.
is, is
but will have the effect of
buffering that.
Now.
You know, if all of a sudden we
lose $400 million or a billion
dollars or.
If we lose $4 billion.
Well, that's gonna hurt no
matter why.
But I do, uh, another comment
here, I think from Senator
Hickey.
I
This isn't the, this isn't.
The
Be all end all of health care.
We do need economic development
and we need economic development
that includes commercial
insurance.
You bring a company in here with
commercial insurance.
That makes a huge difference.
On what our medical system can
bear.
Uh, commercial insurance pays a
lot more than Medicaid,
sometimes 3 times more than
Medicaid.
And so if you bring those, those
companies in if we figure out
how to do economic development.
This becomes less important.
Because now you've got people
with commercial insurance.
Because we don't have it today.
We better deal with this today.
No, and I appreciate that center
cuz I think our private markets
about 25% in that range.
Currently for what we have
because everything else is based
on Medicaid, local government,
the schools. I mean, it is
pretty much government based in
our state.
So, um, that quarter.
Percentage of 25%, give or take
a few. I haven't read up
totally. I, I have to get the
numbers into my brain.
But that's still a very small
percentage, so the rest of it is
still based on our funding from
the government.
Um, so it's just a question to
ask.
But I'm hoping that instead of
finance that we'll be knocking
on the doors of many of you.
Um, as this bill moves forward
because I, I think there's still
much bad.
So, but I, I appreciate and
thank you.
So any other comments from
committee?
What is the
promotion for a due pass from
Senator Hickey.
With a second from Senator Nava.
And if you would call the roll,
please.
Senator Block.
And a boon.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos
and nova. Yesen Pinto.
And Scott.
And hersario Lopez.
Yes, to explain my vote.
Hickey.
And Lopez.
Uh, yes.
To explain your votes, Senator
said the Olofus.
Um, as I said, I don't want to
slow this down, the future of
our state. I will probably raise
unless those.
The answers to my questions are
different. I'll raise those
concerns on the floor as well.
Um, thank you.
Thank you.
Were there any others that I
missed for explain about?
Uh, by a vote of 9 to 1, you
have a due pass recommendation,
Senator.
thank you Madam Chair and
Senator Block does need to add.
A handsome and daring into the.
Here's your floor leader, so you
know, there's a few things to
learn another vote.
Um, I had already asked Senator.
Stephanics to come forward. She
had come in earlier.
So Senator Bergman, just wait a
minute, or a couple of minutes
anyway. Senator Stephanics, if
you would come forward.
And this is on Senate bill 80,
Medicare supplement open
enrollment.
And then representative Yyel, I,
I see you here. We'll go to you
after just because I know Senate
Bill 66 may take some time.
So we'll get to you after
Senator Stephanics.
Thanks for your patience.
Do we get the TV OK?
No.
Call technology.
Give us just a minute or two
while, uh.
Well Matthew tries to
Get the screen going, but we're
still being webcast, so we're
still good.
We're now moving on to
Uh, Senate Bill 80.
And Senator Stefanik.
You have before. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh,
today I'm presenting the Mediap
bill, uh, which is also
described as a birthday rule.
So, uh,
For anybody who is not.
In a group plan for Medicare.
Like, uh,
An employer group.
A retirement group, etc.
I
It often individuals who take
Meig gap.
For their insurance instead of
buying a plan and oftentimes
that's because of cost.
There are 70,000 people in our
70,000 seniors.
In our state who could have
through.
So what is the bill? The senior
65 and older have a choice of
health coverage under Medicare.
Obviously I'm sick over 65, so
I'm not an expert. Everybody's
going, yeah.
So, um,
Not everybody understands all
the options that go along with
this and so oftentimes people
pick Metig Gap when they could
be picking something that is a
fuller, richer, uh, product.
But oftentimes they pick many
gap because of cost.
Because they can't really afford
more.
So anyway, senior 65 and older
have a choice of health coverage
under Medicare.
Original Medicare or Medicare
Advantage.
Original Medicare covers 80% of
healthcare costs.
A Medicare supplement plan
Meigap covers the other 20%.
This bill would allow seniors
with a Medicare supplement plan
to switch to a more affordable
or a different supplement plan
during a sixty-day period.
Each year, whether or not they
have pre-existing conditions.
Oftentimes, if you want to
switch your plan when you are a
senior, you're required to have
an annual uh physical to
determine preexisting
conditions, and you can either
be excluded for coverage for
preexisting conditions for 6
months or a year, but this bill
would not require the annual
physical and it would allow the
preexisting conditions to go
along to a new plan.
This bill, as you see in the
FIRs has no fiscal impact.
Uh, seniors in New Mexico must
go through medical underwriting
to purchase a Medicare
supplement plan after their 1st
6 months on Medicare.
Those who have preexisting
conditions can be disqualified
from purchasing a new plan.
Seniors who cannot purchase a
more affordable Medicare
supplement plan because of
preexisting conditions may be
trapped.
With rising premiums they cannot
afford.
Who would the bill help? I've
already mentioned there's 70,000
seniors in New Mexico who are
insured through original
Medicare.
Now we also know 70,000 people
are not gonna go shopping.
For a health plan.
A lot of people are gonna stay
on exactly what they have
because it's complicated and to
delve into this and to do cost.
Uh, comparisons is very hard for
some people.
Some people might go and get an
insurance broker to help them do
this.
And the bill would help those
seniors with pre-existing
conditions stay on Medicare and
the supplement plan, protecting
their access to the healthcare.
There are 16 other states
including Idaho, that have
passed laws that allow seniors
on original Medicare to switch
their Mediap plans without
regard to any pre-existing
conditions.
So this is a bill to help
seniors.
This is a bill that should have
a flat.
Uh, consequence to the state.
This actually could help some of
our risk pools.
Grow if people changed.
Now you might think that seniors
who want to change plans, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
would want to choose something
that's cheaper, but that's not
always the case.
If you have a complicating
condition.
And you have a family member who
might be willing to help you.
Pay for a higher plan, you might
want to go to a plan with richer
premiums and or richard Richard
benefits and be willing to pay
those premiums.
So it could go lower and it
could go higher.
But you're talking about
offering people a choice for 60
days every year, that's why it's
called the birthday rule.
I brought this bill on behalf of
a constituent who moved here
from California.
And California was one of the
states that had this bill, so or
has this uh policy.
So she brought it to my
attention.
And since then, I've also
gotten.
Letters
From
It's one of the uh large.
Medical groups, it was either MS
or another group, but I'll look
for it while we're talking
today.
So she's not an expert, but she
is the person who requested
this, and she's here in the
audience, man, I'm sure if we
could have her speak.
Absolutely.
Susan, come on up.
Hi, uh, my name is Susan Ellen
Bogan. I'm, I've been living in
Santa Fe for 6 years.
And um I did bring this bill to
Senator Stephanni's attention
because it affects me personally
as well as other people who I
know, uh, the one good thing
about turning 65.
Is that you're finally old
enough to get Medicare.
But Medicare is not free.
It costs $185 a month.
And if you're on original
Medicare.
That monthly premium means that
the government will pay in order
to cover the other 20%.
You need a Medicare supplement
plan.
Called a mediap plan.
The alternative is Medicare
Advantage.
Those are private plans sold by
insurance companies.
And because those companies need
to make a profit.
Which I felt could compromise my
health care.
I decided to go with the
original.
So I pay an extra amount each
month for Meigap plan.
Meigap plans come in different
letter plans.
Like covering different packages
of benefits.
I have a plan G.
And before I moved to New
Mexico, each year when my Mediap
premium would go up, which it
does every year.
I would look around and choose
the least expensive Plan G that
I could find.
And I could get the best deal
available because the state that
I lived in then.
At a law like SB 80.
When I moved to New Mexico 6
years ago.
I discovered that in order to
switch to a less expensive plan
G.
I'd have to go through me. That
means that you would need to
answer a lot of questions about
what kind of medical diagnosis
and treatments you've ever had.
In your whole life.
Those are known as pre-existing
conditions.
And if you have a pre-existing
condition, there is no insurance
company that will sell you the
Meigap plan in New Mexico.
So for the last couple of years,
I haven't seen a doctor about my
shortness of breath.
Because if I were to get
diagnosed, I'd never be able to
switch to a less expensive.
Or any other mediap plan.
I'd be trapped, no matter how
much its price goes up every
year.
The Senate Bill 80 will do, it
provides a 60-day period.
Whether or not I have
It's like Idaho, Maine.
And others
All allow their seniors to
switch meigap plans.
Regardless
I urge you to please pass them
at Bill 80.
And give 70,000 New Mexico
seniors who's the least
expensive Medicare supplement
plan.
So, um, Matt, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair,
I referred to was from the um
dialysis patients citizens.
A national nonprofit patient
advocacy organization that works
to improve the lives of dialysis
patients. They wrote in a letter
in support of this as they have
in other states.
I know there's, uh, there are a
few organizations here to
support and probably some to
oppose, and I'll stand.
And is there, is there anyone in
support?
Of the plan.
Yes, you could if you could uh
come forward.
Behind the senator.
And I'm speaking on behalf of
the legal voters of New Mexico,
the American Association of
University Women and the
National Organization for Women
Local branch and we all support
all these organizations strongly
support this uh measure and uh I
had no idea of the complexities
hearing the previous speaker,
um, you know, mentioned some of
these things,
uh, you, I can see even more.
for supporting this bill, um,
and I, I really respect the
sponsor. She's been working in
this field for decades, and I, I
know she would not bring up
anything that wouldn't
wouldn't um benefit the
population of New Mexico, so I,
I stand strong strong support
and urge you to give a due pass
and um I'm a registered lobbyist
for, thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name's Jason Thompson. I'm here
as a registered lobbyist for
Fresenius Medical Care. We stand
in support of the bill. We
really appreciate the sponsor's
work on this bill. Um, while
most of
Perseus is patients that they
serve um are Medicare patients.
Some of those that are under age
65 be ridge, but
This bill also would provide the
added option for those that are
that build targets the specified
age range, I could also give the
options, um, uh, gap coverage.
And just would provide um a
better a added benefit for them
uh to continue to receive those
services here in the state. So
for that we stand in support and
we appreciate the sponsor's
work.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jason. Is there
anyone on the internet in
support.
OK. Anyone in the audience who's
opposed.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
my name is Brent Moore. I'm a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance
plans, and we stand in
respectful opposition to the
bill. I've had discussions with
the sponsor about our concerns,
but at the core of our concerns
related to the bill is that
Metaap policies are simply
different than major medical
policies or Medicare Advantage
policies. These types of
policies are designed and priced
so that you sign up at the
initial enrollment when you're
6.
5. They are guaranteed renewable
and their, their benefits do not
change. They are letter, they
are identified by letters that
structure allows for the
premiums to be priced much lower
with this type of change, the
associated issue with being able
to shop is the the potential and
the likelihood that you will get
increases in premium. So the
concern for us is the 70,000
people who have these policies
may experience will highly
likely experience increases in
premiums that you see in states
where they do allow this type of
shopping. Uh, the difficulty for
Uh, a hip and its members is
that when you when you offer
these policies, you have to
offer them at a price that would
have been associated with the
initial sign up, and that leads
to the potential for adverse
selection. I would just
reiterate to the committee,
these policies are not like
major medical, they're not like
Medicare Advantage. There's a
strong likelihood that if you
pass this bill, those 70,000
folks will experience premium
increases. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Brent. Is there
anyone on the internet in
opposition.
Oh
Thank you, and I will go to the
committee.
Yes, Senator,
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam
With the folks shopping for
these new policies in that 60
day window.
With those new policies.
A priced
To account
For the preexisting.
Condition that is.
Would they have to be offered?
At the same rate.
As someone with no.
preexisting condition.
Or would the insurance company.
Be able to adjust.
With that additional risk.
Oh, thank you for the question,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and
Senator, um, the purpose of this
is that there would not be any
uh medical.
Underwriting to determine if
there is a pre-existing
condition.
So if I had a preexisting
condition and I wanted better
benefits.
And I went shopping. I would pay
a higher price.
For a plan that would provide
that for me.
If I wanted something that was
going to keep the price low.
I would still look at plans that
would be in that premiums.
But the whole purpose of this
open enrollment and having a
birthday rule for once a year
for 60 days is that there would
not be any medical exams.
So
Mr. Chairman, Madam Chair.
In that circumstance.
A preexisting condition would be
covered.
Or
Lower dollars than the previous.
Oh, I
I don't guess I understand.
How you
Would save money.
Given
The existing circumstances.
Thank you for the question, um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and
Senator.
Uh, as I indicated before, there
are gonna be people who
Might have assistance.
From a family member or a loved
one who would help them pay.
For a better healthcare plan
than they currently have.
If not, these people are going
to continue to look for a lower.
Um
Uh
Cost
plan
So you have people who are gonna
stay flat.
Looking for a plan and people
who are willing to rise above
the existing plan because of
what they feel they might need.
So let's say that I turned um.
65 and
I became acutely aware.
That my parents had had some
medical conditions they never
told me about.
And as they got more ill or they
died.
I went, oh my gosh.
I might have that condition.
And I need to start looking out
for getting the right policy.
for me.
And maybe what I chose wasn't
the right policy.
Once a year
there would be an opportunity.
to shop, to go and look at
different plants.
Now in
The bill on page 4.
It says
Uh, it's in my interpretation
and Xander Dawson wrote this,
who is an attorney and works.
With health and human services
bills up upstairs in legislative
council. I, uh, interpret this
item 3, to say that people will
have to pay higher prices if in
fact the plan charges them a
higher.
So there are gonna be people who
still are gonna want that lower
price, and they're gonna be
people who are willing to pay a
higher price.
But as I indicated, Madam Chair,
right now people on that Medi
Gap don't have the opportunity
they're locked in.
For example, now these are
people who are not in groups.
Taking insurance from someplace.
Like from an employer or P I P E
RA retiree healthcare, etc.
These are people individuals.
Who just uh signed up for
Medicare and Mediap.
And they didn't have the benefit
of a big plan that would take
care of.
So, Mr. Chairman, Madam Chair.
Is the
Is there a requirement?
That the pre-existing condition
be disclosed.
And if not,
Well
It is the insurance company.
During this 60 day birthday
window.
Would they
Have the opportunity to
Review those records.
And make a decision as to
Whether to offer that coverage.
So Madam, Mr. Chair and senator,
um, the purpose of this bill is
that.
I would not have my medical
records reviewed when I go out
to shop.
Now there is somebody, Brittany
is here from the office of the
superintendent of insurance if,
if we get into.
Uh, what, uh, their
interpretation or their rules
are she could share that with
us. Uh, I don't know Brit
Brittany O'Dell.
And uh she might be able to
expand further on this, but the
whole purpose.
Is that if you are going to shop
that you're not going to um.
Have that medical review.
Now, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair and
Senator, we know that insurance
rates go up every year for
everybody.
Um, you could be on the lowest
cost plan and you're not getting
a discount next year.
You're getting an increase.
In your bill.
And so
When people go out to shop.
I don't believe they're
expecting they're gonna see a
big drop.
In the bottom, they want choice.
This is about choice.
They wanna go out and see what's
available either at the lower
price or if they need a better
plan.
OK.
Well, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, I can see.
I can see where
Mm
Hesitation from the insurance
industry is there.
Because they would now be
Uh, required.
to offer
Higher
Oh
Status coverage, if you will.
For people with
That are that that new at that
point.
They needed it.
So the statistical.
Analyses that they use to set
these premiums.
It starts to, to get askew.
Is, is that
Legitimate concern.
So, um
Mr. Chair, I mean, yeah, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, and senator,
uh, one of the, um, I don't know
if it was in the FIR or your
committee analysis, there was a
comment made that this is going
to increase numbers in the wrist
pools for any plan.
If somebody moves from Medi Gap
and moves into a better plan,
you're increasing the number in
that pool.
And every time you increase the
numbers, you spread.
You know, the risk among
everybody. So,
It is
You know, every plan has the
opportunity.
To raise their rates almost
every year.
And they do.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair or
Madam Chair and
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, uh Zedillo Lopez,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am.
So, my mother has this
boyfriend.
He's 94 years old.
And
was just railing about the fact
that when he was 65.
He didn't know about this, and
so we spent all these years
unable to get a meta gap plan.
Because he just, he just didn't
know, and this would solve his
problem.
Right? He, he would, it would be
an open thing and then he could
actually shop.
Um, I, I think this is a really
great idea for for our state and
for our seniors, um.
I had a a question wrote it down
on the bill.
OK.
Um
Any mo it's what you were
talking about now, any
modification to the Medicare
supplement policy.
Currently
Held by the eligible policy.
policyholder or any adjustments
to the premiums charged for that
policy.
It, it talks about a
notification.
Um, it doesn't.
Uh, it doesn't, so my question
is this doesn't put a limit on
what any of these supplemental
plans.
In charge, and that's I think
what you were talking about
before, right? So there's
nothing, nothing that affects
that requires.
Insurance companies to insure
anybody.
And nothing that would require
them to change their rates based
on
The actuarial analysis of what
You know, who's in the pool?
I Is that correct, Madam Chair,
Madam, uh,
That is uh my reading of this,
but if you'd like to hear.
I think that would be helpful
cause that language is confusing
and it's, I know that with
insurance, uh.
With the insurance world and the
medical world, sometimes it
requires confusing language
because it has these buzzwords.
Um
Or any adjustments, yeah, so if
we could uh have the date that,
then, uh, you know.
Madam Chair, for Miss.
I, I am always flattered to be
called Madam Chair. OK.
Um
Um
Good evening, Madam Chair,
Mister Chair, um.
My name is Brittany Otel. I work
at the office of Superintendent
of Insurance and the Life and
Health division.
And could I just get some
additional clarification on
exactly.
What you're asking. I was
reading this and I was trying to
follow on.
Um, it talks about notice of any
modifications.
those supplemental policy on, on
page.
4 of the bill and my question,
so I read this whole bill
looking for um what the
opponents were talking about,
they're concerned about having
to insure people who might have
pre-existing uh conditions.
Against their, you know, and not
make money, lose money because
they'd be forced to insure
people and um
I looked at that language as
sort of relevant to that
question.
But I
I just want an answer to that
question, Madam Chair. Yes, so
in in regard to that, um, on,
excuse me, madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, um, so currently how it
is is um.
Unless the covered person is
applying during the initial
enrollments, they will be
subject to medical underwriting.
Um, so.
You, if you have healthy
population.
They are able to switch plans,
um, which leaves.
The less healthy people in the
plan that they currently have
and their rates could.
Possibly continue to increase
and their only option is to stay
in that plan.
Um
As far as this bill and whether
or not the insurance company can
consider any preexisting
conditions or underwriting um
during this birthday roll
period, these people will not be
subjects, so the insurance
company would not have.
Ask about the preexisting
conditions or anything of that
madam, but they could.
Change the the rates.
Is, is that correct, madam, uh,
Mr. Chair is shaking his head.
Um
Yeah, I, I would like to, I I
don't have our actuary with me
today, um, but I would like to
take that back to her and I can
provide her a written response I
don't, I don't read this bill is
putting any kind of limitation
on their ability to adjust their
rates based on
Um, on what they find with the
pre pre-existing conditions or,
or whatever or anything or what
the pool ends up looking like,
um
excuse me, I was madam chair,
um, Mr. Chair, the risk pool is
reviewed every year and rates
can be adjusted yearly.
OK. That, that's what I thought.
I just think this is such a
great idea for New Mexicans, um,
I think it it gives the
potential of spreading the risk.
Um, in these, in these.
Uh, alternative plans, and it
also allows people to have
choices.
Because some people
Might want a plan that covers,
for example, diabetic, diabetic
diabetes, um, better than
Another plan and these kinds of
choices really are, so I, I
appreciate bringing the bill and
I'm enthusiastically Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Does anyone else have a question
or a comment. Um, I will take
the privilege of uh being the
Madam, Mister Chair, a moment to
be last, and I want to
congratulate.
The senator, I'm taking an
incredibly complex issue.
And being able to cover many of
the ands or buts that the people
are concerned about. And when
When basically the, the, the
plan looks at their experience
in the past and, and how it may
be going up or down with
different pools under the
different plants, and they make
a decision to price that plan at
a certain number.
The
Member
Uh, uh, they're not a member,
they're an individual, maybe to
become a member, they can look
at those prices, but they can't
sell the, they can't shuffle
those prices around once they
put that out in the market.
It's, that's it.
It's, it's done.
If that particular plan over
time gets a lot of adverse risk
and that particular plan cost is
going to go up.
And that may be something that
happens to some people, but then
if, so someone's experiencing
that high and they're saying, I
don't want to do that.
This allows them to go to the
market and look at all the
other, there's A through J if I
remember.
Different plans.
That they can look at. They all
come with a price every year,
and they can find if that plan
has the benefits that they like
and the price they like, they
can switch over, but there was
this underwriting rule to help
protect the insurance industry
initially when the gap was put
together.
To be able to
Do the medical underwriting and
do what was called adverse
selection from the gentleman who
opposed it, but this goes a long
way to give people the freedom.
To make those choices. So, uh,
senators to finally presented
this to me, and actually I
didn't know about this little
piece of it. I used to sell uh
at Loveless, these gap plans and
all the different ones. Um, but
I hadn't.
Remembered about the the
underwriting and knowing that we
as a state and the state does
have authority over the
supplemental.
plans, uh, otherwise, it doesn't
really have authority over
Medicare per se, but it does
over the supplemental plants.
So, thank you for the experience
from California to enlighten us
in New Mexico as California has
done historically, certainly in
my life and kind of at the
forefront. So thank you for
bringing your experience, uh,
lived experience into wisdom, so
that we can have better options
for the people of New Mexico,
and I, I hope that my little
supplement.
covers people, it gets people
comfortable that this is really
a good thing to do, and in the
aggregate, it isn't gonna hurt
the insurance companies that
much.
Uh, if any, um, they'll likely
be able to absorb it and it is
true healthcare costs go up
twice inflation every year or
more, and that's a whole another
subject for another time.
But thank you very much,
Senator.
Stefaniks for taking a very
complex issue and bringing it
forward.
And I'm ready to entertain. Oh,
we have one more question. Yes.
Or, or motion.
That
That we have a motion for a due
pass.
Senator Pinto in a second from
Senator Charlie and uh we should
now call the roll please.
Senator,
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Senator Charlie.
Yes, and to explain.
And her Gallegos.
In her nova, yes.
Senator Pinto
Scott
Oh
Centerio Lopez, yes.
Send her a hickey.
And Lopez
Yes, and to explain my vote.
We have a uh due pass if I my
math in my head is correct, but
I know we now have vote
explanation, and I can't, I
didn't write them down, so if
you were a 1st, 2nd or 3rd,
please speak.
As a Senator Charles.
Thank you, Senator, uh, chair,
and, um, Senator Stefani. I just
wanted to comment, um, that it
it's an honor to care for our
elders. It's a community value
where I come from and special
thanks and gratitude to your
witness who shared her story,
um, our auntie brought this
legislation to us from from
California, and I think it's
really gonna help a lot of our,
our elders in New Mexico. Thank
you.
And the senator.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, um, first of all, I want
to thank the, the witness for
coming in and telling us her
story that was uh that was very
touching, but as uh the
insurance lobbyist came in and,
and Doctor Hickey, your comments
stuck out with me. This, this is
going to increase the risk of
different pools and the
insurance industry is going to
take that risk and it's going to
bring it back down on the
consumer and a lot of people
living on the margins right now,
so that's one of the reasons why
I voted no, but, you know, I, I.
might be, uh, my mind could be
changed, uh, senator, before it
hits the floor because I know
you and I chat a lot, so thank
you for bringing this forward.
Um, I, I have learned a lot, so
thank you.
And uh I'm sorry, oh, and.
Madam Chair. Madam Chair. um,
thank you.
I'm getting.
The closer I'm getting.
I am learning so much more
about, um, Medicare.
And
Options are and if I have the
means of which to do you.
And Madam Chair, I'm not gonna
explain my vote, but I, for
everyone who's getting close to
65, so
Yeah
Get there, but not you. No, no,
I was gonna say, I was gonna say
to, to my left, no one, no one's
getting there,
OK, well, I've, I've been there.
I've been there and I get, but
what I want to encourage
everyone in the room to do is
you start to look at Medicare,
it is so complex.
You do not pay for an agent
services and I'm not doing an ad
for them, but it is so complex.
Don't go out and get on the web
and think you can navigate this
by yourself. The agent gets paid
by the insurance company. It's
all free. So definitely use an
agent to purchase, and if you're
gonna make a change, use an
agent again. Thank you very
much.
Thank you Madam Chair, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you.
Um, Senator Eel, if you would
come forward and I do this not
out of disrespect, um, Senator
Bergman, but your bill is gonna
take a little bit of time to go
through.
Um, and the committee tonight
will be ending about 6:30.
Just because of some of my
health issues, so we can start
your bill.
And then we'll proceed with it
on Friday, um, it's been kind of
what we've done in the committee
just.
Unless yours goes really quick,
and that'll be a different
story. But, uh, Senator Reel, I
don't know if I called your
representative earlier. I
apologize.
Cause now you're in the Senate,
so welcome.
But please present your bill.
I did the same thing to the
lieutenant governor the other
day whenever I called him Mr.
Speaker. It's hard habits to
break, so Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you all
very much for taking time to
hear this bill. This bill was a
request of a couple of Girl
Scout troops in my particular
area.
This has to do with the
retirement of a state flag such
as New Mexico.
Madam chair,
Members of the committee, the
American flag is a powerful
symbol of freedom, unity, and
patriotism.
And our in New Mexico flag.
Represents those significant
rights explicitly.
Our flag should be treated with
respect and dignity throughout
its entire life, and this
includes when it's time to
retire it.
The most important aspect of
retiring our state flag is to
dispose of it.
In a manner that honors its
meaning.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee joining me today.
Is my expert witness, this is
Hailey Bittigan.
And she has done a little bit of
research on it and if it places
the crowd, I would like for her
to read the statement that she
has found regarding retirement
of a flag.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Hayley
Bittigan and what I have
prepared today as the American
Legion developed a manual
reading the retirement of Flags
resolution 4:40 on September
20th through the 23rd in 1937.
And adopt in Congress adopted
this flag code as law number 829
title 36 on December 22, 1942,
properly disposed of a worn flag
by ceremonial also a reminder
that Flag Day was established by
President Woodrow Wilson in 1960
as June. Thank you very much for
that information.
But she just read does answer
one of the questions back here
on the analysis from the New
Mexico Department of Justice.
Saying that maybe one of the
Uh, we did not dign uh.
We did not
Define what dignified manner was
and what
Miss Bittigan pointed out it is
through the American Legion and
it does talk about the proper
disposal of a flag that is.
Gone past its line of duty,
madam chair.
We will stand for questions.
Thank you very much and thank
you for your research and
sharing with us.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support of this measure?
Anyone in opposition? OK.
Thank you. And then we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Madam
OK, Senator Pinto, and then
Have the
Madam Chair
Senator Pinto, I certainly do.
It is the the symbol.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
and it has the the tribe being
consulted.
And so
Consultation,
Madam, I'm sorry, I didn't quite
understand that Senator Pinto.
Um, Madam Chair.
Madam, to know there has been no
consultation.
I think they're done before you
get to the floor.
Thank you, madam. Madam Chair, I
appreciate that comment.
I think our flag with the Z
symbol on it should be treated
just like the American flag with
the dignity and respect that it
deserves.
OK. Thank you, Senator Sidil
Lopez.
Uh, thank you, ma'am. I was
actually just gonna make a
motion for a do pass, um.
Because I understand how
American flags are treated, but
I actually want to also
supplement that point. I'm not
sure what the.
What the protocol is for
treating the via symbol.
And whether there is some
special um that's not gonna stop
me from from.
Uh, supporting the bill because
I think it's a really good idea,
but I think it would be really
great when you present it on the
floor.
You have had that consultation
and if necessary supplement.
If there is something special.
It must be done
Thank you, Senator Nava.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Roel, for
bringing the bill forward. I,
uh, will also second, um.
The importance of the respect to
uh of the symbol and the
consultation. Um, so would love
to ensure that we have that in
place. But I also wanted to
commend your expert witness
because I want to just remind
everyone the importance of youth
voices in these spaces, and how
important they are. And as a
young woman, I am extra proud to
see you there standing with
Senator, uh, Madam Chair, I, I
just wanted to make sure that we
uplift, uh, the importance of
you being here, and also commend
Senators.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward, um, but I would like to
reiterate, Senator Pinto, and
tell you there is a process.
Uh, in 2012, uh, I came back to
New Mexico to start New Mexico
Health Connections.
And in our branding, we did have
an image similar to the Zi
symbol, and we did find that
there is a process within the
tribe to talk to and get a
consultation, uh, for
permission.
To uh
Whatever it is you're doing
because it, it is their symbol
in many ways, but I just want to
reiterate there is a pathway to
do it. I can't remember exactly
what it is, but I think
lobbyists uh whoever the
lobbyist for the tribe would
know.
Out
It's on the website. OK, there
you go.
So, and, uh, and I think that
would be really helpful to
explain.
Thank you. Any other questions,
Senator Block?
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, senator and.
Expert witness.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator,
it's Hayley Bit again.
Benedict
like bid again.
Then again, OK, got it.
Did,
did I, did I not hear that
again?
Geno knows how to say it.
I'm learning a lot about Medi
Medicaid with hearing and stuff
like that, um, so.
I was a county commissioner for
8 years prior to this in the, in
the Zia tribe.
Was in our
Or county.
And I want to say this is back
in 2017 or 2018, we.
We have 3 flags out there in
Sandoval County. We have the
American flag. We got the state
of New Mexico flag and we have
the Sandoval County flag.
Well, one day, the uh beautiful
New Mexico flag.
Most beautiful flag in the in
the country of any state, by the
way.
It was pretty torn and
weathered.
And um
I remember there was a uh a
discussion how do we dispose of
that flag.
Because as a retired military
officer, I, I know how to
dispose of American flags, um,
quite well.
And
We did consult.
With the Zia tribe.
Uh, because, you know, we, we.
We could either say, hey, we're
gonna just throw it in the
dumpster.
That's just not very respectful,
and throw it in the trash,
that's not very respectful.
But we, we have a um
We have a a liaison in the
county.
Uh, with the tribes.
And went through the liaison at
the time.
Went through the Zia Z, um.
Can't remember if it's the
governor of the council or
whoever it was.
And
We burned the flag.
In an appropriate and respectful
manner.
That's, that's already been.
Socialized unless things have
changed.
But, um,
Having the symbol on the New
Mexico flag in Sandoval County
was very special to us.
So we did uh reach out and do
the consultation, which um.
the right thing to do.
To dispose of that
Weathered and tattered flag, so
it's been done before.
And we burned it.
In a respectful manner.
However, Madam, Madam Chair, um,
senator and this.
Let me, let me just read, I want
to just get some clarification
here because to me,
Um
We're kind of leaving out our
Kind of leave out some people
that could dispose of this flag.
It says here,
The retirement of the New Mexico
state flag was beautiful in the
nation, by the way.
Maybe a public ceremony under
the direction of uniformed
personnel representing a state.
Or federal military service.
Or a patriotic society or a
private ceremony.
Let, let me make sure I
understand, uh, Madam Chair and
senators.
What that means to me, how I
read that.
I read that as state or federal
military service, meaning.
Active duty, reserve.
Uh, National Guard.
That's how I read that, or a
patriotic society.
BFW America disabled American
Veterans.
Order of the Purple Heart.
Um
Or a private ceremony.
It was it your intent or am I
reading it wrong, Madam Chair
and senator, to leave out.
Um, police.
And fire
Uh, because in my opinion, there
are quasi.
Qui-military in a way.
Where they would definitely
Um, should have the.
ability or authorization.
To dispose of our state flag in
a Madam Chair and Senator Bloch,
whenever you're talking about
the police, I think that they
would fall under state service.
A patriotic society would be
applicable in my opinion or a
private ceremony.
If I went to listing everybody
that would be able to do this,
I, I would probably pages long.
Right now,
voice, uh, Boy Scouts of
America.
Have a patriotic uh ceremony.
And that's how that also helps
him earn their Eagle Scout.
And the Girl Scouts just wanted
to make sure that our state flag
was honored the same way our
American flag was, but if we're
talking about a private
ceremony.
Out of our ranch.
I do have a flagpole up. It's in
honor of 9/11.
And it took I may I wanted we
have terrible winds out where I
live.
And I dug the hole that I put up
this 40 ft high flagpole on.
And I put, let me think of how
many sacks of semen I put down
there to ensure that the
flagpole was not going to blow
over.
I change out the flags every
year, and whenever I do change
out the flags, they are.
They have seen
Some terrific wind storms out
there, they do.
Become very, very ragged. I have
a company.
In our that I did get
replacements flags from and they
know.
At the end of March every year I
come in for new flags, and what
I do with these flags is right
now I do donate both my American
flag.
And my New Mexico flag that the
Boy Scout troops to be honored
in the dignified way that they
should be.
The people don't know how to
dispose of an American flag upon
burning.
It's this way with all the stars
in this corner.
It is cut across.
Horizontally like that right.
below the blue part of it.
Then it's cut again.
Going a vertically down from the
blue all the way to the bottom.
Then it is folded, putting the
blue stars on top, and that's
how that flag is presented for
either.
Burning
With a salute taking place.
Or by burial and sometimes a lot
of organizations do buy a box to
burn this in because it is going
back.
To the ground.
Where are, where our history
started in the United States of
America.
So I would like to.
Honor all those that do.
Have a private ceremony and it
could be.
Any other
Any other organization that does
want to honor our flags in a
very dignified and respectful
manner.
Appreciate that answer. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I, I think, and we
don't have to do this here
because it's getting late, but
I, I think what might make some
members more comfortable.
We don't have to use the words
will and shall, but somewhere in
here.
Uh, these organizations should
or may insult the ea.
Pueblo in regards to disposing
of the New Mexico flag. I don't
know if that would be friendly
to you or not, it's just an
idea. I don't know.
How some of the members feel
about that.
But there might be a lot of
people in New Mexico who don't
know that is the symbol.
Uh, or we have a tribe. I mean,
they're right down the road from
me and.
But
Maybe
Maybe something to do is to
throw in hair.
A a may and should consult with
the Zia.
just out of respect. I know
there's no way to
Oversee that
But it's a way to say
We respect the symbol like the
tribe.
Uh, and we respect the flag.
So, I, I think it's great, great
bill and support it 100%, um.
But that would just be my only
recommendation.
Thank you, uh, senator, thank
you, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Block, and,
um, Senator Charlie. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, and thank you
to some of the solutions around,
you know, thinking what this
could look like. I think that
would be an in and but having a
conversation with them and I
would be happy to introduce you
to some.
And a good idea.
And
And when it comes to tribes
through New Mexico and across
the country.
There's a legacy of
invisibility.
When you have really good
intentions sometimes so still
end up causing.
And I don't want that here and I
don't want.
be your experience in bringing
forward your firstation and
maybe it's not.
Um, I want to help you.
And
Um
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Esel.
Um, to go back to some of your
original words about the you
wanting the flag to have the
same dignity and respect as the
United States flag. I want that
for the.
Madam chair, I do want to thank
you both for bringing this up. I
would like to contact because I
do want this honored.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Senator Sidil Lopez.
I simply want to
For DuP pass.
OK
There's a motion
for a do pass for Senator Lopez
and a second from Senator Block.
If you
in our block,
her.
And I Charlie, yes, Senator
Gallegos.
Center Nova. Yes.
Center of Pinto
Scott.
Inner city of Lopez. Yes,
Senator Hickey.
Lopez
Yes.
would you pass recommendation?
Madam Chair members of the
committee, thank you very much.
I appreciate the comments.
Thank you.
Um, Senator Bergman, if you'd
like, um, what we've done in the
past is you can, you'll start
your presentation on the bill.
And it will go to the, if
there's anyone in the audience
in favor of such and also on
Zoom.
And then we will roll it over
for Friday just to have the
discussion specifically on the
bill.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, that
sounds great.
So Senate Bill 66 is a state
agency bill and it's a simple
bill that protects children and
vulnerable adults.
By allowing ECECD aging and
long-term services, the
Healthcare Authority, CYFD.
P E N P E D to consider a
certain misdemeanor convictions
such as enticement of a child's
stalking and battery of a
household member when conducting
background check clearances and
licenses for caregivers.
This bill creates an exemption
for childcare providers in
certain caregivers from the
limitations of criminal of the
criminal Offender Employment
Act.
Allowing for the consideration
of misdemeanors or these
background checks for childcare
providers and caregivers.
It also requires that each
exempted agency established
rules for determining the
criminal history screening and
employment eligibility.
My expert witness to introduce
us, introduce herself and add
anything she'd like.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Shelly Strong. I'm the
general counsel at the early
childhood education and care
department.
And uh I know we're short, uh,
Senator Bergman's outlined the
bill.
Is that all of your
presentation, Senator?
OK thank you.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support, excuse me, of Senate
Bill 66.
And if you would come forward,
please.
With the microphone, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gregory Frosted. I'm
assistant secretary of Education
for the Public Education
department and we stand in
strong support of this bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of Senate Bill
66, and thanks for the for the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
Senate Bill 66 would allow the
PED to consider misdemeanor
offenses when licensing
individuals working with
children. The bill would not
automatically disqualify
applicants due to misdemeanor
but would allow the agency to
consider misdemeanor offenses
such as enticement of a child,
stalking and battery of a
household member when we're
conducting background clearances
and licenses and uh I think
it's, it's easy to, to see that.
That would be important when we
are licensing uh individuals who
will be working directly with
children. Um, thank you. Uh, we,
again, we support this bill and
hope that you will as well.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Anastasia Martin, and
I'm general counsel for the
aging Long-term Services
department. We also stand in
support of this bill, as it will
add additional protections for
vulnerable adults who are
reliant on caregivers, and we
urge you to support this bill as
well. Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Justin Boyd. I'm general
counsel for CYFD. I'm here to
stand in strong support of this
bill as well, and I would just
echo the comments.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
See not, is there anyone? OK.
Um, I would dare to say that
there's gonna be a few questions
and um in light of just the time
at this point.
What we will do is we will
proceed on Friday with this bill
to start with.
So we can get into some
discussion.
And then um the other bill that
we were also doing a carryover,
which is the compact bill that
will be the other measure on the
agenda for Friday.
So I appreciate, thank you.
