That order.
Sorry that's okay for your name
at the top.
So the first of bills to be
heard a Senate bill two ninety
five marriage changes sponsored
by the.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Please go ahead thank you Mr
chairman thank Mister chairman
members of the committee so I
had a chance over the weekend to
have some conversation with
Senator Sedillo Lopez she is on
assume right now but before she
left she didn't leave word with
Senator McKenna that she had
looked through this committee
sub as in front of you and she
approves of it and it results
for concerned she did want to
make sure that she made clear
she wasn't trying to justify
that first cousins or other
marriages take place but instead
she was concerned about the fact
that they have taken place and
so therefore what we do.
And so if you and just very
quickly so that you all know
what what we did is if you look
on page eleven.
beginning on on line three.
We insert the language when the
current avoidable mers to be
void the court shall apply the
laws of the state regarding
community property in child
support in the same manner as if
the marriage had been entered in
to lawfully.
We also then on line twelve add
should a party to avoidable
marriage pre decease the other
party the laws of the state
regarding inheritance and
probate shall apply as if the
match had been entered in to
lawfully.
And so that way we protect
people who are in these void or
voidable marriages we made the
same changes on with regard to
incestuous marriages on page
twelve
beginning on line twenty two
with the Clarion incestuous
marriage void the courts apply
the laws of the state regarding
committee property child support
and spousal support the same
ways of the merits have been
entered into lawfully and that a
new subsection D. chair part to
an incestuous marriage process
pretty sees the other party laws
the state regarding inheritance
shall applies of the merits have
been entered into lawfully and
then finally with regard to
fully describe Public polygamous
marriages on page fourteen.
we have that
page fourteen beginning on line
twelve upon to curry political
polygamous or plural marriage
void or the blue Mr Perot
aspects of America void the
courts apply the laws of state
regarding committee property
child support and spousal
support in the same manner as of
the merits or aspects of the
membership and entered into
lawfully and then subsection F.
of a party to a polygamous a
plural marriage should pre
decease the other parties to the
mers allows a state regarding
inheritance and probate shall
apply as if the marriage or that
aspect of the marriage had been
entered into Laughlin I might
have to begin to go into
fractions for the police we part
but that's up to the judge at
that point so Mr Chairman those
of the changes that I made up in
in response to the concerns that
were raised by Senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez I do I
will point out that there is one
drafting issues that I that I
happen to catch as I was going
through this just now on page
twenty four.
On line eleven.
This is the mers licensure
form and the form right now it's
has joined in marriage blank of
blank and blank of blank were
strikingly of blank where they
live is not so much an issue as
it used to be and so but the so
there they they struck the
second of blank but that
instruct the first one so on
page twenty four level and if we
could just strike that of at the
beginning of the line and that
blank.
Leaving the and and the next
point it isn't it already in
your.
That is in the already deleted
it's it's the first one is not
deleted the second one is.
There's there's two of blanks
yes they they struck the second
one that instruct the first one
so we could strike the first one
as well.
I would appreciate that Mr.
Thanks.
Okay anybody want to make that
amendment.
Senator Senator and most us
McKenna seconded any opposition
to that change you got that
would Franken's already given
different.
Okay good is there any
opposition to that.
Seeing none will consider it to
them amended and we'll proceed
with committee discussion
anything else senator bring up
no simply that before Senator
Lopez left should it leave word
with center McKenna that she was
good with the bill with this
with this version I have with
these changes.
But will the committee.
Yes good.
And it's a point five version.
Does that include that when we
floor okay that'll be a point
five that one little change
correct the report I think.
Comment about.
The film before we go to the
sure okay
thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Ivey Soto would you for
the benefit of those viewing the
cast today and the audience and
the committee members the
exchange when I had Senator
chairman about arranged marriage
and how are our current statute
we really don't have a test for
that I appreciate that thank you
Mr chairman and senator McKenna
so this this bill does not
take into account arranged
marriages it does
And and part of it is that it's
difficult when people come in to
sign the form if they're willing
to sign the form it's difficult
to ask the question is this an
arrange marriage or is this.
We actually met the person
your your patrols to before
right and so and so that's
that's unfortunately not
something that that we've been
able to accomplish with regard
to this however the laws of New
Mexico in terms of community
property which is the oldest
committee property laws in the
country big going back to our
Spanish heritage and the laws
that we have in terms of child
support and spousal support even
are ones that that do provide
substantial protection for
people who find themselves in
arranged marriage I want to get
out.
Senator thank you chairman thank
you Sir appreciate that yes.
Any other discussion or debate.
We have a motion and a second to
and the secretary will call the
roll Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Ingle center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senators metes yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Clemente.
Senator Ortiz Pena yes.
Seven a seven does deserve what
was to have sent to have a new
path Mr chairman members the
committee thank you very much.
Okay now we will go to Senator
committees you into your to
build.
Senator Ingle was gonna do
Senator Woods bills we have to
wait for him.
Senate bill two oh seven.
Thank you Mr chair.
Members of the committee
So
Man Mr chair please.
I'm so this this bill puts a
definition in our children's
code to what is the best
interest of the child that
that's all that it does
as we all know you know
definitions are extremely vital
we have a lot of I think
confusion and and chaos
not by any one's fault in in the
department in trying to look at
a you know my intent is a is a
peacemaking and clarifying
policy to just say well let's
let's just have a objective
definition to what does that
mean because in different
cultures are different
perspectives.
Best interest may be maybe means
something different to different
people.
And so that's the goal I'm not I
do have a sub that was just
passed out I I I I personally
spoke with with secretary V.
hill of speaking to the spoken
to some other people about this
bill the original version there
were some concerns and I'm
trying to I'm I'm trying to
accommodate some of those
concerns that's my intent and
honestly I don't think all the
concerns have been met yet in
the current version of the bill
and so I will.
The flag of those for the
committee because I'm actually
not happy with where it's at yet
but I am communicating with
people and I I want to have you
know kind of a consensus so what
I'm not gonna do I'm gonna go
through all these points I think
the committee you know can can
do that there's about fifteen of
them the only thing I'd like to
mention Mr chair.
Is that these first eleven
points are very very
quantitative you know if it
frequency of harm repeat harm
history of a substantiated claim
these are objective things the
ones I'm not quite happy with to
be honest our number twelve of
the willingness and ability of
the family to do such and such
that's a little loose there and
I'm I'm up for either striking
that or or changing that same
thing with number thirteen is a
little loose in my opinion as
well as number fourteen C..
so I'm like I said I'm I'm a
little it like I I I will
certainly accept any any
thoughts there sorry.
Mr chair it's it's we have a sub
two two five okay thank you it
to two five one four we get into
this could get a motion and so.
Senator Gallegos how do you are
you do not pass on.
Good.
Sen.
For discussion purposes great
okay so okay go ahead and send
you done all representative dina
confided in the region of the Mr
chairman is this last thing I
want to say in our children's
code that there is a statute
that that says we cannot
conflict that the children's
code shall not conflict with if
of the Indian family protection
act so that is protected I've
heard some concerns raised by
that but that that has nothing
to do with this bill we asked
the drafters intentionally and
said we do not want to do
anything with it but and they
said we're gonna.
the last thing I will say is I'd
like to tell a short story from
my experience in a cross
cultural of.
Realm okay.
if you look on page three.
Line nineteen okay minimally
adequate health and nutritional
Care.
we're we're I'm getting out on
this is.
A lot of the concerns that we've
all heard with our children's
code are are we being
culturally.
Sensitive in those
circumstances.
Okay.
Well no cultures no cultures
that I'm aware of starve their
children.
Or where there's no culture
where abuse is okay.
And that the short story like to
tell you is when I used to
practice in Africa.
The people that live in our
community lived on about three
dollars a day.
And so initially I thought wow
these these people are really
going to have a hard time taking
care of their children.
Well.
We saw one case of of literal
starvation and a child when I
was there for two years one case
the children had that the child
had a condition called noma.
Which I'm going to but it's
basically a flesh eating disease
of her face because she was
starved.
In my initial response to this
was while these people must be
so poor they they cannot afford
to feed their their daughter.
But the Cameroonians that I
worked with our health care team
they took a different approach
they were outraged they were
outraged that someone would
would do this that they did not
accept this and this was not a
common thing at all whatsoever
for subsistence farmers living
on three dollars today that all
fed their children because they
did it they did as a group they
did as a group in your tribe
rejected you if you did not do
that so as an American looking
and I thought wow this is super
awkward for me because.
The local folks are are just
they're not tolerating this so
my my point is that whatever
culture in which we do not abuse
and starburst children and so
that's why I'm trying to come up
with a very objective cross
cultural quantitative factors to
define what is in the best
interest that's my legislative
intent and I'm certainly open
for for suggestions thank you.
If you want to say anything else
about it okay let's go to the
audience is there anybody here
in support of this measure.
Anybody in opposition to this
measure okay let's hear from the
one supporter and will then
welcome wonderful.
But.
That position okay leave me to
quit.
Thank you chairman and and
Representative Senator data
shows that New Mexico's repeat
rate for child abuse as among
the worst in the country and
that more than forty percent of
children in New Mexico who have
had a substantiated serious
injury from physical abuse or
neglect in fiscal year twenty
twenty two came from families
with the prior involvement with
the state CYFD department in the
preceding twelve months just
last month as many of you may
remember second judicial court
justice judge Stan Whitaker
called CYFD out on repeated
failures involving New Mexico
children and maltreatment.
We hear too much of CYFD going
in and seeing folks and seeing
children in situations are
probably kids should have been
taken out we just don't have
have that happening and as a
result we see way too many
children needlessly being
fertilized abuse and ultimately
killed but occurs at.
The primary purpose of CYFD is
to practice protecting Mexico's
children for whom it receives
abuse and neglect referrals its
stated mission is to improve the
quality of life for children
CYFD specifically states in
policy but if the safety of a
child is ever in conflict with
the preservation of the family
and that the child's need for
protection must take precedence
and I have that as eight point
ten point three point ten point
five point one.
We The New Mexico legislative
body which is you have a genuine
interest in ensuring positive
outcomes for children and
reducing the rate of repeat
maltreatment as judge Whitaker
pointed out there is an urgent
need to address maltreatment and
repeat maltreatment for this
crisis with the most vulnerable
population in the state as B.
two oh seven as amended works to
define explicitly the best
interest of the child in statute
and put a stop to repeat
maltreatment and some of these
most horrific cases
approximately twenty two states
and the district of Columbia
list explicitly with this bill
for courts in the department to
make considerations in providing
the best interest of the child
what factors vary from state to
state you'll see best interest
factors in this bill including
emotional ties and relationships
between the caregiver and child
and its parents siblings family
household members and other care
givers the capacity of the
parents to provide a safe home
an adequate food clothing
medical care the mental physical
health needs of the child.
But just based two oh seven does
as amended just take the best
practice of these national
definitions and ensure the best
interest of the child is
factored into key decisions and
child abuse neglect proceedings
it's worth mentioning that in
the children's code there are
twenty four mentions of best
interest and it's not wants to
fight and that's outside of if
if I have an additional seven
but this bill does not relate to
if that the new subsection a
specifically asked but before
you says it defines when and
where to take the child abuse
neglect best interest
definitions which is in
proceedings to terminate
parental rights and for
permanent guardianship should
address most of the concerns in
their original FIR as the
administrative office of the
courts defined under this bill
New Mexico will join the twenty
two states and the district of
Columbia with important list a
factor to be considered about
the remainder will be from our
general audience for concerns
about the subsection out which I
think became fifteen CYFD
continues to have the
alternative response method in
the pilot stage and that's out
of the largest out for August
twenty twenty two I was in a
present children's court
improvement commission meeting
just last year when a CYFD W.
secretary stated that quote
unquote there is no timeline to
reunification in New Mexico and
under federal law that's just
not true federal law states that
if a child has been in custody
for fifteen of the last twenty
two consecutive months we must
explore different permanency
options the committee sub for
two oh seven narrows the window
of when to apply the best
interest standard of the child
and codifies New Mexico and our
child abuse neglect proceedings
definition to ensure that we are
doing what this agency is
statutorily created to do
protect children and put their
best interest in the child abuse
neglect proceedings first thank
you.
Could you introduce yourself you
didn't forget to tell us your
name my name is Maryland back
and I'm the founder New Mexico
child first network dedicated to
improving the lives of children
and for children in foster care
and those who serve them and
defining best interest is
absolutely one of our priority
initiatives it's a problem it's
not defined as we really work to
really revisit the children's
code we must define the best
interest standard of these
children and their cases thank
you.
Okay anyone else in favor of
this bill.
During that time folks thank
you.
But the folks who the.
By the speaker that position to
this bill go ahead.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
I merry McQueen in the chief
children's court attorney for
CYFD protective services.
And we're in opposition to this
bill as written I want to say
that I I appreciate Senator
committees ongoing conversations
with us about this bill.
Our main concern and as I read
this on page two B..
It says it applies in all
matters and proceedings a
concern a child.
As was mentioned in the last bit
of testimony in support.
The best interest of the child
is a consideration in a wide
range of decisions that CYFD
makes it's considered when we
decide whether to file a case
and remove a child from home.
It's considered when we make a
placement decision for that
child when we decide of sibling
should be split or not split.
It's considered when we make a
permanency plan decision when we
make educational decisions.
And this this sort of laundry
list of factors to consider
cannot be applied in all of
those different decisions that
we have.
For food to have one long list
of factors to consider is
to determine the best interest
of the child just does not work
for all of the various decisions
that we make we're best interest
of the child is a parent of
paramount.
Amount importance.
we have some concerns about some
of the individual.
items that are listed as well
but our our main concern is that
one list is not going to be out
of it's not going to be relevant
to each decision that we have to
make in the best interest of the
child.
And.
The work that it will take to
consider and document the
consideration of each of these
factors in each of those
decisions even though they're
not relevant is going to slower
decision making and it's going
to increase the per case
workload for a wide variety of
our staff including
investigators permanency workers
placement workers children's
court attorneys and it's going
to increase the work of the
court to determine if we.
So again as it's written we do
oppose it but we again we do
appreciate the ongoing
conversations Senator Schmedes
about.
The need to better define best
interest thank you for your
comments and next we have the
the from from.
Hello chair members of the
committee my name is Mike if
it's any I'm a policy policy
manager with full features New
Mexico I mean we propose I'm
Senate bill two oh seven we
emphasize and prioritize
strengthening our families with
resources and support for
families and that are most
impacted by the child welfare
system.
We should not put every family
through the standardized steps
and assessments these often make
us feel shameful loan apple
fearful of the removal of our
children each family has
incredibly unique circumstances.
And they mentioned of the Indian
family protection act which was
an a monumental undertaking it
was a.
We had stakeholders tribes
pueblos trouble if we're social
workers advocates and partner
organizations and according to
this bill and this is before the
Committee sap that the F. and
the FIR says that it does not
take into account the goal if
path which is preventing the
removal of indigenous children
from families and tribes again
if it was led by and centered
the participation of impacted
families by actively seeking the
representation and engagement
throughout the process this
includes this this included
facilitated meetings where we
bill strategy and actively seek
expertise and we are lacking
that and the select legislation
please oppose SB two oh seven
thank you.
Thank you for your comments and
what else in opposition.
I hearing under everyone
assumed.
No one and soon that will turn
to the committee.
Your members respond very
briefly sure thank you for I I
just want to say I I think this
issue Lee comments were spot on
and well.
the the little anyway she she
left but I totally agree and I
actually had crossed out some
language to suggest an amendment
because I I agree that that that
if we apply the standards
uniformly across it and actually
maybe cumbersome what she's
saying is completely correct and
so to correct for that I'm not
proposing this obviously is the
sponsor but we can we could
strike the end of line twenty
four after the COVID as well as
line twenty five on page one and
we could strike the first two
lines of page two all the way to
the word the and then all of
would read was and it also would
read would would be the best
interest of the child shall
basically be relevant to
terminate parental rights and
for permanent guardianship so
could just a very very highest
most serious decision just peel
that off and and these standards
these objective standards would
only apply in that matter that
way I think we could move
forward with getting a
definition in the chilled the
children's code one at least for
once at least initially and then
we could let the department kind
of look at that and see how it's
working but only in those most
serious discussions.
Thank you Mr.
Did you have
the proposed yes to
So on on page one of this line
twenty four.
after the COVID strike the rest
of the line.
Strike one twenty five.
And then on the next page page
to strike line one.
And then on line to strike the
entire line up to the word the
and keep the word of the that we
would read in proceedings to
terminate parental rights and
for permanent guardianship comma
the following factors should be
considered in determining the
best interest of the child.
That way we won't convert well
we won't burden the department
with all these other decisions
where that phrase appears.
We have a motion.
The
foreman hello this and second.
Second from Senator Ingle.
So we need.
Anyone opposition.
Right.
The more motion we have a second
to we need to call the roll.
So we
We have an amendment.
Any other comments before we
proceed no Mr thank you.
Okay.
So we were no open up to members
anyone wishing to Canada.
No one.
Oh sorry go ahead
Thank you Tom
thank you Senator committee I'm
curious chairman and senator
what
Our representative from CYFD the
reaction is to the the to the
amendment would that be okay to
get her in for.
Sure.
And I can catch her options to
choose out of the room I I had
told the committee that I agreed
exactly with what you said it
was a concern of mine I didn't
bring it up my presentation but
what I what I did with the
amendment was now this
definition will only apply to
the termination of parental
rights and that's it.
Because I actually agree through
this is too much and also in
permanent guardianship those to
the.
Mr chair members of the
committee that amendment
resolves a lot of the concerns
around the application to the
wide variety of of situations I
I would like the opportunity to
to review the entire substitute
Committee because I think some
of the items have changed we
really haven't had an
opportunity to go through those.
I think as a list as a whole it
makes a lot more sense limited
to termination and and permanent
guardianship but I do want to
echo our other speakers well who
expressed concerns about the
application to FY because there
is not a definition of best
interest in FY
this could be applied by the
courts to if the I think it's
really.
Tremendously important that we
have that input from our tribal
partners around that aspect.
Okay thank you for that comment.
Services I have well I'm sorry
yes thank you chairman thank
you.
Senator metes and
Part of my memory your name is
Mary.
Next.
are CYFD Mexico McQueen thank
you Mr queen
Thank you for that answer and
then chairman and senator if I
could do a follow up on the
Indian family protection act.
Thank you for answering
I think in part how this bill
affects the Indian percent of
the Indian family protection act
because that was my follow up
and you're basically saying just
McQueen chairman Senator and
miss McQueen that.
The the two words best interest
needs a definition.
Because this bill would affect
the Indian family protection
act.
And I'm wondering chairman
Senator.
And this McQueen could you
elaborate a bit more on that
please.
Senator.
Very briefly if I may I'll just
read the statute.
Quote to the extent the
provisions of the Indian family
protection act conflict with the
children's code the provisions
of the Indian family protection
act shall apply.
So we had a very clear
discussion with the drafters we
so we do not we're not gonna do
anything with it but and that's
how the statute reads now.
Okay and chairman Senator miss
McQueen.
I'm just curious if you have
anything to add.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
My concern is that because there
is not a definition of best
interest in if.
If we place one in the general
provisions of the code it could
be seen as not being in
conflict.
Because there isn't another
definition for it to be in
conflict with.
So I I still have some concerns
that it could affect if the
cases are up but we have to stop
because as it was not working.
So I interrupt.
Right.
So I have no idea how long this
could go on.
Yes you can just ask you
something sure.
Yes.
Running another
thing right there's nothing in.
section.
The.
Shown
on a to the.
To be the if the state to.
To
well we we struck that so we
struck we struggle with that so
now it's only.
Or so I was at the next
subsection vision of life.
This is the what else.
It's a little bit.
One of these questions these
question marks like
of the because to me this one
and this one.
Those are a little.
Thank you.
The.
Some questions
during.
But we will come.
I don't
think we took it out could be I
just haven't had a chance to.
I want to make sure.
The.
To attack.
The.
There were two these that's what
I want to can proceedings to
guardianship.
Here's the full.
This proposed this one just to
clarify I don't think it's
needed to clarify because now we
only have one so Senator nothing
shall apply to the.
To all.
When we work with.
If the committee on okay which
is these are a little less than
this will.
Sorry this but some of them
activate your dealership and.
Bills and I think we can cross
all the.
I would never.
Please okay.
Because the sisters right in in
trials
in the okay.
Hey.
We get to hear me sing okay.
That's going to show you our
strike you got the amendment the
I.
The need to strike down there
F. regarding chapter thirty
chapter.
Okay.
The next page.
The need to strike all the way
up to the to the state.
In all matters.
Okay the second half yes right
now yep okay it is and they were
working.
My concerns are twelve thirteen
fourteen.
Okay
while not to necessary struggle
all over the thank three workers
does need to be rebuilt in my
okay great are not very.
Very very concrete yes.
We know that about.
So I like I do like fourteen A.
and fourteen the.
Because I think the physician or
patient and can look at those
things perhaps yeah okay
and and one by the way I do not
like fifteen at all I think
fifteen.
I think we we.
but we know we can do I think
all of these things we could
probably do in the next.
Thanks committee Judiciary yes
of course okay and so I would
run as of now I am in I am in a
service do this one right now
it's okay to be very clear I
don't think it's necessary
because we have this but if
there's a concern seven let's
just put it in okay great thank
you we'll rework all those and
I'm like I said I I just prior
to the definition I don't I mean
I I don't know hi so you look at
thanks Karen appreciate yet
twelve to fifteen.
To fifteen we're we're talking
about what about what about the
stand here.
I think it's like the same.
You know.
Yes it's it's I see I to
question whether this one easy
one.
Crowder aces or or mention some
things K. to that degree and
that's kind of what that and
getting out but it could be
better adverse childhood for.
I can.
This I guess.
And if that's the needs to go so
F. F. needs to go fifteen
minutes ago okay.
We'll just keep working.
Just.
To a twenty six.
Okay.
There is one but there is
okay.
Which is great because that's
just not the.
The Senate from our.
That.
The new subsection B. went on
strike well I think that's me
too much for the community I I
think maybe for simplicity
Strekal let's strike F. and
fifteen for now.
I don't want to overly make a
crazy and the chairs to much and
then we the state be nothing in
subsection a shall apply to the
from the if the.
Subsection F..
Of the.
No no no
the the Indian family protection
protection act okay.
I am glad that in fact when my
daughter was pointed out to
defusing the.
That's interesting.
Mr the three.
Good for you.
There you can take it you can
take it is your.
A little conference of it is.
We're not just on.
Thank.
Thank.
Thank you.
This.
This year.
To do this of the canister
Center I think with these
changes.
Thanks committee we can.
You can see.
It's.
A better not because of that and
then I'll leave them as they
will come back on.
I guess that's the.
The down side of.
Otherwise we wouldn't we
wouldn't.
The whole idea.
Yes there I mean with the with
the math with what we're doing
I've got one more amendment.
Should be pretty good.
Hi.
Judiciary.
I think.
Everything goes through to
Sharon.
Kim Kardashian group.
This.
Yes the webcast when you try to
make a comment news nation
wrongly.
We'll be back of this.
Because
we
know what the problem is just.
Making it more Senator.
This
is.
Sorry.
This is the.
Yes.
Thanks.
I.
If you have a.
Definitely not.
Well that
I can't get off
yes.
If you.
Last
opening as of yet I am the.
As a lot of money I.
Thanks.
She.
And.
For this.
Sure.
So.
Can.
Yeah.
The case is.
Never.
For what.
Secretary of.
This is so.
Of.
Four yes you have to go you have
to go begging for money that.
It takes
when do influence of the.
The contribute the picture
of the.
Big donors.
Where did she go.
Of all
the.
These.
Well.
Here that that.
We were ready to go they met.
Okay.
Good to have that can see.
We are on okay.
So we can resume now.
Okay Mr chair if I could give a
quick update we had little
conference well we were down so
in in brief
We we do have a one more
clarifying amendment if the
committee would consider that
and we like to add subsection
B..
Nothing in subsection a shall
apply to the Indian family
protection act.
Just to be abundantly clear on
that.
I well I I don't think so I
think for sake of simplicity
what we agreed to do is work if
it's the pleasure the committee
to pass this to Judiciary we
will work on items twelve
through fifteen which I've
already said I think grow little
Lucy goosey and there seems to
be some consensus on that but I
do want to put that amendment
and because I want this
committee to know when you take
your vote is very clear that it
will not apply to if the and and
one last thing there is an
existing law a definition of
best interest of the child in if
but and so that's the section
thirty two a I lost the the code
but anyway it's it's it's in
there if anyone is interested
thank you Mr.
That might please yeah.
They go.
We have a common from us senator
McCain yes thank you chairman
thank you senator and thank you
miss McQueen for collaborating
with Senator metes and I'm
curious are are you are you
satisfied with that the best
interest definition that centers
committee referred to.
And the other.
Amendments that he mentioned to
us.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator McKenna eight
I I'm satisfied that we have
absolutely clarify the if the
issue we have it on both sides
now with Senator Gallegos was
able to identify the best
interest definition and if PO
which I appreciate
right I've I think it's best to
have it in this as well so I
appreciate that amendment and
the prior amendment that limits
this to termination of parental
rights and permanent
guardianship that gets us
most of the way there and we're
gonna have some ongoing
conversations about some of the
listed items.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator thank you Mr McLean
that's all I have chairman thank
you.
We have
an.
Senator Geoghan's.
Is second.
I have a second from Senator
Ingle so any opposition.
hearing now the we're back on
the the bill.
Anyone here I'd like to move to
pass.
As a meant.
All times of the.
Yes the sarb.
Maestas.
I just yeah.
These are just a.
I'm really happy to bring this
forward I I may not agree with
all of the definition but that's
a conversation that has to
happen the I get.
The most frustrating because
I've got Mr Chairman through the
years is folks who.
Who want to change the law as it
relates to
Child custody proceedings and I
Telemeds what you're describing
to me is already in the law.
you know best injure the child
this is the child's best
interest of the child but but
what does that mean you know how
do we guide the judiciary with
regards to.
Of what what.
What we believe are the priority
circumstances and.
And the situations with regards
to what what leads to best
outcome so I don't look at it
from tile placement child
custody abuse and neglect
hearing but just good old
fashioned divorce proceedings
and child custody proceeding so
hopefully hopefully we can come
up with some agreements in the
near future thank you Mr thank
you senator we have a motion and
a second.
Want to call the roll.
Good that the.
Mr chair I apologize I.
They.
Before I was gone but one of the
things of can I think I caught
the tail end of a big dressing
one thing but I think with
federal reserve.
Some of these
Factors in your.
And your bill and I don't know
maybe there's a committee
substitute photo shoot okay we
had some discussed to.
The committee since two plus
we've had to amendments direct
during the session.
Oh my goodness okay well yeah I
will I will make the comments
that I was kind of I was
distressed when I first read the
first one honestly if the
committee biz with me
substantive reddit but I was
just just because some of the
factors for things that a person
of limited means simply could
not could not afford it felt to
me like the best interests was a
middle class family and I are
just broke my heart because I
ran New Mexico with audio which
we're not the the a lot of folks
didn't have the means to
accomplish some of the factors
you you did I sincerely
apologize I will stop now and
I'm gonna have to vote no
because if you read the
substituting I don't vote yes on
bills that I have read.
So I apologize okay anyone else
so.
Comments before we call the
roll.
No the please call the roll.
CENIC I have us yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yeah.
Senator Ingle yeah Senator
Maestas yes Senator McKenna yes
Senators maintenance yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
No explainable.
Senator AUMENT yes.
So Senator you have a do pass
resolutions explainable one six
zero and I had not read your
committee substitute so it may
be fine I just to focus on
things that have Representative.
Okay thank you for your comment.
We have a Senator one ninety
eight.
I'm sorry no one.
Two thirty three thank you very
much yes
Thank you Mr chair.
I have a very brief hand out.
Well I in fact if you agree okay
and then if you're the kind of
proceeds chair the chairman of
the committee thank you this is
Simon's law.
this is a law that's been passed
in nine other states.
I.
How bout now the better okay.
Thank you so that this is called
time is law this is the law that
has been added and no other
states is based on model
legislation and what it does all
it does is the the meat potatoes
there's but there's some
legalese in there but it goes
down
to the very end of the bill
subsection K..
And all this does it says you
cannot put a secret do not
resuscitate order on a child's
chart you've got to have consent
first.
All the new language in before
that it's kind of like goes
through you know if you can get
in touch with one pair and if
their divorce Public goes
through all those things but the
meat and potatoes of the bill is
that you you you cannot put the
secret do in ours on people's
charts anymore if there is a
disagreement on few tile Care
with the hostels as futile care
there's disagreement that the
end of the bill says well they
the the health care institution
that disagrees at least has to
show willingness to work with
another health care institution
that would be willing to either
accept the patient for discharge
the child home like home on
hospice or something like that
so that's all this does like I
said it's it's based on model
legislation it's called Simon's
law but in New Mexico I refer to
it as Simon and Twila is law.
Twyla is a girl who
Unfortunate recent recently
passed away but she came up here
when I'd sponsor this bill when
I was in the house and she was a
victim of this in fact so much
so it wasn't just one secret do
in our it was multiple secret do
in ours no consent.
So much so that her mother had
every day when she came into the
hospital she had to check the
chart because they minority told
once or twice run this again and
they kept doing it.
regarding adults you can ask
arca about this problem you can
ask New Mexico disability rights
about this problem it happens
with adults all the time people
make this very very just in my
mind evil judgment on someone
else's life that you just have
this disability or you know
whatever it is and they just put
these in our orders without
consent so we we need time is
all in our state statute we need
to not be putting up for
allowing with the secret in ours
there is in your hand out a
little snippet on what happened
to Simon the first state that
were Simon was with this
happened and
there is a cancer Missouri and
so they were the first they're
the first state to pass this
this long and and it's also been
introduced at the federal level
so they Mr chair I think that's
that's all I have.
Thank you for the presentation.
Anyone in the audience the
opposition of this bill.
There is not a one support of
this bill.
Well we'll take a three people
from each side.
Lady in the front.
Please use the microphone.
They have to hold the button
down continuously.
The budget gets tired I'll just
be very brief my name is merry
ing I'm I'm a pediatric physical
therapist over to Carrie Tingley
retired from their twenty twenty
and I can say
accurate English at UNM
hospitals that I that witness
saw several times with
one example as children that are
born with osteogenesis
imperfecta where the babies are
born with lots of fractures the
very difficult difficult time
breathing they have lots of lots
of the very fragile children.
But I just I just witnessed this
and this type of case and others
will a doctor she said with
severe disabilities and it's
just really not in the months
place in my and my view and I
see that happen I've seen the
said this in the terrible things
that the parents go through to
realize that someone else is
decided that their baby needs to
die.
And it's just not appropriate
and I really think that this is
a very important thank you thank
you for your comment gentleman
in the front row.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Paul Spencer and it's
a blessing to be here today when
I was sixteen I receive it's
automatic brain injury and that
they were told my parents that I
was gonna be a vegetable.
Had they have put this in
secretly DNR.
During my time that I was in a
coma.
For more than three weeks I
might not be here today.
And I know if that's good or not
for you serving here at the
state because I have a voice and
I attend for the voice to be
heard and I hope that those who
are going through hard times
difficult times like this that
their their freedoms and the
rights will not be taking away
made be made a choice to be made
wholesaler the.
The family and friends that are
there with them to help make
that decision thank you I send
support this bill.
Thank you for.
thank you for your comments as
someone else on the side of the
room.
Lady in red.
Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee and thank you so much
for having me well I'm a
supporter of this bill my name
is a from Hargan the executive
director right to life committee
in New Mexico but that's not why
I'm here I'm here because I have
a little grand daughter who has
down syndrome and which was five
days old she ended up having to
have surgery and six months
later had open heart surgery my
I watch my daughter fight for
her every single breath it is
not right that a doctor would
come and put a D. in our on her
I was here with Senator smitteez
from a representative when the
trial was in the room in a chair
and they totally ignored her it
was heartbreaking to see this
mom that was scared to death to
go and to leave the hospital not
knowing whether or not she would
return to have a dead child
because it replaces secret in
our please don't let that happen
to another child and please pass
this bill thank you.
Vote of.
The people in support on the
side of the room.
Hey what a lady in front.
The black.
Chairman committee thank you for
hearing me
I'm one of your constituents I
also work in health care.
I feel that this is a really
important bill I stand in
support of it.
It is traditionally the parents
and the families responsibility
to place it in our in
conjunction with the patient and
so for that to be taken away
from the patient and their
family and secretly done
undermines the trust between the
pay the family the patient and
their health care provider and
it's just plain wrong I don't
think any of us would want us
that to help and to us or our
family members so I ask that you
support this bill thank you so
much thank my name cease at
Prestea.
Thank you for your comments to
more people on the side of the
room.
Anyone else one of.
Comment on this side of the room
okay.
they will assume.
No one assumes with our return
to the committee members.
yes okay.
I'm sorry.
I thought I did
Yes Representative Harry.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Nicole
Martin.
I just wanted to voice my
opposition in the bill on
certain lines this bill is very
confusing for some of us
understand especially those with
disabilities to assume disabled
youth can make decisions as
ableist the same can be said for
even adults who have
disabilities they're already
legal measures in place to
protect people under eighteen
and their well being in a
hospital setting there's also no
definition of reasonable we're
notifying another parent or
guardian on page eight alright
G. line ten who is supposed to
check on the guardian with
visitation are custodial rights
a social worker the doctor law
enforcement.
This is more unnecessary
bureaucracy.
In the hospital setting meant to
control young people's bodies
during a stressful time when
they need support not a legal
fight another issue on the same
page line twenty one there's no
guidance on how that
should be recorded should there
be printed screen shots of calls
me or texts or emails legal
documents attached to the
medical file does the hospital
or institution have the ability
to store the supplemental
documents thank you.
Thank you for your health the
opposition.
Okay hearing that'll turn to the
committee members anyone wishing
to speak.
Are Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair.
I would.
Is soft and then to hear people
say that it's happening that is
also shopping.
Mr chair your physician.
Informed consent doesn't have
any meeting in the state.
Mister chairman Senator well yes
it does.
And there is very clear.
Times when we obtain consent so
we have ten consent when we're
discussing a surgical procedure
invasive procedure for somebody
when someone is admitted to a
hospital they they consent to
certain things we consent even
when we establish care with a
new physician or healthcare
provider we consent to have
certain.
The protected information used
and things like that so yes
there there's consent all the
time but this is one of these
it's just situations that I
think.
Historically has not been
necessary so it hasn't really
been in kind of the code from
the beginning because I think a
in in my case the just
evaluation of this I I think
we've lost our respect for
people with with disabilities
and I think there's a lot more
that can be said about that is
actually documentary about this
problem called labeled and so
once you get this diagnosis that
is osteogenesis imperfecta or
Edward syndrome or trisomy
thirteen or eight eighteen or
whatever they are you're you're
labeled with this diagnosis then
you're kind of judged by your
your your so called label
but it's it's really it's really
not to you know there's there's
there's nothing in the code that
is explicitly requiring this and
I will lastly to answer question
we're not regulating health care
facilities here that that's once
again this is part of the of
model legislation that's work
through multiple states we're
not requiring someone to have a
written policy we're not going
to go in and regulate hospitals
what we are doing is we're
perfect we're protecting these
these children we're not going
to require them to go right all
these policies
and so I think that's that's
something that's you know
notable
we hope that hope that answers
your question.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I just.
Of.
If they're doing it it seems
that we have to pass this bill
but it's just I would be
interested I I I heard.
For people saying they saw that
which is extremely disturbing
and I think to save one life
it's worth it.
but I really would like to hear
from hospitals about.
What the heck what are the
procedures with regard to this
in our state consulting the
parents is in ensuring that they
have informed consent Mr chair
because.
My understanding of informed
consent was that this would
never happen
and so it's really disappointing
to see this thank you Mr chair
thank you anyone else wishing to
speak the service thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Centers committee so I.
Some like confused as to what.
The reality is on the ground in
hospitals and and and thanks to
which trying to achieve so I'm
looking at this gentleman
looking at the definition order
not to resuscitate I got that
that's awesome that I have on
emancipated minor that's
awesome.
And I'm thinking okay great
skill and I turn the page eight
page nine page ten page eleven
of those three and a half pages
of like instructions.
That I'm trying to like that I'm
trying to grasp so much so.
So help me out help me
understand this Mr chairman
Senators maybe so today for
adults this is run it through
for adults as adults have to
give consent or an adult spouse
have to can give consent
To to essentially order the
hospital not to resuscitate how
does that work now for adults.
Mr chair and senator so a
hospital could do this now their
ethics board could could they
not not on the statutory level
but that is supported sit down
they could talk all their
privilege providers and say Hey
we're gonna be real clear on
this this is what we want to do
right so they think they could
do that
but the the fact that this isn't
happening and and I and I'm not
going to go meet with every
single also just ask them to do
it I think we just need a
uniform standard that that
that's the issue and
unfortunately I think with good
I mean we're seeing people
actually lose trust in some
models this point not just over
this issue the other issue so I
think it's just creating that
uniform this is this is how it
should be okay thank you Mr
chairman Senator committee
because there was there was a
presentation by the gentleman
and we're happy you're you have
a voice or that that
The story told was kind of a
story of a.
About forget the terminology but
essentially.
not having life support right
and so like those kind of an
argument he minimized for
because I can live this is not
life support correct this is
precipitation when someone is
having a and an episode in which
they could die.
Mr chair center accession know
it does apply to continue
licensing therapy so if you go
to the last page.
It will say it's talking about
finding another health care
institution so empowering the
parents if there's a
disagreement they say that is
willing to provide life
sustaining treatment so it
actually does apply to life
sustaining treatment as well
which is different from that the
the order to not resuscitate is
basically if you stop breathing
or your heart stops any other do
on our place then they say let
the person go that was their
wishes but we don't have that we
don't have that in our place
then they're going to give you
know if your heart stops they're
going to give assisted treatment
also if you are on life
sustaining treatment and there's
a disagreement the hospital has
to at least agree to.
A disagreement between the
parents and the hospital.
because those cases do come up
where where where the doctor in
a court may say look that this
really is few tile I know that
the parents may not want to go
it's just heartbreaking but then
they they will have a were but
this this also take that part
extra step to say well wait a
minute the the hospital across
the street or whatever they're
willing to do it they have a
different perspective second
opinion at Setra.
And then that life sustaining
treatments like a breeding
machine would be continued and
that patient that child could be
transferred to the institution
that's willing to accept them
thank you Mr Senator committees
and I'm I'm looking at a for the
folks keeping score at home that
all the three and a half.
Pages of new language that I'm
referring to is in the life
sustaining treatment for minors
statute so you're correct so it
so it's not just orders to not
receptive but it's.
I sustaining treatment for minor
well which is.
It is kind of a double.
Double importance but
It seems like my two experiences
one family member we had a order
to not resuscitate above the
person's bad.
And that person when it was that
person's time you know that
person.
Passed away relatively.
You know uneventful another
family member had a.
I did not have the the do not
resuscitate.
Was dying instead of dying the
process stated and Rustin from
hospice to the hospital you just
had four five horrible hours and
then died for five hours later
just made no sense to me a lot
of anger in the family so to me
it should be adjusted decision
it should be written differently
is it should be you cannot do it
in less you know in less so it
should be written instead of in
order to not recess State shall
not be instituted.
and then you have three pages of
unless it to just be.
Short of a signature on a
document it should not be done
we also.
These instructions are just very
complicated to read it seems
like we could be able to to
write a much more simply so that
the power is in the is in the
state the patient the spouse and
the parents at all times thank
you Mr.
Thank you senator New Mexico we
have of Senator McKenna.
I thank you chairman thank you
senators urged committee
so I I don't know this was
happening I just read the.
The hand that you gave to us and
I'm I'm curious chairman Senate
committees.
Who is doing the secretly where
the findings and.
You as a physician are you
witnessing this are you hearing
about this from your colleagues
I'm trying to I had no idea try
to get my mind around this
happening in our state.
Mr center and I know it is I
know it's hard to believe but
yes I mean it you know if
you're.
If you spend of time and I see
you you will hear comments from
people.
That say things like then this
this guy's just got ago the guy
just pull the plug I mean you
you you sometimes hear those
things.
and so there's a lot of this
external projection of the value
of someone's life from health
care providers on to these
people and yes maybe maybe it's
the dire straits I understand
that nothing in this at all is
going to force few child care
upon somebody nothing at all and
that's what's really important
for us to have become living
well and and you know when you
go to a hospital do in ours and
those sorts of things and and
hospitals are doing that
possible doing that you know
when you go in and you have a
some sort of recommendation
they'll ask you do you have a
living will deal with the our
place that that's not what this
bill is about it's not about
having to do an arts about not
having it forced upon you and
I'll end with this story the the
for I when we moved here I
didn't know anybody except for
our family except for one person
his name is Trent hunter.
And
Headley was literally the only
is the only person I knew in
Albuquerque and Trent came up
with me when we when we have
this bill a few years ago he had
a brother.
With severe developmental
disabilities who is in basically
account like a home.
And who showed up to an
emergency room with kind of a
low a low blood pressure.
And in normal circumstances that
blood pressure was low enough
that he should have been
resuscitated in other words he
should have an IV started in
should been given which is
what's called some you know
intravenous crystal would you
know just been resuscitated that
should have happened.
But it it didn't happen he
stayed there for about six hours
to trance mom arrived at the
emergency room and said.
She saw her son severe
disabilities laying there in a
stretcher no hi vis no nothing
in the pressures like eighty or
fifty or whatever it is.
And she's not.
My son does not have a D. in our
so in essence it says orally in
essence you you cannot you have
to provide the standard of care
you cannot just assume all that
person looks like that they look
like they're so disabled so
we're just gonna or early say
all that they planted in our no.
A clear that in less they
clearly have the in our.
We're gonna we're gonna treat
everyone equally.
The questions thank you chairman
thank you senator yet I just.
Thank you for that because I'm
I'm I'm aware this is happening
and I want to know what your
personal experiences been so
thank you.
What.
Yes yes we want.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair.
So.
Six.
Because.
Section see Mr chair.
It says subject to the
provisions of subsection B. of
this section if an unanticipated
minor has capacity sufficient to
understand the nature of that an
intense an emancipated minors
medical condition the risks and
benefits of treatment and the
contemplated decision to
withhold or withdraw life
sustaining treatment that an
emancipated minor shall have the
authority to withhold with draw
life sustaining treatment so to
your Mr chair Senator
are minors must attend an
emancipated minor be before they
can take advantage of the
provisions of subsection C..
That's a great question Mr Mr
chair Senator I believe it is
sixteen I'm not crystal clear on
that some sort of have an answer
for you.
Mr chair Senator so this the
reason I ask is because them on
page eight.
Of this unemployed after after
in the law we say that somebody
who has the capacity could make
the decision which is got to be
the worst decision to have to
make.
Then you're requiring a parent.
I guess I I'm just I I I
understand I think I understand
the problem you're trying to get
to but I'm worried that this can
this creates confusion because
then you have an anticipated of
the massive rate of minors
requiring that a parent be
involved in the decision after
we just told them that they they
can and so I think that the
statute is just inconsistent
with itself and and Mr Sundar G.
subsection G. does not require
the parental involvement so we
we crafted this bill to make
sure that if if if the actual
patient was consensual that time
that they would be empowered to
do that which is appropriate
need all it says is you can't
put the D. in our unless you
have a parent so this is you
know so this would prevent a
secret in our that's what that
subsection is doing if the
patient's consent table then
there there's not going to be an
opportunity to force that you
have to ask that person so it's
it is a lot like I said it reads
and again our order shall not be
instituted unless the parent has
that so if if if the if consent
has already been achieved then
that's that's not a problem but
when the parents are the consent
makers you know it's a two year
old then that's what that's
where plus.
Mr chair so the Senator then I
think it should be clear about
what we're talking about two
year olds and children because
that was what was the most
upsetting to the idea that they
would be secret DNR's that would
be imposed by who the hospital
or.
As I told you I was just so
upset with this and what I want
to do is I can imagine.
Perhaps and a seventeen year old
an emancipated minor.
With a terminal disease and that
is suffered.
Making the decision and very
very hard decision.
And then it will coming into
this G..
Eight of which you're calling
secret is.
What you're saying is the legal
guardian.
Of the patient a resident who is
an unanticipated minor I I don't
see the REC how you reconcile
the at least in the language if
you're saying that if somebody
under the age of ten separate
somebody under the age of
fourteen then maybe I think it
should say that.
But at least in six our existing
law is.
You're dealing with the no
unanticipated funny then to pay
of minors maturity level.
Sorry this is frustrating you're
dealing with an under an advance
rate of minors of maturity level
and so that's not defined and
then there's no definition of in
G. H..
Or all right.
And and so I I just think that
that needs to be clarified if
you're saying that Hospital
shall not institute DNR's.
Without the parents consent of
the child I'm with you a hundred
percent.
But when you're talking about a
mature youth.
I think that the that a mature
youth.
Disabled or not to say you know
however it needs to be able to
have that that capacity that
attorney and and I just don't
think that the if the bill is
getting to the problem remember
we tell you this what's the
problem we're trying to solve my
understanding that the problem
we're trying to solve is parents
finding out the DNR is been
placed in their child's I file
and having that do in our I
acted upon.
First I think that should never
happen under our informed
consent that should never ever
happen.
You're telling me it does happen
so then we need to design a
statute that will stop that from
happening there needs to be
consequences on that behavior if
somebody's doing it
And and I just concern that this
doesn't quite do that.
The way it's the way it's
written.
so I'm all with all in with you
on the concept of the problem
that you identified I don't
think that the statute current
this bill currently does that.
And I and I just think it should
And I think it easy way would be
to define it to define a child.
Of and and put it of a defining
line within that undermines the
purpose of C..
So with that I I just have a
problem with the bill has
structured but I absolutely
believe that we need to solve
the problem that you have
identified and that.
People here have identified.
Mr Chairman thank you the issue
would you be happy if they take
care of this or you want to do
it here.
That's up to you or and to the
Senator Miss Mister chair
whether whether you want to I
have trouble voting for a
statute that does that mean the
provisions of that are
inconsistent with the provisions
of existing law.
I I can look judicial in the
face by and say I thought that
was fine.
Mr and etcetera I will say that
the yes that the problem is
primarily secret in our but once
we open this if there's a
disagreement before between
amateur youth and the parents or
the parents the hospital we we
have to resolve those conflicts
in the statute if if we're gonna
statutorily not allow these.
then maybe you know maybe they
show up in the seventeen year
old has has consented maybe
there's bad communication you
know we're not requiring a child
to talk to their parents when we
want that to happen and usually
happens like in the neuro ICU in
my experience is a good doctor
is going to sit down have a
schedule family conference and
get everyone together that's
what should happen and that's
what happens a lot of time I
mean part of plenty of those
conversations but but let let's
say there's not there on their
own emancipated they they don't
have good communication but the
child the mature child says you
know I've had enough and I and I
want to do in our
well we we we we say that here
in the new law we have to
account for that and they say
you know what if if the parents
say they lack capacity maybe
they're not in the right mind
well would you can get a judge
to to get involved in and a
judge has to be involved in some
of these very very difficult
situations we have to allow for
gonna recommend these we have to
allow for all of the possible.
Places of conflict and so that's
what that's what we're we're
trying to do and I I think it's
pretty I mean I I you know I I
don't see a conflict here I you
know it says if the minor lacks
capacity you know they're not
mature enough going by the way
the Senator said it's it's H.
fourteen so the parents say my
fifteen year old can't consent
is not mature enough well
there's a clause right here
subsection II when they can go
talk to judge about if they need
to.
Committee your a thirteen member
you want to move forward with
this.
Mr my my preference is to move
for its its model legislation
it's been on states I I think
it's pretty good I I very much
respect as an attorney I I
respect her her thoughts and if
there's some like I said I think
a lot of this unfortunate a lot
of new information but a lot of
it is what I would refer to as
legalese just going over the
different.
Mutations of conflict and so I'm
I'm happy to go through that
kind of I just think the line by
line if if our judiciary thinks
that in New Mexico this model
legislation may not hold up
because when it is secrecy of of
our statute but I think it's
okay.
So what's the.
Full access is a war of.
Comments with the pleasure of
the committee.
To pass from kos.
And we have a second to Senator
Ingle.
please call the roll.
Judiciary.
Senator they have us yes ma'am
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle yes center mass
this.
Will move to explain.
Senator McKenna.
I'm no.
Senate committees yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez no explain my
vote.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Hickey.
Now for.
Center if you know.
With a four four four four.
For defective order after your
explain their bill.
What
was going to distribute I would
vote yes.
And just give the chances for
judiciaire lived here with the
people I got here halfway
through so I missed a lot of.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
voted I can vote for this.
I'm gonna pass but because the
words on the page don't people
the conversation we just had it
is really the the it's just a
maintenance and needs to be re
would work.
Mr chair I voted against it
because I was trying to of and
all offer on the way to
Judiciary it isn't too it
doesn't.
Solve the problem the identified
to just the way it's written now
and I just couldn't vote for for
that reason if you would like to
talk on that's waited to
district happy to speak with you
about thank you Mr chair.
The.
So Senator you have the the pass
the Mr two five two five of five
to four vote.
Okay
Senator Ingle you want to do
Senator Woods bill.
Thank
you for your very.
The.
Yeah I
got the hands that they have the
gas only to a point thank you.
If if you could file out quickly
and quietly please.
Please follow up quickly and
quietly.
We have a lot of bills to cover.
It's been a good goal for you to
consider some of the politicians
will need.
Yeah I read the rest of the it
is.
Yes Hey.
Full nurses came up and said
that they.
It's like that I reset high
total eclipse okay this is
Senate bill one IDA can we have
an amendment to.
Did everybody get a copy of the
amendment.
I did.
Senator Ingle has graciously
agreed to put the bill up for
Senator Woods.
Read Senator thank you Mr
chairman Mr chairman.
Senator Woods is all of us know
Hey.
His father passed away so he
called me and I consented to try
to do this bill for him it's
really a pretty simple bill what
we're doing here is trying to
identify and make sure that the
the the if there's a lottery
winner that they can remain
anonymous if they want to.
not all states have that there's
nine states I believe that do
have a New.
You can be anonymous when you
win a lottery in course this
applies to the bigger into those
prices are certainly not at this
we're the little structures and
things were not talking about
here basically what this bill
does is it also.
You know shows and and go
through what the what the the
tax and Revenue Department
defined as of a dinner for
cation and like I say it if you
win it if this bill passes you
would not have to be revealed to
the public right now you have to
be.
And there are some cases where
there's you know.
People have have their homes to
damaged and certainly been
talked to in strong fashion and
certainly their kids have gotten
scared and things like that so I
just I just certainly am she in
support of this particular bill.
I don't think it's anything that
you know most things and when it
comes to our finances are are
kept quiet and I think this
should be to it is up to the
person if they want to reveal
that they can and certainly the
taxed revenue department gets
information on all those things
for the tax purposes but they
would not be allowed to publish
that person's name unless they
said it was okay and they have
to sign that way that's what
this bill basically does and
I'll try to stand for questions
the best I can and there is an
amendment that basically just
defiance of.
The section and the last the
department shall not disclose a
connection between the winner of
the lottery game information
about the winner Department is
required to reveal that's all
just amendment does.
Okay.
It can be a motion on the
amendment of the committee
Senator tell move the adoption
of the amendment Senator gotta
go seconds it many of the
discussion.
Seeing that any opposition to
that amendment the just
clarifies what it's all about
very good and adds another
section of law that I floated
department supposed to do.
Seeing then we'll consider the
amendment to been adopted and
we'll go to the audience anybody
here in support of this bill.
Anybody here in opposition to
this bill.
The video zoom millions of
members of the committee.
That we have a motion for due
process thank.
Seconded from Senator Gallegos.
Any other discussion the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator I and us.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator masters Senator
McKenna yes Senators metes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes center to
the piano yes.
Senator Ingle your your
eloquence will to give.
President members of the
committee Mr chairman members
the committee thank you very
much and senator what section
yes.
Okay then we'll move to of.
Senator Kernan.
Medicaid eligible to Senator
Lopez.
Point.
Let's.
This is Medicaid services
mileage reimbursement Senate
bill two fifty five.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee and I
want to introduce my expert
witnesses I have Stacy Johnson
Davis with Davis health care
navigation and I also have
working Graham with global
medical response and I do have
an amendment Mr chair and it was
pretty yeah was delivered last
week because.
So if we're living at it builds
is a.
Yes Mr chair we are on page
three we're striking subsection
C. in its entirety.
Okay is there a motion to adopt
the amendment.
So.
Moved by Senator Sedillo Lopez
seconded by Senator Tallman.
The is there any opposition to
adopt the minutes.
I don't have a position Mister I
hope that you made the most of.
I just have a question for all
the discussion about Mr Mr chair
of Senator could you just
explain the amendment.
Of I'm gonna let my experts
explain the amendment on.
Yes dropping subsection C..
Mr chair and senator the we had
removed subsection C. because it
spoke to language with regard to
the IRS reimbursement rates for
mileage and so I believe it was
removed because of the
fluctuation of the IRS
reimbursement if I'm and
speaking correctly.
So Mr chair so just assume it's
so the rates could be higher
than the IRS or lower depending
on what was that thank you Mr
chair that's all I need.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
bill to the amended and have you
explain the bill as amended to
thank you very much Mr chairman
basically this is just requiring
the Human Services department to
create a mileage reimbursement
rate as the title says for
ambulance environmental
modification service and durable
medical equipment this you know
as these home health care
centers go out into the
communities and in many cases
it's many miles away for
instance in my community the the
home health care company that
services our area sometimes has
to go all the way to Los crucis
it's a very very wide area in
rural New Mexico and the court
said it's great cost and even
though there is some
reimbursement included and
provide a range of this is an
opportunity to create to
stimulate right and there is an
appropriation with it so course
we never know this of the one if
it passes this committee would
go on to finance to see if
there's capacity to to include
this so with that I think that
in the get out would you like to
say if you were.
Mr chair and committee I
represented the durable medical
equipment the durable medical
equipment company as well as an
environmental modification
company that both service the
entire state of New Mexico and
as as Senator Kernan indicated
the mileage can be quite
significant when we're traveling
to see patients for the services
and as our costs too big to do
business continue to increase it
really would help offset and
then allow us to be able to
continue to service the entire
state of New Mexico thank you.
Yes Sir.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
committee committee members my
name is working Graham as a and
regional director for global
medical response we're ambulance
company that provides services
in eight different counties of
New Mexico this bill if passed
would significantly improve the
reimbursement rates for
ambulance services are currently
in New Mexico ambulance services
are not reimbursed for the first
seventeen miles that they
transport a patient point
hospital so this bill would
address that for us thank you.
So what the current system right
now is as you it's the first
seventeen there after you have a
right to seventy five Medicaid
that's correct Sir.
But it doesn't take into account
all these factors that you
point.
For the ambulance service no Sir
the it again the the rate
structure for New Mexico
Medicaid for durable medical yes
I see okay so.
But but the the right now
establish for ambulances in your
judgment is fair.
It just doesn't cover the first
seventy miles Mr chair members
committee I know I wouldn't
categorize it is fair I I think
it's it's under what we need but
additionally and on top of that
the normal rate doesn't include
the first seventeen miles of not
only is the right in our opinion
an adequate it also isn't
covered for the for seventeen
miles at that it that is there
anything in here that the
increases the amount you're
going to get.
Yes Sir the the bill if passed
as amended requires that HSD
establish order just continue
the current reimbursement rate
for all miles that an ambulance
travels with the patient.
That is good.
Thank you for letting them the
mileage reimbursement rates the
department should consider the
average cost of licensing and
registering the abilities fuel
ambulance maintenance repair
tires insurance mechanics wages
benefits and payroll taxes loan
interest related to the
ambulances the cost of the
weighted allocation of overhead.
The cost of depreciation.
N. reserves for replacement.
B. eight vehicles and equipment.
But it doesn't say.
It doesn't say what you wanted
to say about the but the seventy
for seventy miles doesn't.
Mr chair members committee it
does on page two at the start
there sentence will our every
mile.
Okay good we go to I read over
the to that thank you this
could.
The let's go to the anything
else Senator.
No Mr chair will stand for
questions okay.
Is there anybody here for
Medicaid yes what would you like
to see about this bill.
Coming up the lady
I am a lot at on the Medicaid
medical director Mr chair
members of the committee we
don't oppose or support this
bill right now the rates are
supposed to be built into the
capitated rate we'll have to
make changes to a number of
different waivers that we have
there's a number of different
programs that have DME and have
Environmental modifications and
we'll have to talk to an actuary
about that you know an actuarial
sound right but we're willing to
work on that.
Thanks welcome you to cover the
first seventy miles no it wasn't
a choice you made the.
So I was just texting someone
while we were while you were
talking I'll try to get an
answer I think we do actually
but let me get you a specific
answer for okay great the videos
want to speak in support of this
bill.
David here in opposition to the
bill.
Anybody
Katie still Katie still would
you like to speak on in support
of this bill.
Yes I would Mr chair members of
the committee I.
Pardon this link on your actual
PDF that is just the PDF of this
meeting that zoom link is not
functional but the one that's on
the master list of all the
committee meetings that's
working.
I anyway I'm Katie stone I am
the vice chair of the New Mexico
developmental disabilities
council and the council just
voted today in support to
support this bill we think it's
a great idea thank you so much
to the Senator senators for
bringing it forward.
She to.
Okay so we're getting
conflicting information one one
in the infinite information was
that people can make public
comment.
But the we just had public
comment Senators.
Many instances okay great.
Let's go to the committee thank
you Katie stone Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr chairman I
I was listening to some of the
things
maybe I misunderstood but here
are part of your reimbursement
process the depreciation of
vehicle attires mechanic preach
all of those things all the
operating costs
Who else has a real sense this
sort of thing I've never heard
of never quite heard that
mentioned that way that the we
would cover all of all of the
expenses like that.
Do you have an answer.
Mr chair Senator so the.
The section that speaks to the
reimbursement rates says taken
to a fact the or into
consideration the cost of fuel
ambulance maintenance repairs
tires those sort of things that
rate is currently set with New
Mexico HSD menu Mexico Medicaid
at three dollars and forty cents
per mile for ambulance services
specifically and only for
ambulance services in this
example but that right we feel
like as well say I feel like it
should be higher is the current
established right that takes
into consideration the cost of
fuel vehicles tires those sort
of things.
With the truth your three three
dollars and forty cents a mile.
And what we're doing here is is
the increasing the fuel oil Sir.
Mr chair Senator no Sir what
we're asking is that New Mexico
Medicaid reimburses us the same
three dollars and forty cents
per mile that they currently
pass for all miles that an
ambulance travels with a patient
one to.
Mr chair Senator that's correct.
More interesting but keeping
world there in.
It is one thing that doesn't
seem to be on this list is the
wages of the driver.
Is that part of it or is it
separately build.
Mr chair I I can't speak to
whether or not the wages of the
driver are part of the rate
setting that New Mexico HSD or
Medicaid did for.
Okay but this
Mr chairman Sir this three
dollars and forty cents a.
Covers the benefits payroll
taxes loan interest related to
the ambulances.
Cost of weighted allocation.
kosher depreciation reserves
replacement industry hackles and
quit my.
Yes.
Yes Mr chairman that's a this is
down and three dollars and forty
cents.
Secretary that okay yes the yes
Sir that's correct right
currently.
Mrs this three that covers all
these things.
Yes go ahead Mr Senator yes that
currently covers it again I
would say we are asking
separately for an increase of
the New Mexico Medicaid rates in
general but that is not part of
this bill.
Okay.
Thank you.
Yes.
Senator Hickey could you and
senator most disincentive
because.
thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for bringing this bill
Ambulance reimbursement by
Medicaid I can't even tell you
how bad it just
And I know a lot of counties and
municipalities are are really
hurting
I've I haven't worked the math
out
but I would and and perhaps a.
Alaina from
Medicaid you may or may not know
about this but there is a
provision in national law that
allows for
counties Advil and Services to
do a cost recovery of I mean I
have the actual that another
words it's almost kind of like a
hospital cost report that only
confuse you further so then we
started with something else in
other words if you can and and
there are there are companies
that help
Medicaid programs work this out
they will come in and actually
build your cost report so that
everything that you have in the
costs that was not reimbursed
gets reimbursed by the federal
government and that does exist
now that's going to take a year
to be able to pull together but
it is in federal law and I
believe that Senator Campos has
a bill quite quite a bit larger
but I think it's this is so
large that good luck
in finance kind of thing but
there actually is the ability
for Medicaid to engage with
these companies to do this full
cost reimbursement to get him
back to a break even and it does
even better it allows Medicaid
to take anywhere from a three
to.
I've heard one case up to ten
percent administrative fee to
pay for these they're complex
reports but there Representative
very doable but it basically
everything that you lose and a
genuine basis includes
depreciation you get to get back
but it's something that Medicaid
would need to take on over the
next year it would take a year
to to get that but in lieu of
that time period this bill makes
an immense amount of sense and I
just don't believe we're going
to get ten million
for the other bill this is is a
little more reasonable so I just
want to point that out I wish
you know that.
Believer I will actually I do
not know everything about health
care okay but I do know a few
things and this is one of them
that I happen to trip across
somewhere in my past but we can
make our ambulance companies
whole but Medicaid has to go out
and and do that and do it in
conjunction with the counties
and municipalities and I believe
that we may even be able to get
Medicare into that picture as
well so is this this is this is
reimbursement request you've got
insurance companies and and and
and they don't do so great
either but but then getting
Medicare to I I believe that
they're considering putting
chair into this program as well.
In that in the go ahead a lady
had the answer.
Mr chair members of the
committee so in the first fifty
mouth is considered part of the
base right after that it's added
into violence so there's this
could affect one flat rate for
zero to fifteen miles and then
after that is a right and the
first fifteen correct and then I
just want to comment to that
it's in our budget we did this
comprehensive provider rate
analysis were very compared
Medicaid to Medicare and the
Medicaid to four other states
and we looked at pretty much
every code we have and we also
looked at transportation and
part of our transportation is
there's a rate increase in our
budget
for ambulance services and
transportation
and on that point Mr chair if I
may please there's a rate
increase we are covering the
cost and and and again the
reimbursement I mean generally
in Medicaid you know with
Medicaid was invented a world
when there was just wonderful
fee for service insurance that
where everyone cost shifting
against and unfortunately the
pattern of paying very low is
just been painting so again I
think this is very important to
do for now and I think that we
need to ask Medicaid can put in
the bill but certainly we can
follow up with you for it if we
have this new health care four
year whatever is going to be
it's simply a matter of doing it
applying seventeen other states
do it and they do it really
well.
Thank the very broadly but to
attention something that are
Nellis is that
Medicaid reimburses at three
dollars and forty cents a mile
after the first fifteen miles
with the chair right.
This is an exercise and that's
it eight dollars and seventy one
cents of a.
That allows billing as of the
first month yeah and the state
ambulance terrapin ministered by
the PRC which I guess is what
the insurance companies would be
under.
The last billing for the first
Mohan has the highest
reimbursement of all the twelve
seventy five a month.
It in if I may get in Mr chair
on this point of reimbursement
the at.
I mean basically the pattern of
Medicaid against Medicare is a a
percentage of Medicare that's
quite down anywhere from fifty
to maybe seventy percent and
again but you're seeing and
Marshall is that old okay let's
do a cost shift but remember we
don't have that much commercial
about people in the state were
half Medicaid and then another
but almost two to.
Twenty two and fifty thousand
chair
and and the other thing I want
to point out that we seem to get
and I'm going to come forward
with bills that on this but I
recently looked at at that
Medicaid base levels that we get
paid in New Mexico and it's on a
chair scale says I I don't want
to confuse and Medicare scale
well when when I look at part a
and part B. and Medicare you are
are factors are like one point
two you go over to Texas and
Arizona and there are one point
nine two point one so even
though we're getting the six
week we again are not covering
coming close to covering what
our costs are for this and so as
we talk about you know I mean
really happy we're getting this
increase for behavioral health
and Medicaid put aside getting
about eighty percent of what
Texas pace I just getting a
hundred and twenty and so that's
the other piece you want to put
into this equation but doing a
good econometric analysis
getting a company to come in and
do the analysis and I think that
they may actually get proceeds
off of first this is something
state but anyway
we're there is a long term
there's a good long term
solution that the federal
government pays and does it
fairly.
Very good Senator most us.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I would like to pass
as amended.
Did you want to comment the
Senator McKenna we have you.
thank you chairman and thank you
Senator Kernan for this bill
because I don't know the bill as
the three of you do expertly
I always think about this
because of bills I'm working on
where is the language in here
that will trigger cost of living
adjustments so that you don't
have to cook the sponsor some
have to come back for asking the
committee to oh we need to up
our rates because cost of living
and maybe in here but I'm just
wanting word is.
Mr chair of let me I don't think
we have it in here but on the
other hand as Senator Hickey
mentioned this could be an issue
that could be resolved down the
road through the federal
through through the state
activating what is available to
federal I think this is again
just an opportunity to cover
these costs until maybe
something more permanent can be
done and so hopefully we won't
need to worry about the the cost
living going forward if we can
do this in the way that Senator
Hickey mentioned through the
department and the federal
government so I think we're
satisfied as it is right now and
then if we hopefully won't have
to come back at a later time
with regard to them.
And I notice you have a two
million dollar appropriation
which match with Medicaid would
create an eight million dollar
fund.
If you get to.
There is a discussion I thank
you chairman thank you senator.
Secretary call the roll we have
a motion for a do pass seconded
by Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Senator my **** yes.
McKenna yes Senators maybe is
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes.
Senator Ingle.
That.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes to
give you the Senator thank you
very much we'll see you that how
we do and finance thank you.
Senator Lopez.
Elemental disability
representative.
Senate bill two sixty.
Then we have your expert witness
zoom.
Red letter is.
Yes Mr chair that would be Alice
McQuay yes.
And we had.
Okay Senator go ahead okay thank
you very much Mr chair members
of the committee I am here in
front of you was Senate bill two
sixty and what Senate bill two
sixty is doing Mr chair members
of the committee is is just
updating statues with more
modern and less offensive
terminology
that the main change throughout
the bill is substitution of the
term individuals.
With developmental or
intellectual disabilities for
the mentally retarded.
Mr chairman it's very simple but
what the bill that we have here
in front of you and if I could I
think Miss McQuay would like to
maybe add a little bit more
language for what we're doing
here right.
This because we welcome.
Thank you Mr chair out can you
hear me yes we can do I rates
thank you very much thank you Mr
chair we have for some
background on the bill we were
right in that developmental
disabilities council was brought
in as a member of the and
supporting states supporting
familiar faces subcommittee of
the Supreme Court commission on
mental health and competency and
and through that subcommittee's
work we identified the need to
replace this really damaging
language from New Mexico
statutes nationwide intellectual
disabilities and developmental
disability has replaced the term
mental retardation advocates and
self advocates are with
intellectual disabilities
asserted that the term mental
retardation has many negative
connotations become offensive to
many people and often result in
misunderstandings about the
nature of disabilities and those
who have.
In fact in October twenty ten
Congress passed rose's law which
charge reference which changed
references of mental retardation
and specified federal laws to
intellectual disability and
references state mentally
retarded individual changing
those to an individual with an
intellectual disability we're
simply doing the same kind of
thing today with state.
I'm answered with that I stand
for questions thank you Mr chair
thank you to the sponsor for
bringing this very important
delta New Mexico speaking.
Right and did you want to go to
the amendment Mr chair yes the
amendment.
A simply Mister chair if you
look of course looking at page
twenty seven by nineteen through
page twenty eight line twenty we
are striking that whole
subsection agents entirety and
are are replacing it
specifically with a what I call
a and much more
Hi.
Able a definition that we'd like
to have been here about
developmental or intellectual
disability.
Their motion.
Hello and Mr chair again miss
macrae may wish to add a little
bit more to this where do you
get this definition this record.
Thank you Mr chair so do
Original Bill had contemplated
changing the definition of what
was a developmental intellectual
disability
with the D. D. Act definition
but after current consulting
ation away at the department of
health and others who this
particular provision which is
about commitment hearings and
the way it's being done
change making that big of a
change out wouldn't be effective
for that particular proceeding
court proceedings and the state
as true as we can to the
proceeding and that the purpose
of the preceding we didn't
change the definition to watch
from the from the original
statute so that if you look at
that then that what it does is
it removes the DD
record that sorry definition and
replaces it and stat with very
targeted replacements for the
words mental retardation which
is a current statutes and where
we got that definition was that
we kept it current with the
with the definition that came
from the competency to stand
trial definition for mental
retardation so we just took the
competency to stand trial
definition and replaced it with
the words it's retardation
because we couldn't defined
developmental disabilities as
development this is you can defy
the term chart and so did that
kind of
Adjustments to that it would
stay consistent with the
competency to stand trial.
Definitions I'm and again that
leaves a lot closer to that
committee hearing and how the
committee hearings should have
should proceed I hope that
answers your questions yes thank
you this report.
Members of the committee we need
admin a motion on the amendment
do we give a quote that you
sent all the native and Senator
let's uh the Ortiz appear
seconded to.
Questions of the eleven.
Thank you Mr chair I noticed
that the that the requires.
So the average general
intellectual functioning.
Concurrently with deficits and
adaptive behavior.
The.
Why is it necessary that there
be the concurrent concurrency of
deficits and adaptive behavior I
ask because.
In the court system particularly
with criminal prosecutions
individuals have been convicted
because they have superb
adaptive behavior.
But they have the deficits and
so they went along an agreed and
confessed to crimes.
Because they I just what are
anyway I just ask the question
why is the concurrent.
Concurrent of deficits in their
behavior required to this
deficit definition just asking.
Mr.
I was thank you very much Mr
chair Senator so out to answers
that question the first is when
we were trying to determine
which definition to replace that
term with we did we chose the
competency to stand trial
Definition because it came the
closest to what they were trying
to do commitment of proceedings
they are very different
proceedings so we didn't want to
expand the number of people who
are subject to commitment
hearings I'm for example in the
competency to stand trial
definition there is a
presumption at a certain I to
level I'm but we didn't want to
do that in the committee
hearings because these are
involuntary commitments where we
are restricting people's you
know rights and so we did want
to it kind of does the opposite
if you know a need and so we
didn't want to expand
the number of people who would
be subject to those committee
hearings by putting in
presumptions that don't
currently exist.
Thank thank you Mr chair I think
that's very very helpful with
regard to commitments but if you
look at a lot of the falsely
convicted people even people
convicted to the death penalty a
lot of them had extraordinary
adaptive behavior but but
confessed to crimes they didn't
commit.
I I understand that you're doing
it for this purpose and for this
purpose I certainly go along
with it but I did want to.
Point out that fact if you read
a lot of the cases of people who
do false confessions that exists
as a problem.
Thank you Mr chair.
The.
It is a discussion on the
amendment is there any
opposition to the amendment.
Seeing that will consider the
bill to benefit.
Then we'll go to the audience at
first I'd like to we have
several high powered witnesses
here I'd like to give them a
chance to speak of this matter.
I'm chair or DC Pino Senators my
name's Branagh somewhat I'm a
justice on the Supreme Court and
I'm also the liaison for the
mental health and competency
commission I've been a judge for
over fourteen years both in our
trial courts and appellate
courts I've had to make findings
both in person and in orders and
in written opinions that someone
was mentally retarded it is
offensive and I'm advocating
that you support this bill
because I think justice at its
very core demands treating
people with dignity and respect
and this gives us a tool to do
that thank you.
Thank you justice.
Yes yes.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I I also thank
you for allowing me to speak my
name is Julie Vargas I am also a
justice on the New Mexico
Supreme Court and I first want
to think Senator Lopez for
bringing this bill it's
something that I've looked for
for several years I spent
several years on the New Mexico
court of appeals and have been
on the Supreme Court for a
couple of years and over and
over again I've had to write
opinions and participate in
arguments I have to call people
and referred to people as
mentally retarded and it is
horrifying no one should ever
have to have a judge someone
with power.
Say those words to them they do
as justice Moore stated they
should be treated with dignity
and respect when they come
before the court or when they
come before any agency of this
the state government to ask for
help I also come to you of a
person who was a sister of
someone who has a developmental
disability and and my family
retarded as fighting words the
family is going to get very
upset if you use those terms in
front of anyone else and so I
don't want any other family to
have to feel that when they come
in front of the court when they
come in front of an agency
asking for help I would I ask
you to support this and passed
the phone to the next committee
thank you so much thank you very
much justice Vargas we also
speak in support of this bill.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to the bill we have a
couple all of the resume was
speak in support for the
available
Jim Jackson and Ellen plates so
we'll start with you Jim.
Thank you Mr chair Jim Jones on
the half of disability rights
New Mexico these are very
outdated terms that are still in
our statute books
and on behalf of the dignity of
people with disabilities I think
it is important that we finish
the job of cleaning up this
language so we would encourage
the the committee supported this
bill thank you.
Thank you for that I understand
Ellen usually you really did us
to speak but thanks for live
zooming in this anybody else
here wants to speak in favor or
just because committee members I
move it to pass.
But we certainly lost our forum.
What would happen to.
Although somebody's coming in
though it's the.
We're looking for.
Steve.
So.
The the you.
You would through Senator you
went through several phones
several of our state codes and
and these were the instances for
that term was used Mr chair yes
and of course this is going to
still have us to go through many
more places within our statute
bit I think Mr chair as we
continue to go through what I
call cleanup.
this is what we have here in
front of you at this point in
the future there maybe with as
we run into other instances we
may need.
Mr chair there may be some other
places that were unaware yes.
Okay we have a motion for a do
pass on this bill.
We have a second to.
Second second of Senator
Maestas.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes yes Senators
maybe is yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator to the piano yes.
Six of six to zero vote with the
three S. absence.
You have a depressive
congratulations thank you very
much Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you justice is
recovering
thanks spending a whole after.
Interesting.
All right in the lottery.
All right Senator Pirtle three
years much anticipated.
Daylight savings time bill.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
thank you for your time today
and and thank you for being
flexible with my schedule and
Senator Gonzales to schedule
over the last week or so what I
have before you is my bi annual
legislation to stop changing the
clocks
this journey started my first
session I think being new.
we all get approached by
different people to drop
legislation.
And so somebody asked me to drop
permanent standard time which I
did and I came to this very
committee and it died a very
painful painful death for many
reasons brought up by Senator
gay Kernan who's on the
committee basically just
shredded it in front of
everybody over the interwebs and
learned a valuable lesson and so
after that I was contacted by a
young mother out of Albuquerque
who mentioned to me that said
Hey we still want to stop
changing the clock but since
there's so many issues with the
economy and everything going on
with permanent standard time how
do we find a way to go to
permanent daylight.
And so in doing that was able to
get it through the Senate
through the house to the floor
unfortunately the committee
report just never showed up and
got lost somewhere in this
building but the support of that
has just grown exponentially
every year
I know many of the of the
members of this committee have
supported in the past
But since then Mr chair members
of the twenty six states have
passed something we were the
first state to get it through
one chamber and almost could
have been leading the way on
this issue but since then twenty
six states have passed this
legislation in only two states
since this was allowed under
federal law back in I believe
the sixties have chosen standard
time read your round.
And I think that's an
interesting thing to point out
and a lot of it I I think Mr
chair members of the committee
is the confusion and the
problems with going to standard
time and on the flip side of
that overwhelmingly my emails
are full of people that love the
extra hour of daylight in the
evening there's plenty of
reasons why just to name a few
lower crime extra time with
family more time to golf more
time to shop downtown more time
to ski more daylight to ski and
so I think there's tons of
benefits of of permanent
daylight saving time along with
the fact that the federal
government would have to make
action so that way there would
be consistency that of national
consistency with regard to time
there wouldn't be these time
zones where eight months of the
year were the same as California
and four months of the year with
the same time as Texas and all
of this confusion this would
require federal action other
states to get involved and so
that there would be consistency
inconsistent time across the
country and with that Mr chair
stable it would require federal
election it would require
federal action and one change
I'm I'm sorry one change that
was made Mr chair members of the
committee was when then house
chairman Senator my Estes had me
as a gas down in Deming and we
worked out some issues with
regard to what is and said that
this with the commerce that go
so there would need to be a
trigger in order for our
students to take action that
there would be consistency with
Texas so that we wouldn't lose
the commerce and interrupt what
we have the real strong economic
driver that we have done in
Santa Theresa so just taking
into those valid concerns work
that into the bill and I I think
as more states move forward we
will see Texas coming along I
will point out that Colorado
actually past something that
said if enough of the state's
past the compacts.
And we're going to daylight
saving time there's going to do
it without federal approval so I
think it's kind of funny how
some states have taken some
different approaches of course
Colorado the first state to
legalize cannabis this kind of
figured out some of the federal
law it's it's only a suggestion
but I don't think we need to go
that far this would be something
that is to put to be Frank with
everybody's kind of a memorial
in in legislation but it's it's
something that's going to send a
message to the federal
government that we're tired of
it we're ready to stop changing
time and the vast majority of
people enjoy that our at the
light in the evening as opposed
to in the morning thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
okay
Anybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
Anybody in the audience opposed
to this bill.
We do have to all the lady who
are opposed.
What is the J..
P..
Let's start with you J..
Yes yes I'm unmuted now I I
don't see a video is that
correct yeah I don't think we
have the capacity right now.
Okay very well well as hello
Mister chair committee members
thank you very much for letting
me speak today and my name is J.
P. and I am the president of the
nonprofit safe standard time and
I'm calling in over from the
neighboring state of Arizona I'm
asking opposition to the general
Senator turtles Bill two eight
seven and pass support instead
for the honorable Senator
Gonzales is bill one nine one we
agree that ending the clock
change is a good idea but we
warn the permanent daylight time
is actually worse than the clock
change it forces early waking in
an effort to increase evening
spending at the cost of health
safety education the economy
energy usage it's it's not a
good idea permanent standard
time is the real clock defined
from the natural world where the
sun is actually position the
sky's the honest time of day and
it turns out it's actually best
for public health safety
education this is the opinion of
the American medical association
the American academy of
neurology the American college
of chest physicians the national
safety council the American
academy of sleep medicine the
national PTA writers from
Bloomberg The Oregonian the Star
Tribune Cato Institute daily
wire there really is brought
bipartisan opposition to it's in
the the policy if Bill two eight
seven and support for the policy
of bill one nine one
I want to address a few things
that were said that regrettably
ring correct there are not
twenty six states that have
passed the same legislation that
would be only sixteen states I
don't know where the extra ten
come from
but it's an honest mistake I'm
sure sixteen states to pass this
bill but it is forbidden by
federal law and for good reason
the last time we attempted in
nineteen seventy four it
actually cost people's lives
it because it.
And it would be for some people
to wake up an hour early all of
winter and to go to school or
work before sunrise and I think
if you ask your constituents
would they like to set the alarm
clock an hour early would be
like to go to school or work in
the dark all of winter they
would they would probably say no
but that's what this policy
would force them to do the
nation of Mexico just a few
months ago decided to get rid of
daylight time not make it
permanent Arizona is on
permanent standard time not
daylight time also Hawaii the
five U. S. territories and most
nations on earth the Navajo
Nation is waiting on your state
to make this change to standard
time
there are border towns New
Mexico that wants to follow you
into making the change to
standard time not permanent
daylight time Texas Oklahoma
Montana there are many states
that are considering bills for
standard time
which is federally pre approved
There was also mention on Friday
of crime and exercise energy
usage and regrettably there's
been one or two studies that
look at only the date of the
clock change showing a temporary
reduction in crime but when you
zoom out of the rest of the year
it actually shows that long term
daylight time is increasing
crime it has no effect on the
amount of exercise it just
changes when people exercise and
it is not safe the daylight time
does not save energy daylight
time is forcing us to wake up
early keeps us awake late at
night which means we're
consuming more heat in the
morning and consuming more air
conditioning in the evening
that's a big reason why Arizona
has not done daylight time since
nineteen sixty eight so in
conclusion I would ask the this
the the health committee would
listen to the broad consensus of
dozens of nonprofits for health
safety and education propose
Bill two eight seven four daily
time and instead support bill
one nine one for standard time
and I'll be glad to answer any
questions you might have thanks
again for letting me speak.
Thank you very much J. the next
is Jeff gentry.
Thank you Mr chairman I assume
everyone can hear me all right.
Yes.
I confirm good thank you so much
Mr chairman Senators I was a
witness for Senator Gonzalez on
Friday so I would urge those who
maybe didn't get to
that to to review it I'm back in
poor Tallas and have three notes
for the committee on SB two
eighty seven.
Those who actually study this
issue support permanent standard
time as Mr P. indicated I would
associate myself with all of his
remarks but my three points or
this one the harmful effects of
daylight saving time are not
temporary not just during the
spring transition but for two
thirds of the year artificial
time produces drugs circadian
misalignment with measurably
higher rates of heart disease
stroke obesity dementia cancer
and our study found road
fatalities the established
research incredible allergy
indicates that SB two eighty
seven would be harmful to the
health and safety of New
Mexicans again I say the people
who have actually studied this
issue support permanent standard
time second during the S. T. New
Mexico clocks say noon when the
sun is above New Orleans that's
a full time zone and seven
hundred fifty miles in the
wrong.
And I would refer to Mr piece
know about all the medical
associations who agree that
standard time is superior and
finally daylight saving time was
drawn up more than a half
century ago by bureaucrats who
had no understanding of
circadian science we are the
Guinea pigs in this failed
experiment yes I agree with
Senator Pirtle that we should
and clock change but we need to
do it the right way.
Please do not just compromise on
the two bills by doing nothing
New Mexico should reject
daylight saving time in favor of
permanent standard time thank
you so much for the opportunity
thank you Mr gentry the one
respond.
Of Mr chair just on a few things
you know the all those medical
reports they they are valid
there's more heart attacks there
are sleep issues there are car
accidents but it's because of
the change forward into daylight
saving time if we stick with it
does go away those stop so I
think there's a little bit of
you know to we see it all the
time in our jobs as legislators
you can tweak anything to make
it say what you want but then
with regard to Mexico the states
that border the United States
are actually following what we
do because Mexico values what we
do and the relationships we have
together with the economy so yes
part of Mexico has stop changing
the clocks but northern Mexico
that the states that border the
United States are actually still
status quo whatever we're doing
because it's important to have
that which I think if if we were
to permit daylight saving time
as a nation which is essentially
what this would do we would just
break off on our own than they
would keep up with that in not
to mention their closer the
equator so they have more of a
twelve hour day anyway and then
I would with regard to going to
school in the dark last thing
was two sessions ago my dad's
cousin well my cousin to he
called me he said then this
argument of kids going to school
in the dark is so ridiculous I
lived in Michigan we went to
school in dark we got home in
the dark and we did just fine
and so I found it kind of funny
that that he called me because
they're so far north that that
notion is just we live in our
little fishbowl that we don't
realize what other states go
through that we'll find a way
will we'll be safe we'll work
through it and adapt because
that's what humans do I will
mention though with regard to
the Navajo Nation this is the
time I I'm I'm kind of a time
your no more about it than I
would ever have hoped that the
Hopis which is kind of like the
donut hole within a donut of the
Navajo Nation they are actually
with New Mexico so we're part of
the the Navajo Nation sticks
with Arizona the the hope you
stick with us even though their
way further into.
Arizona and actually surrounded
by the Navajo Nation so I think
it's kind of interesting with
some of those things are brought
out that it's we'll have troops
but I do appreciate it I will
agree with wholeheartedly the
the to the changing of the time
it is a serious health issue it
really disrupts children in
their sleep patterns and
especially our children with
special needs and so that's
actually the reason why that
young mother from Albuquerque
brought this forward.
Very good okay members of the
committee.
Questions discussion senator
Morris this thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
pirtle for.
To bring it forward and for
listening to folks for change in
the bill year after year.
And for a having a clean bill
that would smoothly make it
happen
The up.
The up then David state
representative up Gonzalez
passed a bill through the house.
For us standard time.
I think that that bill had like
one to send to the and then of
course the Senate passed the
bill for daylight savings time.
and now it's proposed bye bye
two senators the and then of
course the bill that what that
was referred to Mr chairman up
center for as bill couple years
back got to house commerce and
the folks down at the border
Authority were panicked out
because they thought.
The change would happen
overnight and and it would
create this this havoc on the
border because you know Mr
chairman New Mexico.
El Paso county and and to all of
the state just below a Paso and
some part have to be on the same
time.
For that commerce to work for to
work better rather.
So so what this would do is so
the gentleman that was on the
the just spoke on zoom that was
here the other day the humidity
misspoke Mr chairman Mexico.
Besides the border states went
to a single time.
But the Mexican government has
allowed the border States to to
adapt to their northern
neighbors so to us is the same
to our changes it's time when
New Mexico and el Paso county
change there's and so what this
would do correct me if I'm wrong
with this with this change in
Mexico so if the once the
governor signs this nineties
later would it change to
Mexico's time up and then New
Mexico would be different than a
Paso county into our how would
it work so Mister chair and
senator how this would work is
essentially the governor would
sign this and it would just lay
in waiting for the federal
government
and then it would not even take
effect at the federal government
said Hey you can go to the life
saving time if you want to
because the other trigger Ezzell
Paso county or the state of
Texas as a whole would have to
then save both time zones within
their state are been permanent
daylight saving time so there's
some triggers to protect that
and ensure that we don't disrupt
that of commerce because that is
important and I will know Mr
chair they're not here to speak
against it so I'm assuming they
they are either neutral or not
at least not opposed to it
anymore but that's it takes some
triggers and it would require
federal action this has passed
the US Senate it's waiting in
the United States house of
representatives.
Thank you Mr chairman center for
all the up this that can.
We for the most current but I
could practically guarantee Mr
chairman that the second.
you know when it's going to.
You know the second Mexico and
aposs county change obviously
they'll be a lead time The New
Mexico government will then
allow for forced you well it
changed or change it's time to
that all three.
All three states would be the
same time that's kind of the
plan correct Mr chair Senators
up the correct and and I I think
we can assume because of the
Mexican government has already
said northern states to do what
you need to to stay connected
with our northern neighbors that
they would continue to do that
and that's Mr Senator that's
that's the logical conclusion
with the rest of that day and so
we did up in the interim we had
a great hearing down in Deming
kind of fleshed out some of
these issues up in the border
Authority folks are still little
panic but they're not as perfect
as they work with.
and then.
Standard time may work I can
Canada northern latitudes.
But I think in the southern
states I think we're thirty five
latitude.
I think daylight savings time is
the way to go and then you ask
yourself what about ours on
either the same attitude is just
it's kind of hot in Arizona they
want the sun to go down they
cannot wait for the sun to go
down in Arizona unless you like
on sixteen and you're like
having the game you like but so
it's a different reality it's
it's we want more daylight more
daylight the the studies that
I've read
show that it did that because
there's less crime with more
daylight in the evening there's
more time with us spending time
with your kids before you have
to read and sent a better what
not
currently we have daylight
savings time eight months out of
the year.
And just when that the sun is is
going down earlier and earlier
like four forty five forty five
five thirty then boom it jobs
and it's like you get home is
dark you know so
and and lastly Mister chairman
Senator Pirtle nothing prohibits
a school district from tweaking
it's time.
You know you could change your
start times we don't have to
change the entire clock of the
state folks can adjust if they
so choose.
But for New Mexico's reality
I I submit the daylight savings
time is this the way to go state
of so we have Senator Tallman
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
America we can't even agree on
what time it is.
it.
So the uniform a.
Time act was.
Yes in nineteen sixty six so
that's fifty seven years ago
we've been arguing about this
for fifty seven years basically
the in Mr chair Senator we've
we've argued over it the the
year long daylight saving time
could even go into effect that's
they didn't did it and then
pulled it back before it even
took effect and then I believe
it was president George W. bush
he was the most recent George W.
bush is the one that went from a
six and six split two and eight
and four split eight months on
on daylight saving and for on
standard and so that's kind of a
quick history of our our recent
as a country as to daylight
saving time in the changing.
So I was out of the room for
what it maybe answered this
question how many states have a
sixty.
Sixty six of well it Mr chair if
if I may at sixteen that have
passed this there's twenty six
states that have passed some
type of form of this not this
exact verbiage but what for
example state of California
passed it in their constitution.
through referendum that daylight
saving time is what they were so
they were actually able to go to
their people and the people of
California chose permanent
daylight saving time so so just
to follow up on that that point
use we this is California's on
permanent daylight savings that
they're not because it's not
allowed federally but as soon as
it is allowed federally they
they will to but my expert who
was not able to be on today Mr
gates who I worked with for for
years and he's became quite the
expert on this
told me it was twenty six
states.
Right so thank you this two more
quick questions the I don't want
to drag this out so we have time
Senator.
Well you.
Time I don't know if I do have
the so in my an adult I don't
you know the days it changes
just another day for me doesn't
affect me but since it really
affects people in a Mr chair
Senator I can tell you I'm one
of the I think it's something
like fifteen or twenty percent
of the people who are maybe a
little more photosensitive I
mean for me you change it one
hour I'm waking up at three in
the morning bright eyed and
bushy tailed ready to go and all
we did was change one hour it
takes me a little bit more time
to adapt but eventually you know
as humans do we do it that but
it's less of the inconvenience
and and really what it boils
down to is the simple question
would you rather have that our
daylight in the morning when
it's cold in the winter would
you rather have it in the
evening whenever it's usually
even a little more even in our
winners this week you're gonna
seventy degrees it be nice if we
had another hour to play golfer
skier have soccer practice tests
so Mister chair depends on where
you live that's why we can't get
agreement because not
everybody's in the same follow
up.
Situation so well maybe you can.
You're a.
Big time farmers and ranchers so
maybe you have a propensity wake
up early because the farmers to
wake up early and Mister
chairman Senator the clock has
no bearing over my life I don't
allow something to control that
much at sun up to sundown right
come from
well I don't have a hard to fit
in with the other fortunately I
I vote when the last people to
vote so I'm gonna go with
because it looks like it's going
to be a test although the test.
Of the.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr chair this is been such a
crazy issue for me
But the common thing that I'd
get from my constituents is stop
the change.
whether it's set and I have
constituent to written articles
about about it in by the way I
don't know if Mr the.
If the Jeff Beck group Jeff
gentry and Mr Pierce still on I
hope they will be experts for me
has I present Senator Gonzales
is built hint hint if they're
still on
I I'm I'm presenting Senator
Gonzalez's Bill for him but what
I've finally told my
constituents is I will vote for
anything that will stop the
change the thing about of
Senator Gonzales is bill that
will be presented is it'll stop
it immediately this one we have
to wait for of for federal
action now I'm gonna vote for
this one but I'm also going to
present Senator Gonzales is bill
and also gonna vote for that
would because we need to stop
the change that changes resulted
in car accidents and health
problems it's just been a
disaster and so that's what I
support is is stopping the
change and like I said I think
it by first year here I voted
for a committee with a lot of
enthusiasm and then I got so
much I had an article was
written by somebody in my
district who sent the article to
me and convinced me to vote
against it on the floor I've now
come to I will fall for anything
that'll simply stop the change
so I'm supporting your bills of
Mr chair Senator of but I am
sort of lean towards Senator
Gonzales is because it'll stop
it sooner thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Hickey
of the center because of.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Sir pearl for bringing this
bill forward
I don't think we can do either
one until we get a federal bill
right you can do know that this
can distort Mr chair Senator you
you are allowed under a federal
law now to exempt yourself to
standard time okay in in so
that's that's been the case for.
What was the math six sixty
seven fifty seven years and only
two states have done and they
did it right away.
Okay thank you for that the
other one of the experts of Mr
chairman and senator pirtle
really seem to make a compelling
argument that you should go for
standard time medically and I
mean it would I I never really
studied this medically until I
came to the Senate and I was
like what and I know there are
there are definitely medical
issues associated with the
change but
If if we had another expert on
would they be able who is in
favor of daylight savings time
with they make is compelling a
medical argument in Mister
chairman Senator the interesting
thing is is the cherry picking
of data so in the cherry picking
of data it's not daylight saving
time that is causing the health
emergency for the health
problems it's the changing of
the clocks to that time that
that is causing it so I think
it's a little cherry pick to say
well the hard associate well
with the heart association said
was changing to daylight saving
time does cost that cause of
increased heart attacks but if
we stay there and don't change
ever again well then that issue
goes away.
Okay thank you for that answer
I'm just wondering if there's
an.
If you're able to do more casts
and.
Standard time characterizations
of the heart then yeah I'm sorry
I missed my cynicism of is that
the cardiology Association
would would would go one way or
the other there's often and
economic reason to for a lot of
things in health care last
question
last question is so is Congress
pretty close Congress prefers
the daylight savings because
that's what the the polls say
and every in my correct in that
Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair Senator overwhelmingly
Ezzell we're we're talking three
out of four people want daylight
saving time thank you thank you
Mr.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Pirtle for bringing this
bill to us again you have my
support last year I too cannot
stand the change so many of my
constituents family members
friends cannot stand the change
so with that said I have been
looking around researching what
the medical community has been
saying about the to which one is
best and I'm looking at this
latest one is from the society
for research on biological
rhythms.
And
This group is saying based on
comparisons of large populations
living in.
D. S. T. or standard time or on
western versus eastern time the
advantages of permanent standard
time.
Outweigh switching to D. S. T.
annually or permanently and so
with that in mind and because
we've got a bill right after
yours I'm gonna vote for that
one but I absolutely applaud you
for bringing this up again
you just the health concerns the
reduced reduction of accidents
on the job in in our vehicles to
me that's just it's just what we
need to do and
and what was I also as a and I
didn't realize with the other
bill we can enacted as soon as
the governor signs it and that
was such a huge plus for us to
so thank you center Pirtle thank
you chairman Senator gave us.
Mr Chairman chair thank you a
miss more The presentation but
just to be
Forward I know the the time
doesn't matter to me but for my
health my wife would like your
bill to pass if you remember
even when I was in the house As
put this on the desk take
picture of it the last day of
session and I just Facebook it
out ran out of time.
But in reality Mr and etcetera I
I know we've heard this bill for
both bills for a long time but
in my area of the state they
would prefer the daylight saving
so for that regional all vote in
favor your bill I'd love to here
and are a heard of surgeons also
on before but I I I would like
to be able to that will be able
to hear both of them back to
back so that way we can hear the
differences but appreciate no I
will be stand sport Mr thank
you.
Anybody else what's the will of
the committee.
Just a second thank you for the
though that they have the let me
just get into the discussion
here.
What happens if we pass both of
these bills so how can we be a
standard to permanently and
daylight savings time to provoke
Mr chair that's that one hundred
and third vote thirteen vote
that we all you know kind of
hold our breath on once we do
all the legwork to get a bill to
the governor you know I will say
just just in response to to some
of the issues I've I didn't want
to come here and then debate
standard time but with some of
the issues on why we have the el
Paso county and we've taken into
account some of these issues the
amount of of this this rare
chaos that standard time would
cost would be two hours behind
Texas eight months out of the
year which is half of our border
that's a huge part of our
economy
el Paso county would be a
different time than us eight
months out of the year including
to Wildwood the the stage what
would have to pick do we want to
be with Paso county do we want
to be with New Mexico and so
implementing that right away
would cause that chaos in the
the disruption to the economy
where this would allow for some
consistency Nate nationwide but
if both bills did pass it would
then be the hundred and
thirteenth vote is what would
matter.
Senator by us thank you Mr
chairman out Senator Pirtle I I
misspoke earlier that the bill
that was sponsored by then
representative of this Alice did
not have overwhelming supported
it barely passed thirty five
thirty two.
In in Mister chair and senator I
will tell you there were quite a
few of the members of the house
were confused they thought it
was permit delays that they
thought it was just a matter of
my bill the ability to just yes
I'll stop.
They would deliver of course is
your if we pass your bill on the
governor signed your version of
this.
Nothing changes we still have
the change every fall and every
spring until the Congress act
which Mr chair and and members
of the committee for the last
ten years at all I've heard is
that we don't want to change
right away because other states
don't change and so I've been
trying to mold this into what I
supposed was the the will of of
the legislature and so that's
why I have would have but we've
been able to determine that the
legislature's will is pretty
flexible in this election and me
because like our defense Mr
chair in the basketball air
defenses right okay.
The the secretary called the
roll.
Yeah we got a second who gave
the segregated Senator guys
Senator Gallegos is meant
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna no.
Senator smitteez Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
center to the piano the.
Sixty two so as six to to vote
you have a due process thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee and we want to do your
of the bill.
Which which one the other bill
you have with us today is and
bending his definition of
cremation.
I think Mr chair if it's if it's
okay with the committee there's
kind of a crew that wanted to to
be here on that one okay we're
just over but I will say maybe
maybe if I get this daylight
saving bill through I can
retire.
There's some incentive
Representative.
That will go back to Senator
Gonzales is bill and senator
Sedillo Lopez
will carry it we heard all the
testimony are did you want to
add anything Senator no I think
I just really want to emphasize
the point if we did this now we
could stop the change
immediately
and I.
I will ask if they're online
Jeff gentry and Mr peak of to be
available for experts for me
since I'm a.
Thank hearing it for Senator
Gonzales would carry it for a
lot longer
And like I said I support both
of them but this one has the
advantage of stopping the change
immediately and I do think that
the border will adjust
and perhaps move of Texas to do
something as well.
Okay did you want to say
anything Mr P. about this bill.
The still there.
yes I'm here thank you.
I wanted to I wanted to say that
it is the the the dozens of
medical groups that are listed
they are not opposing simply
clock change but they are
opposing permanent daylight time
and endorsing permanent standard
time so again the American
medical association the American
academy of neurology national
safety council literally dozens
of nonprofits representing
thousands of scientists and
medical professionals are urging
you please do not pass a
permanent daylight time and
please do pass permanent
standard time
there was also a statement about
Mexican states following the US
and that is not true it is a few
Mexican cities on the border
that are following the U. S. the
greater areas of the states are
the each state in Mexico is on
their correct permanent standard
time now
the statement just to school in
the in the dark with the current
system of where we have standard
time in the winter that's
because if you have daylight
time in the winter the someone
come up until eight thirty and I
don't think most people want to
go to school or work before the
sunrise so we need standard time
to keep the sun rise before
eight o'clock in the morning for
everyone's health and safety the
Hopi nation is on permanent
standard time not permanent
daylight time as was said
earlier by Senator Pirtle
and it is we do not adjust we've
tried this before we traded in
the forties here in the US and
people hated it we try to in the
nineteen seventies and it
actually.
Hasta children's lives the U. K.
tried it for three years and on
did it Russia tried it for three
years and I'm did it they have
hard evidence showing that it
increases depression permanent
daylight time increases
depression and car accidents
whereas permanent standard time
improves mental health improves
roadway safety
and again it is not sixteen
bills sixteen states that have
passed this it is the that if
passed permanent daylight time
it is not twenty six as a said
it was only sixteen California
was named and that is not
correct California you voted to
end clock change and to choose
one clock later and then
California debated should be
permanent daylight time and
voted no and then debated at the
next year should be permanent
daylight time are we sure and
again voted no so California is
not a permanent daylight State
So with that again please I
would I would urge you as the
health committee to support
permanent standard time and to
reconsider your support of
permanent daylight time thank
you very much thank you then we
have Mister gentry is he still
there.
Did you want to say something
about this bill.
Yes Sir I really appreciate it
thank you.
Chair Mister chairman thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez
The things that I would want to
emphasize are then I agree
completely with Senator Sedillo
Lopez in that stopping clock
change is very valuable.
And we can do it this year if we
do it to standard time but
remember that it needs to be
done the right way and I'm
afraid that some of the
opposition centered this bill
does not account for the
substantial health and safety of
facts as the senator mentioned
just moments ago and that is
substantially higher rates
measurably higher rates of heart
disease stroke obesity dementia
cancer and road fatalities R. E.
N. M. U. study is the one that
found that.
Standard time natural time as
opposed to artificial time as
imposed by D. S. T. R. that DST
raises the the level nationally
in every place that is in an
artificial time zone.
By twenty two percent and this
was recently published in
international journal and I
would just say one other thing
I'm a reluctant witness because
I'm a long distance runner and
evening that I can't run in the
morning my body doesn't respond
so evening running would be a
great advantage for me in terms
of my running but I understand
the science of human
well we call it circadian
science or chronic biology and
it's very clear that if we care
about the health and safety and
as Mr peace said education as
well that we're going to endorse
permanent standard time is just
those who have looked at this
issue closely rather than simply
golfers and people who would
personally enjoy more evening
light it's it's clear that our
health and safety would be far
better served with permanent
standard time I really
appreciate the opportunity.
Thank you Mr gentry okay
Representative the committee we
heard all the fact.
All the information.
Senator and and you moved to
pass.
Take action.
The temporary table it was just
do we didn't we didn't take any
landing yeah we just said we'll
hold it come back sorry.
I'll second that.
Okay what's what's the will.
If they have any additional
discussion of the early
exhausted this issue.
Mr chair Dr a call the roll this
is here today I did you would
wrap it up I I need to apologize
deeply to my constituents who
sent me the study that he did on
circadian rhythms I don't
remember his name but I he did
he did a given given to me the
researcher at U. N. M. who said
that it was really important to
the body to correlate to this to
correlate most both closely to
sunrise and sunset and that a
daylight savings time did it and
I have I apologize I just don't
remember his name and I don't
have a study but I did
appreciate the provision of the
information.
Secretary called the roll
Senator did you have a comment
center of yes one one last
comment
And that has to do with the
science Mr chairman and and
senator
I'm just having a hard time with
the firmness of the
the standard time
There you know there are so many
other things that how we move
with the earth and reserves and
so forth me and literally the
poles and the polar fields and
there's a new book out about how
animals communicate and so on
and and the forces that work
with them vibrations in the
earth and I just think that
there's so much more.
that we need to understand about
how these influences affect our.
And city for depression or what
have you and and I think the
most compelling feature is in so
I I'm gonna vote now the most
compelling feature is that this
is what the American people want
to do.
So I just want to be able to
make that comment before I cast
my vote and I would comment to
to me the issue is can we do it
and we can't do daylight savings
time but we can do this we can
do this that would stop the
change which seems to be the
crux of the issue but.
We'll see this Mr chair it is
very very frustrating because
this is an issue that we know
the majority of people in the
country want to stop the change
but because we can't figure out
which way to go we do nothing.
Okay secretary cultural.
Or we ended our case we maybe do
two things.
The governor and the governor
would choose governor will
decide second secular call the
roll Senator Gallegos.
Clemente.
Senator Hickey.
No.
Senator Ingle.
That.
Senator is this no.
Senator McKenna yes.
Thanks committee Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
center to the piano yes.
Senator Ingle.
Four four four tie.
So which is is there a trick to
motion.
I make a motion for a no REC two
passed within a wreck also X..
Issue I that's Representative.
Does it all of the state
secondary mo is I'll turn into a
motion for a no REC.
This is our second I did a
second by till the secretary
will call the roll.
Senator Harris.
Senator Hickey.
Pass.
Senator Ingle.
The center mass this.
Senator McKenna.
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator AUMENT
yes center to the piano thank
you to.
this is for voting for a no rack
is that correct not.
Senator is if you know yes it's
a it's a for.
Okay this is deadlocked.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee all the
left for the both of.
So this goes down let me make a
couple of adults was because
we've had some people.
Just to have your bill's rural
forward of you already heard
Senator Pirtle is just to rule
over to eighty five the sun the
expanding the definition of
cremation.
If it includes a new.
Hydro hydro based water based
aviation.
The EDD Senator Lopez just
contacted me and asked to have
of the receipt does bill one
thirty rolled over to HST.
So Senator Gallegos it looks
like we've got your bill's up
next.
You know the.
So here's what I have left of
the of the calendar for today
two bills by Senator guy a
ghosts.
Three.
It's three three yes three so it
is advisable if I get three
bills for Senator Gallegos and
then we had we still have I
think deal it had built mobile
home park and the judicial
standards commission oversight
we haven't heard about that and
we.
Okay Senator Gallegos Mr thank
you for this I'm gonna start
with Senate bill two seventy
eight and now this a termination
of parental rights back in
twenty sixteen I worked on
Rachel's law in this sort of
goes with that this would.
Budget adoptee parent from
additional trauma by terminating
the offenders parental rights it
has to do with the
if it's amending at in the
exception to the requirement.
To consent prior to the adoption
the of.
The adoptee would if the adoptee
was conceived as a result of
criminal sexual penetration and.
I don't see CYFD but last week
they told me they were finally.
In favor of my bill and what
that'll stand for questions.
Let's go to the audience and see
if there's anyone here in
support of this bill.
Anybody opposed to two seventy
eight.
Nobody answered members of the
committee.
Everybody's medley reading
quick.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Mr chair a few years ago.
This was the this year my code
was the thank you thank you Mr
chair a few years ago this was a
project of one of the students
in the clinic to try to get this
bill passed I think it was.
Well as of the law school said
probably.
A ten to twelve years ago
and and at that time CYFD was
really against it and and we
were not successful
I really think that this is a
good idea because this.
When a child is is conceived as
a result of rape this forces the
victim to have to deal with her
rapist.
With regard to child support
with regard to
Any kind of you know with the
step if if she if the victim
gets married and once the step
father to or once the.
A stepfather adoption the the
the rapist can continue to be a
factor in the victim's life I
am.
I just don't think that fathers
rights should go this far when
the child was considered
conceived as a result of right
so I have my question I just
have one question.
This is related to the other
bill that we ended up passing on
on page two state section see
biological fathers of adoptee
conceived as a result of
criminal sexual penetration is
defined or incest as defined in
section whatever
With this.
How would this work
Is is this.
Is an ending of the sexual
rights of the of the parental
rights.
Immediately or toward is there
some kind of trigger because
then there are also of the
rights of inheritance.
And so I just want to hear a
little bit more Mr chair about
how this is going to work she.
Because to me the primary person
we should be thinking about is
the child.
And.
And if there is not an adoption
in the future I think the child
should be able to inherit from
the rapist.
I don't know how many of you
members I mean there have been
circumstances we're.
For this is happened and I'm
just curious what your thoughts
are about how this would work Mr
chair Mister chairman Senator
you're exactly right so going
back to Rachel's law in her
discussion any time during the
in a meeting or room or anything
else she re lived the trauma so
this would reduces so what this
does and I and I apologize had
something step out last week and
so my expert witnesses in here
today and they've been in
discussions with on how this
would work but this doesn't even
make the court make a
determination of guilt because
if there's enough evidence that
there's substantial evidence
that this is already occurred
and that the person is
impregnated then they go ahead
and give the.
When we look at that word for it
For
perpetrator would then reduce
their
Gee I just lost it the their
rights so they would be taken
away so if if it doesn't have to
go through the court system it
can be done early enough on in
the situation in order to
provide protection for the first
off of the the female but
ultimately for the child.
But but missed Mr chair we're
I'm not seeing that it is so it
on here.
On page four.
Is it.
If the court finds that the
child was conceived the court
shall terminator permit
permanently suspend legal or
physical custody visitation
rights of responded.
The court for the termination so
my understanding Mr chair is
this does require.
Court action for the
termination.
Is that correct Mr chairman in
center if you go to page three
line nineteen the range for the
purposes of section court need
not to turn the respondent was
convicted of criminal sexual
penetration.
That's correct so this is a new
analysis so whether there was a
conviction or not consent will
not be required and of.
And suspension of visitation
rights and suspension.
Termination of parental rights.
My concern is.
Does is also terminate any
inheritance rights that the
child would have I think about
it has the Arnold Schwarzenegger
situation I don't know if you
recall you have child
out of wedlock.
And then my goal here my
question here and I hope I'm
articulate well.
Is of.
If the rape is the rapist is.
Somebody who has resources I
hate to cut off the child.
Because I think that should be
our primary goal is to protect
the interests of the child.
This this doesn't seem to
address.
You know if it's terminate
parental rights.
That my question is does it also
terminate rights of inheritance.
Mr chair and senator I'm looking
as best I can Hey you see that
it was in here.
I didn't see it in the pointed
to be at appreciated but I do.
The second.
Madam chair Mister chairman
Senator
Page eight.
Of line thirteen item for.
In our section else's the
judgment does not affect the
child's right of inheritance
from through the respondent.
Excellent okay I'd I guess a
relative as I didn't see it I
think that's very very important
I think it's a good idea and I
support this bill.
The other discussion.
With the will of the committee I
move it to pass.
Their second.
Seconded by Senator told with.
I'm just curious so of you know
the the the today said that says
that about the judgment.
Does that affect the ability of
the petitioner the child of the
state.
Of of of the the the the
judgment does not affect the
child's right of inheritance
provided through the responded.
Would that be traumatic for the
mother.
Read to route to re live that to
go to court to get their
inheritance if this is not that
mothers right this is the
child's right a little bit.
Let's say let me do.
Who's going to fight for the
child until the child is an
adult.
The mother or another guardian
and the mother would have the
choice of whether to do this my
guess is if you're dealing with
somebody who is.
Is of of was what was if they if
the deceased of wealthy person
she's not going to have to face
the rapist because he will have
passed away and therefore the
issue is getting the getting
what are child deserves because
her child didn't end up having
of of pair that they should and
they could inherit to a parent
from.
It was what I want to do it what
what I'm not I want to do with
this statute does is it doesn't
punish the child for the
circumstances of birth and that
needs to be the goal of the
child probably won't go who the
who the rapist was in which case
the then nothing nothing will
happen but there are
circumstances in which the
rapist is a wealthy individual
and the mother does no
and this is a way of not
punishing the child with the
decisions that the mother that
decision to the mother made for
the I mean for the right.
For the circumstance better said
and I'm sorry that that was a
very well with the circumstances
of the child for the the yes but
thinking is let's look
collecting from the estate of a
wealthy man if his kids.
Is legal children of choose to
say.
He was never convicted because
that requiring conviction there
was never any any proof he just
went along with this to end it
and then how are you gonna get
anybody of I mean it's nice to
put in here I just doubt if
it'll ever actually resulted in
your DNA is a real possibility.
Well this didn't.
Okay so I have a course of
course quick question
thank you
did you see if you say that this
we tried the just some of the
last year and failed.
Mr stern.
Mr chair Senator I did not but I
know this is been addressed
before and they did not of so
We've had other bills similar to
this of the for one reason other
stumble during the process so
this is the first time I've
carried this bill.
Just curious you know why it
failed to the pin change a lot.
But you don't know Mr chair
Senator I don't know.
Thanks that's all I have thank
you did you have another comment
Senator Sedillo.
On that point a student probably
about fifteen years ago as a
student who was the.
Yes
it was a student project with it
in my clinic they used to do.
legislative projects and this
was this was one of them it was
quite awhile ago.
It but I do recall.
There was a position at that
time.
And I've I believe CYFD was part
of the.
Thank you.
Thank you having to do with
child support anything else.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos is ma'am
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas.
A past.
Senator McKenna.
I.
Senator smitteez Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente yes.
Senator my is this.
No displays.
Senator McKenna.
Senator to the panel yes Senator
basically to explain his with
thank you for.
The first time I've heard this I
heard about this bill for the.
To to the hearing about this
bill and so I'm just reading as
far as I can but it's just.
there's like the mom has two
choices you can terminate
visitation you can parental
rights the only distinction is
what do you consider child
support after that are not it's
just.
It just seems like you can just.
Thank you.
Okay thank you Senator Gallegos
you have a by a.
The six to to vote you have a do
pass.
Elon the two seventy eight no
let's go to two seventy nine
emergency job placement.
Mr Chairman centers this bill
changes the minimize the number
of moves a child may have to
make during emergency placement
and and this one also I talked
CYFD on and there
In favor of we've had some
early discussions it immensely
Marci placement provisions in
child children code to the child
to allow the child remain an
emergency placement if an adult
at the home refuses find
fingerprints instead of require
the adult who refuses to remove
themselves from all and what
it's trying to do is get from
someone that's in the home get
direct ID from them to know
their history so you're not
putting the child in jeopardy Mr
all kids this this only has to
do with with a adult in the home
refuses to be fingerprinted
correct.
The.
It is nobody's heard from CYFD.
Okay is there anyone in the
audience in support of this
bill.
The very opposed to this bill
yes could you say what come up
and use the Mike please.
Good afternoon or good evening
chair members of the committee
my name is Mike if it's any a
policy manager but with full
futures.
sorry then looks we oppose
Senate bill two seventy nine we
absolutely believe in keeping
children safe we know that black
indigenous immigrant and
families of color experience
over policing criminalization
and incarceration at a higher
rate and we receive harsher
convictions in courts this gives
us a disadvantage to families in
this particular bill culturally
we live in multi generational
and mix that is homes anything
that connects our loved ones two
more systems of incarceration
put us at risk not only of
losing the child that we are
trying to protect but also our
loving family members for these
reasons we ask you to propose to
seventy nine SB to CENIC thank
you thank you.
Anybody alive.
At the end I just I didn't quite
get what you said about CYFD is
position of this bill are they
in favor of it or not Mr chair
they Mr Morrow told me there
okay with bill he didn't say
they're excited but it actually
gives them flexibility to
negotiate the agreement with the
adults in the home I wish I
could do is here I don't mind
calling me if you want to hold
off on this to hear from I've
got another bill we can go
through that I have my expert
witnesses here here it would be
good if they could with internet
to come if they could do it by
zoom.
and and I and I misstated so
this is this is the.
This is the adults in the home
where the emergency placement is
putting the child correct Mr
you're right so if it.
And and and they would have to
agree to be fingerprinted or
removed the ones that will be
fingerprinted leaves agreed to
leave.
We see if you'll zoom in.
The the the the the the explains
of into the woods.
Would they get their fingers
printed.
That it shows that they have a
criminal history.
What happens.
Mr chair the they're looking at
just the
Trying to make sure there's no
one in that facility and that
home would be a hindrance to the
child so depending on if it's
just a driving issue we're going
to a felony but if ten years ago
the fact that in the home was
given three years for extension
still in business serving and
he's been straight for ten years
right and CYFD would make that
determination after knowing and
so they're mainly looking for
abuse child neglect those type
of issues to build protect so
you're not taking that child
from one bad situation put and
then another budget to Mr.
Okay these are all things that
the foster families the licensed
foster homes would have already
had to.
Yeah.
Okay.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Mr chair
this is kind of unusual but I
really would like to hear more
from the opponent because I feel
like this bill.
I'd like to hear a little bit
about that from the opponent
because I listen very they're
they're one of my go to of.
Agencies when I have questions.
But I feel like this bill is
helpful to more for families
and.
And and does
It does allow somebody to be
cleared of a criminal record you
know of of.
Of a about fingerprints so I'm I
just would like to hear a little
bit more from them are they
still here.
Thank you I I just I just feel
like this bill does the
opposite.
Of what they're supposed to so I
I I just would like to do that
Mr chair we are diligent.
Okay yes so for us you know
again our families are multi
generational mix status families
and so we just feel like this
would really put our families
into a system that there already
highly policed and are already
highly incarcerated in the
systems well it sounds like it's
going to protect we also have
other family members other level
ones that we might lose because
it does ask for federal
background check and
The reference.
At the I know it's are you here
Representative department of
public safety.
Mr chair members of the
committee of I'm here on behalf
of state police
I will be happy to answer any
yeah because this is.
This is really take the
fingerprint.
The department of public safety.
Show positively identify the
fingerprints subject.
Mr chair members of the
committee well to the so it
normally fingerprint checks
we'll go for the law enforcement
records bureau
And there's a very standard
process the C..
Yeah I guess is just standard
proceed you said that the FBI.
Yes Sir I mean we do the law
enforcement records bureau and
W. secretary Baker hearing
correct me if I'm wrong that's
part of his purview but I mean
we do finger fingerprint checks
from for everybody I mean.
Nurses all kinds of licensing
boards for see with the data the
response whether there is a
record of this person in Newton.
To see if I have the.
Mr chair members the committee
it our law enforcement records
bureau.
Process this work as as the
deputy chief mentioned for a
number of different entities
including this legislative body
for backgrounds we're able to
push those through in a forty
eight hour turnaround period and
and I have to know reason why
something like expedited
placement for a child safety
under CYFD wouldn't be able to
be accomplished in the Senate
says at if possible forward the
fingerprints to the FBI within
fifteen calendar days.
For the day to day basis search
was conducted that would would
that be would always send it to
the FBI.
You yes Sir is there is
something in another state but
you do your own of the in state.
History.
Mr chair members the committee
that that's correct there's the
the difference between the check
and then the setting of the
actual record because we would
be in prison possession of the
physical record at that point so
checking against existing
records for either a hit or a
record is one part and probably
the most exciting part inclusion
then into the database would be
the part that subsequently
contemplated.
But you think you can do it in
forty eight hours.
Mr chair members committee check
against the record just to see
the existence or the absence of
a criminal record yes in New
Mexico.
Against the Mr chair members
committee against the FBI data
is yes we are that forty eight
hours you do if that person
had any prior Feds that might be
a threat to the kid anywhere in
the country.
Any any record that existed
within that that process.
Okay.
Mr chairman of the committee so
I would just add that that check
is the fingerprint checks so
I mean not forced to do a check
right at the time of the name
and date of birth of those
individuals to see if there's
any sort of record that's
basically just the finger
project is in the official check
to verify on top of that as
opposed to the the instant check
that could be done right there
at the on the spot.
But the reason I ask is Senators
because you know you're saying
this is to reduce repeated
movements of the child.
Thank and yet.
We knew we were still they don't
do the finger project a place
childhood emergency basis.
They don't they would have
reason to remove the child
unless something happened.
Here I Mr but I think what's
happening with the department
CYFD people were not wanting to
be checked out so they bring the
child in the home those adults
in the room alright wanting to
be a checked so you'd only have
a problem if someone doesn't
want to participate in with law
enforcement checking their ID
birthday not type information
but it just gives them just
another Avenue that if that
child if that person the rooms
not willing to then they have to
be removed because of the
statute.
We have we have a motion yes.
We have we we don't have a
motion of the floor anybody want
a commotion Senator by this
COVID COVID.
For me thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator is that the I
appreciate what the worst thing
about background checks and all
that stuff that's already in the
statute.
And so what this would do is
essentially give the family and
out so let me see if I'm getting
this correct so say the.
Sales of.
Three roommates want to.
We did take the child one of the
roommates has a criminal
history.
Under current law that child
could not go to that household
if this bill would we be bored
to be passed that person with a
common history.
Can move out and facilitate the
child being in that safe
household with those two
remaining that's correct this Mr
center yes okay great so I get
the policy I agree with the
policy keep in mind though that
this this kicks in if they
refuse to.
To give the free or prince but
there is no mechanism for them
to voluntarily.
Eight.
And then there's a time there's
also a timeline Mr timeline
issue Mister chairman Senator
was that.
So it says you know what
emergency placement.
When a child is to be placed in
a home.
The department shall do tell
shopper for maybe background
check.
The results will be provided to
the department it's a name based
check and we're just kind of a
computer search I suppose the
results of a name based check
shall be provided to the
apartment and within fifteen
days.
Of the name base check the
department shall provide a
complete set.
Of each adults resident
fingerprints so what happens is
the place the child
they do a name check fifteen
days later they get the
fingerprints like they're still
like seems like there's two
weeks that the bit child's in
that home that's the way it
works or my reading it wrong or
do you know Mr chair and
consider your right but I guess
you initial thing is those that
don't want to be fingerprinted
are the ones to really cautious
about so for instance if I had
history and I I knew that I had
history I wouldn't want to be
the guy can the fingerprints
that gives the department the
opportunity to get me out of the
home and so that way protects
the child the the two week
period is problematic but it's
still one of those that they're
looking at just the emergency
placement as a bring trial in
the home if I were a danger and
if I were not willing to
participate with law enforcement
then that flags but I've got a
problem and they would ask me to
leave for the other two members
to be able to can't continue
care for that child thank you so
I think chairman Sir goes if
this goes forward maybe create
a.
They shall do a name based check
within forty eight hours that
That there be an opportunity to
voluntarily leave the house I
think the folks that.
Don't want to be fingerprinted
of the or the folks with active
warrants.
I think they're afraid of the
coolest three as long as it's as
long as the final out so to
speak but I think it's folks
with active warrants and we did
a bill last week or whatever to
to remove like.
Two hundred thousand active
warrants from the suspended
licenses anyway I appreciate the
policy and agree with the policy
thank you Mr.
Okay we still need a motion.
This Mr chair have when we're
when we're more quick question
Mr chair on on our technical
issues per CYFD really wish you
would do is here it says the
amendment requests CYFD the
flexibility to negotiate an
agreement with adult in the home
they do not wish to participate
in fingerprints or adult
acknowledge they will not pass a
criminal check loans CYFD the
discretion to assess is the is
to assess the sincerity of the
adults and the safety of the
plan for the child.
I am just wondering if there's
something going on here that we
don't know or that we don't
understand because.
Somebody else who might not want
to give fingerprints is
somebody's not hit it not in
this country legally.
And that shouldn't affect the
the safety of the child.
Necessarily so I I'm a little.
I really wish CYFD is here
because I would be very
interesting what they have to
say that you get a response to
your Texan Mr chair Senator I've
actually called employers and
sent to text I don't mind
holding this because I I would
love to hear their side of it I
do have another bill that we go
forward it however you'd like to
do that let's let's do that
because we need their input on
this to figure out how this
would work so let's go to your
third bill.
The public safety telecom
required retirement.
Three twelve yeah we're just
gonna hold that until we get
word from CYFD.
Hello.
They're honest they're called.
Is that the.
Well we're doing this one for.
How many long bed Representative
Mr chair thank you centers I
appreciate
as P. three twelve does of
mainly one thing it it will help
us retain dispatchers right now
it's a three to five year
through GPS we're losing a lot
of dispatchers through Tyerman
but it will allow us to be able
to put dispatchers there in
challenging situations due to
the stress their job so they
would be able to be in the
retirement plan with first
responders and that gives them
an opportunity to have a better
coverage for what they do Mr
chair and I've got Angela
Martinez here with me who's our
director of Lee County
communication authority about
Albert Flores here with me to
help me and I think a lot of law
enforcement of historically Mr
what brought this up is I'd met
a gentleman here in Santa Fe
years ago that was on full
disability with the military he
never left the United States of
America but being that he was
traumatized by the information
that he heard and read and typed
up for the military is on full
distilleries I say that our
dispatchers have to continue
that type of thought there have
to hear it as someone calls in
nine one one they have to speak
to the officer and then they
have to report on it so well
we've been talking about this
for years and I think this is my
third year.
And of we've always wanted just
people treat them like we would
for sure Sanchez you don't mind
I have my experts introduce
themselves Mr Mr chair
committee.
Mr chair committee good evening
I'm Angela Martinez I'm the
director for the Lee County
communication authority I'm also
the chair at the nine one one
affiliate and the chair of the
professional standards council.
And if I may also I my name's
Albert FLOTUS I'm the deputy
director for the Misia valley
regional dispatch Authority in
Las Cruces New Mexico.
And also service Executive
Council member for association
of public communications
officers in New Mexico that's
APCO and also the current
sitting president for the
national emergency number
association that's Nina also for
the state of New Mexico.
Okay.
Mr will stand for questions
let's go to the audience who's
here in support of this measure.
Is there anybody here in
opposition to the measure.
What we hear from four five
people who are supportive of it
did you.
Come up and and make statements
to to try to keep it under two
minutes try to to repeats
anything that somebody else's.
Good evening chairman.
Senators Canary.
Hi my name is Matt problem the
fire chief and once the county
I'm here in support of the the
tele communicators at our
question tonight I just want to
give you a little background to
kind of want to see and looks
like when no one calls comes and
whose cardiac arrests is simple.
It usually takes eight to ten
minutes to get on to ASEAN
that's eight to ten minutes that
our dispatchers are tele
communicators are giving CPR
instructions are listening to
the chaos in the background from
a from an emergency are taking
in all of this.
When we arrive on scene we work
on a patient we have a
resolution we get to see the
outcome.
Typically will leave the call as
a cruel talk about it these
folks don't always get that
opportunity in some regards I'd
say that their job is harder
than ours or at least as
deserving as are so from a fire
to standpoint and how to percent
support of of this bill and I
really hope you consider.
Thank you Sir.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is Benjamin Baker and I
am the interim law enforcement
academy director of an eight
thousand person license
constituents here in New Mexico
that we train and license at the
Ellie academy and public safety
tell communicators make up forty
percent of that constituency
we're very proud to be working
towards legislation during the
session that creates more parity
and equality within their
representation in the regulatory
training world as well as
disciplined wanted to give you a
a quick story for your for your
benefit as the professionals who
will describe what they see day
to day what I saw this afternoon
when I left the academy was a
group of twenty five dispatchers
who started their first day
yesterday evening I got to visit
with and introduce myself to
this afternoon they represent
all of your constituencies and
come from all over the state the
one thing they have in common is
that their most important day a
week from now will be when they
have commencement and it's
actually the best part of my job
I found is handing them that
certificate of completion and we
make a big deal out of it I'm
really proud of it the problem
is some of the professionals
that are are leading them at
their dispatch centers are not
able to attend and the reason
why they're not able to attend
is because our staffing is so
short that they can't leave the
seat that their trainee would
otherwise occupied and breaks my
heart seeing this from first
tanks I did not understand that
twenty five years of service I
think that having their
contributions to their community
and public safety be recognized
in a way that is more correlated
to their to their actual work
would be a blessing we support
Senate bill three twelve for
that reason thank you for your
time and consideration thank
you.
Somebody else Mr Mr FLOTUS had
asked to be one of the speakers
at a.
Thank you again Mr chair members
of the committee so one of the
many challenges is the staffing
crisis is that we're dealing
with is at nine one one Senators
when folks come to work for us
usually they do job interviews
and there's a lot of questions
during the job interviews from
the applicants and they're
asking about
our budget you do we do we share
the same benefits as are up
public safety public safety
officers and unfortunately right
now the answer is no when it
when it's regarding the
retirement.
So you can imagine the
disappointment and some of those
applicants face it really isn't
really a job that's attracting
them if they don't get those
benefits.
Nine one professionals across
the state and are in are also in
our app interview no western
regions across the nation they
feel that this these this kind
of answers making those
individuals go work elsewhere.
They want to become public
safety of firefighters are work
for law enforcement and take
advantage of those benefits.
We would love to offer those
benefits especially is such a
good retirement as a good
attraction to be coming to this
to become part of their
profession.
The passing of such a bill will
now places in a better
opportunity to be recognized as
first responders as well we've
been trying to get that know
down for many years.
our public safety dispatchers
though we do consider ourselves
to be the actual true first
responders as we're setting that
scene for the responding units
were gathered information to be
sure that we're not sending our
public safety agencies know a
violent situation we have that
upset mom holding direct
pressure on your son as he lies
on the floor bleeding what we're
trying to give CPR instructions
to the elderly man whose two
week depose wife off the bed and
put err on the floor to properly
Restos resuscitator.
Or our worst fear and we have
many of our our our brothers and
sisters in blue and some of them
are behind us our worst fear is
to listen as they've been shut
out or they're trapped in a fire
or we're sitting there we're
trying to give them get them
help.
As they may be miles away from
any kind of help and you know
that that that's the last thing
we really want to deal with.
We're now entering a world of
technology we're not only here
in the call for help but they're
also being able to see this now.
I can remember taking my very
first call we're somebody was
struggling for their last breath
and now just being able to see
that we're also now if dealing
with challenges of the mental
well being and health of our
public safety dispatchers.
For many years we've been
classified as clerical workers
maybe at one point many years
ago dispatchers were this and so
they were probably clerical
worker also doing the dispatch
duties in fact that still does
exist in police departments
today.
Really as I mentioned our
technology we work with has
tripled.
Required number one tell
communicators have extensive
training in the operation of the
technology that is very much
needed.
To save people's lives.
If that technology fills our
first responders have to get
creative and and how they do
that type of work.
So our peer cities do make an
impact on the community in our
first responded partners we feel
that to reward the career with
such a better opportunity to
offer such a benefit will be
rewarding toward new ones.
And that's all I have to say for
now thank you.
Thank you Mr will stand for
questions.
We have somebody on the.
Zoom was to comment.
It's the San Juan county
sheriff.
Sheriff Shane.
It's either.
Sure hello can you hear me OK
yes we can.
Hello and thank you for this
opportunity be able to speak to
you my name is catching for our
am sure for San Juan County and
I do support this bill and thank
you committee members for give
me the opportunity to speak on
this I can tell you that over my
twenty five years law
enforcement I've seen not only
law enforcement change
dramatically both the roles and
responsibilities of our
dispatchers and today if you
were to look at a dispatcher
compared to yesterday the amount
of work the amount of stress the
amount of fatigue that's on
these folks definitely make some
first responders you know what
you to consider if you have ten
units out you'll have one
dispatcher now these deputies
are accepting one call each one
of these dispatchers are
handling channel are handled
every single call everything
from somebody in need that needs
medical assistance to a burglary
to a domestic violence victim on
and on and on so many of our
dispatchers throughout our state
are working ten and twelve hour
shifts they're fighting the same
deficit that we are fighting the
law enforcement as we move
forward in the up and coming
years to look at other types of
nine one one systems expressly
of the new system they were
about to want smart nine one one
here in a couple years.
Do we have to realize that our
dispatchers Rollins will be
sharing these calls they're
gonna be seen these calls
callers gonna have the ability
to upload photos video.
So their mental health is gonna
be very challenging us coming up
and how we're going to retool
these dispatchers currently with
their parroted R. in the year of
these are Sanchez in your of
these victims may be able to see
first hand what's happened my
fear as we move forward as we
can only take so much as first
responders that's reason we have
the benefit of the pair we have
our first our our dispatchers
are gonna need this same support
and need those benefits and
those abilities to make it
successfully through their
career and just for that that I
highly support this bill you
support our dispatchers be in
our first responders thank you
for your time.
Thank you sheriff.
Yes yes the entity.
Of thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Anthony Montoya P.
E. R. A. I just wanted to add
the para board has not taken a
position on the proposed
legislation but I do want to add
that the analysis on the effects
may be a bit light because
parent itself doesn't have
direct access to
these job descriptions to
determine who and how many this
would affect we're currently
working with that DFA the local
government division to really
nail that down and can update
that
as were able to get it and would
be willing to work with the
sponsor in any way needed thank
you right thank you Anthony.
Okay members of the committee
questions discussion.
Senator Ingle you've made P. R.
A. a long time study what do you
think of this.
I know this is an election.
The I know this is an election
include the bill.
This would take affect less is
it each individual unit has to
voters out I was at election go
to work.
That had to go to the committee.
Mr chair members of the
committee the elections have
been fairly regularly done this
way for a it's it's been decades
and it's and and in this
scenario would be
I presume third reading at that
it's provided to the group as a
whole that would be moved into a
new plan and there's two
different groups craziness of
the municipal
tell communicators would be
moved into musical please plan
and the state telecommunications
we moved into the state police
plants would be provided to
those would be affected by that
and it would be essentially a
majority vote provided that
enough members actually vote in
the election to decide whether
or not they're moving or staying
so the the the whole state as a
group of fifty San Juan County.
Voted against it.
They would still have to
participate if the majority in
the state if if there member
who's under that state plan if
there members under the
municipal they would be within
that group as well yeah so but
either way that we you but all
it's all or nothing that's
that's how it's been an occasion
passed Mr chair thank you
members of the committee.
Senator Maestas.
In order are you finished
Senator Ingle I'm they have to
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you folks I
Just a couple concerns I think
one is that that's cool that.
The dispatchers are.
Consider the law enforcement
family like the gentleman
articulated you know it's it's a
it's all part of the same team
But it is it is a different
reality somewhat I believe and I
know that a.
What is the current retirement
now how many years to someone
after worked before they get the
full.
For the get the full benefits.
Senator it says.
Our Mr chair Senator it's going
to be at thirty years now for
dispatchers it'll be thirty
years Mr Chairman gently so
today it's thirty under this
bill would be what twenty five.
And say for example of someone's
work ten years.
This plan would affect the
remaining twenty years or how
does that work Mr Chairman at so
that hasn't but I don't know if
that's actually been and.
That hasn't been in part of the
study this is far as I know but
but in terms of how the law
treats the worker.
It it is not retroactive
corrected is from here forward.
Mr Montoya do know that Mr
chairman of as a German Russian
to not stand.
I just had in the might yeah the
Mr chair Senator Maestas it's
going forward we would have a
calculation based on previous
served two years and and the way
would be broken up in the
database would would calculate
that and calculate going forward
for the for the new plan thank
you Mr chairman thank you.
Para attorney the Center gave us
and and so if this were to
happen we pass it the folks vote
on it then there contributions
and things of that nature would
change as well.
Correct.
Mr chair Senator yes Sir.
So I just just to let you know
where I'm going from the on.
I think I was just really really
uncomfortable with the the move
towards one hundred percent
solvency for the governor did a
couple years back and I see what
she did I see where everybody
wanted to support it.
Of it's it's in a in a pay as
you go system you want to be
eighty eighty five percent
solvent but you there's no need
to be on no need to be on it
just isn't but anyway so that
leads to greater contributions
that in my opinion take money
out of the current economy and
just kind of.
Save it in perpetuity
that's one thing too is that.
You know sometimes we get a
little too generous with these
packages and then.
And then lo and behold we have
to ratchet the back which is a
horrible horrible thing so I
would hate to write just ratchet
any of them back once they're
put in place
so I can't a good support this
now until.
Tell I see actuary analysis that
pero presumably would do.
But I do
I see where this is going in and
and and I'm actually doing the.
Bill similar to this in terms of
combining dispatchers with the
family of law enforcement so so
I see the thank you Mr thank you
senator thank you thank you
senator most us anybody else
comments questions yes Senator
McKenna as in Sierra.
I thank you chairman and thank
you senator gray goes for this
bill
I like to go back to the
question that senator my Estes
had about
the dispatchers that.
Are going to be hired effective
the day after this hopefully
this bill passes
they will have they will have to
work twenty five years.
However how about the
dispatchers that were hired
January of this year.
Will they still have to work the
thirty years before they're
eligible.
Mr chair may best over a expert
witness.
As a state.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
it it's based on years served
under their specific plans so if
they it only works if they'd
worked one year on the old plan
if they would have that that
credit under there but they
wouldn't have to work.
Thirty years to complete that
out it would be they would now
be under the new one and so we
would be calculating it based on
that and you know the
calculations can get complicated
when you're under various plans
but they wouldn't be doing
thirty it wouldn't it wouldn't
be like they started before the
before this took effect or
something along those lines our
chairman and senator and thank
you for that I think it's a
great relief and then
Yes I have to add is is more of
a COVID
yeah I'm looking at their
average
salary the chairman and senator.
And it certainly does not in my
mind reflect.
The the duty and responsibility
and the stress that dispatchers
have.
R. forty six thousand dollars
and so I would really encourage
a salary survey to be done and I
I was looking at the the
national average to and I don't
think those salaries reflect
what dispatchers do what just
you know they're they're working
at a high hi you probably
critical.
level of being alert and making
all the right connections and I
I just think they need to be
compensated more so thank you
chairman thank you senator.
Thank you Senator McKenna
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr thank you for
bringing this bill forward I was
out of the room so if this
questions of already been
answered let me know.
So what's what's the is Senator.
Sedillo Lopez would say what's
the problem we're trying to
solve here.
Mr chairman if I may Senator so
historically we lose a lot of
dispatchers due to the stress
and this would just put them in
a parity with the first
responders so they would be in
the same retirement group with
them so that their their
benefits would be similar I'm
gonna hand it over to thanks for
witness for clarification on
that but that's what I
understand.
Mr chair Senator.
That that is correct we're
asking to be put placed under
the law enforcement retirement
plan right now where nine one
one dispatchers are classified
as secretaries and clerks
nothing against secretaries or
clerks but that's not what nine
one one dispatchers do a more
asking to be renamed or
reclassified under that that
category as law enforcement
agency.
So this is the what's the
unfunded liability of this.
Is it in sound condition.
Sound financial shape.
Mr chair and senator I don't
have the F. I. R.
when you're gonna go and those a
mission to the statuses of the
law enforcement they are on.
The yes Sir Mr chair Senator it
depends on which plan you're
looking at for the state police
plan which state dispatchers
would move into it's over funded
it's probably about a hundred
twenty seven percent plus or
minus over center to state
police as the municipal police
pant plan is
at seventy three percent funded.
So there's how many tears are
there within the public safety
department is to.
Two plans.
then Mr chair Senator there's
there's.
Various different plants are you
just you're just speaking of
just police plans there's one
state police plan and there is I
believe for five municipal
police plans but they've been
cut off over the years one of
which is going forward Kateri's
and one is stature
The you're creating.
The defense dispatchers are
placed are glued with the
secretary Mr chair Senator yet
there would be municipal general
which is for all all other
municipal employees or your
state general for your state
general employees and then the
as your your police plans for
your.
In both of those.
I was curious as to why
Sir my Estes has a problem with
this the.
Well he left the room so I can.
I miss getting is done with the
hunger that's his problem okay.
Hello thank.
Okay
I'm done it do you have it but
but the issues it really is that
they would have to pay if they
voted to get into this plan.
They would have to pay more
there's a higher percentage of
their salary.
And we're not increasing their
salary.
So I mean it is it's like.
The W. wash it's it's a dilemma
for them and whether they want
to put more in to get more in
the it is after twenty five
years or whether.
They want the money to also it
looks like from the.
If I are that the that there
would be a loss of over time
they wouldn't be is eligible for
additional overtime and wouldn't
that exacerbate the problem you
have now with vacancies.
We looked at a Mr chair yes Sir
that is correct it so as far as
the overtime goes if we are re
classified as law enforcement
right now law enforcement has a
schedule which is called at the
Panama schedule so they have
every other weekends off and.
In a two week in a payroll in a
two week they they work two days
on and then they'll have their
three days and then they work so
again it's every other weekend
so that will save some of the
over time as far as the
dispatchers go yes Sir.
But for the dispatchers that's.
That's extra money or or maybe
they they would prefer not to
work overtime if they now
Saturday Mr Mr chair they.
Maybe they do like the overtime
I'll tell you right now for my
agency at the Lee County
communications authority there's
not one dispatcher that doesn't
support this bill.
Okay good.
Go ahead actually Mr chair we
also are the same in Los crucis
and yeah they do love working
overtime that's definitely one
big.
Thanks for them as well but
I spoke to a majority of our
dispatchers when I found out
this bill was live to get to get
their feeling on it and
everybody seemed to be in
support of it.
Senator Hickey then Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for reading this bill.
What is the turnover rate of
dispatchers.
Thank you an annual basis.
Mr chair Senator I know we we
have the life expectancy as a
dispatcher is three to five
years
and I would save the longest for
us would again be that.
Two to three or three to five
years for for LCA.
Mr chair and and senator and and
experts.
then right are they.
Do they move it out of other
jobs in public safety I mean how
do they get to twenty five
years.
Mr chair Senator so the job is
so stressful
I just actually had two
dispatchers within two weeks
quit that the working twelve
hours and with the overtime that
working four to five days
straight so that in itself is
stressful enough and at one
dispatcher that they had just
quit was there for two weeks.
Of course she's with the
training officer in the training
officer is taken that often I'm
one calls and she's listening
but when you're doing CPR for
twelve hours a day or you know
you're here and you know the
deaths the screams that that
it's very very stressful to them
so that that's what's causing
that and and the pay on top of
that you know that they're not
getting paid they're getting
paid what they're being
classified as and that's the
secretaries and and clerks.
Mr chair it in Senator and
experts.
I wouldn't say what why didn't
you come forward with more pay
for them rather than the
retirement.
Good question.
Mr chair Senator so some some
counties have but some counties
can't afford it.
So with that retirement that
dispatchers that would be coming
out of their their pay.
Mr if you don't mind.
Mr chair Senator Hickey just in
response to your question as far
as the state police side so on
page the legislature did find a
very sizeable pay increase for
state dispatchers of last year
but that is from a very
depressed level that they were
starting from
and I believe that the current
house bill two I think has
another targeted increase this
year for them as well but I will
say
We still have the same
recruiting issues impartially
just because of the depressed
level this is on state side or
vacancy rate is been run in
before and after the last
increase about thirty five
percent which is the highest of
any job group in our in our
agency.
Thank you Sir and Mr chair
And senator Richmond and others
I'm still very new that this
work
Experience helps
to some degree some would say
But it would seem to me that
experience in this job is
something to be very highly
valued I mean it it is a
incredibly stressful.
And be the kind of the more time
you you you work at it you
probably learn how to de stress
around it but I just see this
pattern in the state that some
of the most stressful jobs
because we initially kind of
that particularly community
health workers
What we're seeing in substance
use peer professionals you know
they were we're gonna under we
and we do under pay
substantially and I just you
know this goes back to hopefully
as we redo the personnel system
in the state is beginning to
look at it it no it doesn't
necessarily take a master's
degree to do something like this
but the ability to handle the
stress and the skills and the
experience that you get from
doing this job is somehow got to
be economically rewarded we're
just going to continue to go in
circles like this not only here
but in so many other jobs out
that's one of the frustrations
I'm having is that we we we have
kind of a bass Act words person
system in which we are not
valuing the stress of the job
and I would put teachers in that
category in many ways as well so
I I thank you for bringing it
forward but I would also love to
see a bill next year
and I I again learning to
understand state county city and
who's who's who's what where but
some bill that would recognize
the value of this job and
experience so that you would get
people to twenty five years.
Thank you very much for bringing
this forward thank you Mr check
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez
followed by Senator Tallman for
the second time.
Thank you Mr chair did
Of but also
wanted to just as a question I I
want I pock and I don't remember
this coming before I I did it.
Mr chair and senator I've never
taken it that committee of the
two times I've had it it's just
been run here in the capital so
that that I know of in in my
tenure it's never been done.
thank you Mr chair the only
reason I ask is because then of
we get at least a.
In my experience a fuller
analysis than this I support
this because it's it's the right
thing to do and I just to
encourage you if it doesn't make
it this year to take it to I pod
so that we can we can get the
fiscal analysis as far as I can
tell
and and I think center my as a
said this to this is a pay as
you go plan so that the funding
does it doesn't have to be a
hundred percent and the state
police funding of the state
police plan is so over funded
that this that this is just the
right thing to do but I do
encourage you to go to I. pods
so that we can have the full
analysis get all the committee
members on board
but I'd like I said I supported
in or the audience what is I
park if investment pension
oversight.
Committee.
That
Senator told the for the second
time.
Thank you Mr he could still has
Senator Hickey asked a good
question.
And maybe.
I don't know if you gotta answer
if he did I didn't understand.
So you said the at the average.
The special I work three to five
years so.
That that's not long enough to
get in vested so how this is
going to sound.
Your problem
they transferred other state
they take their pension other
pension plans throughout the
state.
So how.
If the three to five early going
to have to get a pension.
Mr chair and senator let Mr
Martinez center but this is a
benefit enhancement do give them
the opportunity to want to stay
I love the friendly amendment by
my two colleagues to add of
funding in this so we can pay
more and I know that's a
different discussion for
different day but I think this
to me right here gives them a
desire to an opportunity state
because we're meeting them
halfway to give them a future
but all it miss Martinez after
that let off of an incentive for
the agency This Is Your just
tweaking the systems out of huge
increase in benefits is it
really good will motivate people
to stay longer.
This and I don't know maybe I'm
on.
Mr chair Senator it's I believe
so yes I do I think it's it's
more it's more attractive to
them I get a lot of
Hello a lot of younger.
Younger.
Kids of nineteen twenty years
old and it's to them it's more
attractive versus going to
Walmart that's paying the same.
You know they at least take up
the budget there re classified
law enforcement there under law
enforcement so yes I I believe
that this would help.
So what you did say earlier they
all most if not all of your
employees supportive so.
I was supported.
Thank you Mr chair that's all at
Senator Ingle.
This.
There I have worked on a lot of
the stuff over my years and
thank you have to look at a lot
of New Mexicos our salaries in
some instances may not be as
high as certainly in the
starting point in law
enforcement you have a lot of
folks start sometimes in these
jobs young and then go and do
something else and but the the
thing about our the next New
Mexico's all of our employment.
There's no one beats our
retirement packages nobody.
And that's one thing you always
have that's never mentioned but
we have best retirement packages
in the United States.
Like that placement they're
really good they're really truly
are good and there's a lot of
things there that are not talked
about but they're they're and
after.
a past due bill a few years back
twenty years ago I think for
state placement if they were in
the patrol car they got to
retire twenty years.
Well it was another year later
caught him Jennings you always
got tickets at the officers and
everybody else in to us we would
get as many tickets not really
but the thing about it is you
have to realize in so many cases
that are retirement packages
this one is an incentive to stay
but every job that you have
where you have really younger
people starting there's a lot of
turnover and they're probably
always will be every other job
I've ever been around is it has
that says the same same thing
for awhile and the budget so.
We do have some aspects that.
Right the pandemic get longevity
you can get to retirement in the
state full time retirement for
four Year sixty if you start
early thank you.
What's the point of the point
our.
I would also say that comes from
our older generations New
Mexico.
We are we if we you're not going
to get killed waste we need to.
The that lower entry level
otherwise they're going to pay
higher one.
I just think that we need.
This country has never been as
great as it is now and we have
to recognize.
I think I stand by my comment I
agree is retirement maybe good I
think that was something that
was great we look back in the
fifties and.
Okay what's the will of the
committee.
With a motion for do pass from
Sedillo Lopez seconded by
Senator Tallman.
Any other to discussion or
questions.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator guy Harris yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Ingle.
Senator Maestas no.
Senator McKenna yes center's
media center city of this yes
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz if you know yes.
But seventy one both you have a
do pass Mr chairman commission
of centers thank you Senate bill
three twelve I do have the state
commissioner I did.
Well and that's bad.
But you get paid their debt to
thought of Mister I do have co
tomorrow on his way from CYFD
who is coming more from CYFD.
But we get to go to you that.
Senator Stewart.
Yes know who's a pro tempore.
Okay until you're pro tennis
graciously.
Thank.
The.
Thank you Mr chair.
You're you're starting to fall
asleep so I.
The first.
What education standards no.
Thanks for.
The.
Right here.
What's your name again.
In.
And so three six description New
Mexico.
By yeah.
Right.
Senator other thing on Senate
bill.
Two ninety eight mobile home
park act changes thank you Mr
chair and thank you committee
Senate bill two ninety eight is
related to property in amending
the mobile home park access is
requiring a regimented
application tenant payments will
provide notice for example
before the sale of mobile home
properties will also limit rent
increases based on the cost of
living the bill requires a
mobile home park owners provide
written agreements with detailed
information about fees and costs
the committee charge and how
payments will be applied the
dispute resolution process in
terms of any rental termination
agreement a big picture Mr chair
members
people in mobile home parks are
often at the mercy of of
suddenly there of their mobile
home park is extremely
attractive to developers that's
kind of where this originated
ten years ago I sponsored a bill
in this area but it's basically
you know affecting low income
you know tenants that that are
are vulnerable and that's kind
of the the focus of all this and
and
So I'm here and joined by Tom
pretty mention he's managing
editor Matt messaging Attorney
Legislative New Mexico legal aid
can you Sir he can briefly
describe the bill I can I want
to thank.
Representative Rubio and
Representative Andrea Romero
because basically they're the
ones the really went to town on
this bill I will I will in a
perfect world it would have been
more involved with the actual
drafting of the bill but but it
you know I think it's very clear
that these folks need to be
protected and also just as a
note New Mexico is second only
to South Carolina in the number
of families that live in
manufactured housing so this is
a statewide issue I know there's
a woman Act constituent of
science that that will speak
your briefly and you should have
heard her her her letter
basically this is an issue in
the Silver City area it's kind
of that you know just very
Center member back in the day
trying to protect one of these
mobile home parks communities
right outside of off of I.
twenty five near the Coronado
mobile home community which is
also kind of that being targeted
for development and so forth so
that was that's how I got
involved with it with actually
commissioner o'malley at the
time we what we collaborated on
that so have just already said
too much so Mister press pretty
mint can you explain this bill
and it's certainly and we'll go
to.
Questions yes to the mobile home
home park act applies to people
who own their mobile homes are
buying them on time.
And rent the space in a park
with twelve or more spaces it
doesn't apply to someone running
a mobile home it doesn't apply
to someone who owns a mobile
home park it on on the back
somebody's farm it applies to
people in these mobile home
parks and they're inherently
important vulnerable because
they're often their biggest
investment usually they're only
investment is that home so if
they're forced to leave the
space because they're only a
tenant of the space they
generally don't have the means
to move the home because moving
a single item cost five thousand
dollars moving a double wide
phone home my cost twice as much
so when when a mobile home park
owners who rent space in a
mobile home park has to leave
they generally walk away from
their homes it's like you're me
walking away from our retirement
savings and so this adds extra
protections much needed from the
current version of the law.
Thank you and then I just need
to add that The New Mexico
Center for long property really
was big engine behind the scenes
this initiative so with that
will stand for questions.
Let's go to the audience and see
is there anybody here did you
just.
You need to use the Mike when
you talk okay is there a hearing
you as of okay but don't start
over that's.
Is there anybody here was to
speak this.
Is there anyone here who was to
speak in opposition to this bill
okay we'll start with Mister
dread then we'll go there and
there.
Come up and use the Mike so they
can hear you as of.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
we can do have a we have to push
the button down we have a limit
on testimony.
Well.
But yes three minutes three
minutes each take three Mr
chairman mark Duran
Representative The New Mexico
manufactured housing association
we stand in opposition to the
bill Mr chairman this bill would
only make it harder to provide
affordable housing for New
Mexicans of the thirty pages of
legislation has numerous terms
that are undefined in the act of
arbitrary statements in the act
the bill is sweeping it requires
a mobile home park owners and
managers to predict when a
violation or crime is to occur
let me just read one section
question for you Mr chairman a
section to I to me disorderly
conduct for the commission of a
crime is grounds for the
termination of a rental
agreement if the landlord has
your finger must be slipping
because it is not picking you up
okay.
section to each with page this
is page eight Mr Chairman.
Okay let's see disorderly
conduct or the commission of a
crime is grounds for the
termination of a rental
agreement if the landlord has
provided written warning to the
residents.
I don't know how we would give
written warning on the
commission of a crime and the
landlord establishes that there
is a likelihood of future
conduct so I guess we're going
to try to predicted that conduct
last sentence there so no and
also there is no such likelihood
if the conduct of conviction was
committed by a member of the
residents household or other
residents.
And it is not likely to return
to the household there are
numerous instances like this Mr
chairman where we just are not
going to be able to interpret of
of what this means we can't
predict violations we can't
predict crimes even if we did
predicted we certainly couldn't
and then determine whether or
not they were going to recur
again the reward for us Mr
chairman and in this legislation
is if after trying to predict
all of this is the penalties in
the legislation increase from
five hundred dollars and
occurrence to ten thousand
dollars in the current that
legislation has rent control
included in it that is far more
worse than rent control that
this committee has already
considered
Mr chairman the the there's a
provision in here this as before
our owners can sell a mobile
home park that they have get
have to get first right of
refusal to any resident or any
resident group.
Once that resident group
determines that they'd like to
buy the park we then have to
give them time for financing it
doesn't determine and then how
many times that can occur over
and over that would practically
critical no are from selling the
park again Mr chairman and
members of the committee all
this legislation would do and
we've worked on good legislation
I've been executive director for
thirty two years I worked on
major legislation was Senator
Stewart sitting here and many
other times this is sweeping
legislation that would only hurt
affordable housing Mr chairman
not help that one.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr dress.
Yes.
This bill Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Randi
Valverde and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors we're
concerned that the broad changes
in SB two ninety eight will lead
to less affordable housing in
the state when we are at a point
of needing affordable housing in
a critical way this bill
implements rent control and the
economic evidence demonstrates
that that will both reduce the
quantity and quality of
affordable housing the changes
to the grounds for terminating a
rental agreement severely
inhibit landlords from
terminating rental agreement
putting the quiet enjoyment and
safety of other tenants at risk
also the changes to the eviction
procedures increase the amount
of time to vet from forty hours
to sixty days.
The bill significantly increases
the civil penalties against
landlords and there's new
language adding private remedies
against landlords that are very
concerning to us finally we
would point you to the concerns
outlined in the FIR that many of
these cases will now have to go
to the District Court level
where as they used to be able to
be handled in small claims due
to the high increase in civil
penalties thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Yes Sir just keep the button
down and it'll work just fine.
Like this yes Mr Chairman group
members of the committee my name
is Doug this but my wife and I
have managed communities in
Santa Fe and Albuquerque for
almost thirty years and also on
the board of New Mexico
manufactured housing association
this bill purports to protect
and stabilize affordable housing
and in reality it would have the
opposite effect by driving
decent and quality operators out
of the state I'd like to address
several of the proposed changes
the extension of time to pay no
one that runs a committee wants
to if they act good residents
every manager I know works with
our residents when they work
with us yet with no insanity our
expectation to perform sadly to
some choose not to the time it
takes to file get a hearing in
other delays that can happen is
sufficient to get help for those
that really want to.
The help is there and we will do
whatever it takes to get them
that help.
As long as they want to help
themselves rent control does
that also limit the cost of
insurance taxes materials and
labor if not then all this is
going to do is prevent community
owners from investing in their
communities in the future.
The first right of refusal
already addressed makes no sense
at all first of all it requires
a legal entity that can hold
title.
Then approaching owner and
provide some form of
consideration to get that right
so my question would be is what
consideration is being given to
the property owner I don't see
any in here.
And then to find that non
existent entity who will likely
does not have the experience in
such matters to get financing
for such a property it's
difficult enough when you know
what needs to be done to make
that happen.
there's nothing preventing
anybody including residents to
get themselves organized and
make an offer to purchase the
community at anytime they want.
also is been address preventing
management from enforcing rules.
Imagine having to tell your
residence you know what we can't
enforce the rules that are being
violated because we have to wait
until we take a violator to
court and get a conviction or
because we have to somehow gas
when a crime is going to be
committed it doesn't make sense
the bill is vague it does the
exact opposite of its purported
benefits and it would make the
job of providing residents with
quality affordable housing
incredibly difficult thank you
thank you Sir and then there's
somebody online who wants to
speak in support of the bill and
that is Joanne do Michelle.
Mmhm.
It's D. Michael thank you
Michael.
Mr chairman and distinguished
members of the committee.
My name is Joanne J. Michael on
I own a manufactured home in a
land lease community in Silver
Silvercity and I said Bill two
ninety eight.
Two years ago at the age of
seventy three I decided to
downsize and plan for my future
as an aging single woman on a
fixed income I paid seventy
thousand dollars for
manufactured home and three
hundred fifteen dollars a month
for land ranch land lease
community.
However we the land order gave
me a rules for fine she said I
could stay forever if I complied
with her rules people in the
community said she was fair and
trustworthy so I trusted her.
For nine months I lead a stress
free life the community is quiet
and peaceful and surrounded by
nature I had someone build a
deck so I could step your enjoy
the New Mexico sky day and night
I have a real bill for my
friends now and for my future I
planted rose bushes and
installed a fence for my dog.
My neighbors are friendly and
kind and help each other several
of my neighbors are single women
in their eighties and nineties
living independently fixed
incomes.
One day.
Nine months after I moved here.
We all got a letter from the
landowner and now I'm seeing
that you have sold the land
under our homes.
Stirs.
State are you all showed up and
moved the woman we all trusted
to a different town.
The new all offered us month to
month land leases and assured us
that they would not raise rents
yet three months later they
restore rents twenty percent.
They provided no justification
or additional services without
Senate bill two ninety eight
they can increase our rent again
and.
And again.
Is Senate bill two ninety eight
had been in place a year ago we
as a community could have
purchased the land under our
homes and we wouldn't be living
in fear of arbitrary rent
increases or worse.
When this in more happened I
decided to research to find
solutions and what I found was
horrible every week people
throughout the United States are
losing their homes because
predatory investors are taking
advantage of the fact that
mobile homes are not.
And that the people in these
communities are invisible and
not protected under the law.
I found that the property rights
of landowners were given
Priolo priority over the
property rights of these
homeowners even folk collective
value of the homes can be
several times greater than the
value of the land.
Everyone is familiar with the
table cloth cool trick where the
table is set with dishes and
glasses and a magician pulls the
table clocked off the table
without disrupting the dishes
and glasses the people profiting
from this practice are trying to
convince everyone that when you
sell the land under people's
homes no damage is done I can
assure you.
That's not true.
Mystified okay.
I have to
work.
next is a lista Kenley.
Kenny got guide.
Thank you Mr chair can you hear
me yes.
Thank you members of the Senate
health of public affairs
committee I am a strong support
this bill I'm a resident of us
taking care of Santa Fe as a
former Oregon state
representative and chair meeting
on Human Services and housing I
heard many horrific stories like
the one you just heard about
manufactured homeowners referred
to as residents in this bill who
are forced to leave their homes
when a park owners called
landlord in this bill raise the
rent beyond their means and yet
it was so difficult to move
their home the cost of you being
if residents could even find a
new part and losing your
community was devastating this
devastation was magnified
multiple times is part owner
decided to sell the whole part
we dozens of families searching
for new manufactured home park
all of the time we passed
several similar bills to address
the rent stabilization in this
bill eviction prime lines the
right of first refusal in a park
sale and other measures to
support both manufactured
homeowners or residents and park
owners or landlords knowing how
important this stability is
particularly for senior citizens
and people with disabilities who
make up a large portion of
residents in manufactured home
parks I urge you to support
Senate bill two ninety eight I I
that email to you with other
bills that we passed in Oregon
that help both homeowners and
partners and I also emailed
Andrew Miner suggested amendment
which would be to add email
addresses to page two lines
eleven of fourteen to make it
easier for residents to reach
their landmark thank you so much
for taking my testimony and I
urge your support thank you
thank you Miska can you go what
Geyer of then the last one is
miles Tokyo.
To open.
Good evening chair members of
the committee my name is miles
Pocono deputy director of Ole I
represent we represent
hardworking families throughout
the state we are immigrants
naturalized citizens early
educators artists hostesses
retirees and much much more many
of whom live in mobile homes we
fully support as B. two ninety
eight we believe this is a
racial and gender justice issue
please pass this over to an
important bill thank you so very
much and have a pretty.
Thank you miles.
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
chair and I just want to respond
bit to the opposition look this
is not a perfect bill I admit
that for sure it's got some
issues I admit it right away on
the other hand I don't I do know
it's not as if this is coming
out of no where it's not like a
gratuitous attack on the
realtors of the development of
good hearted wonderful managers
of mobile home parks abuses are
real they have happened and
continue to happen in New Mexico
and nationally so this is where
this bill comes from so the
notion that there's no real
problem here everything's fine I
don't agree with that notion so
I would like to turn to my cover
to Tom pretty then just briefly
respond to some of the issues
raised that will just go right
to the committee.
So the moped press the button
the mobile home park act is
meant to provide greater
protection to mobile home owners
than just someone running an
apartment because the idea is if
you have to leave an apartment
you go find another apartment
and however cumbersome that
might be that's much less
cumbersome than having to move
your entire home the cost five
to ten thousand dollars to move
so the part of mobile home park
act is supposed to provide
greater protection and in a lot
of respects it does not for
example under regular landlord
tenant law most of non rent
violations you get a chance to
fix some before the landmark and
take you to court not under the
mobile home park act the land or
just give you thirty days to
move and you move and you don't
get a chance to fix that
violation would be of debris in
your yard or neighbor guess came
over and was destructive or what
have you would you can do in a
regular tenancy and sure there
are plenty of good part managers
who will work with their tenants
to to be to not to not to force
something they otherwise legally
could enforce but we don't want
to rely on the good nature of
that park manager we want the
law to say you have certain
protections because you own your
home page only assets so this
bill is meant to put some
standards higher standards on
evictions of from mobile home
park than it is from a regular
tendency thank you but thank you
the let me just ask right up
before we get into committee
discussion.
You've already admitted there
may be some things that need to
be fit would you be willing to
to meet with some of the the.
People have spoken up position
to the bill who pointed out some
of the more troublesome aspects
in it and try to work it out and
come back with a mechanical
test.
Again but my issue this is an
odd situation for me because I
was not involved in them
granular drafting I totally
respect all the work that went
into it but by all means because
I feel yes the answer is yes
there seems to be a problem
they're not sure of this
solution may not go too far so
working with them again you can
find a way to but then we can
can we can come back the good
thing you know we've tried with
the dialogue Mr chair and then
we come back okay anybody else
want to say anything about this
before we let them.
Back up and fix it is your
chair Senator having go fix that
I think that's a wonderful idea
are there any other aspects that
you wanted to point out that
didn't get brought up by the by
the speakers in opposition at Mr
chair no I I think that there
are this the concept in the bill
a good some of the remedies
maybe a little bit hard and so
forth but I think this bill is
is needed perhaps a little less
draconian families personally Mr
chairman I would feel better at
least trying to you know to to
establish a dialogue and we may
not be you know have a shaggy
dog story income everybody's
okay but it's but I think it's
worth the effort but please let
us come back you know sooner
rather than later if possible
one of the big things from the
FIR is that ten thousand dollar
fee which immediately put you in
to District Court road and metro
or or magistrate which is a
problem for a lot of ways and I
do think the opposition did make
good points I must say Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator.
Neil and senator Cory I have
feel if you're listening in for
bringing this bill
so I really support the theme of
this bill and by earlier plot
both sides for wanting to work
on the language to get it to
tighten it up but I I see this
as urgent I saw a very upsetting
profile of a man veteran if this
did happen out of state but I
know this is happening here in
New Mexico as we just heard of
veteran who did he does only his
trailer but the land as this has
been shared with us has been
sold and he got an eviction
notice and he was absolutely
crumbling
chairman and senator and so this
is urgent we need to take care
of folks who are obviously
getting
Getting.
They don't have the law on their
side and we need to fix it so
thank you chairman Senator.
Thank you thank you so you did
anybody else want to bring up
anything else Senator Maestas
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you of their o'neill
gentlemen this is the advocates
and and what you're trying to
I'm reading through it I just
read through the first first
like eight pages and I don't
think I've marked of Bill
the prime.
But it up but I see the policy
that you're trying to get at
your and you're trying to kind
of micro manage all of these
relationships sometimes quite
get there
but there's a lot of words in
here that just aren't defined
there's a lot of scenarios that
we're kind of somewhat
unrealistic.
that so I would just try to.
Craft a bill that I think we can
so we can tweak some of the
problems now we're not going
anywhere could you can tweak the
statute every two years but I
see bills like this comp come
through with awesome intense and
they never ever move the needle
because they never got past.
Thank you and thank you and
we'll do that and will report
back right where another I get
yes thanks thank you senator and
and Mr of Freeman thank you so
much thank you Sir thank
Senators.
If we're going to do Senator
Stewart and then we're gonna
find out the answer to the CYFD
question Senator this is the.
Senate bill three oh to a
judicial standards commission
oversight.
Thank you.
Hello there is food by the way
Mr pretty then there's I think
there's still food is there
still somewhat there's food in
their office their help yourself
to submitted for and that goes
for anybody in.
What's food there's Chinese is
Chinese and I don't know if it's
a.
So called.
If it's a
yeah I don't know if it's good
for you I don't know what the
Chinese with a map for this.
But then again please thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee with me I have Phillis
Domingo's she is the executive
director and general counsel of
our judicial standards
commission.
Mr chairman when we passed our
state ethics commission at the
last minute there was a house
floor amendment that house floor
amendment put something in our
judicial standards commission
agency that is unconstitutional
and doesn't belong there and it
doesn't work for them so this
bill just takes that out so the
judicial standards commission is
supposed to be dealing with
judges
and and basically only judges
this ammendment added court
court appointed commissioners
hearing officers administrative
law judges or special masters
and their duty is to provide in
our constitution so they can't
deal with that type of employee
so the amendment try to make
them responsible for those
employees but they are not
responsible for them so let me
turn it over to a misdemeanor
this and she can explain a
little bit more detail.
Mr welcome thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you we are just
trying to get this language
cleared because our jurisdiction
is mandated by the constitution
which is over justices judges
magistrates of the state and
this bill that was introduced
this amendment to the bill was
introduced that gave us
jurisdiction by statute but the
jurisdiction can only come from
the constant a constitutional
amendment so we're trying to get
this language struck the hearing
officers are special hearing
officers particularly our court
employees so that they're they
report to the District Court
judge of theirs and if there's
some kind of discipline that
needs to be done they are court
employees and we just do not
have the jurisdiction over those
special masters commissioners or
hearing officers we think this
is it was.
Basically an encroachment of the
executive on the judicial we had
an attorney general's opinion to
that effect and we have left
of copies of that opinion with
you all and I hope that you have
them and that it would be found
unconstitutional if we if we
were to discipline hearing
officers and we would fear that
our agency would be sued because
we are we didn't have the
constitutional authority to
here discipline over hearing
officers so we're asking you to
please strike the low the
language in the in our statute
thank you.
Thank you put your was that
amendment Peroni one to twenty
one.
It was I was caring it was the
ethics commission
those six sixty eight it was a
generic bills because of the
last minute the rules committee
could not pass a commission and
so we did a new one in the last
week and so there is an
extensive amendment this was put
in on the house floor on the
last day we all know how the
house members are.
I think they had help from some
of our people with their
amendment.
So is there any discussion
members of the committee or
anybody here in favor anybody.
Are you in favor against
traditional standards committee
use here support okay the videos
of members the committee senator
Maestas Mr chairman and senator
about a protest it says here in
accordance with this section of
the constitution any justice
judge or magistrate of any court
may be disciplined or removed.
And that's all set so.
That's as far as the authority
went so great catch thank you
Mister chairman Senator.
Well it kept them from doing
work for the last two years to I
mean that was the problem
because they have this we
basically gave them an
unconstitutional mandate and
they've been trying to figure
out what to do about it so it's
it's not just a simple thing
it's kind of it's messed up
their their commission I'm of
the due process okay news
Senator to tell them to
discusses on the main time
nobody's been disciplined.
We have not been in the we have
been dismissing complaints
against erring officers because
they are court employees and the
discipline goes a comes from the
chief judge of the District
Court those go say they have
been disappointing people it day
by the challenges well given
doing just a moment okay that's
thank thank you.
Representative motion any other
discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Second it would you have said
Senator Ingle seconded.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna centers committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator to
the piano yes those we have one
other thing to cover.
You.
But seven to zero vote thank you
thank you yes and we we we still
want to finish up with Senator
Gallegos is bill because we have
somebody from CYFD here that was
Senate bill two seventy nine
emergency child places.
Thank you Mr makers and there is
Chinese next door if anybody
wants to there's change to try
to peddle to try to.
Pushing to try to chase I you
know I.
I was supposed to which was made
by assistant came up and gave me
a note of those to wish Senator
o'neill Happy Birthday.
And I it it just I just spaced
it totally.
So so tomorrow can you remember
information serenade in on the
floor of the floor.
You're you're so good at it I
mean.
Yeah okay Senator goes Mr chair
Senators we have court tomorrow
with CYFD here he can speak
appears in favor of the bill if
not he has to leave now but
you'll do so we have in here to
give here his insight on the
bill okay what's the
department's position of two
seventy to.
Mr chair members of the
committee we support this bill
we would like to remove the
emergency clause to give us time
to to train our staff and and
also the P. S. time to to to
train their staff your.
Anybody I've moved to a man to
remove the emergency clause
second second willing to accept
that as a friendly amendment I
am.
Any other discussion of the
bill.
Senator Senator Sedillo Lopez I
hope you don't know it is there
any opposition to the to the
amendment seeing none will
consider them their the
emergency clause.
To have been eliminated thank
you I help people are paid R. J.
grew with me but.
How does it work now the Mr
chair but.
If the if the adult member does
not increase does not submit
fingerprints and that child is
immediately removed this this is
is an application to get you
that that they can enter into an
agreement sorry Mr chair members
of the committee that they can
enter into an agreement so that
child isn't removed from that
custody immediately.
Some of the comments of that is
hello of course.
For that the department would
have.
But it's not all that.
Yes Representative that I just
want to hear that.
Senator Maestas.
Hello thank you Mr.
Because of that.
We have a motion the second.
Any opposition let's let's the
colic of secretary called the
roll with us.
Senator Wirth yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
test center Maestas Senator
McKenna Senate committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman center to the penal yes
thank you committee members for
a long and productive meeting
thank you very much thank you
senator by eighty seven to zero
vote to have a defense.
Senate health and public affairs
committee meeting is adjourned.
weld.
