Is here Serena Services.
Which is
Senate bill two fifty eight
crime including.
Then we'll go to Senator Pirtle.
Two sixty five both of those
were scheduled for Friday in
reading to them.
So we're gonna go ahead and
start with those and then we're
going to go to the.
The main event for tonight to
the house bill forty seven.
Then also mentioned several
bills after forty seven we're
going to take two eighty five
members you mental health
evaluations.
Those three bills that are forty
seven that I mentioned so far we
think.
We have been wrong in the past
we think those three we'll go
quickly and won't take a lot of
time.
We'll go back to the regular
calendar with the US you have
free medicine changes to seventy
nine.
The record medical records
Senator he's bill to eighty two
and right on down the line
except for center city a little
this bill if you're here for
Senate bill three oh three.
Changing the educational
retirement board membership.
Million here for she's requested
that we roll that over to when
she.
Okay so did you say that the
webcast is operating after yes
we can start okay roll Senator
Baca I see here here we have a
quorum and we're ready to deal
with Senate bill two fifty eight
the crime of.
Senator.
Senator.
Okay okay I'm good now.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for stating that this would go
quickly I'm glad I have
everybody's.
What I have for you today is
Senate bill two fifty eight
Senate bill fifty eight create a
crime of looting what we had
previously
observed in the the past summer
and and even previous to that is
is situations.
We're either due to acts of god
or civil unrest we have an offer
there is an opportunity that
some people take to
illegally enter grounds and the
either a vandalized items are
still items in this just
codifies that so it sets forth
the stage which is.
You think you're entering the
home correct welding in which
normal security the property is
unavailable if that's due to a
fire natural disaster right off
or other man made disaster or
emergency and the your.
Training and exerting control
over it and either damaging or
removing property of the owner
of this would make that.
If you satisfy those elements
this would make it a felony to
loot state again we are one of
very few states that do it does
not have a crime of looting we
saw this summer of some of the
so a protest so got a little bit
out of control Mr chair
committee members at the there
was extensive damage to property
both downtown and all up and
down central and some of the
states you too any of these
these businesses were were
severely damaged due to that.
This is why it's impact was a by
where we cannot prosecute that
source It sort of activity.
With that Mr chair of all my
questions from the committee.
We will go first to the public
and I have one person signed up
to speak in opposition to this
measure she's here we'll hear
her first.
This call from the offices of
the public defender.
Are you here.
Currently not.
so and I have nobody lined up to
speak in support so let's just
throw it open is there anyone
here in there in the.
Those.
Meeting who wants to speak.
this measure either for it or
against it.
Raise your hand at the bottom of
the screen is saying this is
reactions click on that and then
when it says race and will
recognize.
Okay seeing none then we'll go
to Senator sure we'll go to
members of the committee and
we'll start with senator
communities followed by Senator
thanks.
You Mr chair I just have a brief
comment
We we used to live I used to
live I did must but training
on the east coast where we had a
hurricane.
come in and it's not you know
from time to time the hurricanes
would hit and I saw that that
sort of situations in this bill
of course we don't.
We don't we're working on one of
the few states that we don't
really have a lot of natural
disasters but what I saw from
this is when there is a bad
hurricane would come through.
a really really bad one and it
would essentially leave a lot of
places deserted and even a lot
of law enforcement would would
not be present or their
communications would be so due
to some degree.
And we have a lot of looting and
I I think this bill.
Address is at least an over
arching.
Concept within criminal justice
and that's the fact that.
the the presence of law
enforcement the presence of the
very real.
Possibility of being caught of
being sentenced convicted of
crimes it does deter crime and
this is exactly you know what
what we witness on the east
coast is that exact fact and and
when you see this this handout
enforcement listed.
we we see the the heart the
heart of people come out and the
the fact that.
You know the these folks would
would be committing crimes of
regularly if if there wasn't
that the hand of enforcement in
them that real.
What and and held hello.
And so I I
am I find this.
This bill interesting because I
think it illustrates that
prince.
Illustrates the principle that
we need to sort of the sort of
check on on people who otherwise
would commit and sometimes it's
not just looting but it's
sometimes extremely violent
crimes when when we have a
natural disaster we have some
other emergency where we're law
enforcement is is not present.
And so I I just want to say that
because I think it's a real
fascinating
topic the the the center brings
up thank you Mr thank you
senator Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator
Neville really needed we have
Statutes that actually indicate
that property damage and some of
the things around property are a
fourth degree felony so couldn't
Senator could you respond.
You're on mute Senator Baca.
We certainly do and what we have
right now is a it's more of a
piecemeal approach to it okay so
we have we have a larceny of
what we have criminal damage to
property some of those offenses
are felonies and it depends on
how much you how much you either
still and how much damage is
caused I think this more gaps to
work gets to the fact of the
heinous ness of the crying this
isn't a simple larceny or
burglary this is this is a time
of unrest when you know either
the property Mr of Mr chair
Senator has there's no means to
call me so officers there's
there's really no no security a
play store of.
Because of the vulnerability of
the situation which is like I
said a addressed right that sort
of the and so heinous this of
the crying I would think of and
and really many states agree
with that because they have
similar statutes is that it's a
little bit more severe you're
not just shoplifting a whatever
candy bar what you're actually
entering into a business during
during these types of you the
legal activities or activities
that are non man made and
there's just no security in
place and so.
That's and and actually the
Barcelo bit higher so if you go
through here all these all these
activities have to existed six.
This report so you have to first
you have to have the scenario
the scenario is going to be a
fire natural does disaster
Ariete a mop or other man made
disaster or emergency so you
have to have one of those
situations exist and then you
have to actually be preserved
control which means you have to
go with and and really showed us
for the yeah that's the I really
just entering and happily the
only showing active menu at the
damaging or removing property so
this is things like that point
breaks through windows or you
know we see we see in the video
we've seen video of these things
people having at ATMs or cash
registers or things like that
with hammers and then actually
removing property we see this as
well this is something like
carrying a television now or or
whatnot so if you have all those
items together that would be if
that's what would make this new
statute of come into play so you
know that your question yes we
we can address this now but we
address it as piece meal so I
guess I would ask ask myself no
is there more serious to enter
building during this time and
say carry something out with the
things on fire it's been smashed
in your actually stealing items
at this point in the normal type
of larceny that we're used to
seeing shoplifting at a Walmart
or that sort of thing and I
would think the answer would be
yes that Hey this this is just a
step higher.
Okay.
Well Mr chair Senator.
I'm really wondering
I have an aversion to creating
felonies and it really affects a
person's future.
So if we're talking about
somebody with substance abuse
problems and mental health
problems
we're really.
Labeling them and giving them a
record for life and I don't
condone the activity of looting
at all I'm just concerned about
creating.
Another felony so I I'll listen
to everybody else right now
thank you thank you.
Thank you senator thanks
next we'll go to Senator guy in
Los.
Mr chairman for earlier Baca
just just real quick question.
I'm trying to understand and I
understand fourth degree felony
of the third to break into my
truck and take items but do I
understand your bills you talk
about
Restitution that they're having
to pay back of their car.
Mr chair and senator gray go say
actually no they would just they
would just be there would be the
criminal offense of of of.
being which would result in a
felony so so no they're
listening there wouldn't
necessarily be restitution
although judges are typically
what grafted brought discretion
at that that could be part of
the sentence so it doesn't it
doesn't necessitate that
restitution be placed in there
as part of the sentence but I
would think that it could be if
a judge thought that would be
fifty.
Mr chair for later the reason I
bring that up is.
Years ago I would say about
twelve maybe fourteen years ago
we've got a number for Christmas
got ready to leave coming back
home loaded all our clothes or
gifts came back inside for
probably two hours thank you bye
and someone decided they wanted
to ban and all the
All of our gives and what we
found the back and it was
trashed and empty of.
The young man.
there again is in Colorado but
the only restitution we got was
from our insurance which we had
played deductible which I'm
grateful for having but I just
wondering if there's any would
tie restitution to this but
that's my big concern and and
that's not during
hello hurricane or anything like
that that's just a regular theft
of the vehicle but when I bring
the bill I thought there's
something in there restitution
so I I must be wrong with
I appreciate you know that the
and in times of dire need of
civil unrest.
Of catastrophes the it sure like
everyone gets over anxious
maybe.
G. R. something kickstand but I
appreciate I just want to touch
base yes I'm not talking what
that all you.
Thank you senator guys grow to
Senator McKenna followed by
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you chairman RTZ Pino and
thank you Senator Baca for bring
this legislation so we can
discuss this afternoon hi I am
I I detest any sort.
I I would never condone that
and.
I was a victim of
the card.
Car damage and theft Friday
before last.
And is mad design I'm about what
the person did persons.
What they took from my vehicle.
There's no way I would press
charges and want someone to have
a felony.
On their record and so I'm I'm
curious chairman and senator
Baca.
Why why is a felony in indicated
here.
Well thank you Mr chairman
Senator and thank you for that
question the fact of the matter
is is that some of those laws
are already on the books so that
you know it can it can range
anywhere from.
Two hundred dollars in fines and
fees to who Federal T. of a
second degree felony for cases
of over twenty five thousand
dollars worth of staff and so so
those those already exist
depending on what the role how
much they broke or how much they
might have stolen so
to press charges you know that
that's another item I guess.
But for what you're talking
about on that sort of
that sort of sentence or penalty
assessment against a person is
already on the books and even in
the sense of just looking at us
after a larceny once you get
above twenty thousand dollars
you're looking at a second
degree felony felony at that
point so the sentence for this
looting is potentially much
wider and what that would be so
I think this gets less at that
and more at looking at the
overall scenario of the crime
and the situation that exists
and so so it it's not I would
say a stiffer penalty per se
because you can have the same
penalty if you went in there and
stole an item and they charged
you with with the after other
the charging you with looting
what what it does is it says
windows broken people smashed it
in already the stores wide open
and vulnerable at this point
you're looking at a looting
charge so it's a little bit more
of a deterrent is way.
That that now you're looting
we're not just going in the
store and shop lifting something
we're not breaking into your car
and stealing something this is a
time of emergency and we're now
but we get it taking advantage
of this store for this our
retail spotter what have you and
retrieving valuables are
damaging property just for you
know at a very vulnerable time.
I thank you chairman thank you
senator.
Yeah and again it is.
Upset as I was because of the
looting that occurred.
yeah we saw it hi I'm just
really has a chance to.
To come down the track of the
charge of felony because.
Because of so many other factors
and I'm I am curious our
chairman and senator Baca is
there anybody in this room room
right now from law enforcement
could comment on this.
Why did speak to law enforcement
when I was when I was crafty
appears on their there is not
here today so I I don't I don't
have a professional.
With the today this bill
unfortunately has been rolled
over two or three times it
sometimes gets difficult.
To reschedule.
But you know that's that's just
the fact of the matter today but
thank you I appreciate the
question.
Thank you senator that's all I
have right now gentleman thank
you.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Senator Senator for
bringing this bill
Mr chairman it's section A. one
excludes public buildings.
Why is that.
I'm sorry she went out for just
a second Senator would you
please repeat your question I
apologize of course Mr chair
section eighty one of your bill
the definitions of as commercial
and residences in private
buildings and it seems to
exclude.
Public buildings.
Why why is that.
We wanted to keep Mister chair
we wanted to keep the definition
more narrow well but you know we
didn't want it to get confused
with some public areas like I
guess it could like the
structural Parker things like
that well we're more focused on
this bill Mister chairman
Senator on on those on those
types of vulnerable businesses
that belong to individuals that
recently like we've seen damaged
and even even though here in
Albuquerque during the past the
past the summer where we had
some activity related to this it
was it was a private businesses
that were mostly affected
whether that's the sense that
the individual committing the
crime house while they're doing
it or or or some other reason I
I do not know but there wasn't a
great deal of damage to public
buildings that that was to
speaker during this last movie
that happened in Albuquerque
itself so if you went down
central it was just a parent
with paper hitting last fronts
retail stores things of that
nature especially vulnerable
people seek additional TV's and
other valuables a not so much
breaking into a public building
where there's not a whole lot to
offer in in that way.
Senator Mr chair my concern is I
think about January six.
And what happened on January
sixth
in our U. S. capitol and the
looting and the and the traders
I mean that's the only way I can
think of it that activity that
took place that not only damaged
property at the capitol our
property because the property of
the capitol belongs to all of us
and not only that but undermined
our democracy by trying to stop
a normal a congressional process
and so to me excluding public
buildings.
I have a principal of you treat
similar conduct more less the
same you know and as you look at
that and I also have the
principle of you look to see
what the problem is that you're
trying to solve.
And I have trouble understanding
the specific problem you're
trying to solve since we already
have criminal of criminal in our
criminal laws laws that cover
this activity and I don't know
why a prosecutor might go to the
extra trouble of trying to prove
that there was a Ryan been some
activity became Ariete or that
there was you know sometimes you
know those kinds of standards
are hard for a prosecutor to
prove so and then third I have a
problem
creating a new felony because
one of the things that was
fascinating to me is the
treatment of the people
Who who were participating in.
In black lives matter movement
activities and how they were
treated and how the people.
Who were participating in that
January sixth of that retreated
so I I have spent a lot of
problems with this bill
Miss Mister chair and I guess if
you want to comment further on.
On the exclusion of public
buildings and how you think that
that's that this statute
addresses a problem that is
unique that would be fine but I
do have a lot of problems of
this bill Mr chair.
Thank you so you want to come
and senator Marco.
You know just to say Mr chair
that you know I'm first of all
I'm if if the not including
public buildings you know it is
out if that's the way that I
could gain the good senator
supported still on well open to
amendment so she has something
that would that would result
that I'm I'm happy to.
To move move it forward with
something like that a senior so
I don't think it's been a huge
issue released in New Mexico you
know we haven't seen that I'm
happy to consider that further
again if this isn't so much an
issue of can we charge so
someone with something this is
an issue of what what is the
scenario what is the situation
this is an emergency this is a
this is a mapping is Astor this
is riding this is of those you
some legal activities so what
this does is it's inclusive of
those items that you discussed
one of which is actually if you
think about it you can have
again a person walking into a
smashed into the building to
remove items and I think most
reasonable people would agree
that that that is somewhat more
heinous than.
Then like I said a simple a
simple shoplift out of Walmart
just due to the wall over
ability and the building thank
you building off the of the
individual there is security and
Representative what we approve
bailable for in this area where
you have security in other
situations and first can
actually take steps to protect
their property from theft and
damage here there is just no way
to reach out you're just kind of
on the mercy of the individuals
walking by and I think those are
the big takeaways from.
Again Mister chair I I I can't
support your bill it really has
too many problems so thank you
Mr chair that's all I have.
Thank you senator so the lotus
Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator thank you for.
Bring this forward of the same
one of my questions and I wanted
to.
Senator Sedillo Lopez asked and
that is you know what's the
problem you're trying to slow
the second question you may have
already answered it I get came
in late.
If you have a this tell me and
not a live with that so what
does this bill do that.
Other property.
Crimes.
Don't do what is it is it.
You don't feel the punishment is
so severe enough
Mr chair and this and Senator
Baca.
Well two things in some
instances that that's right in
some instances instances it
isn't it isn't severe enough
We're talking about a whole
different situation where we
have this principle up items
that are discussed in subsection
one of section eight that's a
whole different scenario that
we're normal theft occurs so in
that case yes I think that crime
is more severe.
Or that the punishment should be
as well and so you're not that's
the first I don't second item is
you know we're putting a tool in
the in the toolbox of the
prosecutors was branch or this
is a crime of looting I think
you know even even the sound of
it is it is more you know it's
more of a heinous nature then
the something like a larceny or
petty larceny you know here
again think of the situation
you're walking into a damage
compromised facility or causing
that damage yourself and they're
going it either baptizing
removing property and so this is
a you know just a it's another
way of addressing that problem
and you know.
We to toner retail store which
I've owned and I've owned
several businesses restaurants
retail stores manufacturing.
To get broken into is one thing
and I was just sharing with one
of our fellow senators today out
of business right now that has
been broken into at probably at
least thirty times now.
That is something different to
me as a business owner Mister
chairman Senator.
Then somebody coming in and
taking advantage of the
situation where I have no means
of control I have no security on
the building I don't have
anybody there.
We're in a time of crisis that
that to me is a completely
different situation and I think
business owners such as myself
and I have to talk to them about
how to wind up smashed in on
central and and happy to take it
from that that is certainly a
different situation feeling.
Then you know someone breaking
into your vending machine and
and taking some soda pops we're
trying to get it and get it the
changing quarters and so I I
hope that answers your question
Mr chair and senator Tom.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
so this bill current judiciary.
That's correct senator.
Mr chair so up.
If you feel that the.
The.
The punishment doesn't fit the
crime.
Crying Mr chair and senator is
somewhat different so I I think
although this encompasses other
crimes
I I think it's it's a different
crime and therefore the the
punishment should fit it so I
guess the simple answer to you
would with the and some
instances know the punishment
doesn't fit the crime I guess
would be my answer and I'm very
glad to hear that it's going
next to Judiciary to so I I
appreciate that.
So thank you thank you Senator
bye thank you Mr chair one final
question so maybe your answer
this what.
Your guess what what prompted
the you too.
Kerry is built from a personal
experience.
Will Mr chair
No I would say was a personal I
do have personal experience as a
set of up and broke it into
several several times you know
what I looting has one of my
businesses ever been looted now
what prompted this Mister
chairman Senator.
Lee was the activities last
summer.
Where we saw of a protest turned
into something else turning to
vandalism of property theft of
property.
Where I just bill for these
businesses it you know ten and
twelve thousand dollars for
windows.
You know and then going in the
stores display racks.
Here's the thing.
Your here's the thing Mr chair
that some people many people
don't know is that your
insurance provider on these
commercial policies of at least
money anyway there's County arts
many times for Robson riots
where they will cover that sort
of activity so really the
perfect there's there's just
roll recovery and there's you
know and the person can do you
know very much damage and again
there's no security there and so
you know I think this just
addresses that particular
situation in those particular
acts of war that we have right
now.
So you're saying
just to be clear that some some
or all insurance policies don't
cover.
looting.
That's correct.
Senator Moores.
I'm not sure where Senator
Tallman went.
He was wrong.
So.
Thanks to you.
Mr chair I'm ready with the
motion.
Senator Tallman returning the go
ahead Senator
Mr chair I.
This Mr chairman of the table.
We have.
Our motion to table as a non
debatable motion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Any we can't hear you.
There are no signs Senate bill
two five eight to table
and I'd like to expand my vote.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
He's on the phone.
No no.
Yes explain my vote thank you.
There is a no I'd also like to
briefly explain please.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Here's the facts yes.
Sir Tom.
Three three Senator.
Do I get.
That answers are Tom's place.
Well I see you.
Sir Tom interest of all.
Thank.
I'm getting back on a CM.
Thanks.
Senator Tom.
what happened okay we're voting
on a motion tabled.
And the lotus to you.
So what's the vote three to
three.
Yes this point is three three.
So
Yes explain my vote.
In a yes so we have a number of
you'll want to explain to voters
here in the seventies Center
Ingle thank you Senator Ingle
we'll go to starting with
Senator guy and so use your
first.
Thank you Mr chair really
hopefully.
Saw the opportunity change this
bill to be able to then in
public buildings.
Since we did not try that
amendment well I was gonna vote
no because I really think this
bill should have gone forward.
Amendment on there so with that
are you thank you thank you
senator.
This was essentially you who is
next at water explained the
remote.
Senator.
You chairman and thank you
Senator Baca for this discussion
today
To reiterate why I couldn't
support it hi and as mad as we
all can get about the incidents
of looting I simply believe a
charge of felony is entirely too
severe because of what it can do
to that person's life.
and.
I do see in the FIR that we
already have criminal laws that
address.
these crimes so
Thank you for the discussion I'm
I always learning something at
every meeting thank you very
much thank you senator Senator
Schmedes you want to explain
your vote yes Mr chairman and I
also really appreciated the
discussion lots and I I just I I
voted no to table because I was
in favor of the bill and mainly
because of the point I was
discussing earlier is these
types of these are the types of
folks that are purposefully
going in and destroying things
and still because they know or
at least they think they're not
going to get caught and I I
think that this crime of looting
is kind of like it can be an
entry point or almost eight a in
Hansard of someone they they
feel like they not to get caught
they know that there's a
disaster they know the costs are
around that going you'll in the
state are you know I I just got
to steal something I don't get
caught or anything they can go
on and do that again again again
and so I'm fully aware of the
collateral consequences of
family it's a big deal if very
much is but because of the
unique nature of this crime that
that's why I voted no on the
table thank you Mr.
Thank you senator communities
Senator Stefanics did you want
to explain your own time.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you did.
No Sir I didn't but no.
I made my my views about the
bill clear.
Then Senator Coleman are you
still there.
Yes thank you for your vote of
confidence whether I'm still
here I I just don't see your
picture that is the issue.
It is okay just keep talking
just you can see in Mr chair
okay.
Yes yes I think I lost the.
My screen went blank I was
actually I was going to vote
move a do pass with no correct
to increase your eight.
Both sides of the argument I can
see what the centre back is
trying to accomplish but it the
needs some work obviously if
the.
The value of the property.
Is zero five to ten thousand
dollars in that have you see
that should be a felony in my
we have thinking but anyway
needs.
Needs more work and that's kind
of conflicted on it so thank you
for giving me opportunity to.
Explain my vote thank you Mr
chairman thank your Senator
back.
Thank you senator Tom and and
senator Marco let me just
explain why ability to the
table.
I think several people made to
point that Senator it's a
deterrent and and yet.
We already have laws don't
deter.
And in to me the deterrence
comes from the certainty that
you're gonna get caught and the
issue was looting is is taking
place for this mess.
Is going on so it doesn't.
Adding another crime.
Does increase the chances of
getting caught I mean it's still
gonna be very hard to pin down
which of these people running
down the street we're the ones
that actually.
To the
The TV set out of the store
window or whatever so to meet
that's the key challenges the
knowledge in the in the
criminal's mind they're going to
get caught if they think they
can hide in the crowd and get
away with it.
We can tack on six eight ten
different panels.
The crimes in Mexico usually
difficulty it is simply not
going to be as much of a
deterrent as making sure they
get caught.
But any other thank you senator
for rings for maybe next year
was a little work you can you
can ring again and and try again
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee for a
lively discussion I appreciated
the suggestions have a nice
evening great thank you senator
okay now we'll go to Senator
Pirtle still to sixty five
county of jurisdiction and then
we'll go to house bill forty
seven.
Thank you Mr chairman and pass a
bill to sixty five and and for
those that have been on the
committee of before you see in
this bill many times we get it
through this committee we get it
through Judiciary we get it
after the floor just to to
provide the house Judiciary
Committee but this bill simply
then the statute to line up with
the state constitution to
article two section fourteen
clearly state that the
court case that hearing shall be
in the county or district aware
of the crime or the incident
incident happened and so
currently what can happen if you
will just use where I'm from to
make that simpler for me you can
get pulled over and Ross will
and instead of the officer
citing you into the magistrate
court there also they can
actually send you past or future
there's a magistrate court all
the way down to Carlsbad and so
they could fight you there in
the only way to get it back as
you would have to go to Carlsbad
and and during your arraignment
state I want to move it back to
the county that it happened so a
citizen that's presumed innocent
on any infraction would have to
take time off from work drive
all the way down the Carlsbad
just to get it moved back to
Russell what this says is that
the the person who cited have to
contend with that sometimes Mr
chair members of the committee
the officer maybe from Carlsbad
and and the person that was
cited maybe from Carlsbad so to
make it simpler on everybody
involved they may want to fight
it to an adjoining counties so
this would still allow that
flexibility that a lot of
officers and judges of really
appreciate now it's just that
Hey the person being cited has
to consent to this so that way
that they're not being put out
and we're not putting an undue
burden on our state thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator for we we have
heard additional before and and
I want to thank you for reading
it again if it's a common sense
bill which you do have somebody
who signed up to speak against
it if he's in the room with that
because of those experts may his
comments no matter why he
opposes this bill.
So you are you with us on this.
Anybody want to make a motion.
President Mr Chairman Senator
Ingle I'm moving too fast.
We have several seconds let's
make invite bipartisan senators
to excuse a second this and
Senator Gallegos any other
discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Bill two six five and our guy it
goes yes.
There are Ingle.
Yes.
Yes Sir.
Yes.
Yes Sir Tom.
Yes.
Yes.
Congratulations Senator Pirtle
here oratorical skills and one
is over.
Jordan sweet Mr chair short and
sweet thank you very much thank
you and next we'll go to house
bill forty seven.
And we have the the house
sponsor we have the Senate
sponsors so we'll we'll go to
will start with representative
Armstrong then we'll go to
Senator Stefanics.
Mr chairman and did a little
upset okay let's do it this is
okay.
Does.
Hey Mister chair we have a lot
of Sanchez on today in the
Senate there's myself there
senator bill o'neill and there
Sir senator Kerry Hamblen and
senator Neal might be out care
giving but if he comes back he
wants to
senator he is okay great some
yeah okay so Senator Neil wanted
to say a few words Senator can't
Hamblen wants to set few words
Representative Armstrong will
say a few words and then she
will introduce.
Erin Armstrong one of our expert
witnesses another expert witness
is Dr Steve Koenig and another
expert witness is professor rob
Schwartz retired from the U. N.
M. law school.
So Mister chair.
I will start with a brief
introduction to the bill some of
you have had have heard this
bill in the past some of you
have not.
this bill is the Elizabeth white
field and of life options act it
was named after Liz with white
kids who is a judge who appeared
in front of our Senate
committees the last time this
came to the Senate since died
and she specifically asked for
this opportunity.
But this bill was first
introduced to my knowledge in
nineteen ninety five by myself
and professor rob Schwartz was
assisted me Madam in the
development of this bill.
At that time I had a vice
president of a bank and his wife
from the white rock Los Alamos
area the requested the bill
because the husband was going to
have a painful death based upon
his diagnosis and he wanted the
option.
At that time of we have not
discussed this a great deal and
public and in society but since
then it's become a topic that's
been discussed many places.
And actually we have a high
percentage of New Mexicans who
actually approve of the concept.
So to start with.
This bill relates number one to
an adult.
Who is terminally ill.
There have to be mentally
capable of making an important
decision and they have to be a
New Mexico resident they cannot
come from out of state to use
this bill.
This person also has to have the
capabilities to self administer
the medication it's totally
voluntary program.
There are requests protections
in here of the patient has to
have a health care provider who
determines that they are
terminally ill and mentally
capable of making this an
important decision of this
requesting the medication.
If there's any doubt that
provider has to refer the
patient to a metal licensed
mental health professional.
Chairman's if the patient has
the capacity and is mentally
capable of making an informed
decision.
It is an important decision
making because the health care
provider must ensure that the
person is requesting this
voluntarily no one is taking
them on and explain all the on
anticipated outcomes the risks
and the alternatives including
hospice and palliative care.
It this bill will give people
peace of mind who are terminally
ill.
In order again.
Only one third of the population
who obtained the prescription
actually used it it was their
way of knowing that when they're
needed to be a decision they
have that option.
Some died before they feel a
need to use it.
For others just knowing they
have the means to end their
suffering provides peace of mind
and take some of the anxiety
away from dying.
We still insurers access the
bill has a forty eight hour
waiting period from the writing
of the prescription to the
filling of the prescription to
ensure timely access for
critically ill and suffering
suffering patients.
Health care provider is defined
as an M. D. I DO and advanced
practice nurse or physician's
assistant.
Our laws allow the physician's
assistants and nurse
practitioners to define to have
prescriptive authorities in in
our rural areas quite a few
people only see practitioner or
PA.
This bill print that protects.
Doctors nurses and loved ones.
It's very explicit it says
medical aid in dying is not
suicide.
Physicians nurses and loved ones
are protected against
prosecution.
They're protected against
prosecution for assisting
suicide in this bill.
Further good faith compliance
with the law may not be
construed as unprofessional
conduct or considered neglect.
The law mandates that the death
certificate lists the underlying
illness as the cause of death.
It also prohibits any insurance
policy from being conditioned
upon or affected by a patient
taking advantage of the law.
Medical aid in dying is entirely
voluntary for patients health
care providers and pharmacists.
As I said the last time I
presented this bill to the
Senate.
This bill is not for everyone.
My parents in their nineties and
very very Catholic would never
have that.
Their physician to consider
something like that.
They're right that was there
right.
But today we have people who
would like to have the option to
request assistance if so needed.
At this time
Representative Armstrong you
want to go or you want to have
the Senate sponsor speak.
I think you can.
Mr speaker and then I'll kind of
wrap up and introduce Aaron okay
thank you so is Senator o'neill
on would you like to say a few
words Senator is thank you
thanks to both you and
Representative Armstrong for
inviting me.
I'm co sponsoring this very
important bill but two years ago
all I remember I've been a
member of I think it was I would
think does inspect recommend I
can't remember it's all a blur
but I remember this very well
and I remember how impressed I
was with all the work that you
have done on it the safeguards
that you had in place I I I you
know I was just so impressed and
then fast forward you know I can
save you both continue to work
on this bill with advocates
answering concerns safeguards
are in place are you know for
those of us who might be close
to.
Close to this issue it's the
ball about having the choice you
know when you're really really
really sick and in pain you're
at the mercy of that and just to
have the choice if you want even
necessarily use and you won't
use it without all these very
important safeguards doctors
approve all kinds of of safe you
know of of steps you have to go
through to to avail yourself of
this compassionate end but it's
the choice it's the choice
despite have that choice and so
again thank you both for
sponsoring this bill and I look
forward to listening to the
debate thank you.
Thank you senator Kerry Hamlin.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator Stefanics for for
this and and Representative
Armstrong you know it's actually
it's very much an honor for me
to be able to speak here today
as I have a friend who grew up
in Los crucis had long family
roots in Los crucis she was
somebody who came back to the
community she was an incredible
artist she moved to Los Angeles
to help start the L. G. B. T. Q.
Center there then met her
partner they lived in DC part of
the year and they lived in Los
crucis the other part of the
year.
About eight years ago she was
diagnosed with Parkinson's.
And you saw that she tried to do
everything she could every
single possible treatment for
Parkinson's to try try and
school that that that
deterioration of her mind and of
control of her body but it was
within the last year and a half
of that it was actually a year
and a half ago that we started
seen her physical abilities to
really start to decline and she
was losing control over her body
motions for control just in
terms of muscles what she was
able to do she was no longer an
independent woman independent
strong stubbornly wonderfully
stubbornly woman.
And and so was when she started
using a wheelchair that she
started sharing with her partner
that she wanted to use this
option as a way to not suffer
anymore.
And she was able to last March
was March fifteenth actually
that she had met with doctor in
Washington DC and requested the
medication that she could take
to and her life because that was
the only thing she could control
of that point in her life she
lost every opportunity to
control her life except that it
took her less than twenty four
hours because she had been
thinking about this every single
day.
And so but she would have done
it in New Mexico had she had the
opportunity where she loved and
she grew up but she did not have
that opportunity so I think of
the Cheryl and I think of other
people who want to have the
prolonged death.
Ended sooner so that they're
suffering stops so I appreciate
this opportunity I do hope
you'll support this because
there are people who need to be
able to make those decisions.
To end their suffering to end
their suffering for their
families and to know that they
are able to die with dignity so
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator semantics thank you
representative Armstrong for
this.
Thank you now let's go to
representative Debbie Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I just want to
add a couple of points to the
summary of the of the bill and
then tell you why it's important
to me personally.
Well we have the nurse
practitioners and PTA's can be a
prescriber can be one of the the
two providers that are necessary
one does have to be an MD or DO
that affirms that the individual
is meets the eligibility
requirements
We also get questions about the
forty eight hours that being
such a short time but and I'm
I'm sure our professor Schwartz
can talk more about this but in
other states like Oregon that
has a two week waiting period
that two week waiting period is
between your first request to
the prescribing
provider and your second request
and it and then requires consul
then may require
other
determining of capacity at
cetera so it actually takes
often four to six weeks.
This we haven't counted what
time the process takes we've
just put an additional forty
eight hours at the end of the
process for a hold on the
prescription to given one
additional kind of waiting
waiting period are cooling off
period so that
so someone can can think it
through one last time.
And.
as senator mentioned it's
The bill is not call medical aid
in dying it's called end of life
options act because it's all
optional.
And it's a continuum of
potential options and end of
life and what's found in other
states that do this is also that
the end of life care as a whole
gets better in the state because
this is offered because it
starts our conversations and it
it there's actually greater use
of hospice greater use of
palliative care when they're
when this option is also on the
table because it's one of the
things that done you have to
have a real conversation about
how do you help someone at the
end of life to be as comfortable
as possible and is in as much
control of their decision making
as possible as as they face the
end of their days so and in
other states over ninety percent
are on hospice actually who
request this I just wanted to
make those couple of points
because the rest of tonight is
going to be hard for me.
I'm.
The number one question I get
asked though is why I got
involved.
Why do this work.
I start with kind of a general
answer of I've been working as a
physical therapist and my
decades of clinical work started
right out of college as much my
first job as a physical
therapist working with
A terminally ill children.
And I later moved more into
geriatrics so I've dealt with
professionally
death and dying my whole
Career I worked in hospice
worked in long term care home
health.
I'm but it didn't really really
hit me personally twice started
taking care of it being the end
of life care giver.
Our family and friends and I'm
one of those friends that I was
the care giver at the end of her
life was many of you know her
Patty Jennings.
But it's really real real real
to me now.
with my daughter hearing and
many of you know Aaron.
But I'm not going to tell you
for story I'm gonna let Aaron
tell her story.
issues here with me so I'm just
gonna turn my computer so that
you can see Erin and let her
tell you.
Evening Mister chair members of
the committee.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to speak this evening my name
is Erin Armstrong for those who
don't know me.
And I desperately want to live.
I do one word delicious on
sparing exhilarating ordinary
boring challenging heartbreaking
way.
One of more than anything I've
ever wanted.
And I'm fighting for it every
day with everything that I have.
And I will keep fighting that
fight.
Until there are no more options
and I've run out of fate.
And I start by sharing the most
basic truth with you so that you
don't get the wrong impression
today even as I thank you to
allow me some small measure of
control in my death.
I first spoke in favor of this
bill and twenty seventeen.
Here is students spoke as a
member of the audience and as a
survivor of cancer that I had
been managing for nearly twenty
years.
My support then came from my own
experiences and insights as a
patient.
Someone who had suffered.
Since my teenage years value the
ability to struggle with and
make complex difficult health
care decisions of my own.
I also spoke is the chosen
family of other patients friends
board of shared battles and
experiences with cancer.
Friends who've lost those
battles and died debts they did
not deserve.
My testimony then in twenty
seventeen was real.
And heartfelt and honest and
personal.
But I'm here again today with a
much more immediate perspective.
In twenty nineteen.
A rare genetic mutation in my
long managed cancer took charge.
Because in my old familiar enemy
and teacher to spread
aggressively to my bones my
lungs liver and may bring.
Is the last two years have been
completely surreal.
Brutally devastatingly all too
real all at once.
Three craniotomy is a massive
infection unspeakable nerve pain
and multiple rounds of radiation
therapy later.
I find myself alive today thanks
only to a clinical trial drug
that is being tested on my body
and significant cost.
If this blessed life extending
medication turns out to be like
the ones that have come before
it.
Its efficacy is likely time
limited.
Grateful is too small word to
describe the way I feel about
the additional time but I'm
being afforded.
When my optimistic days.
I catch myself hoping for many
years daydreaming into the
future.
My more realistic and immediate
goal is to live into my forties
I turned forty later this year.
Whether I have a year or six
years or six months left to live
this ordinary beautiful life.
I am coming to terms with the
knowing.
That this disease is likely to
catch up to me much sooner and
I'm ready to go.
There are moments when the
heartbreaking reality of it all
is inescapable and stick it
more.
And I am unspeakably sad at the
thought of being done.
Of all that I will miss.
What scares me the potential at
any of it.
These last two years have
granted me terrifying glimpses
into the potential for physical
suffering.
I'm afraid at the thought that
my final days could be filled
not with loving good byes and
memories shared with loved ones
with wrenching pain and
disorientation.
As a patient with an illness
that is likely terminal.
I.
One of the same level of
continuity and ability to make
choices about my eventual death
as I have always had in my
choices about how to stay alive.
I've heard earnest and well
intentioned people.
Express their feeling that one
ought to accept one's natural
course of that.
That only god or some other fate
can determine when and whether
one lives or dies.
But respectfully the truth is
that measure I have already
cheated death.
Without all of the countless and
desperate medical interventions
and trial drugs I without
question would have died of this
disease already.
This is a difficult.
Essential truth for me and for
so many other patients with
terminal illness.
We simply wish to benefit from
careful medical intervention
once more.
In a way that affords us some
small measure of control and
dignity in our final days.
This bill is smart.
It's careful it's conservative
it's the kind of thoughtful
legislation at this topic in the
people of New Mexico to serve.
And it will bring me
immeasurable peas as I move
forward in my own journey to
live and eventually die.
Thank you very much for
listening to my story and I hope
that you'll consider voting for
this important hello.
Mr chair we have two expert
witnesses of professor rob
Schwartz and Dr Steve Kean Ecker
might want to make a couple
comments that they're gonna also
be here for questions
professions Schwartz.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you so much for setting aside
time to talk about humane and
dignified Health Care at the end
of life today I I know many of
the people were here and I've
heard many of the stories that
you'll hear before as some of
you have as well and it is just
impossible not to be moved by
these stories every time I hear
them and not to be convinced
that there is this is a very
important bill that confronts
Committee tonight I'm rob
Schwartz I'm on the faculty of
you and then law school or I've
talked for forty five years
where I've studied health law
and we're I've studied at end of
life care for the last thirty
years over the last ten years
I've also been teaching at
university of California
Hastings college of the law and
UCSF medical school and I've
been able to observe the
implementation of California's
end of life options act and as
the committee knows the
constitutional issues
surrounding eighty dying have
been fully litigated New Mexico
and the New Mexico Supreme Court
has determined in the Morris
case that the question of
whether aid in dying should be
available to New Mexico
residents is a question for the
legislature medical aid in dying
is not constitutionally required
it is not constitutionally
protected prohibited The New
Mexico courts are going to
respect whatever decision the
legislature makes this year I
was proud to sit next to Senator
Stefanics twenty six years ago
when she introduced the first
medical aid in dying bill end of
life options bill and I'm proud
to sit next to centers to panic
said representative Armstrong
and Senator o'neill and Senator
Hamblen and and Representative
Hochman Vigil this year to
virtually sit next to them this
year when they present the bill.
I'll well once again and we have
learned a great deal during the
intervening twenty six years
we've learned a great deal from
the hearings and from the
discussions at those hearings
and I am really confident when I
say that today you are
considering the most carefully
crafted and thoughtfully written
bill that deals with this
subject that has been introduced
in any state legislature in the
United States now it's always
possible to find a quibble with
some part maybe the forty eight
hours should really be twenty
four hours or maybe it should be
really seventy two hours but
what you have before you is a
compromise a series of
compromised compromises made
over the last quarter of a
century and today we know that a
strong majority of New Mexicans
of all ethnicities and religions
support aid in dying we know
that house bill forty seven has
been unambiguously and very
strongly endorsed by the
Albuquerque journal and the
Santa Fe New Mexican we know
that aid in dying has been
supported by city council
resolutions up and down the Rio
Grande a including a unanimous
bipartisan resolution of the
Albuquerque city council just a
couple of years ago.
let me say just a few words
about terminology because it's
so important in this area we are
here you are here today to
discuss medical aid in dying
which is a process where an
adult resident of New Mexico who
is both competent and terminally
ill and was fully informed on
the risks benefits and
alternatives and who can take
the medicine himself can request
that a provider rate a
prescription for a medication
that if taken will result in a
peaceful death and advocates on
both sides used charged language
I know that those of us who've
been supporting this bill for so
many years sometimes referred to
it as death with dignity which
was the term originally used
when Oregon passed its act but
we all support dignity and I
realize that all of us on both
sides of this issue on all sides
of this issue support dignity
and that dignity but opponents
of medical aid in dying
sometimes called euthanasia and
just like it's unfair for us to
refer to this is death with
dignity it is unfair for them to
call it euthanasia euthanasia is
formally prohibited by the
statute and it would remain
prohibited in New Mexico if this
statute were to pass similarly
the bill has nothing to do with
suicide whether it's assisted or
otherwise suicide is where a
person here rationally attempts
to solve a temporary problem
with a permanent solution.
In eighty nine a competent adult
who is near death attempts to
solve a real problem.
In the only dignified way that
is available and instead of
leaving family members the raft
and guilt ridden as is so often
the case with suicide medical
aid in dying allows family
members to face the M. together
supporting each other it brings
families together without guilt
and without recrimination when
that is what families needs most
as anyone who's ever been
touched by suicide knows there
are many good reasons to outlaw
assisted suicide but there's not
a single reason that we outlaw
assisted suicide that is also a
reason for outlying aid in
dying.
Now the US Sanchez at summarized
all of the safeguards that are
included in this bill the
drafters of the bill have
learned from other states which
have passed similar legislative
session and they've left out
some of the roadblocks to
medical aid in dying that really
protected no one but made it
effectively impossible for
people who wanted and needed
medical aid in dying to get it
and I'll let me just mention
once again the three most
significant differences from the
other statutes and the ones that
I think of our Jerry been
explained the reasons for those
differences first the fifteen
day waiting period which has had
the effect of making it
impossible for people that get
access to aid in dying in
California it seems that about
half of the people who seek aid
in dying end up not being able
to use it because the fifteen
day requirement in reality take
something more like forty five
or fifty days on average in
California and half of the
people died before they have an
an opportunity to actually use
the law it makes a lot more
sense to have eight period after
the formal process is gone
through in a forty eight hour
period seems to be an effective
period in other states that
include that forty eight hour
waiting period the second this
statute broadens the scope of
providers who can be involved in
some circumstances as
Representative Armstrong said it
provides a role for physician
assistants nurse practitioners
and for purposes of psych psych
evaluations only to licensed
mental health professionals
always requires a position
however and MD or a DO before
aid in dying can actually a bit
before prescription for aid in
dying medication can actually be
filled and finally this statute
has a conscience clause that is
designed not only to protect.
A patients but also family
members and providers the
statute contains what I think is
the strongest conscience clause
in the country no individual
provider is ever required to
participate in a practice that
the proper provider believes is
morally wrong on either side it
has a very vigorous conscious
quant conscience clause and it
protects those who don't want to
participate and it also protects
those who do want to participate
not only from formal actions of
the state but also by actions
from Y. syncing boards from the
hospital from insurance
companies and from other
agencies medical aid in dying
fits particularly well within
the established New Mexico
health law traditions that have
made our state a national leader
in healthcare decision making
one that's been copied by many
other states.
Those traditions recognize two
fundamental principles and we
just and by mentioning those
first New Mexico recognizes the
value of cultural diversity and
the diversity of religious
values among all its citizens
that diversity is a positive
value in New Mexico and I'm
really proud of that second
there is a strong libertarian
streak that says each one of us
as human as a human being gets
to decide what medical care we
will get that is a question for
individuals that is not a
question for the government.
Thanks so much for your time and
your energy considering this
bill tonight.
Thank you and we have doctor
Steve caning.
Mr chair RTZ Pino senators and
guests good afternoon I'm doctor
Stephen Koenig and I very much
appreciate the opportunity to
present a medical perspective
about medical aid in dying.
I've had the pleasure of knowing
many of you New Mexico has been
my home for the past forty five
years it's where I did all my
post graduate training as a
physician and we're I practiced
medicine as a phrenologist
caring for patients with kidney
disease many home I got to know
well over a period of many years
I'm retired now but dealing with
death and dying was very much
part of my professional life.
You just heard Aaron's
incredibly moving story.
Our hope how grateful she would
be for the possibility of being
controlled the most difficult
time of her life.
I'd like to share with you
another short story involving
medical aid in dying that had a
great influence and why I'm here
with you this evening.
A few years ago I came across an
essay written by a fellow named
Greg.
That began with the provocative
title good bye cruel world but
not just yet.
You see Greg had been diagnosed
two years earlier with stage
three lung cancer that was
treated with radiation and
succeeded in getting him into
remission.
Here's what he wrote.
I was hopefully be around
another few years well it was
discovered last month that the
cancer has come back with a
vengeance now it's stage four.
The consensus of my treating
physicians is that I have forty
six months left on this mortal
coil.
But I'm happy I am shattered out
and shouted from the rooftops
happy as a resident of
Washington state I have the
legal right to look cancer in
the face and say you don't get
to dictate the time and manner
of my death I do.
Grade then went on to describe
the procedures you would have a
the following several weeks to
allow his lungs to function a
bit longer so that quote I
should remain healthy enough to
enjoy my July going away party
healthy enough to walk in the
garden with dozens of friends
and family.
Healthy enough to share good
food good beer and good
memories.
And at the end of the evening to
bid farewell to my friends that
retired to the bedroom drink my
cocktail and fall asleep.
In the loving embrace of my sons
and their mother.
He added.
I implore you to advocate and
fight for aid in dying
legislation death with dignity
should be a universal
fundamental right no state
should have the power to dictate
how much suffering you and your
loved ones must indoor as you
approach the end of life.
We're really got my attention
was an attached pull that
although informal and
unscientific reflected the
opinion of a rather large
community who reads the blog
we're Greg's essay was posted a
contentious and thoughtful
community that seldom agrees
overwhelmingly and much of
anything.
And one thousand two hundred and
twenty seven votes ninety seven
percent voted that people with
terminal disease should be able
to choose the time and matter of
their death.
Ninety seven percent.
Medical aid in dying is not
suicide as you just heard from
eloquent the other good
discussion by Dr Schwartz and is
not a decision that death is
preferable to life.
Suicide indeed means a choice of
life over death but medical aid
in dying makes no such choice.
Terminally ill patients are not
choosing death medical aid in
dying only provides a choice of
how death that is imminent will
occur.
Here's the crux of the medical
issue positions of always
recognized the food that relief
of suffering is a fundamental
part of our quality and of
course there is the ages old
admonition to do no harm.
In recent years the profession
has been able to use ever
improving tools and treatments
to very successfully alleviate
physical pain in the
overwhelming majority of
patients with severe and
terminal illnesses.
The traditional argument has
been why should be participate
in bringing about death if we
can really suffering isn't that
doing harm.
The problem is that these
assumptions are incomplete and
miss understand what it means to
do no harm.
Suffering is not only about
paying.
Senator emotional suffering and
emotional pain or just as
important and just as powerful.
The fact is that there are many
patients for whom not being able
to be confident of being in
control of their destiny of how
and when and where and with whom
they will die of their terminal
illness imparts emotional
suffering and pain that can be
every bit is decimating as
physical pain.
Simply knowing that they're in
control provides excuse me
provides immense relief.
In fact data shows that about a
third of the patients who have
received the cocktail never
elect to use it.
But one hundred percent of those
patients are enormously relieved
and much more at peace knowing
that they had the option.
As a physician I am strongly
supportive of HB forty seven I
am convinced that this is not
only that this is in accordance
with the most sacred covenants
of our profession but is
precisely what it means to be
compassionate at the most
difficult time of the patient's
life.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to talk with you
this evening.
Mr chair we will stand for
questions and for comments from
the public.
Thank you very much Senator
Representative senators and
representatives and expert
witnesses.
Here's how we're going to do
this because of the the late
hour because of the.
Large number of people who
contacted us on both sides of
this issue I have over twenty
five names of people who want to
speaking against this bill and
over forty names of people who
want to speak in support of this
bill.
We're gonna we're gonna set a
time limit we have a clock into
rural pose said Clark.
Fifteen minutes three side in
this issue.
I will go down the list I'm
gonna try to focus initially at
least on those the people who
signed up as representatives of
organizations and keep in mind
the total amount of time
available for your opposition or
your support is fifteen minutes
so if you go on for five you you
actually limited to several
people from being able to to use
any time at all.
I'll try to give you a little
lead so you know you're coming
up next you can fund mute
yourself and be ready to start
speaking the soon as the
previous speaker is finished.
So we start with those who are
opposed to Senate bill that we
house bill forty seven and we'll
start with the The New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
Steve around hello he's going to
be followed by Kolton Miller of
the New Mexico coalition against
assisted suicide.
Hello are you there.
Okay well.
I don't see him so less if he
comes on we'll we'll we'll give
him a chance.
Kolton Miller of the coalition
against assisted suicide
followed by Maryland goals in
the disability rights education
and defense fund so Mr Miller.
Hello can you hear me OK yes.
Great some good evening Sir
chair and members of the
committee on thank you for your
time and attention and for
making my education possible as
you said my name is called
Miller I grew up in Dona Ana I'm
a medical student here at UNM
and I'm committed to serving the
people of the state.
This founder of a parent
organization of compassion and
choices said that this is
ultimately not about money this
is ultimately about money and
not about choice.
The idea is that it's cheaper to
encourage someone to kill
themselves and to care for them
when they need it most.
This removes their freedom and
it will ultimately hurt our
state.
When a patient presents when the
provider presents this as an
option it takes away a patients
free choice.
Why most patients fear that that
they are becoming a burden to
their loved ones.
This recommendation only
amplifies these very real
concerns and fears and pressures
vulnerable patients to not
thanks really about their death.
So the answer to this isn't a
prescription the answer to this
is what I call community that.
An effective supportive care not
death thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Miller so now we
have Merioles golden falls
invite Joseph marine of the
patients rights action fund.
Marilyn golden thank you Mr
chair.
we oppose H. B. forty seven but
because if this bill becomes law
some people's lives will be
ended without their consent your
mistakes and abuse not all but
some will be that no safeguards
have ever been enacted or even
close that can prevent this
outcome fully
also there's a deadly mix
between are broken profit driven
health care system and
legalizing this practice which
will immediately become the
cheapest so called treatment if
insurers deny or even merely
delay expensive life sustaining
care the person will be steered
towards hastening their deaths
will insurers do the right thing
for the cheap thing.
Also palliative sedation is a
pain free option to people who
are dying making what HB forty
seven offers unnecessary and I
yield my rest of the time to
subsequent speakers thank you.
Thank you miss those marines
followed by migratory.
Well I'm not sure that I guess
is must see most voters who
represents church of Jesus
Christ of latter day saints.
The doctor masamoto to so we'll
with Joseph marines.
Are you there Joseph.
Yes thank you Mr committee
chaired our committee members my
name is Joseph Reina
cardiologists practicing in
Baltimore Maryland with over
twenty years of experience
caring for thousands of
patients.
I ask you to oppose H. B. forty
seven which would legalize
assisted suicide because it
represents dangerous and
misguided public policy violates
many basic principles of patient
safety and medical ethics and
does little to address the needs
of patients with advanced
illnesses and disabilities
assisted suicide is not medical
care it has no basis in medical
science practice for tradition
and states the past assisted
suicide laws very few positions
are willing to protest the
lethal drugs used in assisted
suicide is never been
scientifically tested and the US
FDA has never approved any drugs
for this purpose the drug
cocktails used for assisted
suicide have been empirically
derived from performing
on controlled unscientific on
regulated unethical experiments
on people using combinations of
cheap generic drugs sometimes
with terrible results the law
can be routinely violated
because it relies entirely on
self reporting with broad legal
immunity given to physicians no
witnesses to consumption of
drugs falsification of death
certificates no routine audits
investigation or supervision by
an independent safety monitoring
board HB forty seven also
compels participation of
physicians in New Mexico due to
a right to know and mandatory
effective referral provisions
which are not present in any
other assisted suicide laws in
the US.
HB forty seven provides a new
license for doctors to violate
basic principles of medical
ethics to experiment upon and
take the lives of from the rural
patients with broad legal
immunity and no real oversight
or accountability this
perversion of the prescribing
power that society entrusted
positions it does not give any
patients new rights and takes
away many legal protections I
ask you to support high quality
palliative hospice care and pain
management programs and not this
bill thank you.
Thank you doctor marine next we
have Micaela torrez also drive
committee with the church of
Jesus Christ of latter day
saints and all.
He will be followed by by the
state run health who has joined
us now go ahead.
Dr Torrez.
Let's go to Steve run has are
you are you there do you can run
a.
Yes Mr chair can you hear me
yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
public comment my name is taken
Steve Rangel I'm the associate
director for the New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops.
And we're opposition your house
bill forty seven.
Doctor assisted suicide opens
the possibility of human error
just as it does for the death
penalty if there's a chance that
a person would be killed we
didn't choose to take their life
at that time and it's called
murder the data is clear that we
have health care and hospice
care to do with pain.
If we're not willing to provide
health care health care and
hospice for everyone.
And we have no business writing
prescription drugs to kill.
We should be talking about
making healthcare available to
everyone so they don't have to
choose death.
Elder abuse is considered a
major health problem in the
United States with federal
estimates that one in ten elder
persons are be used.
Placing lethal drugs into the
hands of abuse generates an
additional major wrist to elder
persons.
The church believes in a
consistent F. of a life from
concession to natural death.
On a personal note my mom has
been on hospice for over four
years now.
When she was first placed on
hospice the doctors informed us
that she would probably not make
it for six months.
By the grace of god she is still
with us today.
I ask you to vote no the house
bill forty seven thank you thank
you.
Then we have
John Kelly the second thoughts
he'll be followed by a little
more the right to life committee
of New Mexico Mr Kelly.
That
thank you.
My name is John Kelly I am the
director of second balls
Massachusetts disability rights
advocates against assisted
suicide we are disable
progressives United against
legislation and cultural
messages but it's better to be
dead and disabled I am a poster
boy for better dead than
disabled because people describe
me as paralyzed from the neck
down.
All the reasons out in Oregon of
for our non pain related the top
five our description of my life
depending on others for my care
not being entirely content but I
love my life is full of meeting
and connection with the
outrageous Freddie state
government to declare a law that
depending on others for care
makes life fun dignified lack of
support which makes more than
half of people and legalize
state feeling like a burden
that's not a choice bioethicist
Thaddeus pope projects will be
expanded to disabled non
terminal
and then New Mexico should know
that it's only one demographic
pushing for this bill the
professional managerial class
and wealthier white people
specifically just about everyone
using a lot of California and
Colorado is non white Hispanic
ninety four eighty nine percent
respectively Q. four and twenty
thirteen show that of black and
Latino communities opposed by
two to one and the same of was
found in the Massachusetts
referendum in twenty twelve.
These laws are a form of white
cultural supremacy and should be
opposed thank you.
Thank you Mr Kelly
next we go to fill my heart of
the right to life committee and
then Alex is chasing Berg using
Asian prevention coalition.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee you hear me yes.
I can remember many gonna focus
with almost done with those my
office before you close the
house one list on the New
Mexico coming almost total the
Ms yes Mr plus that it's not
going a on
the yup with that movie online
almost in a given market must
know if you think you know state
almost more let us know that yet
I am a couple more executive
director for right to life
committee of New Mexico here in
New Mexico we take care of our
mothers fathers sons and
daughters when they're suffering
we walk along side of them as a
we compassion really means it is
our privilege to be with them
until they either get better or
pass on we do not abandon them
at the time that they need us
the most and we do not encourage
them to die sooner by taking
their own lives or dispositive
because their lives matter I
slipped my my mom's bedside days
and have my finger on her post
as our heart's not beating with
that hard on me you bet but I
would do it again please vote no
on H. two forty seven.
Thank you miss more no in LA she
numbers of the euthanasia
prevention coalition to be
followed by
Michelle drain of care net.
Michelle drain of Karen and.
Okay how about Frank Baker R.
O..
I know I've seen is name.
Carrero there.
Can you hear me yes.
Yes you use in Asia in countries
of at a loss for for a long time
shows it it covers a wider and
wider group of people as time
goes on expanding even to
children.
Like the Netherlands and Belgium
we have euthanasia laws for for
awhile as she's our government
starting to change guidelines
you.
to permit euthanasia of children
under twelve without even
changing the law.
Legalization bills are always
expanding like waiving the
requirement for just a second
assessor when the person
requesting assistance to size
elderly in a nursing home the
unit euthanasia lobby likes to
say euthanasia gets rid of fears
of dying a bad debt some
euthanasia victims end up
suffering six to nine hours or
some cases three days some of
these drug cocktails burn them
out causing great pain.
In the Netherlands and Belgium
there's is a feeling that these
things are out of control your
handicapped child may have it
decided for them that the
quality of life is now not
adequate the tears wet pressure
put on them to use nicer child
in those countries you now see a
few children under the twelve
with handicaps.
Well technological problems are
also targeted the pioneer you
Senator Holland.
And it's the to a steep rise in
the last seven years with people
with psychological illnesses.
We'll have fears of dying a bad
debts they already go to hospice
programs that may help the dying
have copies for passion that
held this family and friends.
When people.
If you notice speaking please
mute your so.
We seem to have lost Mister
Carrera proves son does to be
followed by Romero Rivera.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is herb
Santos junior and I was asked to
present to you today in regards
to the immunity provisions found
an HB forty seven.
Becoming a lawyer I was a social
worker and as a social worker I
saw first hand how the socially
and economically disadvantaged
people not adequately protected
by the law this motivated me to
become a lawyer we have seen in
my thirty years approximate law
representing people who have
been harmed by negligent and
sometimes intentional misconduct
is that there is always attempt
to avoid responsibility and
accountability this is
multiplied when there is basic
immunity provisions this is why
you folks as stewards are
protecting your constituents
must ensure that legislation
does not include language that
could allow for non compliance
with the law result in the
victimization of the most
vulnerable simply put community
fosters negligent conduct HB
forty seven is currently right
with the new unity provision
which could allow intentional
and negligent breaches without
accountability good faith
compliance is a vague term of
art used in contract law it is
routinely subject to
interpretation
it will be used as a shield by
doctors from being held
accountable immunity will also
result in denying citizens of
this state access to justice it
is one more attempt to erode the
protections of the seventh
amendment of the U. S.
constitution which our founding
fathers unanimously agreed was
paramount to protect the
citizens United States and also
the bill of rights section
twelve of the New Mexico
constitution.
This way to safeguard the most
vulnerable from unacceptable
conduct it's not have any
immunity provision whether is
this law or any other lost over
to what you folks are
considering H. before with
abolishing qualified immunity of
police officers and government
officials every stakeholder in
this piece of legislation has
immunity in their actions as
long as they follow the rules if
they don't follow the rules may
harm another person should be
held accountable to the full
six.
Cards for the public I
respectfully submit there should
be no community provisions thank
you for the opportunity offer my
thoughts on this issue thank you
Mr Santos then we'll go to
Romero Rivera to be followed by
Anthony Vigil.
Is Romeo Rivera was.
Okay the hills we followed by
too many but I would.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members yes I am Anthony Vigil
professor of surgery and
practicing in New Mexico for
twenty three years smooth
talkers are attempting to a
swallows your consciences they
claim in the H. B. forty seven
program is not suicide we
opponents would love to be in
favor of aid in dying just as
Mother Teresa was the need help
compassion love but we know
suicide when we see it.
You're alive one minute you
voluntarily and intentionally
take one hundred second all
pills to end her life the next
minute or three days later you
are dead.
The second all did not ramp up
the cancer and cause death the
second all that you took
voluntarily maybe you
unconscious and stopped
breathing and you died
intentionally that is suicide
period.
The expert witnesses eloquently
teach that two plus two equals
five that is taking second all
intentionally is somehow not
suicide I know that all of you
good senators know that two plus
two equals four so do the good
citizens of New Mexico.
Big brother knows that two plus
two equals five.
Mr chair think that Pat center
was mentioned and he appears to
be ready.
Many come out of it if we have
time we'll go to has.
Thank you very much I am also a
physical therapist you've worked
in the queue Care with oncology
in terminal cancer patients as
well as
With children or terminal
first off I just want to state
Aaron in Debra.
I'm going to pay for both of you
because I love you as a sister
and you know you guys are going
through a lot I want you both to
know that we are more than
questions in that when we die
it's not the end
I'm here today to remind
everybody that.
That sense of control when we
die.
And that fear to controlling
whether when I go over twenty it
doesn't need to true happiness
that happiness is fleeting when
we accept life in life we all
die that's part of accepting
like meeting last that you find
true joy
and we're able to cherish it
with all that we have but I will
need
Thank you.
That we have sent to.
We'll go to
I'm sorry Megan Smith.
Thank you chairman I am do can
have some of thank you for this
time well whether lost sister
and several other relatives died
with dignity and with minimal
pain and help from pelleted care
and hospice and their loved ones
to help them number family spent
precious time together in an
environment that brought our
family together and the best in
people I experienced a woman who
lived alone with her only
relative a disabled daughter the
woman became very ill and the
daughter was condensed was
convinced the call hospital.
Care she is a disabled woman
should that's and the hospice
nurse came in and made a
unilateral decision that she
would withhold
food and hydration from the
woman and the woman became
extremely ill well found out
about the woman and called me to
come in and and evaluate the
situation I called your doctor
he had no reason
to be in this condition.
I immediately called an
ambulance that are sent to the
emergency room.
We gave our hydration and
nutrition and she recovered and
gave her only daughter R.
eighteen more precious months of
her life and might be here is
that this kind of bill would
have given them this hospice
nurse all rights to let this
woman by.
When we were without dying drugs
rather than withholding program
water in addition I'm worried
that
by setting this example we
already have a high rate of
suicide in our state and we were
just incredulous.
To all.
Percent suicide thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr Senator okay
reviews so it's in time for the
opponents of the bill no open
fifteen minutes back on the
clock do the same thing I'll try
to go with people are indicating
they represent organizations we
cover as many views as possible
So I'm gonna start with Caroline
Yanni of the New Mexico
psychological association
followed by Glenn Buckland of
compassion and choices.
Thank you Mr chair my name is Dr
Catalina Yeni I'm in New Mexico
licensed psychologist and as
president of the New Mexico
psychological association.
The New Mexico psychological
association board approved the
following position state.
The New Mexico psychological
association supports the dignity
and worth of all people.
We support people's right to
self determination and are aware
of and respect cultural and
individual differences in that
self determination.
Our organization supports the
role of psychologists in the
Elizabeth white field and the
flight options act our role as
psychologist may include
assessing a patient's decisional
capacity.
It may also include therapeutic
conversations about engines
values and their advance care
plans.
In New Mexico psychological
association supports Elizabeth
white field and of life options
at.
Thank you thank you.
We'll go to Glen Buckland of
compassion and choices in except
for him will be Jim Jackson the
city disability rights New
Mexico.
Thank you can you hear me yes.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm going back Cohan
from Rio Rancho New Mexico here
in support of HB forty seven.
I made the decision earlier
today to stop all treatment for
my cancer I've been in salvage
therapy since September which
means everything else we've
tried has failed I've lost all
durability and have chosen not
to continue after twenty three
months of chemotherapy.
When HB forty seven is passed it
won't be available for me I'll
be gone by then.
So why am I here because I have
compassion for everyone with a
similar experience to money.
You all have compassion to.
I'm asking you to expand your
compassion for those with a
terminal illness having control
over how we die alleviates
tremendous concern is we don't
know how painful or
uncomfortable are deaths may be.
And one day all of you will die
to.
Today we have a real opportunity
to create a better passed
through death for the many yet
to come.
Please vote for house bill forty
seven thank you.
Thank you.
Jim Jackson and disability
rights New Mexico to be followed
by Joyce powers of New Mexico
nurse practitioners council.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of Jim Jackson
registered lobbyists for
disability rights New Mexico
this is a controversial issue in
the disability community because
of historical abuse and
mistreatment discrimination and
the general devaluation of the
lives of people with significant
disabilities in our society
disability rights New Mexico
recognizes this troubling
history but also recognizes the
fundamental importance to people
with disabilities of self
determination the ability and
the authority to make choices
for yourself about one's life
and wants to.
Disability rights New Mexico is
new is neither promoting or
opposing this bill but we do
want to acknowledge and
appreciate that the sponsors of
work closely with us to address
concerns that we have rates and
we are now confident that there
are adequate safeguards in the
bill would ensure that this
option will only be available to
individuals with disabilities
who are at the end of their
lives and you have clearly shown
the capacity to fully understand
the issues that are making this
decision voluntarily without
coercion and we thank you for
your consideration.
Thank you Jim
so we had a choice powers of the
nurse practitioner council to be
followed by a Nancy Nancy eight
L. of the end of life options a
coalition.
Is our reserve.
Okay so we go to Nancy a bill to
be followed by Susan McCarthy
the end of life option.
Mr chair judge powers was on
mute she's here
Go ahead.
I just can't see I can see her
but I don't know if she knows to
to use our self.
Right now.
Yes go ahead.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Doris
powers I'm here representing in
New Mexico nurse practitioners
council are as you all are aware
of your practitioners providing
a significant amount of primary
care within this general state.
And we are here to support our
H. P. forty as.
I personally have a lot of
either.
Both personal and professional
examples which we've already
heard of this.
Very nice ones up till now
this provides another option of
it is certainly not mandatory
for anyone nor should it be of
but it is another option so
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
Mr hours then see a bill to be
followed by Susan McCarthy of
the end of life option.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Nancy a
bell I'm retired social worker
and I've lived in Santa Fe for
thirty years twenty twelve my
brother in law Ron was diagnosed
with the galloping leukemia my
husband and I were on the
speaker phone when we heard his
oncologist in Oregon tell him he
had only days or weeks to live
and that he might have emerged
to death but Ron had an option
that none of us here in New
Mexico yes have and he chose
that option a gifted writer Ron
got to ride the last page of his
life story rather than
hemorrhaged to death in an
ambulance or an ER or an icy you
wrong got to died peacefully on
his own terms in his own bed
surrounded by those he loved
what a gift the state of Oregon
again our family thank you.
Thank you.
so then into Susan McCarthy to
be followed by Jorge Otero.
This is.
Okay Mister of federal hill road
to be followed by
Once Polis one so.
I can hear yes hi good evening
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is totally so
that no software engineers
working in Albuquerque and
lifelong New Mexican.
In twenty eighteen my father Bob
local hard working honorable man
and devout Catholic that's the
away from metastatic cancer in
his bones the last months of his
life experience extreme pain
weakness in his arms and legs
not a vomiting painful
constipation and incontinence
while in hospice we had
conversations where he would say
yes.
This is speech or this is not
living.
Or I wish there was something I
could do to just.
Make this item.
As a Catholic I was raised to
respect other people's faiths
and not judge others.
One to one walks in others shoes
one should not stand in the way
of this compassion option being
available for someone else why
there for ask you Mr chair and
committee members to support
house bill forty seven and give
New Mexicans the option to have
a compassionate and dignified
death thank you thank you Mr.
Poems when so to be followed by
net dean.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
columns once open I'm from Santa
Clara pueblo while working as a
hospice social workers there
were a few patients including my
own mother bring us one so who
talked to me about aid in dying
they wish New Mexicans have the
same rights and of life as
people in other states have
those who desire to aid in dying
or not in the majority but felt
their voices should be heard
they were not depressed or
suicidal but knew their lives
are coming to an immediate and
they were receiving very good
hospice palliative care but
wanted to have a choice they
were not interested in how many
more days they could let but
rather the quality of days they
could share with their loved
ones we do not know how many
folks on hospice actually user
comfort care medicines in the
middle of the night all alone or
choose to stop eating and
drinking in order to hasten
their debts this bill is not
about forcing anyone to do it is
something they do not want to do
or offending anyone it is about
choice the ability to make a
personal decision that each of
us can we make for ourselves I
urge this body to pass this bill
thank you thank you Mr.
The nineteen to be followed by
it NEC of them.
Thank you for hearing us the
state in my name is that do.
And I live with the TBI I've
lived for of.
Fifty seven percent.
I'm sorry I accidently muted
you.
Thank you can you hear me now
yes thank you.
I stand in support of House
Bill.
Sorry forty seven
living well and dying well are
separable the ingredients are
the same.
And with courage and intention a
well lived life can flow
naturally into that that that
honor state and reflects the
values and beliefs of a
lifetime.
I think you missed me saying I'm
sixty five years old and lift
percent fifty seven percent of
my my life with a disability.
It is my belief in support of
this bill that the layers of
protection are intact to create
protections for all parties most
of all the patient this is not
assisted suicide this is an and
the of life option.
This is a matter of choice.
Thank you having my father in my
arms when he suffocated from
lung cancer that he did not know
we have
yes suffocated.
Being one of the first my sorry
I was the service that my aunt's
being a victim of rape and
strangulation because of.
How are that family members had
they were able to pull the plug
on her during that Karen Quinlan
case.
Just January twenty fifth
attending someone side when they
did not have the option of
medical.
Medical aid in dying.
And it took four days that it
did not have to suffer thank you
so much for supporting this
bill.
And for your time this evening.
It is a carefully considered and
carefully crafted piece of
legislation thank you thank you.
Do need them followed by Diane
make cash.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Danny
second I'm I work at a New
Mexico nonprofit but I'm here to
night solely in my personal
capacity.
are you gonna New Mexican born
and raised in the Misia valley
near Los crucis and Misia I have
supported this bill as a
Catholic as a person of color
for many years in my personal
capacity.
but we're chair it's a little
bit different.
my father passed on February
twenty second twenty twenty one
of COVID.
New Mexico and our country has
been ravaged by the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
Some of our loved ones go
quickly.
Some go very fast I tried faxing
heart attacks and strokes many
of our loved ones Dr.
My father was transferred to the
ICU euro.
Thanks to be taken off the
ventilator because he was in so
much pain.
So many of our loved ones are
going to suffer through the side
effects of COVID should they be
the long callers who are living
with symptoms for months and
even years I hope that you would
have this compassionate option
when they make decisions at the
end of their life.
to to support this.
Thank you thank you.
Diane my cash to be followed by
seventeen to.
I just want to share that my
family has experienced first
hand the sorrow and anguish of
seeing a terminally ill family
member with unmanageable
unbearable and unrelenting pain
violently and as a last resort.
And we.
I'm sorry I I'm back on on mute
I was telling about my brother
in law
he had unrelenting unbearable
pain.
And as a last resort he took the
manner and timing of his death
into his own hands by putting a
gun to his head and pulling the
trigger.
It was an incredibly mentally
strong man throughout his life
this was not the hopeless after
the desperate I'm thinking man
he took matters into his own
hands because he had no options
David is there better his wife
deserve better we all deserve
better I hope that I will have
option should I need them at the
end of my life I wish David had
options at the end of his this
is not about assisted suicide
this is about compassionate care
in the process of buying thank
you.
Thank you David seventeen
federal to be followed by
Dr center ten.
Mr Chairman we can tell I'm
proud to serve our state of New
Mexico as long term care
ombudsman for over twelve
thousand residents and family
members across long term care
facilities in New Mexico.
Our office is in strong support
of this legislation two night or
three core reasons the first is
our duty as ombudsman to listen
to advocate and to further
expand the rights of residents
in New Mexico this bill provides
those three foundations it
provides a strong safeguards
that have witnessed requirements
that have physician requirements
that have a capacity requirement
that even has a conscience
clause as well we have a piece
of legislation here that is
focused on the economy of the
individual which is the core
function of a residence right to
choose their own medical care
plan and to not deviate from
that this is really important
legislation for so many reasons
of what you for tonight but the
strongest of what you should
hear and should continue to hold
our our is that this is about
the economy and dignity of your
fellow New Mexicans being able
to control their own medical
decisions and having the
capacity to do so thank you so
much thank you very much for
your time.
Thank yous
so Dr Sandra tend to be followed
by Erica gringrich.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Sam.
I'm a retired family physician
I've been present at birth at
yeah.
We no longer square a
Hippocratic oath to the gods and
goddesses nor do we protect
medical secrets we're now called
to listen to our patients that
teach important care your wife
will end of life options will
allow us to patients with all by
your request medications which
are like when it becomes
intolerable.
The qualified patients must be
certified six months or less of
white white right.
Reporter auspice Haynes relief
and all available modalities to
make life bearable when we do
not share or listen patients
sometimes resort to guns racers
or auto accidents this review is
your to hear and understand and
care legislature's called upon
to allow each of us the autonomy
to make our own decisions when
death is near it is a kindness
and caring for the patients and
for patients family thank you
for attending to this issue
please support hospital forty
seven thank you.
Thank you doctor can.
Congruence do we followed by
Adrian their.
Mr chair and members of the
committee wrote.
Can you hear me yes okay my name
is Dr Erica Gregory I'm a
professor at the school of
social work at New Mexico state
and before that I was a
geriatric social worker thank it
was in twenty seventeen when I
traveled with social work
students to Santa Fe and to
advocate for a similar bill.
and I remember feeling very
passionately them which which
stems from my work with
terminally ill patients that I
work with testifying to their
pain.
And their loss of peace and
control.
But my passion is different
today it's more personal I was
diagnosed with stage four cancer
when I was pregnant with my son
Iraq.
My cancer has spread to my bones
in November.
I'm gonna ask you today is to
let me and to let to let us
decide.
When the fight ends.
When the pain is too much.
And let me say goodbye in a
peaceful and meaningful way.
When the doctors agree and I can
make that decision in my last
week Thursday.
Not to suffer.
My family to allow us that
peace.
Thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
Adrian terror.
To be followed by.
Julian
Mr Mr chair and committee
members.
You hear me yes.
My name is Adrian there I'm from
Silver City and I have a story
about a good death because of
the option of medical aid in
dying in two thousand and two my
mother was dying unfortunately
her pain could not be controlled
but because she lived in Oregon
she could request a medication
to end her suffering for life
became intolerable on the day
she chose to die when she was
handed the medicine she started
drinking it as fast as she could
we need finished drinking she
had a little smile on her face.
She then died peacefully
surrounded by family this was
profound and the best thing was
that she was no longer in pain
and because it was legal it was
not lonely and scary the beauty
of this law is that when the
dying person get the
prescription they have peace of
mind because they have control
of the end of their life and
they need may even live longer
than they would have otherwise I
have been thankful that my
mother had this option eighteen
years ago.
In January I celebrated.
My mother's life on what would
have been her one hundred and
ninth birthday I still Mr please
vote yes for house bill forty
seven thank you thank you Mr
Julian include followed by
Catherine salicin.
Are you there Julian.
Catherine salicin to be followed
by Dr Judas Brennaman.
Thank you chairman Pino it's a
privilege to be able to speak
briefly as a former hospice
nurse and the founder of the A.
R..
Aids clinic here in Santa Fe
back in the mid eighties I have
been present at many deaths and
I have seen the ravages of the
suffering that can be
uncontrolled I the best
intentions of medical practice
so I speak on behalf of nurses
who have cared for their
patients with incredible
commitment and vigilance and for
the families that have had to
ensure deaths that could have
been different so please support
house bill forty seven.
Thank you very much.
Dr Judith Roman to be followed
by Dr Catherine Morris is there
sufficient time.
Thank you Mr chair I am Judith
Roman I am a retired emergency
physician and professor emeritus
from UNM and now a hospice
volunteer in the E. R. I saw
many terminally ill people.
Suffering including us on
hospice my parents were both on
hospice my father said it was
the worst in the battle of the
bulge might terminally ill
mother also had Gallup the Kenya
died weeks later without a
choice of that would medical aid
in our in dying to spend every
one of those last weeks in
mystery shortly lonely missing
my father's arms around for
waiting why.
In a nursing home jukebox we let
later he sees every night next
in diapers she couldn't eat or
drink followed by you sent this
nation activation leading to
physical restraints and
escalating that she spent her
last days sedated and
unconscious with excruciating I
wish my mother had options
please support this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
A few a few seconds left is Dr
Catherine Morris was.
Yes yes Sir I am please please
you'll be our last speaker all
right I'll see quickly thank you
so much Mister chairperson for
hearing this testimony I'm an
associate professor of surgery
and hi is this bill I hope the
following story will explain
why.
By the time I have met this
person practicing as a surgical
oncologist in Oregon and work
with thousands of cancer
patients she was the first to
ask me for medical aid in dying
and I certainly never would have
brought up the option myself.
And cared for her and her Markle
family for over a year when the
cancer recurred and she asked me
this question it was the most
difficult decision I've ever
made in a career challenging
choices and and I'm so thankful
that I said yes because of the
piece that I thought overcome
her when she received that
answer he told me now I have a
door I can open if I need to.
In the following months she
lived with an immense joy in
teller condition worsened
suddenly she told me at that
time Dr Jim I'm suffering I'm
going to use the medications as
Monday will you be there I was
with her and her family that
cold December evening and I
witnessed a fierce determination
to celebrate her life and her
family and to have a past
peaceful passing by exercising
her agency under the Oregon law
it was genuinely transcendent
and this is the grace that I
truly pray will extend
terminally ill mentally
competent patients in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you very much doctor
Morris.
Members of the committee that
that completes the public
comment and representatives of
Armstrong or Senators defendants
did you want to have any
Representative of comments or to
your right to the committee.
I'm.
Representative Marshall yeah Mr
chairman members of the
committee I just I just have one
one comment and.
Want to talk about this later
chair professor shorts can
expound but we've had for
decades.
In New Mexico the uniform health
care decision act and the
ability for and it you know
living wills herbal power of
attorneys you have to yeah.
Will I have to ask if you have
have a living will or end of
life
Actives and if you have a health
care decision maker and those
are for for.
Health care decision makers to
make decisions for you when you
can't make decisions for
yourself including life and
death decisions
refusing treatment stopping
treatment pulling the plug if
you will and that's a power
you've given to somebody else to
make those decisions for you and
that our our life just decisions
that's not what this is.
We don't give this power in this
act to anyone else.
You can't put it in your durable
power of attorney.
Not part of your health
directives this is the decision
you have to make for yourself
and carry out yourself.
And so I I just want to point
that out
Mr chair and committee members
we have allowed others to make
those health care decisions for
us this is about making your own
and at the end of your life so
with that
Mr chair I think we stand for
questions.
Senator Stefanics anything.
Now Mr chair well the stand for
questions.
The first is from Senator and a
guy it goes and then Senator
Schmedes.
Mr chair Senator Representative
thank you for the discussion
it's up definitely a
heartbreaking story.
Okay Representative Armstrong
and her daughter and my prayer.
But I do have a couple of
questions and it revolves round
a round of Representative
Armstrong was lasting our last
comments if if I understand
right.
No one in the family can
administer this is that correct.
Mr chair and senator
of this it must be able to be
taken by the individual
themselves.
Okay well thank you Mr Senator
what about if someone were to
coach how would you determine
that its the
person's own directive not my
talking me into.
And and if I do talk him into it
in the past could my brother use
that against me as more.
If you want.
Mr chair Senator at the big
repeat the beginning of your
question you think about.
Okay.
I think you said coast I'm sorry
so this does require an
individual to request it of
themselves.
To be by of the alternatives by
the physician and the health
care provider and if there is
any doubt that that person is
not making their own decisions
it can be referred to a licensed
agency mental health provider so
that if a physician saw a
hesitancy on somebody's part
because you thought they thought
it was being they were being
coached or coaxed into this they
could refer them on for further
discussions and evaluations but
the person just have to just
work themselves.
And then they are referred they
have to be evaluated first and
then referred to the second.
Professional.
Add to that
Mr chair and senator they have
to be evaluated by to providers
and they also the the
prescribing provider before
prescribing this has to be in
writing and witness to people
and at least one of those has to
be a totally disinterested our
party so you know I think we
have as many safeguards and
ensure as you can that you've
had a couple of professionals
and witnesses a firm that this
is a volitional choice.
Thank you for that Mister
chairman Senator Representative
that goes to my next question
then how long do you think that
process takes you have to
providers now to help.
Go through the process.
Well Mr chair in in our.
State there are definitely a
lack of health care providers
and so if a person has a
relationship with a physician
who is determined that they are
terminally ill that physician or
healthcare provider could
probably facilitate that meeting
of the next person but in some
areas of our state it might have
to be done through a tell us
second not a primary secondary
telehealth meeting and so first
a person has to have a terminal
illness diagnosis they have to
be evaluated before they
referred to the second person
before they would get to
prescription and then there's a
waiting period.
Thank you for writing notes as
I'm listening to you but and and
I appreciate that I really
appreciate the tunnel as well as
diagnosis from ended why
and this is my problem on the
bill
Years ago my father had been
considered termly ill and I took
two weeks off of work your is in
hospice.
Cared for and the whole time.
He took his last breath on my
lap and in those ten days that I
had him.
All of those fourteen days we
had a really really good time to
met grandkids that he never met
his kids came in to give their
condolences and make commands
ten years ago my mom was
diagnosed with cancer and it did
not sound like it's going to be
very good goes back to the
question on the coercion and
not.
In that discussion she did want
to be a burden to the family and
it was not an option we didn't
have it on the books but she
felt that if I can't take her
she got to go now.
Dr Linda Smith a lot of
Albuquerque did a great job.
And this past weekend we start
remodeling the house commuters
so that my mother can live
across the street from me
because the technology in in
Canada right now is take leaps
and bounds I know that my mom I
don't know how many years.
But she's got some productive
years that you spend with my
family Hermes her nephews
sisters live in the area and I'm
afraid that if we have this on
the books that ten years ago my
mother would take the option
just because she didn't want to
be a burden on me and and for
that reason just knowing what is
going on in my life all have to
stand in opposition to the bill
because I think once you put it
out there people are gonna think
to they're gonna be emotionally.
Hi a motion.
And in pain and they're gonna
take the least amount of you
know it it's going to be to them
the easiest route out.
But if my mother and Dawn done
that ten years ago she would
have missed ten years our lives
she is not always been without
paying.
But she's been a productive part
of our family want that all you
thank you Mr thank you senator
Senator committees to be
followed by Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair and and and
Representative.
In looking at this bill one of
the one of the first things I
look at.
When I look at any legislation
is is is equal treatment and are
we are we treating everybody
equally or are we are we kind of
you know picking winners and
losers economically or are we
are we are treating people just
verily and there's two
principles I I really
I really can't quite understand
why are are in the bill because
of an equity issue and I'd love
to discuss that with you briefly
one is the ability to self
administer.
My my my question is why is this
limited.
To only people that can self
administer the one of the
reasons I'm asking is because of
my background as a head and neck
surgeon have a lot of patients
who cannot they can't feed
themselves they cannot the
administer things to themselves
because of their anatomy or
because their dexterity and so
I'm I'm just wondering why.
Folks like that quadriplegics or
whoever it may be why they are
excluded from the bill.
I thank you Mr chair Senator for
the question I'm going to hunt
this to professional shorts.
Thank you Mister chairman
Senator committee thank you very
much for that question because
it's a really good question I
think an important one as well
it's been the self
administration provision has
been in the model officials say
the in every act every state
from the time that Oregon passed
the first statute now a quarter
of a century ago now now but
more than a quarter of a century
ago the original purpose and the
purpose still today is to assure
that in fact it is the patient's
decision to take the medication
and so the a presumption is that
if the patient must actually
physically take that medication
then you'll know that it is the
patients it's an additional
confirmation because of course
there are been several other
confirmations along the line
it's an additional confirmation
that it is the patient's
decision to take that medication
there are some people who have
suggested over the over time
that in fact the self
administration requirement be
removed there are some people
who believe that it does in fact
inappropriately exclude those
with a LS or with other
conditions where the patient
wouldn't be able to take the
medication and the thought was
that it's unfortunate that they
can not taken advantage of the
statute or that it's so
important to include yet another
confirmation of the fact that
it's the patients choice that
that is a reasonable compromise
and again we were taking a
compromise wrote on this portion
of this bill as in so many other
provisions in this bill and that
is what generally has been seen
as the compromise on that issue
but it's there because of the
additional confirmation of the
patient's choice.
Thank you thank you doctor
Schwartz and Mr chairman and
senator I
I I just once again with the
with the equal treatment issue
I can just you know and and and
we've had I've heard from a wise
people in this legislature about
we don't want to create.
Let we want to create litigation
we don't want to draft
legislation that will lead to
litigation and I'm just
wondering you know as a as a
person with that it could a
person with a disability when
they develop their own terminal
illness and they can't they
can't qualify I just wonder if
they would say look you are your
this legislation discriminates
against my disability the and I
have a lawsuit based on ADA so I
I don't want to get too much
into the weeds with that and I
don't want to speculate what a
court would say I just feel like
they have a pretty good plan
because they've been kind of
carved out in this in the in
this are excluded in in this
legislation also that's one
point in the second point that I
can't quite understand is the
the the the suffering piece you
know we can't we're never gonna
know whenever you'll be able to
put our self in someone else's
shoes and know how much they
suffer but suffering is not a
it's not a requirement
requirement in the bill we may
we may envision this bill being
utilized by people who are
suffering but just under guy
goes brought up.
you know.
People people suffer.
Without terminal illnesses.
And so I understand that once
again this bill only allows
people with a terminal illness
but we can still be excluding
people that would say look I'm
I'm really really suffering here
I have you know Lou Gehrig's
disease or or Parkinson's or
some some other more insidious
disease have locked in syndrome
had a severe stroke or they've
had severe quadriplegic and they
want to die but they're not
diagnosed with a terminal
illness and so they are also
excluded and the reason I bring
this up is I just don't see how
we can possibly she this
legislation in its current form
with the two arguments I
presented someone you know
people with disabilities are
excluded because of their
disability and then people with
extreme suffering
who don't have a terminal
illness but they say I'm I think
I think I might be suffering
just as much or more as other
person and because suffering is
not required once again this
this bill does legalize
altruistic suicide which is what
Senator Gallegos was was
referring to someone who yes
they have a terminal illness but
they're really not suffering the
reason and because we've given
an extra twenty to the
individual the reason they
choose to end their lives early
is financial and not because of
suffering that's completely
legal in this bill and it's been
well documented and other other
Societies throughout the years
so those are those are two.
Any questions they're very deep
questions I'm gonna take a long
time to discuss and then we can
have coffee sometime and discuss
these in in in person at some
point but I like to have those
two principles of who are
excluding I just don't see how
we can't reigned people with
disabilities and bring the
people that are suffering and
without turning this was I don't
I just don't see how we can scan
stand for that as a society over
the next you know whatever I ten
years I'm I have a couple
pointed questions Mr chair one
is you know if we see
legislation that's come across
this committee as well as the
public I see public affairs
committee in the house about
establishing residency and what
that means so on page one of
Senator could you tell me what
what is the definition of
resident of the state.
Mr chairman thank you for the
question of professor Schwartz
you want to answer that.
Four or I can get me I'm sorry
Representative let's go to the
law professor in.
What.
Was about how the residency
being established on page one
thank you very much and Mr chair
Senator committee that's a
really good question to that is
been there's been some
litigation in Oregon over
exactly that question it's been
an issue elsewhere over that
question because of course
residency is in part a
constitutional issue and there
is a federal constitutional
requirement that we provide
residency to those who actually
do take up living within the
state normally residency looks
at a series of different factors
so normally determine residency
you'd look at for example how
long someone has actually been
residing living in a state
whether or not someone had owns
property upon which they live or
owns LA has a lease in the state
whether or not someone has a
driver's license and in the
state
of course it is possible to move
it obtain residency it is
extremely difficult for people
who are terminally ill and
otherwise sec to do that but it
is imaginable that someone could
and I don't doubt that there are
some people who have moved to
Oregon to take advantage of the
death with dignity act in Oregon
but generally you would look at
a constellation of those factors
to determine whether someone is
in fact a resident of New
Mexico.
Yes and and but Mr chair and has
center Dr Schwartz I mean that
but my.
My I mean my dad that doesn't
respectfully that doesn't answer
my my question and I I've seen
built in a lot of bills come
across the table and they will
specifically say they'll say
you're you have you've been
accepted to a you know to go to
school higher institution that
council's residency you are are
pursing a home intend to retire
you you you're taking a full
time or part time job in New
Mexico so there there are it's
very easy to establish that
requirements to make maybe a
different side of a question is
the intent of the bill to allow
someone to with with a terminal
illness from a sale Paso took to
come over and be you know living
in New Mexico or you know for
for a week and and they would
still I mean with the plain
reading of this bill they say
Hey I'm living in New Mexico now
I plan to come here in my life
I'm living here another very
long but that that is certainly
a lot of this bill is not Mr
chairman and a Centers metes and
and that's a I think entirely
again entirely reasonable and
thoughtful question and I look
forward to that coffee sometime
down the road on the other US
subjects questions right.
but let me tell you that the
limitation US.
We go wire could put special
limitations on for example who
gets in state tuition when in
fact it defines residency for
tuition purposes but in terms of
providing people rights under
the law generally there's a
constitutional requirement and
the the US constitution allows
people to move from state to
state and so if you want to
become a resident of Nebraska or
Minnesota or any other state in
this country you can move there
and become a resident you don't
have to follow the amendment to
Minnesota can't say you have to
live here for a year before you
become a resident if you really
become a resident of Minnesota
and you're living in Minnesota
than constitutionally you must
be treated like a resident of
Minnesota for constitutional law
purposes for the rights to
exercise the rights under
Minnesota law and that's where
we are with this bill I think
that in fact there is simply no
other legal latitude allowed to
us I think it's extremely
unlikely that New Mexico will
become a center for for medical
aid in dying that hasn't
happened in Colorado for example
where this is been legal for
some time now it hasn't happened
in California it hasn't happened
in a why even where there might
be a greater motivation to move
for the love for the last part
of one's life I think that there
is that there's no practical
likelihood that that will ever
happen in any case as the
statutes written I think that
it's and it we goes as
constitutionally as far as the
state can go in limiting this to
residents of the state.
Mr chair Senator and and shorts
I mean it's it's very like I
said I've seen a lot of a lot of
legislation that that's very
that's defined this if we're
relying on the US constitution I
mean I I don't see anybody
litigating this and in federal
court let let let's just move on
I just want the committee to
note that this definition
resident is very loose it is not
just a someone that's lived here
their whole life for even for
you know a several month I mean
it can be very very it can be
interpreted very very loosely
and then my next question is I
want to bring up the the the
point that was brought about
telemedicine this bill can
certainly allow a Telemeds drive
that has a medical license in
New Mexico it doesn't live in
New Mexico that's another
concern of mine and I did Mr
chair have an amendment I wanted
to bring that the address that
issue if if the property to move
that amount right now.
You you can make it in the the
motion for to adopt an amendment
Senator thank you Mr chair I
like to collect the move
this ammendment in the the two
oh two numbers two two zero two
two eight point two for
discussion please and then you
provided in advance to the
committee yes Sir Mr chair.
Can you put the driver.
Thank you for the amendment.
Yes we have to see what it is
first rig and seconded until we
see it.
Thank you Mr no no is the other
one.
I just have to.
The other one.
Should say February twenty
eighth on the top.
Yes yes that's it thank you.
Mr chair so this this ammendment
was actually brought
I was drafting it in in two
different events but I thought
for time purposes we just
combined combined into one and
they they kind of address the
same overall concept.
Committees Senator doctors trees
amendment.
Also in at.
Okay.
Discussion you explain why you
why you're doing this Senator
yes Mr chair us to this this is
a this moment those two things
and I'd certainly be you know we
can parse them out but they're
very very simple one of the the
number one.
Choirs that the prescriber is
going to be a a physician or or
an osteopathic physician as an
MD or DO the reason I'm doing
that of course is because as
we've heard this committee
there's a lot of complexity of
care that goes in with the
signing someone's going to end
their life intentionally and I I
think it's appropriate I think
it is
You know I think it's the right
thing to do and I just have a
concern about bringing in a lot
of other health care providers
for making this sort of decision
and I I understand the argument
with the rural access but this
bill already requires that aces
positions is present in the
picture already so these are
people that that are going to
have have been involved in
already established Kerr with a
physician if I thought that the
establishment of care up with
position would have been it
would be impeded with folks this
the probably the bill could
stand as it is but I think
because we've already required
that a doctor be involved in the
patient's care all ready I don't
think it's too much to ask for
the actual prescriber is indeed
a physician and then lastly what
this at a just a few things
requires a doctor to be the
prescriber instead of allowing
nurse practitioners in the dust
and also requires an in person
examination
and then know where the bill
doesn't requiring in person
examination it does require as
I'm I met amending here on page
six it requires you to examine
the individual but Mr chairman I
can examine you right now you
know you're you're no need to
stress I don't hear any strata
you're nervous about K. H.
amount of give a symmetric face
I can I can examine you and
documents some sort exam to meet
the needs of this bill as
written but I just want to
ensure you know there something
specially with this end of life
especially for gonna ask
physicians to.
Now in my opinion go outside of
their medical license and can
try to determine that someone is
not being coerced and not having
undue influence you know that
that's not why we licensed
physicians in New Mexico but if
we are going to go ahead and do
that in this bill there are some
things you just can't do through
telemedicine and so this would
also just require that the
prescriber
instead of just doing a chart
review because all we're all
we're requiring now is is
essentially a chart review and
that they've they've determined
you know the they met these
criteria so so once again
requires only a doctor can
prescribe in there has to be in
in person in in person
examination at some point.
Senator you're the sponsor and
send representative Armstrong.
Chair that Mr chair that is an
unfriendly.
Questions.
the server and.
Now on the amendment the number
you have your hand still hello
from before and will come back
to is there anybody who wants to
speak on the amendment.
Okay everybody.
The Senator tone.
Just because of the.
Okay anybody else on the
amendment.
we have a motion to to amend the
bill was determined to be
unfriendly.
Did you want to have somebody
else speak to Senator.
All.
Mr chairman for vote okay.
Seeing no further discussion the
secretary will call the roll.
Also for.
Yes.
The first amendment right first
amendments are guidelines yes.
Thank all.
Senator Ingle.
I'm the amendment.
Your muted Senator.
Your new insurance will.
Your I think you know that
better yes
vote yes on the amendment.
No.
Yes.
Lopez do.
Thanks no.
Tallman.
No no.
So that amendment failed Senator
do you want to go to your second
one.
Mr chair
I I can't or I can I can go to
it now or I can get so I just
have a couple more questions but
okay for.
Okay thank you Mr chair
I appreciate everyone working
through this with me
I had another close very pointed
question and I I don't need to
know all of a long answer just
so we can keep keep going
because I know other people
questions on page eight.
and this really gets to a key
point about people that have a
mental health problems people
have depression so when a
physician sees a patient they
may not be they may not have any
experience with mental health
problems I think we all agree
with that they don't have the
training and and they they they
don't
they won't be able to really
recognize for clinically
diagnosed somebody with a mental
health disorder so this is
really important that I want I
want to understand someone
section for page eight it says
if an individual has a current
history of a mental health
disorder and so there there's
nothing in this bill to require
that evaluation by a mental
health professional all that has
to be done to meet and I'm just
reading the plain language of
the bill to satisfy the
requirements of this
legislation.
If they they only get referred
if they have a current history
of mental health disorders so my
question Mr chair Senator is
what safeguards in place to for
someone that has been on
diagnosed.
They have not they have been
misdiagnosed which by the way is
one of the leading causes of
medical malpractice claims in
America
if they miss a diagnosis and
it's not on their chart they
have a mental disorder is there
any safeguard in the bill that
would provide for mental health
professionals that point.
Mr chair Senator Schmedes thank
you we're going to go back to
professor Schwartz on that.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
a Centers committee first of the
bill was amended on the house
side so current was changed to
recent so the language was
changed and I think that that
was at the request of and and at
upon the recommendation of the
disability rights community so
we were looking to find
something that again would be a
compromise would make sure that
these cases really got hurt and
also recognize the rights and
the issues that you raise here
today this was the a compromise
that was reached I hope that you
find that satisfactory yes thank
you Mr chairman the doctor short
thank you know I I did see that
amendment it's just the the the
fact remains that that the the
prescriber all they have to go
off of is the chart and they
don't necessarily that they
don't have to perform any sort
of mental health screening
that's that's on the bill they
don't have to I think they're
good doctor they're going to
or or good Pete you know good PA
or somebody but they they they
of course have the option to do
that but it's not required and
the mental health evaluations
not required so my my point and
I I I I would hope I'm not gonna
ask the question because I want
to move on but I would hope that
the bill's sponsors would would
consider that that
it is very possible that someone
could come with a terminal
illness that once in their life
early that.
That a and a a diagnosis of
clinical depression could the
next and they can still meet the
requirements of this bill and
they will never see someone that
specializes in in mental health
that's a really important
provision of this bill and I I I
I appreciate including the
history of it but we're relying
on the fact that somebody made
an appropriate diagnosis and
that somebody didn't miss
inappropriately miss a diagnosis
of a mental health problem so
I'll move on from that I think
it's a really important point I
wish for in the bill special
mental health problems we have
in New Mexico and the lack of
access because people are not in
the coming having being being
screened these folks people I'm
very very concerned for me I
like to move on to the to that
amendment Mister chair if if I
could and the the the reason I'm
gonna bring this one.
Is the community peace and and
there was a gentleman that that
is common in the public about
this issue and I'm really this
is a great here to discuss this
topic community because this
committee has heard a lot of it
is for the medical malpractice
bills about immunity or about
liability for physicians what is
the standard for liability in
New Mexico and and of course the
bill we just heard just the
other day with with taking away
certain communities I I just
don't see it and I'm I'm in
section
C..
Get to it.
I'm in section nine now for
everyone at the immunities
provided I I
I don't see a reason why we are
providing immunities if this is
going to be considered just
another legal
thing to do under your your
medical license I I just don't
see why we are having immunity
and I'll tell you one story real
quick about this is a former
professor money had been
referred a patient that had
supposedly had cancer at the
back of the eye in this person
was going undergoing radiation
and all kinds of problems and
they ended up saying well we we
really is kind of second opinion
then doing surgery imported it
piece of gauze behind out from
behind the persons on the basis
actually never had cancer had
been misdiagnosed and even went
to the to the the the extreme of
having six weeks of radiation
therapy once again this bill
doesn't you know if it doesn't
that that person we've been
diagnosed with a terminal
illness
what are you know been carrying
around that that is easy Hey
your your cancer is not
responding at all not it's not
doing anything well the reason
why is because it actually
wasn't cancer and so I this is
the one example but in in the if
you look at the medical
malpractice act you're not gonna
see good faith standard in fact
one of the expert witnesses has
published on this that doctors
can actually misinterpret the
law and you can't just rely on
your own interpretation I can't
just say well I interpreted the
law this way and I acted in good
faith good it is indeed a very
vague term it it really means
honesty and the only time it has
been brought in a medical
malpractice on the plaintiff's
side there's a good faith
you know you know that there's a
good faith that malpractice has
been performed and because when
certain states did that it costs
a lot of problems is all this
amendment does and and why like
to to to move you know
Chair is all it does is it says
instead of a vague good faith
it's standard that would allow a
potentially bad actors to say
well I that was my understanding
of this bill and I I thought I
follow the rules I did good
faith they were honest but they
were negligent and so we we
can't confuse honesty negligence
in a court of law and it's very
very very different court law is
all this does is raise it to
that same standard and non
negligent non negligence
standard instead of a a a in my
opinion thank good faith
effort but with that Mr chair
I'd like to move that amendment
for discussion and I think
Trevor has.
Yes.
All.
That's all we're doing here on
this is this page eleven that's
in section ninety munity section
it just gets rid of the the good
faith part and it just says you
know that that that that this is
not negligent and so it would
give that that typical standard
of of negligence in this case.
I really would like to.
Professor Schwartz opinion on
this.
Now I'm Mr chairman Centers
committee members the committee
I I think that that that we
maybe over reading section nine
which includes the immunities
section immunity immunities are
for a conscience based decision
there's no immunity for
negligent conduct a negligence
is measured against the standard
of care which is determined by
health care providers so if
there is a standard of care in
medicine it will apply to all
providers who engage in in all
kinds of health care work where
there is an immunity and where
there is good faith community
which I think is the appropriate
standards and the the drafters
of this compromise bill thought
it was a good the the a good a
standard where there is a the
good faith immunity is when in
fact someone decides that for
reasons of conscience for
example he's not going to or she
is not going to participate in a
die if in fact as a provider
choose I'm sorry I don't do aid
in dying because of my of a
reason of conscience then you
cannot be liable if you honestly
and in good faith really
believe that your conscience
tells you not to provide aid in
dying the statute also provides
protection on the other side if
you say I can find a line in
this case you are similarly
protected but what you're
protected from is the decision
to participate or the decision
not to participate in providing
aid nine once you in fact
provide health care once you act
in the role of the position and
actually find the gear you are
held to the standard of care to
the ordinary negligence standard
of care.
Share and that's why the
immunities as section mines
title provide applies only to
conscience based decisions and
the goal is to protect people
who in fact may
recognize where their conscience
in fact directs them or dis
would wear because they have a
conscience that directs them to
engage in some kind of conduct
we're not going to ask them
whether that conduct is
negligent we are in fact going
to say if you're honest in
saying you can't do this then
that then you won't be liable
for making that decision.
Mr chair I have a comment on
that yes this this is very if I
want I want and hopefully
members will clearly read this
this is not about conscious.
Is some conscience stuff in
there but it is been we've
density immunity section that's
why the sections entitled
communities not.
Conscience protection it's both
it was just about conscience
protection they would the
drafters would have labeled this
section conscience based
decision not immunities so I'm
gonna read the plain language of
the bill has nothing to do with
conscience okay if you follow me
through this tree on the bottom
of page ten a person shall not
be subject to civil liability
for participating and medical
aid in dying in good compliance
that is nothing to do with
conscience what so ever in that
as well on the algorithm tree
that this legislation outlines
that the I'm I just read it
straight there so so this is not
you know this is what happens is
if you are participating at all
so if you're the prescriber or
whoever else you're getting
pulled into this legislation
because you qualify is that
let's say you're the prescriber
and you get pulled in and then
there's a there's a negligent
case but all you have to say is
I I was not subject because the
bill says I'm not subject to
civil liability for
participating in good faith in
the end of life options act so
it it pulls you in and it gives
you explicit.
Good faith compliance immunity
your decision could have nothing
to do with conscience it doesn't
say that it says that you
participated in the act it
doesn't say participate because
of a conscience reason so I
respectfully disagree with with
our shorts on that issue this
clearly gives a a different
standard and cars at a different
standard for physicians or
whatever the prescribers is I
don't have that protection any
any case of any of my practice I
don't have that I haven't seen
it in anywhere in medicine
you'll never find this this type
of language in the medical
malpractice act at all you just
won't find it.
You can you go back to gallery
view for us to.
Thanks.
For this amendment.
Also I can.
By Senator Gallegos.
Thank you for the discussion.
The only thing I would say is
this has gone through House
Judiciary and this did not
become an issue there it does go
after this committee to Senate
Judiciary so I know that
besides professor Schwartz and
the good I of the drive we will
have more attorneys looking at
this as well.
And senator do use the and
Representative do you consider
this a friendly or unfriendly
amendment.
Unfriendly.
Okay Mr chair
if it is because of the Sanchez
comments if it is on friendly
and if the sponsor has said that
she'll consider this the next
committee I'm I'm happy to to
pull the amendment if that helps
things through.
Okay we have one lawyer here in
this committee and the the last
four or five in the next
committee so you may have a.
There are venues there to to
deal with it with was an issue
of interpretation of some
language.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I I think the point has been
made that I I we we should not
be be carving out immunities for
for anyone and just I think two
more points and I'll bring this
in for a landing Mr chair
something that yeah just two
more.
Some of the really really stood
out to me and it was the very
last witness that was in support
of the bill
so I am very much respect and
she said this okay this is the
support of the bill when she was
talking about a dying patient
and I quote I certainly would
have sorry I missed over I
certainly wouldn't have brought
it up myself.
I certainly wouldn't have
brought it up myself you know
why she said that because she's
a she's a good doctor we should
be covering up initiating these
things and if I go that this I
didn't even realize this till
the discussion but I'm in page
page nine section six and it's
entitled right to know.
What what's really and this is
where the US economy goes
crashing through the through the
through the floor.
Is it says a health care
provider shall inform terminally
ill patient so my my question Mr
chair and senator Representative
is is my interpretation of of
this right here the right to
know is that health care
provider may initiate the
conversation is that correct.
Mr chair Senator they may yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I I have a I have a a
big problem with that and the
reason I have a problem they can
instantiate the conversation is
when a when a doctor and some
people that come from cultures
that medicine is still very
paternalistic meaning how you
just kind of doing the drive
says mean there are cultures
that that have that view of
doctors now so they don't have a
lot of the more affluent culture
they did with Dave Conway from
paternalistic medicine and they
kinda you know go to the go to
doctor Google and those sorts of
things that but but this not
we're talking here we're talking
about that we are actually
allowing and one of the
witnesses I don't know if this
is true or not one of the
propose witnesses actually said
this does not exist in any other
states I don't I don't know if
that's true or not haven't had
time to research it but I want
everyone to understand that the
health care provider can
actually initiate the
conversation of Hey have have
you ever thought about this
option have you ever thought
about just ending your life
early and especially someone
from a culture that that still
holds Medicine in a very
paternalistic fashion even if
they don't this can be itself on
do influence in itself the fact
that the doctor initiate
something it's it's a gentle
nudge it's a gentle nudge toward
ending your life early and it's
kind of like when you're when
you're swimming at the beach and
you've been waiting off the
coast for twenty minutes and
suddenly you look up in your
umbrella is way down the way
down the coast line you just
didn't really feel that you
didn't know it and and and then
here you are and so I I really
have a major problem with the
doctor being able to initiate
the conversation especially if
it's a drive that might be a
utilitarian or or it's cetera
there
is some issue you think we
should we should withhold we
should allow doctors to withhold
the information the.
This is available that that's
your view of this should be done
no Mr chair it's not that they
should withhold it so that you
have this tension of what we're
not going to you know to go in
and try to stop the patient from
being from from finding out but
when we say shall in your
amendment may I think would be a
lot more appropriate they they
may but we're saying shall you
are going to initiate this
conversation you have to
required by statute.
So that that's my problem with
it
but what shall is all reasonable
options available.
Just this one all reasonable
options available it seems like
that's just good medicine to
give the patient the full array
of what's available to them and
then let them decide.
Yes Mister chair I I agree with
your statement but practically
how it's going to carry out it
there there's there's no there's
no regulatory framework of how
that is is presented and and I
just recognize that I mean a lot
of the
a lot of the the subtle
financial pressure that can come
along with these things and so
there there's no when we say you
are going to notify it's I I
just think they need people need
to operate under their own
medical license they need to
operate under their own you
listen to their patients and so
there's no withholding of it but
the state shall is is little
strong for me.
but I have a last for Mr
chair than we can up to take a
while but this is the area I'm
very passionate about the last
thing this is that's probably
the biggest reason that that I I
am opposed to to the bill in
addition to the you know
telemedicine things all the
other things I've I've brought
up the the immunity issues
when a lot of times.
When people gain more autonomy
some other people lose out and I
I view this is kind of a teeter
totter you know you have some
people that came more Tommy but
then you have at the cost at the
expense of others my grandfather
died of bladder cancer I have no
concerns about about my you know
my grandfather's economy had a
loving family upper middle class
educated have a fairly high
health literacy
and of course that doesn't
exactly describe those traits
don't exactly describe the
average New Mexican.
And so I I just I have a concern
in this actually decreases a
Tanami for people that are
pressured by state finances and
they're really not suffering but
they choose they choose to die
because they feel like they're a
burden I know that's like with
my own grandmother who felt like
at times she was burden because
of her multiple sclerosis and I
just want everyone to know
that's perfectly legal
altruistic suicide is perfectly
legal under this this act
and so in closing Mister chair I
I really appreciate it will
listen to me I I've put great
thought into this and I I hope I
hope.
Even though I'm not sure you
know may not be changing certain
people's money but I think we
can listen to each other in this
debate and learn from each other
and I I truly believe this is
going to take away it's going to
increase some people timing I
harborcenter great but it will
decrease other people's Petani
people who are more vulnerable
and lastly this has been brought
up I'll bring up very quickly
just in a minute or less
in in recent times the CDC has
described that suicide rates are
going up that that's
indisputable overall suicide
rates are going up I'm not
talking about.
A death under this act the
overall suicide rates are going
up we don't know exactly why.
however thank you my very first
point about suffering.
Yes a twenty year old girl with
depression or but to help the
twenty one year old male has
some other type of of of the
issue.
or someone that's otherwise
young and they develop a
condition where they are
suffering quite a bit.
We can put a measurement on that
and these people are going to be
watching someone with a terminal
illness that are undergoing a
great deal of suffering and yet
once again they qualify but the
but the young person that is
saying Hey I'm I'm suffering
just as much why can't I kill
myself why not.
You know and and I have a
concern that once we open the
door and say it's okay to in
your life under these terms the
the lay person is just going to
say well we're we I can in my
life early based on the fact
that I'm I'm suffering I'm
really really really suffering
I'm depressed or whatever it may
be and the World Health
Organization has a lot to say
about this they say that you
have to avoid placement of
stories about suicide you have
to avoid explicit descriptions
of how people kill themselves
you have to avoid and I'm
reading straight from the World
Health Organization to avoid
language that normalizes suicide
is so and and I'm using the word
suicide very.
Cautiously knowing that a lot of
people that are still listening
to this.
Thank you they don't want to
kill themselves they would
prefer their terminal illness go
away that that's a key
difference but I I do disagree
with the in the presentation of
the bill the definition of
suicide the definition of
suicide is intentionally ending
your own life that that's
basically paraphrase from
Merriam Webster
but there is a difference in
this case we have a terminal
illness and you want in your
life early it is suicide because
it's intentionally taking your
own life but it is it's it's a
complete different scenario then
then some of the other centers
that we would consider otherwise
but once again the lay person
with low health literacy they're
they're not going to put
everything together and say this
is only for terminal people
there is a is for suffering
people and I'm suffering so I
want to kill I wanted to kill
myself too and that's the bigger
problem here that we have seen
in Oregon we've seen overall
suicide rates go up the CDC once
again is looking at this we are
addressing it as a legislature
we're either number one or
number two in the country
overall suicides so I'm asking
even if you're philosophically
supportive of this bill please
consider the specifics of New
Mexicans were very unique and I
I believe this is the wrong bill
to bring on our population thank
you Mr chair thank you for
bearing with me.
Thank you Senator Schmedes next
is senator Tom.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you center for bringing
this bill forward all the hard
work.
Issue of the put into this so I
had to questions ones were
answered the other one's a legal
question let Judiciary deal with
it.
Since since there have of.
Plenty of lawyers that can that.
Into the weeds so consequently I
moved to pass.
By Senator Sedillo Lopez
discussion on the amendment.
I mean in the of the bill of the
of the motion Senator Sedillo
Lopez did you have anything you
want to say well I I did I did
want to say that
Last year or last time it was
before us I wanted to apologize
because
I was looking for ways to make
the bill of more I don't know I
was just thinking about my
mother who's very Catholic and
and I I made an amendment that
was really the only by or eight
during the committee I think
probably because the of.
professor Schwartz is a
colleague for many years you
just that okay that's a friendly
amendment but I look at this
bill I read this bill now and it
is just really a masterful
balance.
It really takes into account.
Giving people options and so
that you know if you if you
don't choose this you don't you
don't chooses and and.
People in New Mexico based on
their own personal beliefs and
their own.
Just just like to me just like
the abortion bill you know base
you can hold your own beliefs
and your own values about this
and and still.
Believe that others should have
this economy and not and and not
I think my my stupid will
amendment last time really micro
managed this process and I trust
physicians I trust health care
workers.
To get this right.
and I just also wanted to say
that I totally agree with the
first professor Schwartz
description that the good faith
is it is very clear
participating for refusing to
participate in medical aid in
dying in good faith compliance
with the provisions it's it's
it's a it's a conscious it is
immunity for making that
decision it doesn't have
anything to do with with that
raising the standard of care
so I
I'm very happy to six second
this ammendment and I
congratulate the Sanchez or
again again bringing it and
bringing a lot of peace of mind
to New Mexicans.
Thank you senator further
discussion Senator McKenna.
Thank you and good evening the
chairman and thank you.
Senator Stefanics and
representative Armstrong or.
Bringing this.
Legislation to yet another
committee meeting I really
appreciate your tenacity.
Your patience for.
How are provided.
Process works and I I realize
that laws in the state in this
country they should be hard to
pass and you have certainly.
That that I'm so thank you for
waiting all these years
I'm.
By the way chairman and senator
Representative I don't have a
question I have more of a COVID
because I've been.
I'm I haven't left my seat ever
since the testimony started I.
I want to think Miss Erin
Armstrong Mr Glenn ball upland
Mr nation okay.
Do not.
and Dr Erika rich and pardon me
if I'm not pronouncing your last
names correctly but I want to
thank you for being with us this
evening and you're you're forty
two your willingness to share
your what's very private.
It's very private not everybody
can do what you did this evening
and to to share those challenges
with the public.
I want to thank the subject
matter experts Dr king and Mr
shorts Dr brown and Dr Morris.
for sharing your.
Your expertise and your
experience working with
patients.
And
Finally chairman and
representative and senator I
remember it wasn't too long ago
I heard about a woman who lives
in California she was stricken
with incurable disease I can't
remember at this time it was
cancer what have you but at the
time California did not let her
use.
What should have legislation
like this and so.
She and her family decided they
had to move to Oregon.
Because or again have the law
that allowed her to.
Use medical aid in dying and I
know there's other terms for it
this legislation that escapes me
right now.
But you know what.
If we're successful with this
legislation.
We'll have New Mexicans the
don't have to deal with that
very trying expensive.
A decision to move elsewhere so
they can.
They can have.
the ability to make this very.
Important decision for
themselves.
So with that I am.
I thank you and
I think this will bring a lot of
he's too many New Mexicans.
And one of the most trying times
of their lives so thank you
chairman thank you senator thank
you Representative.
Thank you senator McCain any
other discussion.
Mr chair could I make a final
comment yes please.
So besides the fact that the
major newspapers have endorsed
this bill I would like to remind
people that that at twenty
twenty just last year Gallup
poll showed that seventy four
percent of Americans support
laws.
Allowing patients to seek the
assistance of physicians and
within our own state.
Medical ethicist John Gibson
says that the current act this
act would strengthen New
Mexico's on going commitment to
honor patients autonomous health
care decisions people here would
like to be able to make their
own decisions thank you
committee for listening to
everyone.
Thank you senator Representative
did you want to say anything in
closing.
Thank you thank you for everyone
that testified in for the for
the debate and for your honest
on and
consideration of this really
important
the legislation it will bring
great peace to a lot of people
in New Mexico thank thank you
and and Senator o'neill did you
have anything you want to add.
Yes I appreciate this this are.
By log in the bill and well now
this is this is really important
and really powerful emotionally
and I want to thank everybody
that testified also thank you.
The secretary will call the
roll.
I don't
know.
Well.
Would you repeat that please
Senator.
No ma'am and I'd like to explain
my vote thank you Santo Domingo.
Years in Senator.
No.
Thank you.
Yes.
So.
No.
Third Lopez yes
thanks yes Tallman yes there are
two C. panel yes.
Senator goes to explain his
phone.
Mr chairman and centers I
appreciate the discussion is
with a heavy heart so being
Hispanic I see a lot of bills
come through here that seem to
to me highlights of.
Injury to us is in a minority I
think of the bill so we go
through and they remind me of
the Holocaust and when
government government decides
who and when they should die it
bothers me we've taken out the
less than next generation with
portion and this one here I
think it takes up our last
generation I thank you for that.
Okay we did Moses the bill
passes the motion passes and it
will move on to the next bill
thank you very much thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto are you on
board I am Mr Chairman are you
doing.
You assured me that we can do
emergency mental health
evaluations quickly.
I did I did and I appreciate be
able to do this after you've got
your consideration end of life I
guess that makes me the
afterlife.
So what this bill does is we
allow already in statute for
police to transfer Hey a person
under certain circumstances to
get mental health assistance.
However the problem is that when
police transfer somebody there
protocols normally are to
transfer them where they are and
and costs and put them in the
back of their police cruiser and
when someone is suffering a
mental breakdown this often.
Reach extreme stress and it
often makes people act a little
bit
in a way that that that the a
police officers and feel the
need to have greater control
over the situation this is
unfortunately result of them and
some deaths or injuries to
people with the police officers
were called out to help that's
what this does this bill does is
that it allows.
Eight officer to ask a and E. M.
T. to transport the person for
the police officer so the so the
evaluation still down by the
police officer as to whether a
person should be transported but
it allows them the EMT to do it
either at the request of the
individual or at the request of
the police officer for one of
the reasons the police officer
can already do it and with that
I'll be happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you and we do have the two
people signed up to speak one
against terror Bernalillo
Eisele.
Please yourself and you can
state your opposition to Senator
Ivy Soto this bill.
Okay I'm.
Mr.
And members of the committee I'm
I.
Read this bill but
Actually speaking of that like I
do like the idea of not having
to have cause to go to the
hospital but I also think you
should and the police of the
state Senate even be able to
make a call to take somebody to
the hospital in the first place
I don't think that they are
trained to do that and they
shouldn't be allowed they're not
medical staff and
as far as going to the hospital
without wearing handcuffs and
stuff I like that idea so thank
you very much and you guys have
a good night.
Thank you.
Then Jim Jackson wanted to speak
in support of the.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and I want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward and for the reasons
that he suggested some of these
interactions between persons
to appear who may be having a
mental health crisis of some
kind of their interaction with
the police is
can sometimes be volatile and in
the it did very issue of being
transported to an evaluation
facility in handcuffs or in a
police car can be really
traumatic for a person with
mental health issues
For other people who might be
the suspected of having a mental
health issue and so giving them
this less intimidating option of
being able to.
Of the transported by any anti I
think it will.
Present and the some of those of
problematic encounters at the
senator has referred to and so
the disability rights New Mexico
does support this bill thank
you.
Thank you and then the Rehm
media I don't know if you're
speaking for or against this
either way witcher comment on
the bill.
I'm definitely speaking against
and.
I I want to start first with the
text messages are
a book quote that my daughter
sent me earlier.
And this is very important in
this entire bill I found out.
Earlier from terra that it that
it's we're.
The.
Let me just start there's always
been a tendency to regard those
women who have been publicly
punished by the state for their
misbehavior is a significantly
more apparent and far more
threatening to society than New
there are numerous male
counterparts studies indicate
that women have been.
Even more likely to end up in
mental facilities.
Then then.
That then then suggest that well
jails.
I'm sorry I'm trying to.
Bear with me guys I appreciate
you taking the time.
And prisons have have been
dominant institutions for the
control of men mental
institutions have served a
similar purpose for women that
is deviant men have been
constructed this criminal as
well deviant women have been
constructed is thank
now I want to give you that is
the very to the three minute
history of what both myself and
my mental health experience back
in two thousand seventeen at the
age of thirty five.
First off.
If you can please keep it short
please yes two to three minutes.
And we're talking about the
involuntary hold of.
People for an assumption of
police officers I have extensive
past in the past year so if you
can just bear with me I've been
listening to you guys for
several hours to get to this
point so I'm one of six sisters
I'm one of four who served in
the active duty army and then
the next New Mexico National
Guard I'm one of two who has a
master's degree in education
during my time in the New Mexico
National Guard I was six
sexually assaulted by my first
line leader Richard Gonzalez my
co worker Brandon Diaz C. as a
recruiter my G. one.
Anthony Lee L. from the New
Mexico National Guard and on
eight August eighteenth I use an
open door policy to express
these wonder bility and I was
taken to the VA label this
bipolar and held without due
process for ten days.
I was retaliated against by
general not the and discharge
regardless on administrative
discharge regardless of an extra
extraordinary eight year
military career.
It was absolutely devastating
Ansel press fast forward I
became an independent
investigator I received several
reports from the wives of New
Mexico New Mexico national
guardsmen and law enforcement
there in New Mexico we have
stated literally that.
They've been told by their
spouses should they try to hold
them accountable for deviant
behavior not only will the
world.
Not only will the world believe
that they're they'll make the
world believe that they're crazy
well they cover it up
since then within the past year
I've been arrested twice by APD
the first arrest.
For helping or aiding the woman
off the I. forty in you Bank
bridge and then two days later
as I investigated not only my
kidnapping but.
The rate of homeless women by
Albuquerque police department
officers I was arrested again
data M. D. C. for four days and
traffic to the BA four at the
end additional twelve days for
mania I'm getting to the point.
Being mental health
professionals to this point are
making the mistakes of
misdiagnosed and women and it's
absolutely ignorant to create
such devastating tool for
retaliation more importantly
there are.
The men and women of law
enforcement are completely
ignorant to the trauma and
trauma responses of women and S.
B. two eighty five.
Allows one hundred percent
biased against women and as
Robert Stewart earlier said
during that H. B. our house bill
forty seven eight that medical
care should be the choice of
individuals not the government
and I just believe that we're.
Definitely opening up for
opening up the state for
litigation
as I intend to do for the Miss
Gallegos that took place for me
I just a hundred percent want to
oppose this bill in every way
shape and form mostly on the
basis that law enforcement is
not qualified and currently
women.
Women.
And the medical and more
importantly the mental health
institutions when it comes to
the misdiagnosis of women.
Thank you ramming.
We got your point thank you
thank you.
Senator.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Sir.
Closing comments before we go to
the committee.
No Sir.
Committee members.
What was your.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you Mr chair
I always ask myself every time I
I look at a bill what is what is
it that we're trying to
accomplish with this bill what
is the problem we're addressing
what is the goal you know what
is the objective and I'm having
trouble figuring out the
objective what is the problem
we're trying to address Mr chair
Sir.
Certainly Mr chairman and
senator to be a lot of us have
those questions so we already
have in statute section forty
three best one best tech that
allows members of mental health
evaluation and care by a police
officer detaining in
transporting a person for better
for worse whether we agree with
that or not it's already in
statute for more similar help
valuation care at the end in the
absence of a legally valid order
from court only if the process
otherwise subject to lawful
arrest or the assessors
reasonable grounds to believe
the process just started so side
or based on the police officers
on this race about station has
reasonable grounds to believe
the person is also a mental
disorder presents likelihood of
serious harm to himself or
herself or others or a position
our psychologist has made a
determination so so the the
problem is and this is actually
brought to me by percent of
Albuquerque as they're trying to
address the issues with the
consent decree part of the
contract such a great cause
because the thing is right now
the only option.
Is for the police officer.
Under the circumstances that
already exist in statute.
To decide that they are going to
transport the person the police
officer has no option to ask
somebody else.
So what this does is that allows
an emergency medical technician
or mercy medical responder.
Who doesn't have a gun dozens of
people in handcuffs doesn't put
them in the back of a squad car.
To transport a person for an
immersive mental health
evaluation care in the absence
of a legally valid order from
the court which is the same one
from above only if the person
consents which is what we prefer
or at the request of a peace
officer for any of the reasons
provided for in subsection eight
of the section so we're not
expanding at all what it is that
what the purpose what the what
the provisions are for more
cumbersome mental health
evaluations of them we're
allowing individuals to make the
request for themselves so
sometimes they do.
We're doing is we're giving an
option.
So that they're not always
having to be transported by a
police officer who treats the
person as a criminal a lot of
the testimony you heard was
testimony of people part of
whose trauma is the fact that
they've been treated as a
criminal in the mental health
process the mental health
evaluation system and this
allows an option where where
they're not treated like a
criminal where you haven't into
doing it and staff that's what
we're trying to solve.
thank you Mr chair I I see that
and and this is kind of hard to
talk about.
But I have this is why I wonder
whether it's necessary I of the
happened to of have.
We should where someone
was suicidal.
Call the police and was
transported to the hospital in
an ambulance.
So I'm a little bit of.
Hi is that this is necessary.
Because this is exactly what
happened when I had a very very
difficult situation to deal with
and so.
Watergate.
So you know it is so that it
does that does the consent
decree limits.
It would require police officers
to do this Sir what don't they
already have the flexibility
will that's what happened in my
it we know in the situation that
I dealt with it it was quite a
few years ago
Probably.
Ten to twelve years ago but
that's exactly what happened so
I don't understand why this is
necessary if they are real.
So I will just tell you that
this the law that I quarters
benefactors bank in seventy
seven and that law actually does
not give the option I don't know
what happened in that
circumstance but that option
does not currently exist in
statute.
And this is exactly the point
what happened with your friend
that is what should happen.
What should happen right and so
and so one of the reasons when
the city reached out to me about
this bill that I immediately
said yes.
Is because one of my best
friends lives up in Seattle.
And and his neighbors across the
street as a kid these these are
young adults try to years old
but but but but but my best
friend seeing them grow up and
and he's he's been having a
tough time mentally and he was
he was kind of freaking out one
day he was pacing back and forth
from a house of reps are going
to do with it so they called
nine one one nine one one seven
the plates.
The conversation they had and
and then and then said well
you're and and the guy said to
go I need to go when I need to
get out I forgot to get your
help it is a great and then the
police officer take takes out
his ankles.
And this guy runs about.
Then the police officers are
worried that is going to interim
self so they break into the
bathroom.
And he's got something because
because not a contractor right
this is any paranoia that he had
this is feeding it right now.
And.
The police end up shooting him.
Shooting him.
I think it was Representative to
anybody.
Why because it kicked in that
response from the police
officers where as they could
have that that have the option.
They could have called an EMT to
come and do exactly what
happened with your friends.
Okay.
So so that makes it very
powerful to me because I think
of the lease of the Serra case
which is why I'm bringing the
police accountability bill that
would have a call for
independent investigations and
independent prosecutions is
because whatever with the least
loser they put twenty the shares
Department with twenty one
bullets in her body for eleven
women and that was a mental
health call.
We're still shooting her after
she fell according to the uncle
who saw this so so this has the
potential for saving lives if if
they PED us for to do it I I
think it's odd because.
In my experience that's what
they did.
but if they don't think they
have the authority I totally
support this bill.
And that's exactly what it is.
Thank you.
The lotus.
No Mr chair that's all.
Senator Gallegos.
Mister chairman Senator
appreciate the discussion my
lines are short of down the same
practitioner studio Lopez
so what I understand me just
give you a little background we
had a a friend of ours and Ralph
will I and Hobbs I'm about two
months ago was taken into
custody and ghost
they didn't know what you're
gonna do shares that they not to
she's trying to so she's
panicking they did drug test and
alcohol tests honor did not find
anything so they took her to
Ralph.
And took her to a mental health
facility there they let her in
the facility did not allow her
there because they did not have
the right paper and the police
officers and already let.
This bill here but I understand
that it would have been a an EMT
Without the handcuffs what are
their options to.
Transporting without in them
hurting themselves.
Certainly so I Mr chairman and
senator I ghost so sort into has
a few different options to
transport somebody you know I
mean worse comes to worse I can
always I guess struck a month
regarding E. but in most cases
here's here's what we know about
people mental health disorders
is that is that in most cases
when people are asking for help.
They're they're on that urge but
they're not.
They're not off off off that off
that cliff yet.
Right but they're but they're
susceptible to the stimulation
that will put first off that
cliff.
And so and just like you know
pregnant police officer show up
there on guard they're there to
help but someone starts acting
in a manner where they can't
predict the next behavior they
go into they going to straight a
police officer.
This gives everybody that option
where a lot of times people say
yes I would really like to have
some help yes I would really
love to go and and in fact I
don't you know I don't know Jim
Jackson saw the light or not but
but but you know what this bill
of rights right so they could
tell you story after story of
the story of the story a person
who when they reached out to her
for help if someone would just
treat them with with the dignity
of the humanity that they have.
They go for help.
Well.
Mr chair Senator I guess my next
question then is how would so
let's go back to the Hobbs
situation.
How would they know wanted to
send an EMT not a police officer
because they did not know what
our situation was until after
they'd drug test urine alcohol
tester because they could not
distinguish thank you touches
higher ground okay right real
oddity they think it may have
been due to the COVID.
Because they never did find
anything wrong with her about
four days later he came off of
whatever she had her system and
went back to normal but I don't
know how they would to
distinguish she needed mental
health.
Until after they tester.
Are you exactly correct and that
is why there's two criteria for
the empty the first is the
perfect sense.
The second is at the request of
a peace officer for any of the
reasons provided up above so the
peace officer still does the
evaluation in in the case and
this you would still have the
peace officer showing up first
as the first responder once
they've eliminated these other
options like okay now we know
what we're dealing with.
So then they would have called
the M. T. to come to do the
transport for that purpose.
And that I I can see that Mister
chairman Senator then.
What would cause the patient
even if they were taken without
their consent now that they want
in control
to still try to lash out at
I would perceive that if you
came to get me given a an empty
if you're gonna strap me to that
governing.
You're gonna have a fight on
your hands and.
You human nature right but I'm
just wondering to me how.
To de escalate it understandably
softer side that already brings
up of fear but in the end T.
side I just don't know totally
how they would there can't I
know they gave me a shot put me
to sleep time data give me some
more but in that early part of
the discussion of the
altercation.
I'm more worried about the M. T.
police officers you know they've
got the best on the how to
training they they know how to
handle themselves and EMTs.
In that situation I'm just
wondering how that works
that's a great question and and
and the answer to question is
EMTs don't rival.
If you don't write alone and so
therefore you've got you've got
plenty of need it was gonna be
who's gonna be navigating the
vehicle given another any of the
anti in the back with the person
so it's not like the person is
is on is is is a lot and this
morning probably police officers
police officers generally
speaking right alone and so
that's why they end up treating
everybody with the same
protocols because they're by
themselves right.
You've got to me in need who can
who can be time on task with
that individual the entire time
of the transport.
Okay well I appreciate that
those are the only questions I
had would appreciate discussion
we'll see were arrested debate
goes thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator.
What's the will of the
committee.
I'm in the past.
The motion for into this is our
second.
Sure was.
Many of the discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Because.
Yes.
The Andrew luster.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Tallman yes.
And senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Resolution Senator Ivy Soto you
do yes thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and as a as a veteran
of the Senate of the four
percent of public affairs
committee I appreciate very much
of the work that you all do and
and the time it takes to work
through your agenda am I
appreciated very much I'm gonna.
Thank you senator are less
middle of the night will be
Senator Neillsville.
First you think medicine
changes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members I echoed senator I just
sort of.
Madam there are yes so
just to say it is Senator Hickey
still with us yes okay well
maybe we'll maybe we'll try to
insurers into depending on how
this and go Senator.
Thank you thank you Mr president
I mean Mr chair.
And members okay so Senate bill
two seventy nine proposes to
repeal the osteopathic medicine
action then the medical practice
act you authorize New Mexico
Medical Board to license and
regulate the practice of
osteopathic medicine Mr chairman
members we've got us the past
we've got doctors they want to
work together this is a mutual
intention makes total sense
medical doctors work side by
side with us do you have they
have similar education and
training our New Mexico we now
have that Burrell College down
there in Los crucis a majority
of states have won Medical Board
that Representative regulates
both the hours and days but New
Mexico at the moment has to.
Osteopaths are under our of the
so the New Mexico Medical Board
is established staff licensing
investors staff to the Reno.
Be a really good place for the
US in the same way that they are
a replicate regulate M. D. so
but where we are with this bill
Mr president I mean Mr look
there's a mutual intention to
join forces but.
We're still working out the
details of this intention it's a
good rate.
Very deeply committed effort I
have who are of the secretary
Linda Trujillo thank god and
them Medical Board this is our
Representative you know
executive director Center
Franken in Austin and and a
doctor Jeremy admins isn't
osteopathic think all of them
have been patient enough to to
hang on
to hear the spell that my
message to all of the both the
committee members and but folks
were in the osteopathic
community and the medical
community were still very much
working out some things but I
think we have very much the op
the opportunity to pass this
important bill as I've said in
the past you know this goes on
to Judiciary there's plenty of
time for these two camps to work
out these details so I guess
I would just defer to you of Mr
Chairman to see how you want to
proceed basically you know our
our hope is that we can get it
you know to pass out of this
hardworking Committee and
knowing that you know we've got
time to work out some of these
issues before Judiciary.
So I said that so that's all
absent well.
Maybe we can hear from your ex
for witnesses and then find out
what these remaining issues are
that would be helpful for a.
Superintendent trillion.
Welcome to the committee it's
good to see you again thank you
senator thank you Mr chairman
thank you senators and and
senator Neil really kind of
capitalize the entire bill it's
a long bill and you know I can I
have the pleasure of bringing on
bills to this chamber as a as a
historical thing so I'm kind of
proud of this but I do believe
that the minor changes that were
suggested to me on Saturday
we've come to an agreement on
those and they're they're all
going to be friendly amendments
but we did not have the time it
wasn't until later this
afternoon that I got elected
agreement on everything and we
didn't want this bill to be
delayed so it's our commitment
for the for the the the parties
involved it is our commitment
that we will have a draft and
that draft will be ready in
plenty of time before we go to
the judiciary and will probably
be drafted tomorrow but they're
very minor changes I'll let the
Dr Jeremy admins maybe explain
those and founder Frank but RLD
is very much in support of
efficiencies and the to bring
these two boards together yes it
does remove them from our of the
yes there are some budget
implications but this is really
good government and and that's
really why we support the.
Thank you was senator or bad
doctrine to us to go first.
I'll go first Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Sandra Frank and I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico Medical Board the New
Mexico Medical Board is in full
support of merging the two
boards the osteopathic medical
doctors and the medical doctors
we call them M. dis and deos
about seventy percent of all the
the states in the United States
have one combined board that
regulates both of these
positions for the very good
reason that they they work side
by side they have the same
training and experience and in
fact in twenty twenty three
there residencies are going to
emerge so the in in the in the
real world they are both
considered physicians but in the
state of New Mexico they're
regulated by two separate
entities The New Mexico medical
board is an independent board we
have seventeen employees who are
dedicated and well versed in
vetting and licensing medical
doctors we have almost nine
thousand medical doctors that we
license now we understand that
the deos are growing profession
but right now they have about
eight hundred individuals in the
state who are licensed under R.
LD we also have a dedicated
staff of investigators and
compliance officers who look and
make sure there are
practitioners in the state of
New Mexico are practicing in a
safe and manner and are looking
at inefficiencies and in
competencies and our physicians
and take care of them to
remediate them for the
protection of the public so
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you.
The actually the FIR says there
are nine hundred ninety seven of
students passing doctors the
state so their number is growing
and with real there they'll be a
lot more coming in probably Dr.
Thank yes I might just say I did
a check on that today and and
it's up to one thousand forty
nine.
Growing by leaps and bounds.
We may not have a shortage of
this Q. so this is going
doctrines yes chair members of
the committee can you can you
hear me okay perfect all right
perfect thank you everyone for
allowing me to speak on behalf
of of the the is in the state
I'm the immediate past chair of
the New Mexico osteopathic
medical board and and have been
serving in that position and
then that rules for for ten
years I think that you segue
perfectly into one of my
concerns with the bill and that
is about the quality and and
what it means to be equally
represented on this new board I
understand that there are
proposals in in good faith
to fix some of the the finer
details and I am in full support
of us combining boards are most
for our physician assistants who
are working in the state because
the the language of our our our
two boards is in somewhat
competition you have to be if
you're a physician assistant you
have to be licensed under a DO
or M. D. or autonomously and
sometimes if you're working any
are setting a have a and M. D.
who's gonna be your supervising
physician and then two minutes
later gonna have to DO that's
going to be your supervising
position and then and then you
may have an autonomous physician
assistant so combining these
boards will will definitely fix
a lot of the efficiency issues
that were having in the state
and and I think that all the
deos are Promociones I would say
are fully in support of of
combining these boards but I do
have questions about equality
Minnesota if we take a look at
that state they have twenty five
thousand in these right now and
just the thousand DO and their
board is comprised of at least
one DO and at least one M. D..
And I would say that the reason
why they do that is two fold
number one D. as in and these
are seen equally I work with M.
D. I've worked with them these
are my life a training that in
in the institution at UNM was
the chief resident there in
family medicine we are seen
seamlessly across the the health
care workforce use no
distinction between M. D. isn't
deos review each other
collegiately we collaborate just
as Sandra as miss Frank
mentioned product mentioned we
are going to have the same post
graduate training programs so I
don't understand why there is a
distinction in the proposed bill
to have a certain number of deos
in certain number of M. D. it
should be at least one and the
it should be at least one the
that we we have some
professional representation on
the board as you mentioned we've
greatly increase our number of
licenses issued in New and this
will also fix administratively I
don't know how often a seat has
been vacant on the M. D. board I
know that there has been a seat
that's been vacant on the in the
board for some time and and
that's COVID well if we if we
have a qualified candidate that
can sit on that board it doesn't
matter if it's M. D. or D. O. it
just matters if they're
qualified and I feel that that
would really represent the true
quality that deos are going for
and so I I respectfully submit
and ask everybody to reconsider
that language in the bill as I
feel truly that we are equal and
we should be treated as equal
and that that I would full and
whole heartedly support this
bill thank you chair members of
the committee.
Thank you.
Senator anybody else you want to
have yes I really I would just
emphasize to doctor admins
that's exactly what we're
working on right now and and to
to follow up on on the second
secretary Trujillo's points it
seems like we're making real
progress so by all means
continue to to be working with
us and and I'm confident that we
can come in probably with the
committees of the Senate
Judiciary and and have everybody
on the same page.
One area is it just that one
area the the representation on
the board association it seems
to me I mean I haven't been
involved in a granular level but
it seems to be a larger issue.
Chairman yeah Mister chairman
Senator there's a definition and
there's a missing word of and
then there's the request to have
at least to DO and there was
agreement on that language and
so we'll be moving forward
tomorrow with the
a draft for that so so these are
basically just the issues that
the doctor really yes I to me
but that that's correct to
travel I I think you're actually
right Senator you're very close
to having is because I don't
think there's strong objections
to any of those changes I do
have doctor reading down as
somebody wants to give public
comment to others Brad Scoggins
and Kristen reed who are in a
to raise questions about this
bill right because they are they
still with us.
Yeah I'm right here thank you
senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
chairman and other members of
the Senate health and public
affairs committee and this is a
very important issue to me I'm
I'm a life not long New Mexicans
and a surgeon in New Mexico
osteopathic surgeon for twenty
years
I want this to continue to be a
state where DO is our want to
set up practice and I want not
only the wording of this bill to
be inviting to them but I want
it to reflect fairness parity
and equity so that when and if
they do face this board and for
and I think that bad physicians
get sued nothing good physicians
get sued but all physicians
deserve boards that I'm is and
you know as a welcoming to them
and they trust is going to look
out for their best interests as
well as the best interest of New
Mexicans and I agree
wholeheartedly with what Jeremy
admins has brought that doctor
admins and I want to thanks
under Frank and Linda Trujillo
and raffle clash for their
efforts and getting us together
as two groups thank you.
For the committee this is on the
bottom of page twenty nine the
issue is raised so you can read
that section on the board in its
composition.
It is assumed Brad Scoggins.
So with.
I am Mr chairman.
You speak yes thank you Sir
thank you the committee I know
it's getting late so I I think
the the point of view to flee
maybe I I'm I see that.
I'm not just in a few Farmington
for the last six years and
currently the president of the
New Mexico osteopathic medical
association been a member of of
of the task force on the what's
that medical association looking
at this bill for the last six
months and that you know I I
agree with everything Germany
the the committee have said
specifically as it relates to
everything in the bill is very
agreeable to to our constituents
and you know I think I I think
the proposed language of Mister
Yeoh and and this Frank is up is
acceptable and that's all I have
thank you.
You thank you doctor.
Senator still a few people might
want to speak in support is
Ralph McLish on.
Angus Campbell.
For this Cyrus any of them the
same investment we're so late
the more.
They probably really more
morning so you have this is
Scott so I risk so.
Dr services okay yes please
share your comments with this I
wanted to emphasize the the idea
to boards want to come together
in a way that we would have
parity we would have an equal
voice I think that the what the
state needs I am a pediatrician
and I in the the professor.
Actor to the broke college
prospect Medicine and we feel
like.
This is a bill that could be
beneficial to all.
Both Indies and deos we feel
like language in the definitions
are something that we can agree
upon there are some there are
some language in the bill the
needs to be cleaned up and I
think that could be done without
a whole lot of problems but the
parity is essential because we
work beside one another I've
been chief of staff of the
hospital there's out allopathic
uses that are that are chief of
staff we need to make sure that
we continue to have this type of
parity moving forward in the
state because it's going to be
good for all.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you doctor.
Okay Senator Woods anything else
will go to the committee for
questions good.
Senator Ingle.
motion for a new tester Senator
Ingle is there a second.
So.
Thank you.
Any of the discussion.
You really.
You really Senator o'neill this
great secretary will call the
roll.
Senate bill two seven nine
senator that goes.
Yes ma'am.
Ingle.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
All.
Yes.
What to do now yes.
Regulations Senator yeah we do
yes is to engine three.
The Judiciary Committee is
really tough though you you
won't have the same timely
manner.
Yeah I get that experience that
all the there were three that
is.
Engine ensuring.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator committee we we
we just what I.
Yeah I I.
Yeah I want to vote yes on this
bill please.
Unanimous and thank you senator
okay thank you all right last
middle of the night and I would
I want to apologize Senator when
your son.
I promise and we we get it is
billable we just we're gonna
have to start with this bill on
Wednesday.
And then we'll do we have the
Sedillo office is rolled over
Senator systemic sensibility
we're going to roll over and
Senator McKenna has built a
rural or it'll be we'll start
with our committee members after
senator Munoz.
So finally in a Senator Hickey
welcome Senate bill two eighty
two it's not bad if you're less
you see with the discussion
becomes a lot less vigorous at
this time of night.
Yeah I think we're a little
tired thank you committee for
bearing with the one more bill
tonight
I want to present our bill that
makes a change to the medical
records law this has to do with
the information health
information exchange that that
actually maybe Dawn third of the
former CEO of of this health
Foundation and myself wrote a
bill into that or not.
Rhoda grant in two thousand and
three to HHS the H. R. Q. to
start health information
exchange in New Mexico and it's
fitting that we are here sliding
all the way through the end of
the evening because it's been I
just like to get this up and
running keep it going lots of
challenges along the way but the
I I think the other night we
talked about two scoops of ice
cream actually there's three
scoops of ice cream and a cherry
and whipped cream on top here.
The federal government and CMS
which is centers for Medicare
and Medicaid status within HHS
did do a grant to call ninety
ten so we put up ten percent of
the money is the state and the
federal government
Representative ninety percent
anyway it's resulted in a thirty
million plus infusion of funds
into this health information
exchange and entity this is a
tremendous value to the state it
takes digitalized information
and locate said that one source
it's always been very hip of
protected and is of great use
its by the you know you're
unconscious to get taken to the
emergency room record last
they're able to get what
medications you're on your past
medical history and it's a great
loan in emergent situation but
now it's becoming a wonderful
tool for clinicians and
hospitals all over the state you
not only do access yes because
they now have access to test
results and again I do want to
emphasize that in this state the
patients are on the and in the
same way that there opted in and
let's say the side that they
don't want to be and you'll hear
more about that but the that's
wonderful is that this bill in
combination with the offline
Hey your database that the
department of health is going I
think has an RFP out that is
basically look at cost of care
and you combine it with clinical
components of their the state
will have an immense amount of
data the prior ties what it
needs to take care of in the
future how much money to spend
on it to ensure that we're
giving value so this is cleaning
up something that came from the
initiation of health records
long ago and I'm gonna have my
experts testified.
This why the oil change in
languages there and I have with
this night Terry Stewart chief
operating officer sinker knows
the levels for the foundation
changed its name a little while
ago the distribution of funds
and now is very dynamic east who
is the CEO who god bless them
stayed with it who six top years
and and got us where we're going
to be one of the most incredible
states for healthcare data to
analyze the forces all patients
protected and Randy macdonald.
Lawyer and he will be answering
questions that patients have
about so Jareth if you could
take it away and the others and
and and you you do have an
amendment do you.
Yes we do we do have an
amendment and I'm gonna ask.
A Terry Stewart to is that that
I'm sorry okay good and and and
Trevor you you can get it is it
is short amendment it's a it's a
brief just worrying to.
You.
So please Mr go ahead please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and Senator
Hickey and I would like to defer
the discussion of the amendment
to Randy macdonald the attorney
and privacy experts because he
spoke so eloquently about that
this morning.
Thank you.
Well prepared remarks a good
afternoon so James at the
beginning Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
amendment would fix a typo on
page four line twenty five and
changing a reference to a
federal statute.
Two ninety DVD SD two to ninety
do do that too.
And as in going through the
process of the review of the
bill
lance Chilton was formally a
member of our board of directors
and at levels twenty foundation
suggested that we include a a.
Definitions health care
operations activities and this
is the definition of health care
activities health care
operations activities from hip
of that will be putting put into
the bill to clarify that.
Children in the analysis on the
bill.
so members of the committee and
let's deal with the amendment
first and then we'll go into the
details is there a motion to
accept the amendment.
I moved to accept the amendment.
And this is their second a
second.
Thank you thank you Senators any
opposition to any discussion of
the amendment or any opposition
to it.
Seeing none will consider the
bill to be amended and we'll
move ahead to the actual
discussion of the.
The amendment of the bill
itself.
So Mister did you want to talk
about the bill itself.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and Senator
Hickey as you were told my name
is Terry Stewart I'm the chief
administrative officer at
synchronous which is the state
of New Mexicos designated health
information exchange synchronous
is a New Mexico not for profit
organization and Diane yes fine
this evening to discuss with you
the importance of the health
information exchange I've worked
for over thirty years within the
healthcare community of New
Mexico and last spring I was
honored to join the synchronous
team I understand the impact in
the need for data to flow to
healthcare providers to improve
health outcomes for all New
Mexicans as senator he mentioned
synchronises working on a
program to build and improve the
health information exchange in
our state in this is supported
by thirty one million dollars in
federal funding from the CMS
high tech and it's matched by
three point two million of state
funds the funding the
legislators committed to build
the state of the art H. I. E.
has allowed synchronise toward
collaborative Lee with prominent
health IT vendors as well as the
New Mexico Human Services
Department in the New Mexico
department of health this public
private partnership in New
Mexico.
Will become a model for other
states over the past year I have
learned more details about how
physicians healthcare providers
and their staff access the
records in the internet and I
understand some of the barriers
of the H. I. E. N. Y. this great
tool has not been implemented by
a wider group of health care
providers the current state and
federal funding have remove the
financial barriers for health
care facilities however some of
the barriers to access the data
we need.
With the funding we have built a
field of dreams for health
information however the more
stringent privacy protections in
the state then the federal
health insurance portability and
accountability act or HIPAA
privacy rule has had an
unintended consequence of the on
the use of the health
information exchange by health
care providers the current
electronic medical record act
allows for medical information
to flow easily into the each I.
E. without the individual's
consent.
Fires consent for health care
providers to use the data.
We have left the fence around
the field.
Minimizing those who can play
ball so the solution is to amend
the current electronic medical
record act which would allow the
situation in which prohibitions
on the disclosure of individuals
electronic health information
would be allowed specifically if
the disclosure is made to a
health care provider I
deprivations health care
institution or healthcare group
purchases for him treatment
payment or appropriations thus
aligning the state's privacy
rules with the federal privacy.
Having one set of privacy
criteria for health care
providers in our state thereby
reducing the administrative
burden.
So why is this needed it will
help improve health care by
sharing information between
health care providers it will
reduce health care costs by
eliminating duplicative medical
procedures it will ensure that
disclosures are only permitted
under rules.
And maintain state law
protections against
inappropriate disclosures it
will allow us to successfully
implement the program to improve
the state's health information
exchange to meet the stated goal
of this funding that has been
provided to us to on board
eighty percent of the hospitals
Indian Health Service tribal
health clinics federally
qualified health centers skilled
nursing facilities long term
care in prisons as well as forty
percent of independent physician
clinics in behavioral health
clinics in our state.
The federal high tech funding
sunset September thirtieth of
twenty twenty one we have seven
months to successfully complete
this program to leverage
additional federal funding for
the on going sustainability of
health information exchange.
I thank you for your time your
service in respectfully ask the
committee to note yes to this
ammendment thank you thank you
Mr drive east and you want to
say anything.
Your mute India.
Think about that Mr chairman
my name's Tommy Stan CEO for
synchronous and asynchronous as
you heard in Terry's
presentation is the state as a
economic health information
exchange.
Synchronous currently includes
billions of health care records
on over two million New Mexicans
and aggregated view of a
patient's health history from a
variety of different
organizations can be extremely
powerful.
The synchronous AJP has played
an essential role in the comment
pandemic collecting the majority
of COVID results in providing
them to department of health and
to providers in the community.
The synchronous health
information exchange provides a
number of value added services.
Perhaps the best way to
illustrate how are synchronises
with a real world example.
A few years ago young pregnant
woman and her third trimester
was in a bad car accident and
transported to a trauma care
center for care the quickly
determined that the synchronous
agency had her medical record
including her prenatal care from
another health system this
information was invaluable and
quickly providing the
appropriate care that resulted
in a good outcome for both the
mother and baby.
Despite examples like this
organizations have decided not
to use the synchronous health
information exchange because the
additional consent requirements
above and beyond what's required
for him back to being an impact
on workflow staffing costs.
So if you look back over the
last five years can you imagine
how many examples like this
mother and baby have occurred in
these organizations how many
lives could have been impacted
if the laws in New Mexico were
aligned with the federal hit a
requirements.
I ask you to please approve
Senate bill two eighty two and
make the powerful synchronous in
operability tools available to
more providers to significantly
improve the quality and safety
of patient care for New Mexicans
I close thank you Mr chairman
thank you to our trees good to
see you thank you.
This.
so we have several people who
want to say a few words about
this was to keep your remarks
brief and we'll start with Dr
Meghan any welcome doctor
mentioning.
Thank you Senator chair and and
senators on the committee on by
rimac and the I am a oncologist
here in New Mexico and I would
like to give a couple of
examples of how removing the red
tape of that currently binds our
hands will improve health care
quality and decrease cost when
we see a patient at the cancer
center we will also need to get
outside records we call one of
our local institutions and they
tell us they can take a month to
get that outside CT scan where
they happen to find that the
tumor that we're working on.
What happens is it takes a month
is I can't wait so I duplicate
this we order another CT scan
that is to health care costs and
it would be made unnecessary by
this particular bill.
The second thing that occurs is
in the quality of care and the
customer service to our patients
if a patient comes and makes an
appointment with my at my office
ideally I would be able to pull
down their records and look at
them and be able to give that
person who comes to see me a
more informed consultation
because I would know what is
been going on with them
medically however currently I
can't do that because I have to
get a written signature within
the patient shows up in my
office and then I can fax that
over to the institution that has
those records and make the
patients sit around waiting for
me to get those records so we
can eliminate that delay and we
can eliminate duplicated
services if we eliminate the red
tape that this bill will
eliminate thank you very much I
hope you will favorably Act on
this bill thank you thank you
doctor.
The then Stetson Berg from the
U. N. M. medical group.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee I'm Stetson Berg
interim director for the United
center for telehealth vice chair
of the New Mexico telehealth
alliance president of the New
Mexico health care executives
and treasurer for the New Mexico
information.
And management systems society I
cannot echo announced on what
doctor Machen any just said that
is exactly the case especially
with the U. N. M. there are tens
of thousands of physician
assistant line calls to U. N. M.
every year and those providers
who are giving those consoles
can not view that record to give
a good phone consul because of
the regulations that are
currently in place another thing
that we do at UNM is the access
neurology neurosurgery and now
expanding into cardiology
consoles and those we also do
not have access to the H. ID
these are not you and patients
their patients at twenty four
sites across the state and it
would be game changing for these
patients to have the providers
to be able to see those records
without jumping through hoops of
gaining consent entering them
into the UNM medical record and
then accessing the H. I. E. so I
ask that you vote in favor of
this bill to increase access to
patient history for better
informed consoles easier to
transfer treatment documents
quality chart review and follow
ups to see patient outcomes
access to value based care
metrics and as a reduction in
overall health care costs and
duplicated efforts thank you.
Thank you very much Mr now it I
don't know if is Tom yes see
here.
for Mario Cruz they also
assigned but I I couldn't spot
him in the in the room.
Doc turned in for the night we
were texting okay well given my
my apologies for running so late
we'll go to the committee and
what's the what are the
questions from the committee.
And we we do pass.
A second.
Any discussion.
Who wants to engage in a
prolonged debate over this bill
at this time.
Seeing none the secretary will
call the.
The role.
There are those.
Yes ma'am.
All.
Dr Cruz.
So.
Yes.
No.
Your Lopez yes.
Yes.
Home yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes the congratulations you
Senator Dr Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I see
tonight is kind of spring
training for the rest of the
session that I'm ready to go to
midnight next time around but I
think all my expert witnesses
and I want to do a shout out to
doctor Machen nineties has been
Dr and they who has been the
chair of the board all during
our getting this off figured out
and you are going to love the
data at the department of health
and be able to bring to you.
Next year and especially when
they pass the are when they get
the up here claims database and
getting together and you all
night and I really appreciate it
I want you to know that the
house health committee voted ten
to zero today you also.
Well good luck thank and members
with that will conclude we are
rolling over the so I think I
