Senator Pinto.
Senator Scott
Yeah
Centeria Lopez here Senator
Hickey.
Thank you very much.
Um, and as the agenda does say,
we have a presentation today.
Um, regarding the Children's
code, reform task force, and if
I join us and Judge John Romero
if both of you could join a
table.
And uh as you know, we have
Some legislation going through
um this session.
Uh, that refers to the
children's code.
Um
The Children's code, of course,
is central and.
Miss Connelly, of course, will
update us. I know with a little
bit of information about the
children's code, the report you
have here in front of you.
This is a supplemental report
that was um worked on.
I'd say probably the last 3
months of 25, excuse me, 24.
Um, there is another initial
report that came out.
Um
That one is on online health and
Human Services Committee because
the initial report was given, I
think in September.
If I remember correctly, back in
Socorro.
Or was it August?
August, September, but anyway,
it's on the legislative health
um. Um, so we'll have an update.
And then, um, between the two
and then the subcommittee.
Uh, from the children's um code
task force.
So with that, Miss kindly, if
you'd like.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kristen
Connelly. I am an attorney and a
child welfare law specialist.
I'm nationally certified since
2006, I believe.
Uh, and I'm also the chair of
the director of the Corinne Wolf
Center at.
Uh, the law school, however, I
am here as the chair of the
Children's code reform Task
Force, I was contacted and asked
to take this work on, um.
In 2024 when the original
funding from 2023 and 2024 by
the legislature had been given
to the AOC, but they felt like
it was known with this work, and
I agreed to take this on.
I do need to say because I am an
employee of the University of
New Mexico.
I was asked to take on the
chair, um,
After it was already formed in
2023 as a way to serve the
public.
And we were asked to review the
children's code and make
recommendations to the
legislature. We then were able
to obtain additional funding
because our task force felt
there was so much work that
still needed to be done and we
wanted to bring a little more
forward.
This group is made up of
long-term subject matter experts
with direct experience or
research.
Um, experience.
As the chair, it's my
responsibility to take the
guidance of the task force
members and the report that
arose out of this work is the
work of the task force and in no
way reflects the judgment
guidance or interests of the
university of New Mexico.
Thank you.
I could ask just for we have
some competition back here I
think on some noise.
If you could, um, maybe move the
microphone just a little bit,
either closer to you or at an
angle.
Just so that we can hear you a
little bit.
Either that or I'm hard of
hearing. Could be true. You
never know.
But is this oh that is
significantly better. I can hear
that. Thank you.
So, um, we, as, as we referenced
there were 2 different reports,
one issued at the end of June
and one issued at the end of
January.
And we have brought a a quick 2
page outline that we've
distributed, uh, talking about
the legislation that we thought
could perhaps move policy and
children's law forward in the
state, um.
And I'm just going to dive into
that.
So
First we suggested amendments to
existing statutes on page 19 of
the supplemental report and and
these reports are beasts.
They're 76 and 80 pages each. I
encourage you to use the uh
table of contents and the
guidance that's offered on your,
uh, two-page guideline.
Uh, so in the supplemental
report, we, uh, suggested
revising the definition for a
neglected child and preventing
child remover and longer stays
in custody when poverty is the
only issue.
Uh, this more clearly describes
neglect, uh, and works to carve
out those rare circumstances
when a child is removed from a
home for poverty alone. There
are not a lot of those that
happen, but every now and then
that is what does happen and the
more kids that we can keep out
of foster care assuming they are
safe and it
Um
The better off we are.
Um
We also, uh.
Uh, recommended that case
workers are to make reasonable
efforts to provide practical
support to families.
If the parent accepts resources
and makes the changes that
brought the child to the
attention of the department,
then very likely it would not be
necessary to remove that child,
um.
To keep them safe.
It would also require the court
to make findings about what
justified the placement of the
child in foster care other than
inadequate financial resources.
Another uh proposed amendment
would be to ensure the economic
well-being of children in state
custody and their families when
possible.
Uh, right, that shows up on a.
Page 16 of the original report.
Uh, that would require that
there be a study conducted by
CYFD, as is already required
before you go to disposition
following an adjudication of an
abused or neglected child.
But it would need to include
what conditions other than
inadequate financial resources.
Brought the child into custody
and what were the efforts that
were made to establish, obtain
or secure.
Secure uh um.
Secure financial assets for
young people who have been
brought into custody, such as
stable accounts, and we heard
from the floor of the Senate
earlier that there's already
some work happening on that.
It also requires the court to
make specific inquiry of CYFD of
what they're ongoing efforts on
that.
Now, because I am not a subject
matter expert in all of these
elements I have Judge John J.
Romero here who will also uh
introduce himself and will
address some of these elements.
Judge Romero.
Thank you, Ms. Connelly, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for the
opportunity to present a review
of what the report contains and
a few other things as well.
Uh, as noted, my name is John
Romero. I'm a retired judge from
the 2nd Judicial District Court
in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
beginning my 5th year of
retirement, I spent all 17.5
years on the bench in the
children's court division.
Hearing exclusively.
Child welfare cases in juvenile
justice cases, uh, with that
background, and I should also
add that I was the first.
Sitting judge back in 2006 to be
Designated a child welfare law
specialist by the ABA accredited
National Association of for uh
council of Children.
Uh, I am not a current of
certified member, but for
various incendiary reasons, I
chose not to continue that.
I'm also a member since 2004, a
past president of the National
Council of Juvenile and Family
Court judges, which has been
training judges.
Since 1939 in the area of child
welfare and juvenile justice and
a am honored to be faculty on
some of their training sessions
nationally.
One of which we just had here at
Tamea Resort for tribal court
judges on child sexual
exploitation, something that was
well received by a tribal court
judges.
I'm going to speak to you uh for
this uh segment about uh an
amendment found on the original
report, page 19, that has to do
with removing the presumption of
abandonment.
From um the neglect and abuse
Act as utilized for terminating
parental rights.
I should quickly add that that
presumption of abandonment
consists in it exists in the
adoption Act.
Which is a whole different
Uh, set of circumstances and our
proposal to amend.
The uh presumption of
abandonment in no way impacts on
the adoption Act in its contents
regarding uh presumption of
abandonment. The reason for that
is
Many of the elements of the
presumption of abandonment is
set out in the Adoption Act. I'm
sorry, and the neglect and Abuse
Act.
Our conditions created by the
removal of the child by the
department itself.
And particularly in this day and
age when things are taking so
long to get uh adjudicated.
Uh, the, the feeling of the of
the task force was why should
parents
caregivers be punished by
children being in out of home
care for uh uh an extended
period of time when it was
beyond their control. Other
factors that affect the
presumption of abandonment I can
address later in response to any
questions if you have any, um,
but, uh, that in very quick
nutshell is the reason for
proposing the changes, uh, that
require removing the presumption
of abandonment from Article 4.
The neglect and abuse Act of the
Children's code, not Article 5,
which is the adoption Act. Thank
you.
Judge, would you be pardon me,
madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I'd like to
request Judge Romero continued
uh talking about revision of
time limit. The task force
worked long and hard addressing
the issue of
Uh, the timeline set out in the
adoption Act.
Uh, the way they're set out in
the New Mexico, uh, abuse and
neglect Act are not necessarily
in consort or follow what the
federal government requires,
particularly the adoption and
safe Families Act.
So the whole notion, and I
should also add that this uh
working group was staffed by
members of CYFD by practitioners
who represented parents.
Practitioners who represented
youth uh as either guardians
that light or youth attorneys
and at least 2 of us judges,
myself and a sitting judge.
So, the discussion had to do
with how do we
Bring New Mexico's timelines in
line with what the federal
requirements are.
The after studying the the the
concerns that we were looking
at, um, it actually works out
better to uh change the timeline
so that it comes into compliance
with the federal legislation.
And, and has a couple of
benefits. Number one, without
necessarily giving
Anyone in advantage or
disadvantage, it allows families
additional time in keeping with
the federal requirements.
To work a case plan that would
change their behaviors and allow
for reunification or return of
the children to their homes.
Uh, it also provides for
timelier permanency for
children, permanency being a
number of things, either
reunification.
Uh, freed for adoption or
involved for the older kids and
uh another plan permanency plan.
Meaning aging out of foster care
and being placed uh with a
substitute family that
necessarily wouldn't be adopting
them.
Part of the timeline revisions
really calls for what
May be a term of art front
loading the system.
By requiring us judges to
actually do what the federal law
passed in 1980 requires us to
do, and that's provide judicial
oversight over the entire child
welfare process.
For too long, probably at least
4 years into my uh judgeship.
I thought the child welfare was
a responsibility of the
Children, Youth and Families
department.
Uh, the scales fell from my eyes
and the realization was that we
are all part of the child
welfare system.
Even you old folks sitting here
as citizens of the state of New
Mexico.
Certainly those of us who
preside over cases and are
involved in ensuring that
timelines are met.
Ensuring that services are
provided in a timely fashion and
ensuring that services are
uniquely designed to fit the
needs of that particular family
and that child, one plan, one
size does not fit all.
So front loading the system by
having judges do what the
federal law requires and be more
engaged by asking questions.
Asking for for results, setting
hearings more frequently than
just what New Mexico's statutes
require.
Quite frankly, many
jurisdictions throughout the
state of New Mexico were already
doing that.
In our court, uh, there usually
was a 6 month period.
I think it was a 6 month period
between the time the the
dispositional reported in child
welfare was, was entered, and
the time we came back for a
permanency hearing which was to
decide what's going to happen.
The child's gonna go back.
Or um we're going to move
forward to terminate parental
rights.
In Berlio County, we were
requiring an interim review at 3
months after the adjudication
hearing to see how things were
going, and quite frankly, that
was requested.
By attorneys representing the
parents.
The attorneys representing
children uh joined in with that
request, and it was not welcome
necessarily by everybody because
it meant more work, but that's
what we're here for, not for
ourselves, but for the benefit
of the parent, the children and
families.
who didn't ask to be invited
into the system, but are in it
and our goal is to provide
better outcomes.
By being engaged and being
accountable to what our jobs
require us to do.
So that children and families
benefit from that aspect of it.
Thank you.
I'm sorry, I'll move on to
revising the definition for a
for a neglected child to include
instances when a child has
negligent, unsupervised access
to a firearm or other deadly
weapon.
I grew up in Amarillo, Texas.
I'm 2 generations removed from
ranching, uh, and I went to
school and church with ranchers.
I am not talking about the 13
year old who's had Eddie Eagle
training who takes the rifle out
to take out the predators that
are killing the sheep. That is
not negligent unsupervised
access. It's unsupervised, but
it's not negligent. The parent
has made good decisions,
training the child, the child
has
as a reason
Uh
We are uh.
The task force felt that it was
important.
Uh, to look at this and to make
sure that.
We're distinguishing.
If you're drunk and you leave
your handgun out in the living
room where you're
tortured 13 year old can get a
hold of it.
That's one problem. It's
completely different if you're
13 year old conspired and worked
and worked behind the scenes to
try to get to that gun and you
legitimately had no way of
knowing that that was happening
and as far as you knew you had
adequately locked the weapon.
We just felt that it was
important along the lines of
Benny Hargrove, for example.
To make sure that we had a way
when parents were not being
responsible with their weapons.
Uh, Judge Romero.
in the supplemental report, the
one issued January on page 28,
there's a discussion of the
Families in need of court order
Services Act and the proposed.
Amendments to uh that section of
the of the Children's code
32A-3B1 through 32A 23B22.
Families in need of court order
services as an alternative to.
Uh, ensuring that prevention and
treatment services are afforded
families and their, you know,
parents and their children or
caregivers and their children.
Uh, an alternative to filing a
petition of abuse and neglect.
And further,
Um, embroiling the system and
its resources in a more intense
program.
So the proposed amendments
Uh, revise the Children's code
to permit families.
And the children, youth and
Families department to
collaborate.
On a plan to provide.
Uh, services for families in
need.
Without having to go immediately
to an abuse and neglected
termination.
Uh, it creates a process by
which the families in court
order services, uh, case can
lead to
Uh, if necessary, to an abuse
and neglect petition eventually
if that's what.
If the efforts are not
successful in dealing with this
through the families in quarters
changes. That's a short version
of what uh the Fios uh
amendments as set out in
supplemental report page 28.
Uh, set out.
The new act that the task force
is proposing. It's called the
crossover Youth Act.
A lot of folks don't
Throughout the country, in my
experience, at least, crossover
youth are referred to as dual
jacketed.
A duly adjudicated New Mexico
has adopted the terminology
pretty consistently of referring
to these kids as crossover
youth.
Crossover you usually start out
in the child welfare department.
Uh, in under neglect and abuse.
Um
One prominent physician in New
Mexico has said it is in child
welfare for delinquent children
are born and created because we
overlook the need for services,
not only to the children, but to
their families. It's very
difficult to provide services.
To
A family when you're not
including parents or caregivers
and the children involved, so
the crossover Youth Act as a
proposed new act defines terms
that not only will address
children who are in both child
welfare and juvenile justice.
In my experience on the bench,
it was not.
Out under abuse and neglect.
Ended up in my court.
As a juvenile justice offender,
alleged to be a delinquent
child.
Before our court took the bull
by the horns and said, one judge
should handle both cases.
Not every jurisdiction, but
I know what's, I know what's
gonna happen in the Jews comes
to me.
And my judicial authority allows
me to require attorneys from
both cases to be present at
every hearing.
Whether it's a neglect and abuse
hearing or a juvenile justice
case.
For too long,
When a child ended up in the
juvenile justice arena.
The folks in child welfare.
Protectives their problem now,
juvenile probation and the judge
handling the juvenile justice
case can deal with it from now
on.
That's not how it's supposed to
work.
Particularly when they both
reside in the same state agency,
Children, Youth and Families
Department. This act.
Proposes to promote.
Better coordination, not just
among the folks in in the CYFD.
But among law enforcement,
Among service providers in the
community to ensure that
The backgrounds of these
children are looked at. They're
um adverse childhood
experiences, the trauma they've
experienced and to ensure that
we're not working at cross
purposes and ensuring that this
child ends up.
With a commitment only to be
released.
And recidivate, but we want to
make sure that we're producing
positive outcomes by uh so that
these children who have been
overlooked before are not
overlooked or some other factors
that I'll quickly touch on and
and we can address them later if
you have any questions, but the
um
Fostering Connections Act that
allows kids who turn who are at
least 18 and meet some other
requirements can be voluntarily
in a court uh overseeing
program.
And interestingly the uh second
judicial district court has a
youth court program that some of
these kiddos who have aged out
of the foster care system
without being adopted, but ended
up in a permanent guardianship
are being addressed because of
events that followed their uh
bad experience in child welfare
in a juvenile justice.
And I can address more in
detail.
When we get to that.
Oh
The last, thank you. The last,
um,
Suggested new act was something
that was worked on by the
Children's Court Improvement
Commission a couple of years ago
and then when the Supreme Court
decided that it was no longer
appropriate for the CCIC to
propose any legislation. Yes, I
get the separation of church and
state that uh sorry, church and
say that was cute part the the
three branches of government
that was interesting, um.
We wanted to make sure that this
brought got brought forward,
however, and this would allow in
very rare cases and only when
it's in the best interest of the
child for a child to be safely
reunited with a parent who
previously lost their parental
rights, but who has subsequently
corrected the causes and
conditions that brought the
child into state custody.
It would allow any party the
ability to file for the
reinstatement of parental rights
by the child, by the former
parent, or even by CYFD, it has
to be in the best interest of
the child, and the department
then could still file a new
abuse and neglect act arising
out of that if things go wrong.
Uh, that's in the original
report on page 35.
Now
Finally, we have recommendations
that came out of the task force,
things that were thought
experience, experiments or
things that we would request the
3.
Arms of government to consider
and maybe we're planting the
seed of something that can
happen 10 years in the in the
future.
For the executive, including
state agencies.
We recommend that we have true
collaboration between the
children's cabinet, the
aggencies, the children's court
Improvement commission and
various task forces such as
Senate Memorial 5 Task Force,
the Children's code reform task
force to better support families
in poverty and help keep
children out of foster care.
Now
Our report Big Life says
universal basic income. Since we
wrote that report, we learned
that that may or may not be the
exact language that would be
ideal, maybe what we were really
thinking about was guaranteed
basic income.
Universal basic income is a
little bit like a distribution
of the dividend out of the
permanent fund in Alaska. We
probably all heard about that.
Alaska has this permanent fund
and in 2024 gave everyone $1700.
Um
New Mexico produces more gas
than Alaska or more oil, uh, and
more than North Dakota, uh, more
than North Dakota.
As well and more than Colorado,
the only one we fall behind is
Texas. Wouldn't that be an
interesting thing to do to truly
support families in this family.
Do uh in this uh manner. Do we
really think that's something
that
Our state is ready to move
forward on right now. No, we
don't, but do we think it's a
useful conversation to help
raise our children out of the
direst poverty. Yes, we are
asking as members of the task
force that we consider that.
For the legislature.
Uh, we think it would be useful
for legislators to have annual
training about how the
children's code works. It's
pretty weird. It's very
different than.
Criminal law or regular civil
law, there are unique
responsibilities and federal
requirements, um, that are not
necessarily at play in other
aspects of the law.
We would suggest future changes
to state law, particularly as to
a dependent child, which most of
us would think of as an orphan,
a child whose parents have died
or whose legal guardian has
died, leaving no one able to
care for the child. This is the
horrible circumstances, but
maybe both parents die in a car
wreck and the kid is in the
state.
Dependent child would allow
expedited processes to help that
child move to permanency more
free more quickly, but what we
heard from the attorneys that
represent young people is that
kids whose parents have died
don't want to hear their parents
accused of having abandoned them
or having abused or neglected
them, and right now under our
current law, those are the only
3 choices to.
adjudicate a child who may have
lost both their parents, so
we're recommending putting new
language in for a dependent
child. We thought, oh well,
that's easy, we'll just change
the definition in the code.
Well, that's wrong. We learned
very quickly because there are
all sorts of changes that have
to happen throughout the entire
chapter about those expedited
processes. We would also like to
uh consider application of this.
to children who are brought into
custody under the safe haven law
which protects a parent who is
in terrible straits from being
criminally prosecuted. Right now
you do, however, still have to
have a civil legal process to
disentangle the child from the
legal custody of the parent to
allow them to move forward, but
what we also know, according to
our experts from CYFD.
That's about 50% of the time in
safe haven cases once the mom
finds out, oh, I could get help
with that. Oh, their services
for that? Decides that they
actually do want to try to be
reunited with their child, so
safe haven, although we think,
oh well, it's easy. Here's a
baby in a basket, take care of
my child, I can't do it. It's
not quite that simple, so it's
not quite the same as an orphan
child.
Um
We'd also the task force wanted
us to ask to make sure that
medically assisted treatment for
substance misuse disorders was
explicitly permitted. I
personally having represented
parents and and kids in the
system have had heard a judge
tell a parent who was doing very
successfully on methadone. Oh,
you've just substituted one
addiction for another. Never
mind that they were no longer
breaking the law.
going out trying to obtain
opiates, etc.
Um
We, uh, want to remove any
reference to child prostitution
throughout the code because
children cannot be prostitutes.
They cannot, they can only be
victims of human trafficking.
No child is choosing to be a sex
worker.
They may think they are at the
time, but that is really not how
a child comes to do that.
Then for the judiciary, um.
We, uh.
The, the task force suggested
that the children's court Rules
Committee develop in the courts
adopt any rules necessary, um,
to fully implement any changes
to statute that might be
arising, um.
And to look at uh rules to
facilitate effective and timely
service of process by
publication or in person.
Uh, to have uh if a parent shows
up and they've been dodging
service, but they show up in
court. We want somebody to be
able to hand them a copy of the
paperwork and they're now
formally served. They don't get
to say, oh, I never got. Yes,
Judge, did you?
With regard to to the judiciary.
Seems to me like this focus
appropriately is focused on what
the children's court Rules
Committee should do to um grease
the skins for some of the
changes that we're proposing, I
would suggest
That judges and lawyers need
training as well. I recall
probably 15 years ago when I had
the good fortune, probably one
of the first times I was here
at, at, at the legislature.
Talking about Karin Wolf Center
for Children and Family Justice
and how valuable they are in
training lawyers and judges.
That particular legislator said
to me, Why do you guys need
training? Didn't you go to law
school and didn't you pass the
bar?
Um, just underscores part of
what I think Ms. Connelly
mentioned about we all need
training, um, and, and
personally as a judgment I was
sitting on the bench, I think
the annual training that I got
at the judicial conclave, the
training that I got at the
Children's Law Institute and
very importantly, the training
that I got by participating in
events that the National Council
of June on Family Court Judges
presented.
Made me a better judge, a more
aware and alert judge more
compassionate and more sensitive
to the unique needs of every
family and every child.
As I mentioned earlier, not one
size fits all, so that's just
my, my take on training the
judiciary and, and to underscore
a pointed Kristen made about.
A child prostitute.
And in the uh Finko's revisions
that we're talking about, it did
say that if a child is engaging
in activity that otherwise would
be deemed prostitution.
Our own delinquency Act, and I
think that amendment passed.
While I was on the bench, I
don't recall exactly when.
But in 32A 23, it says as used
in the delinquency Act,
delinquency Act means and that
committed by a child that would
be designated as a crime under
the law if committed by an
adult.
Not including a violation of
Section 30-9-2.
Which
Basically is the prostitution
statute. So it's specifically
prohibits
Alleging that a child is a
delinquent child under that
portion of the adult criminal
code.
I just hold on to the rest.
I would prefer we have the
presentation, take notes, and
then we'll go back and ask
questions.
Thank you.
Uh, I do have a, a very quick
summary of
Not changes to the law.
But information sheets that the
juvenile committee or the
juvenile work group of the task
force, um.
Worked very diligently on on
doing the research.
Um, and reducing that to a
one-page document that I don't
know if you all have gotten yet
or not, and I'll briefly go over
what some of those are.
Um, without going into great
detail, be very happy to answer
questions. The information
sheets have to do with adverse
childhood experiences, it makes
reference to a.
A research project that was done
specifically to New Mexico
children detained in the
juvenile justice system in
long-term commitments.
Another information sheet has to
do with adolescent and young
adult brain and delinquency, the
connection with the developing
brain, the immature brain and
how that may or may not lead to
delinquency.
And also how futile it is to
change our
Uh, to, to buy into the notion
that being tougher on crime.
Is actually going to produce
A greater public safety and more
efficiency in the way we spend
our money as a government. The
futility of severe punishment.
And then one of the consequences
in juvenile justice of the way
we do things is that there's a
real impact on racial and ethnic
disparities in the juvenile
justice system.
Where a marginalized children or
children from marginalized
families are the ones that
disproportionately end up in the
juvenile justice system.
There's also an information
sheet that has to do with the
incarceration of youth. Why that
is something that needs to be
considered in terms of the
long-term benefits to our
society and then their families
themselves.
As an example, I remember, uh,
having kids on my caseload that
were being held pending
adjudication.
Or almost into a year at the
juvenile detention center.
A facility that's designed for
short term detention, not for a
year of incarceration.
How does that impact their
school?
Well, when I was on the bench,
it was actually a program in the
detention center that
Provided for kids to at least.
Work on some of their
educational needs, but that
didn't always work out so well
because the teachers changed the
programs changed, and it was a
band-aid on a cancer.
Um
There's also an information
sheet on the juvenile detention
alternatives initiative, Jedi by
the NE Casey Foundation.
Or jurisdictions ended up being
part of that program in the
state of New Mexico, started off
in Bernalillo County.
Uh, and then finally, something
very important made reference
earlier to what Doctor George
Davis said about delinquent kids
were born in the child welfare
system or the neglect of the
child welfare system and
bringing them in and providing
services and treatment, but
upstream interventions, uh, how
those can be preventative, uh,
and how those services will
actually uh promote children not
being involved in either the
child welfare system or in the
juvenile justice system.
Those are all contained in the
information sheets.
That I just mentioned to you and
happy to respond to questions
later if you have it. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
that is the end of our
presentation at this point.
Thank you for this opportunity
and for the invitation to
address you.
And thank you very much. um,
just for information for
committee members.
At the back of your report in
front is where you have uh the
one she resource uh that Judge
Romero mentioned and it talks
about, um, again, the, the uh
adolescent young adult brain
delinquency and again has
resources where you can go back.
And uh verify and and do some
more.
Our research and reading, um,
with regards to uh anything, any
questions with regards to the
juvenile justice area.
So I want to say thank you for
your presentation.
Um, and if there's any questions
that the committee would have.
Um
We have a couple of persons
here.
Um, who maybe can.
Uh, answer some of your
questions and we'll.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Miss
Connolly.
You tell me what percentage.
The problem, kids in this state.
In her generation, how many of
these circumstances, Madam
Chair, Senator Scott, I
personally am unable to answer
that. I do not have that data.
We certainly know that uh abuse
can be generational, uh, but we
also know that uh poverty
affects many generations
produces uh as well as the
effects of.
Uh, discrimination for people of
color. We, we know it makes a
difference in how people.
Raised up in the world. I, I'm
not certain if I'm accurately
addressing what you're asking.
And I don't know how we would
track the multigenerational
piece of it.
Madam chair Senator Scott,
that's a great question. I wish
we had data that would inform
because perhaps we could do
things differently based on what
the data teaches.
I can only tell you from my
experience sitting on both the
juvenile justice bench and on
the child welfare case sighed
that very often poverty and
neglect were a foundational to
these kids coming into custody.
Whether on the juvenile justice
system or being removed from
their families.
Miss Connolly mentioned abuse as
being generational.
Uh, I used to just cringe when
um one of the allegations in the
in the
Probable cause statement in
child welfare cases was
Mom is living with a significant
other who is abusive to her and
to the kids. She's failing to
protect her children, and that's
why we're going to remove the
children from her. He's not a
caregiver. He just somebody
who's there.
Uh, the father
We didn't know a whole lot about
him initially, but he was not
initially in the picture.
So what our system did,
Was Mom who was being abused.
Um, battered a victim of
interpersonal violence, our
system.
Yours truly included further
victimized her by removing her
children from her, and
eventually those children may be
returned or not. Her rights may
be terminated and the father's
rights terminated as well. So
when I say I wish we had that
data, that data would be very
helpful in guiding us into what
we should be doing and
dissuading us from continuing to
do what we have done.
Unfortunately, to my knowledge.
Those data are not available.
So, Madam Chair, Judge.
You don't believe that the
disintegration of the nuclear
family.
Consisting of a mom, a dad.
And any children that may result
from that.
Family unit
You don't believe that the
disintegration of that.
Nuclear family.
Is, is
Ms. Connie indicated she'd like
to address that.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
I, I don't have an opinion about
that. I don't know that answer.
I just know that we have to work
with the kids that come to us as
they are in the child and family
welfare system.
And if their family is 4
generations all living together
on a compound that's great if or
not if their family is one mom
struggling to support 4 kids by
herself, sharing a house with
somebody that's great or not. I
just, we just have to work with
what comes to us and I and I
don't know. I, I don't have an
opinion about that. I, I don't
know.
Madam Chair, senators Scott, one
of the things that
It was not uncommon, at least in
our child welfare cases was that
there was a father and a mother
and children.
And I'm not sure how to define
deterioration of the nuclear
family, uh, how, how that should
be defined. I can think of
several different ways.
What I saw mostly was a lack of
resources, some of them due to
their own bad choices in life,
some of them maybe not.
But they were a family and
intact family living in a very
dire circumstances and unable to
care for their children or
unwilling maybe in some
instances to care for them as
they should.
But if deterioration of the
nuclear family is an issue, and
I would.
I wouldn't disagree with you
that that's an issue, not the
unique and only issue.
How do we as a society, as a
state with the services that we
spend on
Kids and families after children
are removed, be better spent in
holding that nuclear family
together.
Uh, by assisting them and
providing services without
bringing them into the legal
system, where now we're paying
CYFD we're paying CYFD
attorneys, we're paying the
judge. We're paying for
attorneys who represent the
children and parent and
attorneys who represent the
parents.
It's just a dilemma that needs
more study, and, and I wish that
data that you're talking about
or the alluded to were available
to inform us on what direction
we should be taking and what
direction we've been taking
should be abandoned, but an
excellent question that I think
addresses.
The bigger picture of of what
we're facing in our state.
Well, Madam Chair, Judge, the
comments with respect to
Lack of resources that
legislative council or
legislative finance Committee
report.
The detailed the equivalent
revenue stream.
Of a family of 4.
With one minimum wage job.
Participating in.
All of the state programs.
currently available to them.
And that was in fact, it was a
number higher.
And most working families
managed to achieve.
So
Something else
Something else
Besides dollars is going on.
And a phenomenon.
That is a consequence of
Public policy.
Over the last 30 or 40 years
that
Does not the formation of
nuclear families.
Stable
Well if you care to respond,
please do. Madam Chair, Senator
Scott, I, I think that
Uh, not all families who end up
in our system qualify for the
services you're making uh that
you're referencing, even with,
with, you know, a steady stream
of perhaps minimal income.
Some of the services that should
be available are not available
if you make enough money not to
qualify for those services, but
you're not making enough money
to pay a private practitioner
for those services. For example,
um, a, uh, and a full blown
neuropsychological evaluation
for a child to determine whether
He or she qualifies for a DD
waiver.
That that's outrageously
expensive, but if your family is
in the child welfare system, for
example, or they're making
enough money so that they
qualify for state or federal
services.
Um
And, and not beyond that, then
they may be able to access those
services and participating in
them very willingly.
Without
Uh, missing a beat.
Those families who may wish to
participate because they are
working, perhaps both parents
are working, make too much money
to qualify for some of those
programs and don't participate
in them because they can't
afford it. And some of those
families end up with their kids
in the juvenile justice system
or in the child welfare system.
So again, I, I think that that
that the nuclear family is an
important role and important
factor, and yet,
Each family is unique and
different and, and to, to look
at each family individually and,
and, and individualize the
services they need is what the
courts and the system should be
doing.
Uh, not looking at a broad brush
and I'm not suggesting that you
are, but that's what some of us
want to do in the system is
paint these folks with the same
brush, and it doesn't work.
Thank you. Thank you for your
answers. Thank you, Madam Chair
and uh Senator Scott, if I may
add to that, uh, on.
Childlaw.Um.edu
under the Children's code reform
Task Force.
Um, you will find these reports,
you will also find background
information that was conducted
by our researchers. One of the
things that truly deeply shocked
me was the discovery that
nationwide, there there have
been studies that show that even
a $100 extra a month to a family
can reduce child welfare
referrals, and it's some.
startling number like 16% for
every $100 and such a simple
intervention. It may be the
difference between the stress of
I've got to pick up another
shift at work so I can afford a
birthday cake for Susie.
But if you've got 100 bucks,
maybe you can buy a little
birthday cake at Smith's and not
have to work an extra hour away
from your kids, and so that was
and I would ask you to look at
the uh the monetary impacts of
support and preventing child
abuse and neglect referrals, and
that report does appear on the
Corinne Wolf Center website.
Like
Thank you, Senator Sidil Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for this report, um.
And I really like your idea in
in creating this task force of
having sort of separate separate
statutes, we had a task force on
the family updating the family
violence Protection Act, and the
idea is to update the whole
thing, and I think that that
just is pretty hard to do in a
session because when we have so
long, so I think your approach
is actually a better approach.
My question is, is, are, are any
of the suggested amendments,
have you got?
Madam Chair, Senator Sedia
Lopez, uh, I personally don't
know what has and has been
picked up because of my
position, I'm not permitted to
lobby at all. I could only come
upon invitation. I have not been
tracking that, so I really do
not know that answer, and it's
possible that Madam Chair may
have that information more than
I.
Madam Chair,
There are several bills that are
already in the process of being
drafted and those are the
recommendations that came from
the task force. There are 55
bills at this time.
Um, as you will go through in in
our leisure time, of course.
We go and look at all the other
recommendations. Those are still
too many for us to have in one
session. So what are our vision
is, is next year a few more, and
for those, you know, it, it just
takes time.
For us to review, but there are
5 measures that are currently
being drafted at this time.
And they're the ones who are
being who are recommended here.
Excellent. And Madam Chair, um,
So the very first bill that I
ever.
Well, I think it was the first
bill. um, I carried the bill for
uh Gail Chasey in the Senate,
she was looking for somebody to
carry it, um, when she did the
amendment to the juvenile the
Uh, prostitution, see code.
And um the clinical law program
where our experts and so my
question is, and perhaps um.
Expert Romero, Judge Romero
knows is
The reason we did it that way
was because.
it was kind of a complicated
thing to do because we want.
And so they became children in
need of supervision instead of
delinquent children is, is how
we did it.
My question is, is that working
or do we do need to remove any
senatoria Lopez, an excellent
question, and it, it actually
comes under the umbrella of
child sex trafficking perhaps to
be addressed uh in, in a broader
umbrella discussion.
But what was happening with
children who are being
trafficked.
And they're not, they're not
doing this willingly contrary to
popular opinion. They don't like
sex contrary to popular opinion.
They have been, um, either
recruited uh uh induced into
believing something that isn't
by those who
call themselves child
psychologists, not a pimp. One
guy said that I'm not a pimp.
I'm, I'm a child psychologist. I
know how to find vulnerable, uh,
he didn't say ladies. I know how
to find them, I know how to talk
to them, and before you know,
they're working, making me
money, not them money.
So what was happening, some of
these kids, uh, and, and I
underscore their kids, their
children, uh, being raped, being
sold for someone's sexual
pleasure.
Um
They get arrested because they
have announced has happened
recently uh in Albuquerque, uh,
with two young girls who were
seen uh on East Central, uh,
scantily dressed.
One of them under 14, I don't
know how old the other one was,
and they were brought here, they
didn't come here voluntarily
from California, but now there
are they're in some kind of
custody. I don't know where
they're at.
Uh, and the perpetrators of the
sex trafficking are facing
federal charges along with state
charges.
So, these kids who would get
arrested.
End up in the juvenile detention
center awaiting a petition and
they're being criminalized.
Or being victims or being
exploited and what this
Seeks to do is ensure that they
don't get charged for
prostitution.
But they still get charged for
other stuff, um, if they were on
probation and they're out.
You know, where they're not
supposed to be, they're
violating their conditions of
probation when maybe they're
still being trafficked.
Kids who get trafficked, some of
them live at home. Their parents
don't even know that instead of
being at the library studying,
uh, that they're out, you know,
being coerced forced uh to, to
sell themselves.
Um
Familial pimping is another
thing we don't hear a whole lot
about, but it's, it's
Rampant across the country where
families themselves.
You know, sell their kids uh for
drug in exchange for drugs,
money, whatever it is.
So this is a preventative.
Section of the children's code
that says you can't charge them
for prostitution.
I would conclude by adding that
I think it was the 2018
amendment to the Child Abuse
Prevention and Treatment Act.
That
In one of its provisions.
Say that a child who's being
trafficked.
is a neglected, I'm sorry, an
abused child and that that
should be handled under the
Auspices of child welfare, not
juvenile justice.
To my knowledge,
That has not been incorporated
into the practice in New Mexico.
The typical response nationally
is, well, we don't have a third
party exploiter.
Um, you know, it has to be, you
know, we didn't have a provision
for a third party exploiter. We
have a provision for a parent or
a caregiver or a significant
other who's been residing with a
child exploiting the child. Then
when you have a trafficker
explaining the child, that's a
third party, we have no
jurisdiction over. Consequently,
we can't bring him under the
umbrella of child welfare.
Something that is uh desperately
lacking.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think those are all really
important things, but it also
tells me that that um.
That amendment that was made is
in 2019. I've, I remember very
well because it was my first
session, um.
That that amendment isn't doing
what it was supposed to because
it we did a lot of research and.
They did not want it
decriminalized completely, they
said we want to be able to offer
services and so that's why she's
the.
They, uh, whoever it is, the
victim is, is labeled a child in
need of services.
And you're saying not enough.
I think that.
This is part of the families in
need of court order services
that is set out in more detail
in the reports, but and I'm
excuse me, Madam Chair and
Senator Saa Lopez, I would, I
would argue that that while it's
not doing enough, it's because
we're still
Using our biases when kids come
into our system and.
At least passing.
Judgment on who they are.
They're they're.
Frequent flyers in our juvenile
justice systems I've heard you
say. Are the or she she is she
here again when we don't know
the rest of the story. We see
the tip of the iceberg, but we
don't see the 80% below the
surface, that really tells us
what's going on with that child.
So I think more needs to be done
to address this population.
Especially those who are for
marginalized communities.
And ethnicities who are more
victims.
There are more sus uh
susceptible to being, you know,
being looked at and judged from
a biased perspective without
having all the facts. And and
Madam Chair, when I was at the
executive director of
Communitario, um.
When
Young girl, um.
was
Right, well, she came in, um.
And what had happened to her is
she was brought from Mexico.
With her boyfriend.
Who then put her, she, she'd
been here for a while and of
course she had not having
papers, it was just it was a
very, very and the fear of being
was yet another problem and.
As you point out, she was a
victim.
And to me, in every sense of the
word.
Um, she had no interest or
trying to stay here. She got to
her here.
Uh, and I, I didn't blame her.
Then I have another question
about this, that people who
previously lost their parental
rights.
But then they've corrected the
causes.
Wouldn't those children be
adopted and isn't that or or
whatever.
Madam Chair Senator Sio Lopez,
we would love for all those kids
to have already been adopted,
but that's not the case. We
have.
30 kids a year age out of the
system.
Um, a lot of interest in this is
by young people who do not have
prospects of being adopted, cute
little kids adopt, get adopted
pretty quickly, a spiky
teenagers, none of us are very
adaptable as teenagers, and it
does happen, blessings to the
folks that do that, uh, but
there are plenty of kids that
that doesn't happen with,
however, this, uh.
Uh, proposal also includes kids
that have been adopted, but it
is just or have guardianships,
but it is just obvious that's
not quite working out in those
circumstances, the family that
adopted has to agree.
That the parents can retake
parental rights. So that's,
that's part and parcel of this.
So be yanking kids away from.
People in adopted families
unless.
Unless the parent, the adoptive
parents, Madam Chair, senatorio
Lopez, that is correct. That is
correct. All right, because the
way this was phrased, I was like
this could be a problem, but I
think that's, that's important
that you clarify that.
Um
And I really think the training
idea because it's very, very
complicated, and I also think it
would that in addition to us
getting trained to get trained
for how the system to parents
who get their, I know this
doesn't happen as much in from a
home with domestic violence,
instead of the the parent go
thank you very much for all of
the work on the task force, and
I, um, I really appreciate that
and I see the expertise of the
individual serving on the task
force, and I wish you.
question. I noticed, Mr. Chair.
That um
I, I noticed that um
The Ombudsman idea is not on
this, or is it?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Senator Cedilia Lopez, we did
not address the ombudsman's
program because we understood
other people were working on
that.
But so you didn't take a
position one way or another on
that.
Thank you, um, it's.
Being on legislative health, I
really love having you get
together, having the thought
going going.
Um, the thinking by all these
experts going through the
system, but it's really, really
valuable to us because we don't
have time.
To to do that kind of work, and
I really we're doing this
because it's it.
And it's better for it to be
comprehensive. So thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I
I'll let Senator Gallegos go
first. He was before me and uh
I'd like to go after.
That'll be fine. Thank you.
Now,
Miss, uh.
Um
Miss Connelly
And Judge Romero, uh, I just
wanted, I'm gonna apologize, I
came in late, but Miss Connolly,
I just want to start with part
of your testimony and you're
talking about Safe Havenville or
Safe boxes, uh, and I wanted to
correct, you said 50% of the
cases the mom wants their child
back.
Currently, and, and go back in
history in 2013 when we did the,
uh, the adjustment to Safe Haven
box or save him.
Bill, uh, is to hand it off in
person to our station.
Since, uh, soul was shown in the
dumpster in Hobbs. I've been on
the safe haven box. We have 3
little boys, they're all getting
ready to be adopted.
None of the parents have come
forward, so we're 100% you
showed 50%. I want to correct
that because I know in some
other instances, not in the safe
haven box in other instances
they've gone back to try to
recover and see why he does work
with them on that, but to my
knowledge as of today.
Those 3 little boys are still in
the process. There are too
little other little girls that
have been brought to the
hospital during this period.
I do not know about them and
their parents and what's going
on? I just wanted to clarify
that because I just wanna make
sure that
Right now the safe haven box is
the best option that we have
going for us because it's
working.
I just wanted to correct that.
Miss, Miss Connelly.
Uh, may I address that, uh, Mr.
Chair,
so Mr. Chair and Senator
Gallegos, I think the safe haven
box is a fabulous idea. It is
amazing and wonderful that we
can relieve parents of the fear
of criminal prosecution when
they realized that they do not
have it in them to rep to raise
their children. We think it's
wonderful.
My 50% is not a statement of
fact, it's a shoot from the hip
based on anecdotal information
from the children's court
attorneys that served on our
task force who guesstimated we
think about 50% of those moms
say, oh, I can get services?
Well, yeah, let me try to
parent.
So I'm, I'm, I am delighted to
hear about those 3 little boys
and those couple of girls in
your district, thank goodness
and what a blessing that those
kids early on have families that
love them that want them. I
appreciate that and uh thank you
for clarification. Uh, I only
have 2 in my district. The other
young man is from Bilan and the
two little girls are somewhere
in the actually where they're
at, so, uh, I did want to, you
know, I appreciate.
Mr. uh, that you guys are are
happy with Safe Haven Bill. I, I
would like to have, um.
Some support because uh it seems
like.
Uh, CYD secretary.
And the 4th floor have a problem
with it right now we don't have
protection for the mother, so
Miss Taran.
It's, let me give you some
background. My daughter works
for CYFD.
When the first little baby was
deposited.
See, wife he did everything they
could to find the mother even
use in in Lee County we have a
camera system called the Eagle
Eye.
They wanted the city to give the
name or the license plate of the
mother, the first time we do
something to hold that mother.
She's done a huge justice for
the child, but the first time we
put our hand to prosecution for
what just abandonment, uh, then
that save him box has no more
value.
And so I see you're ready to
respond, Miss Darrell.
Yeah
Mr. Chair and Senator Gallegos.
One of the really tricky things
about safe haven is that there's
two parts of the law that have
to be considered when a child
has been surrendered.
The criminal part, it's a crime
to give your kid away.
That's where the protection is,
and that is appropriate and
beautiful. The civil part. Oh,
I've got this kid that was given
away. What do I do about this
kid? We need to know about this
kid's DNA. We need to know if
there is some amazing wonderful
uh abuela out there who can
raise this child with all the
love in the world. We need to
know if this mom that
desperately put her kid in the
safe haven.
Did it because her abusive
boyfriend said you get rid of
that kid or I'm gonna kill you
or worse, I'm gonna kill the
kid. That's the problem and
that's why CYFD has to work so
hard to find out who this parent
was to discover what were those
horrible circumstances that led
this parrot to think this was
the best option.
Thank you.
And thank you for that Mr.
Chair.
And lady, uh, so to give you a
little bit more background, uh,
in July of last year we had CYD,
the governor's staff. We had
public safety. We had a lot of
the people that are surrounding
see what uh the say Paville all
came to CYFD for an agreement.
We looked at that and to try to
resolve the the packet
information or the, the
information, so in the current
statute, if you hand a child
off,
That parent will be asked in
person.
Uh, do you want to give any
history or of the name of the
child or anything they're not
obligated.
At all
The mom can drop it off and and
walk and there's nothing we can
do against her.
In the packet at Sapa box.
It is now set up that it has all
the information in there so as
you open the door to insert the
child.
Then the packet falls and it
gives you all the details, even
the services that you can be
provided.
If you're so well consider, if
you want to reconsider, you
would have that you have CY
these information you have the
safe paper boxes information and
they give you the opportunity.
If they never call.
I look it as the same as the mom
walking away. Now the problem we
have, we had an agreement.
For this session.
I have been asked to stay off
the bill so it'd be signed.
Which is pretty sad.
But we're looking at for this
session last Monday the
Secretary of CYFD did not follow
through, so we're going to run
the bill as needed as we have it
without CYDs.
Intervention and agreement.
In order to get it to the
judiciary.
So that our attorneys can look
at this and they can look at the
issues and solve it because
right now the way it is that
mother is I just want to let you
know that we did do an um.
Agreement we had everyone at the
table.
All day at CYFD in order to
resolve it for this session.
And so far
They pulled back
That's why I say, Mr. Chair.
Uh, gentle lady that they
actually want to make a
punitive.
Because they, they feel that
they're still some.
Um
Miss Handling of that child, and
it could be the father, it could
be the boyfriend, uh, the one
Mer.
Ventilla and uh.
Judge, uh, the one in Berlin.
Uh, who actually turned
One
Last Thursday, I believe.
Uh, was they wanted the
sheriff's department wanted to
use him.
To pull the mother.
Out of a human, um.
These
Uh, home.
And I told him, you actually
know you have a sex traffic
home, and it is operating.
But they didn't use the child,
but they were thinking through
how do we get her out and save.
Because a male brought that
little boy to the land Fire
Department, not the mother.
And that was, we know that
because of a phone call.
So there's a lot of.
Information out if they built, I
think this year needs to be.
Uh, we've got 10 currently we've
got 4 other, uh, jurisdictions
that are looking to install
them.
And we owe the mother.
For her sacrifice.
To protect her.
From CYD and anyone else, so,
uh.
Mr Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, I
will change directions now just
because I think I've beat that
horse to death, uh, but.
Madam Chair,
Miss Judge Romero, I just wanted
to ask you and.
I apologize. I hope I
misunderstood, but
In the discussion, I understood.
That um
In children's code, and you can
correct me if I'm wrong, that
the primary consideration of the
welfare of the.
Madam Chair and Senator
Gallegos, it's not quite that
simple. Ultimately, the welfare
of the child is the
consideration. But how can we
consider the welfare of the
child without considering.
The role that that family, the,
the caregivers, mom and dad or
mom and grandma, whomever is
taking care of that child.
How that impacts or doesn't the
welfare of the child. If you
remove a child from the only
family that's ever known and
terminate parental rights and
place that child for adoption.
Not having family time, not
having time with siblings, uh,
not even having family time with
the pet, the only, the only
living breathing entity that
that child may have found
comfort from, how are we
promoting the welfare of the
child. It is a comp.
It, you know, it's a fine mess
you've gotten us into, Ollie, I
guess is the old saying, it's, I
wish it were that simple, but
that's why the judge, the
attorneys, and the providers
involved in these cases need to
be trained.
Thoroughly so that they know
what to look for and to consider
all of the elements that impact
on the welfare of the child, not
just removing them from the
family that maybe has substance
misuse issues as working 3 jobs
and isn't around for the kids.
That that's not in the welfare
of the child.
Uh, so
A, a
Factfinder, the judicial officer
is the one who needs to get all
that information and needs to
ask, even though the horses long
ago dead back to safe haven.
See, I had the experience for
CYFD did not want to move
forward with a case where a safe
haven of
Um
placement of the child had taken
place. Um, I think at a fire
department uh office. And, and
one of the issues that CYD was
hanging her hat on, all of a
sudden their real concerned
about the Indian Child Welfare
Act.
When
You know, they used to
disqualify me from hearing cases
involving the Indian Child
Welfare Act because they said I
was too anal about its
provisions.
Now they're saying we need to
find out who this mother is.
So we can find out whether this
child is an Indian child.
Well, that's a, that's an
important question, but at some
point.
A judge needs to say.
We can spend years doing that
and you're never gonna get
there.
Now the welfare and best
interests of the child analysis
has to come in permanency for
this child is of significant
import. Let's move ahead.
And, and in spite of all the
protestations from the
attorneys, the department.
Um
A a judicial order has to be
issued and we move forward.
That's why appellate courts
exist.
Miss Connelly, did you want to
also add to that?
Thank you if I may, um, Madam
Chair, Senator Gallegos, I, I
wanna clarify.
The 3 bases for child and family
welfare.
Are safety.
Permanency and well-being of the
child when this work started
about 100 years ago.
The only thing we looked at was
safety, but that ended up with
kids getting stuck in foster
care forever being made legal
orphans, uh, being turned into
wards of the state who were then
essentially sold into slavery,
as it were, the idea was, oh no,
we're, you know, 100 years ago
out on the the frontier we're
giving you this kid to be your.
Uh, you know, to learn from you,
but really it was kids having to
go make their way in the world
cause they've lost everything.
We then recognize that
permanency getting kids into
permanent homes as soon as
possible, whether that's
returning home or being placed
for adoption or guardianship was
important and that well-being
was huge that kids' hearts were
not being tended to at all. It
was only their physical bodies.
Now the other thing that we have
in child and family welfare work
are two different concepts. One,
we must support our
constitutional rights.
We have a right, all of us to
parent as we see fit unless we
are legally found to be unfit.
Once a parrot is found to be
unfit, then we look at, OK, now
we know that now what is the
best interest of the child. And
so there's two conflicting
concepts here, well be well,
they're not conflicting, but
they sometimes get kind of
muddled up. One is well-being,
one is best interest, so I just
wanted to make sure that we were
clear on that distinction. Thank
you for that opportunity.
Thank you, Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you both, and I appreciate that.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna follow your
3
Pieces and, and I just want to
show you where I don't think
that it always works that way.
For instance, Mona Lisa, I, I
presume you understand the young
Romanian girl who was in Hobbs,
who was in our custody state of
New Mexico's custody.
And released to the parents.
They left the state they're in
South Carolina.
When they found her in a
hospital, she was blind because
the parents were unfit. Now they
were already separated, but we
say YFD allowed them to have
contact, which I understand in
some circumstances you do want
to try that.
But it's usually a little bit
more background and my daughter
wants runs costs of Lee County,
so they intervene and they make
sure that you have third party
intervention when you're doing a
uh um.
Parent and child interaction.
That's what should have been
done. The police department nor
anyone knew that their parents
left.
A cause of found.
That house abandoned.
Not any of us and she was in our
care, so I, I appreciate the
safety and and permanency and
the welfare of the child.
But sometimes if we don't follow
our own rules.
We heard the child.
So going back to the task force,
Madam Chair, and, and, uh.
Both, I guess my thing is, is I
just want to make sure that as
we, we look at this as far as
the task force that were not.
Over protecting the parent.
So we keep your 3 pieces in, in,
in view.
Because if we send a child back
to a drug infested home.
A drug infested home.
That's wrong.
And I know that that happens.
But the thing is, if the child
was born already.
Uh, having drug issues.
And we have that child out from
that home.
I think we ought to understand
the whole process so that way we
don't give that child back.
some that is not going to clean
up.
And my final point I'll make is
with ICA.
So in that meeting that we had
at CYFD in July.
That was brought up.
Historically, you can ask the
secretary, uh, historically they
send out letters.
On all children they've never
had any of the tribes or
nations.
Return
Looking for that child. So I
think as long as we are doing
what the federal standard is
that we notify the tribes and
pueblos.
That is our obligation.
If they were to come that
creates a whole new view because
we've never had to deal with
that.
And you do they are Native
American or however that fits,
but I think that there's a lot
of things that we've already
jumped through hoops and trying
to correct now.
See why you'll stand on CDs
still
they had an agreement.
They've stepped back, and that's
their deal.
But I think that in the overall
I would ask as a task force
looks at the whole view.
And do not put that child back
in harm because I think that's
where we are failing.
Right now it's CYD so with that
I'll yield and thank you all for
being here. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And thank you, Judge and
I'm sorry, it's been a while. I
forgot your name.
Kristen Connelly.
I remember that. Just have some
questions here to kind of
For me to understand it and
maybe the public and those here
or those watching.
Um, this committee here was this
a bipartisan committee?
How many people were on it?
This task force. OK, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Block, I
would have to sit here and count
on my fingers. I'm gonna say
about 20 people.
I don't know anyone's political
affiliation, I never asked that.
I stepped in. I what I did was
step into a a task forces and
you don't know that's OK. I'm
not trying to just get, I'm not
trying to play catch you. That's
fine. That's good, that's a good
answer. That's a great answer.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
um.
Madam Chair, uh, did you have a,
trying to understand the makeup
of this committee. Was there a
foster parent on this committee
by chance?
I, um, Madam Chair and Senator
Block, I don't know if there was
a foster parent. I know a couple
of people had fostered children,
but I don't know if there was a
current foster parent. I don't
think so.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair was there.
A parent that adopted a child or
children, um.
Working with CY.
I don't know. We've, we've had
some people that have adopted
out of the system. I do not know
that answer though.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um.
Miss Connolly
Who, who appointed the committee
members? Was it?
Uh, you know, was it the
governor? Was it some people in
CYFD, was it a mixture? Was it
one person that made these
appointments.
So, originally this came the the
funding went through the
administrative office of the
courts, uh, and there was a
judge in the 2nd who took
applications and made decisions
based on the applications that
came in. I do not have that
personal knowledge, that is what
I have been informed of.
After I agreed to take over, we
realized we didn't have anybody
from a district attorney's
office. We didn't have anybody
from juvenile justice. We didn't
have anybody from CYFD that
dealt with juvenile justice and
we didn't have a general
counsel uh with CYFD and under
my chair, we reached out and
invited people who agreed to
serve.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Did you have
anybody on the committee that
May have been a fostered, uh,
child, obviously an adult now
that weren't adopted or uh.
A child
As an adult I was on that
committee to kind of provide
some guidance of where, you
know, where that kid was coming
from, Madam Chair, Senator
Block, I am delighted to say I
know that answer, and we had uh
young people uh that had been
through the system. Now I don't
think we had any young people
that had been successfully
adopted. We had young people
that had ended up aging out
because they were never able to
find placements. Thank you.
That's that's that's your best
answer yet.
Well, well, I think
so too.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, how many children come into
care annually for poverty. I
know you said it was pretty low.
Do you, do you have a, a number?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Block, we don't currently track
that. There is nothing that
determines, and here's part of
the problem with poverty. A kid
shows up to school in the same
filthy clothes they've worn
every day and they have scabies.
Is that abuse or neglect, or is
that poverty? I don't know.
They didn't get to the doctor
because they didn't, they live
in Karon County and they didn't
have transportation to the
doctor.
They don't wash their clothes
because they don't have the
money to.
pay at the laundromat and they
wash once a week in their sink.
It's very hard to suss out the
question is if they are offered
resources to address those
particular lacks, then do they
get their acts together and uh
effectively parent their
children.
It's, we don't collect pure
financial information right now.
Thank you. Thank you for that
answer. I appreciate that, uh,
Madam Chair, because I know
there's, there's a lot of gray
area. I think the judge is
shaking his head 12 6, he
agreed. I'm with you there, and
that's that speaks writing
policy uh very difficult. So I
understand that.
Uh, how many kids are right now
are in uh CYFD custody or care,
meaning they're in the foster
program or or some other program
in CYFD.
I don't know I uh Madam Chair
and Senator Block, I am sorry
today I do not know the total
number of children in care right
now. It's beyond my.
Charge
Judge care to guess or it would
be just that, I guess, unfounded
in reality, so I don't know the
answer is listening, they know
I'd be interested in that. So
thank, thanks for
The center is to Dia Lopez
talked about adoption, and I
want to hit that real quick.
Um, some of the most friendly
states to adopt actually is um
Utah and Tennessee.
And I was wondering if the task
force.
Looked at what
Um, Utah specifically is doing
uh in Tennessee.
To provide more incentives for
more adoptions because right now
in the United States is roughly
2 million.
I want to make sure I have this
here, about 2 million couples
that are currently that comes
out to about 36 waiting families
for every child whose placed for
adoption in the United States.
Um, are we providing in this
task force or their
recommendations to provide
For more incentives to adopt
here and if so, what are those?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
um, one of the things I didn't
disclose is a practicing
attorney, that was one of my
One of my bread and butter
aspects, adoptions, private
adoptions. They did a few
adoptions coming out of the
neglect and abuse system from
CYFD.
I think New Mexico compared to
other states that I'm familiar
with, unfortunately Utah and
Tennessee are not among those.
Um
There's, there are subsidies for
adoptions, subsidies that are
supposed to help the adoptees
with the family that is adopting
them,
uh, they, uh, uh, attorneys are
paid for by the state.
Uh, I think got a Title 4E or
4B, I forget which.
Uh, the Social Security Act to
facilitate the expense of
adoption and and uh so I don't
know what other states do. I'm
not sure what Utah is doing or
Tennessee to sweeten the pot, if
you will, but New Mexico in my
experience, does a lot to
promote adoption. In fact, to a
fault.
I think at one point, the CYFD
website.
Um, had a little portion on it
that said if you want to adopt,
become a foster parent first,
and you might be able to adopt a
child from foster care.
Um, which the incentive then for
being a foster parent was to
adopt, not to help.
Keep families together, uh, but
rather to.
Participate in tearing them
apart.
Most of the adoptions that I
did, I never.
So anything about the families
afterwards.
I did, however, have occasion.
To find out that some of the
adoptions did not end happily.
And that came from the kids
themselves once they aged out,
who said no one checked on us
after that final decree of
adoption was entered. No one
found out whether we were OK or
not in our household. Many of us
were trapped, some of, you know,
one kid, I won't say many, one
kid reported that she was
trafficked afterwards. And
another, uh, in another part of
the state where agriculture is a
little bit more prominent than
in Albuquerque, although there
is some agriculture there in the
south.
Valley, um.
They were basically hired out as
Uh, as laborers, uh, once they
were adopted. Same thing with
guardianship, there's no follow
up by the court or by anyone
else as to what happens to these
kids once they're adopted.
I think adoptions are great if
the families adopting are
properly vetted and, and to the
extent that one can determine
the agencies or or or CYFD this
is a truly going to be a
permanent family for this kid,
and that they're going to be
treated better than they were by
the family that they were
removed from. Unfortunately,
there's no provision in our law
for any follow up. Once the
decree of adoption is signed,
it's bye, have a nice life.
Thank, thank you, Judge uh for
your expertise. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
You know, I, I think you just
identify gap.
Um, you know, because I think we
have.
I'll say consistent oversight in
the foster care system.
But may be fine, not sure why it
hasn't been done.
But sounds like a good idea to
me, uh, Madam Chair Judge, in,
in your
In your time, your expertise as
a judge, uh,
In this field, how long does it
take normally for a couple to
start the process of adoption.
To, um, sign on the dotted line
when the child uh
For children are theirs.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
it's a dreaded lawyer answer. It
depends.
If it, if it's an adoption out
of the child welfare system.
In most cases, the prospective
adoptive family has been caring
for their child as a resource
parent or foster family in
whatever terminology you wish to
use, uh, and, and they are the
ones that once
A decision to change the plan
from reunification to adoption,
meaning termination of parental
rights.
Typically, they are the ones
that will be adopting. A judge
should be asking, and I don't
think I did often enough until I
learned I think there's a a
saying that do your best until
you know better and when you do
better, when you know better, do
better, and that's what I
hopefully did toward the end of
my term, uh, on the bench, but I
didn't, I didn't ask often
enough.
Of the family that was a
prospective adoptive family.
What do you, you know, how can I
ensure, how can I be persuaded
that you're committed to the
welfare and well-being of the
child from now and forevermore,
not just until they turn 18
because those of us who are
parents and grandparents, and in
my case, great grandparents.
Know that that commitment
extends long after your kids
turn 18. In fact, the commitment
and the obligations may be
greater than in my experience,
at least.
So, I, I think asking that
question being that
That inquiring magistrates that
were required to be when we sit
on the bench and have people's
lives in our hands, that, that's
an important thing to ask. So,
those were the folks who were
typically adopting. So that case
may have gone on for 2 years
before you get to the place
where that prospective adoptive
family, I the resource parents.
May decide that that wow, we see
the light at the end of the
tunnel. We didn't start out
thinking we were going to adopt,
but because the the way the case
went, and because of the
relationship we have with this
child and the child with us and
with the rest of our family, we
want to be adopting this child
and this child wants to be
adopted by us, so that case
could be going on for 2 or 3
years before you get to that
place.
In private adoption with some of
the agencies that I worked with
in private practice, families
would
Find it an agency they wanted to
work with a licensed child
placement agency, private, not
the state.
They would do whatever they need
to do, pay their fees, do the,
the initial workup on their
backgrounds and history and so
forth.
And then typically there would
be like a binder that had this,
that this family would put
together pictures of themselves,
their family, their dog, their
cat, the house they live in and
all that stuff, and a, and a
prospective.
apparent
Who had decided that
going to be able to parent this
child.
But they wanted to find a family
to place the child with, they
can go to that same agency just
out of, you know, just sort of.
Without any
Knowledge that this family was
already there waiting to adopt
or many other families looked
through their binders and pick
someone.
And then there was a process of
meeting maybe.
Now probably virtually back in
the olden days in person and
deciding if this is something
that would work. Do I like the
way you look. I mean, there were
uh there were birth parents who
decided not to go with his
family because no offense to
anyone has a beard, I think only
one of you in the, in the
courtroom, Senator Gallegos,
but, but there was the mom who
said, I don't like the way that
guy looks. He has a beard and
he's wearing.
You know, a hat that looks like
he likes to go out and kill
Bambi, you know, I don't want my
kid with that family. Uh, and
then there were others who
didn't care about any of that
stuff, you know, they felt a
constant, you know, connection
with that an immediate
connection with that family.
That could probably take less
than 6 months.
Particularly if the mother was.
As they used to say in the
Philippines in the in the family
way and in the 8th month, you
know, it was a matter of time
before that child was born and
that very tearful emotional.
Transfer of the child from the
mom to the adoptive family took
place. So it depends.
No, thank you, Judge for that.
So thank you, Madam Chair,
because in the United States we
have a lot of um
Parents that go overseas to
adopt because it takes so long
in whatever state it is, New
Mexico, whatever.
They go to the top 3 countries
are China, Ukraine, and South
Korea.
It costs you between $30,000 and
$40,000 to do that in those in
those countries, be quicker.
You know, uh, one of the things
I, I really worry about, and
we've talked to somebody
mentioned this in this uh room
here is the sex trafficking, I
think it was you, Miss Connelly
talked about sex trafficking.
And um I saw it here.
Uh, in the United States when I
went down to the border in 2022
at the Border Patrol.
And uh the border patrol
captured about 15 youths.
Um, from
They're from Guatemala,
Nicaragua, and Honduras. They
were all between the ages of
about 4 and 15.
And uh they were they were in
kind of rough shape.
And it was probably the most
disheartening thing that I have
seen with children.
In 2006, never forget.
Um
The thing that really upset me.
was I asked the border patrol
agent, where, where are these
children going?
In the border patrol agent said
about all these children that
have been sex trafficked in the
past 4 years to a crime, what's
happening to children in this
country.
And I, I worry about that here,
which you talked with.
He's 13 and 14 year old girls.
Uh, that recently were.
Made the news unfortunately Hope
CYFD.
As
Provisions in place and guard
rails in place when it comes to
foster care because, you know,
you talked about adoptions,
parents, you know, things,
things go bad sometimes with
adoptive parents, it just does,
I mean, life, life happens.
But it goes real bad on the
foster side too and especially
on the guardianship side, so I
hope there are those um
Boundaries in place and that
brings me to my question, uh,
Madam Chair, and in Judge Ms.
Connolly is, you said, I want to
make sure I understand the top 3
things that you look for is
safety, permanency, and
well-being correct when it comes
to putting a child.
Into guardianship.
Um
Foster care or adoption, I
would, I would imagine.
It, well
That should, that's correct. Is
that fair to say?
So, um, Madam Chair and Senator
Block, technically, um.
Uh
Safety, permanency, and
well-being are specifically
guidelines for child and family
welfare work best interest of
the child, which is a separate
measurement within those things
is what is considered in things
like placement, what services a
child needs, whether they're
having contact with the parent,
whether an app whether a
particular person is appropriate
to adopt or whether a particular
person is appropriate for a
guardianship.
Perfect. Thank you for that.
Thank you, ma'am for that.
That's exactly where I want to
go on this cause I wanna make
sure.
I understand this because I
would imagine.
There's some type of risk
management framework that CYFD
does to to go through some type
of checklist to, you know,
figure out, OK.
Socioeconomic status, you know,
just so many different things
that they go down, they get a
score and.
I, I, I like, I like the, I
like, you know, the objective
data, subjectivity is very
difficult for me to get around,
so just, I don't know how the
hell you did what you did.
Um, that being said,
Her foster parents, do we, do
we, does, um.
If we have a
Hispanic
6 year old little boy, little
girl.
Uh, in the foster care.
Mom and dad had issues, whatever
you got to find a good home for
this little boy, this little
girl.
We don't take into account race
or any type of ethnicity for
that, doing uh here in New
Mexico, do we, we want to make
sure no matter what.
What the parents, we don't
really care what race or
ethnicity the parents are or any
other things like that, we want
to find that safety permanency.
6 year old boy or girl.
Um,
Madam Chair and Senator Block,
that is so outside our charge
that I do not have an ability to
answer that, you would have to
ask CYFD what are their current
standards about how they choose
that, um, there is certainly a
question about honoring a
child's culture and we now have
the beautiful strong Indian
family Protection Act to help
children stay well connected
with their cultures.
If they are Native American, um,
however, otherwise I, I can't
answer that, that's a question
for CYFD. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And, and
I'm aware of the um.
The law on the Native Americans,
um, and where that.
Recently talking to someone
that's been um trying to help
perform CYFD.
But I would hope
In this country
In this state
That
We would not base.
Guardianship
Not base foster care.
Not based adoption.
On the
Race, color, creed of uh of an
of an adopted uh parent because
that just kind of goes.
Against what every fiber in my
body because
That mom or dad can provide a
lot of love and a lot of care.
It's not based on skin and that
bond that they want to have, and
I, I'll be asking CYFD that
because to me,
If you can provide them a loving
home.
A safe home, a place of
permanency.
And provides for the well-being
of that child.
Race color creed.
Orientation shouldn't shouldn't
matter in my mind.
And uh Judge, I know you want to
say something. Madam Chair,
Senator Blan, um, one of the
things that I'd like to announce
is that we're in the 4th round
nationally of the Child and
Family Services reviews.
And it's what the Children's
Bureau.
And the the state child welfare
agency, which we're all a part
of the child, the, you know, the
state child welfare system.
Is doing or not doing to comply
with federal standards.
And certainly one of them to
your point.
As far as well-being and
connection.
Is this a culturally relevant
placement.
And that doesn't mean that you,
you know, uh, uh, you know,
eliminate folks who may not be
Hispanic or may not, may not be
of whatever ethnicity or origin.
It is despicable, however.
When a child is removed from a
family.
Because he's been pushed out by
that family because he or she,
um, are not gender conforming.
And it happens especially with
boys who
Come out to their family that
they're gay. Get out of my
house, I never want to see you
again.
And then they placed this child.
In a very conservative family.
Nothing wrong with conservative
families. Values are great.
Except when they impose their
values on someone who is
diametrically different from
that.
Two things. 11 person who runs a
very uh great service
organization in in Albuquerque.
Mike was brought here from one
of the Caribbean countries. He
was placed with a family in
Colorado Springs.
He, he has it.
A Hispanic name, the country
that he came from.
And he said, when I, I don't
speak Spanish now because one of
the things that my loving
Christian adoptive family did is
any time I spoke Spanish, I got
beat with a board.
Until I didn't speak Spanish
anymore, so I don't speak
Spanish now.
This gay boy that was placed in
a in a in a foster family.
One of the things the foster
families started trying to do
before the department found out
about it was began to persuade
him.
Whether you believe it or not,
uh, I'm not espousing one belief
for another. You're a sinner,
you're gonna go to hell because
of your choices, and we're going
to take you to a therapist that
will
That will counsel the gay out of
you.
Now
Is that
Looking out for the well-being
of that child who needs a loving
home because maybe he can't go
back to his original home.
Again, it's one of those dreaded
answers. It depends, but, but
from, from the very, I had that
case with that gay kid, and I,
and I, I was aghast. I
challenged the department, how
could you have made that
decision to place this kid.
With a family you knew was
likely to take this course of
action.
They, they moved him from that
home and placed him somewhere
else.
But did I do my job by railing
against them and saying,
What were you thinking?
Kind of like I might ask my
My kid and I say, I don't know.
I appreciate that judge, Madam
Chair, my, my last point here
is.
Um
You know,
I think Miss Carver they won
under the Constitution that you
know parents are gonna have.
Parents are going to push their
values on their kids whether
they're liberal parents or
conservative parents pushing
whatever thoughts they are, um,
you know, I certainly didn't
agree with.
My parents on some of their
philosophical thoughts, recall
getting beat for that, you know,
maybe, maybe a couple other
things I did, I probably
deserved to get smacked in the
back of the head from dad, which
I don't want to get into now,
which is embarrassing, but um.
You know, I just, I want to make
sure that
I have a hard time.
I, I would have a very any
state.
was
Making adoption and foster
parent decision to read.
When in my opinion,
I don't care if you're black,
white, Asian, Hispanic, Native
American.
Whatever
There's that parental love.
And love crosses all I, I hope
that's what we're doing to
provide, like she said,
the priority of the child is
safety, permanency, well-being,
and by the way, the first one is
love.
That's the main point. Can these
parents love this child as their
own.
Oh, I always give them the
benefit of the doubt to go
through the process.
Well, thank you, thank you for
your time. I want to turn it
over to Madam Chair, I yield.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, if I may add one
final point to Senator Block's
comment. There is a safeguard.
It's a federal law and whether
There's an awareness of it and a
desire to comply with it. It's
called the multi-ethnic
Placement Act, which basically
prohibits what you're just
talking about, that is placing
kids because of their race,
color, or creed in a way that
matches, you know, whomever the,
the, the long term family is
gonna be.
The first consideration is this
a family that's gonna love and
care for this kid as though they
were their own.IA provides for
that.
Thank you, Judge. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and the reason I
said that
It is because Ms. Connolly
talked about.
The
The state looks at the culture.
I, I really
I want them to look at the
well-being of the child based on
love, safety, permanency, and
well-being.
your time today. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you.
Judge.
This has been extremely
Informing for me, and I, I want
to thank you.
Or the work in the task force
and spending the time with us
today.
Um
To expand our
Horizons and awareness and maybe
a number of my colleagues are
already
Right, quite aware of.
Some of the very, very difficult
issues that we've been bringing
up here.
Uh, but as I was.
Going through your booklet,
which
I, I will try to read, maybe,
um, and that, uh.
But
Talking about future upstream
intervention.
And
You know, if we could get that
figured out and probably the
first one is you both noted.
Madam Chair.
Uh, is
I mean the issue of poverty, I
mean this.
It, it breeds
Conflict stress relief from
Medications that alcohol and
other
Drugs.
Um
That
Then
Brings along potential for
conflict.
Uh, in the family, the finances
not being stable, talking about
that $100.
And the arguments around that.
And what I'm wondering, uh,
since I
Wrote a bill a couple of years
ago on mental health parity.
Uh, in there, I had uh a number
of
Prohibitions, uh, that the
health plans could do
commercially and theoretically
the MCOs in terms of Medicaid.
And uh in terms of prohibitions
from them denying access to
behavioral health.
Hair and one of those uh
actstases that I
have come through various uh
Experiences, learnings, what
have you in my.
Medical and even personal
career.
Is the value of family therapy.
And how
A number of issues can actually
get resolved. I mean, it's all
of us probably, uh, uh.
are not the greatest of
communicators, perhaps uh.
Stereotypically, we with the Y
chromosomes are a little worse
at it than others, but.
The
There really is a skill base to
learning how to communicate.
Um
And
Between parents and
Also parents who with children,
but particularly if there are
troubled children or troubled
parents.
And
This issue for me came up this
morning on, on the
Another bill and in education.
But
Uh, I'm wondering in terms of an
upstream intervention.
If
The
Uh
I'm not quite sure how to put
this, mostly requirement.
That CYFD that
Uh, the MCO is the HCA.
Uh, and, and commercially, uh, I
see the superintendent.
Commercially insured, fully
insured.
That
Payment for.
What are called Z codes.
And the billing nomenclature.
Or family and relationship
therapy.
Um, that
They have to be paid, and now
it's, it's in this.
Bill that that we have, it's
very complex. It kind of comes
out of backwards.
Uh
But that started with our
Senator Domenici in Washington
and mental health parity, and I
do seeing the uh superintendent
sitting here, they are putting
this to work.
Um, and, but I'm, I'm toying
with the idea that maybe I just
need to for clarity for the
health plans and for the MCOs
that say,
That
that uh.
Relationship in family therapy
has to be compensated.
And, and paid for.
And and you know, it's, it's a
skill.
That you don't just kind of
learn overnight or having been
in a relationship, becoming an
expert. I mean, it's something
that really requires schooling
and experience.
And support
And I'm just curious from your
vantage point.
If you think that
Uh, as you're looking, as you're
looking upstream and looking at
ACS prevention and what have
you. If we had more focus.
And providing resources.
Or relationship therapy, family
therapy, we might reduce the
number of ACEs and all these
downstream impacts that we have
when people don't know how to
communicate, get along, and then
create a conflicted environment,
use medication for stress and
then we're just downhill on
addiction.
So that's kind of long winded,
but I'm, I'm trying to
The do I need to do more clarity
for the health plans that um you
gotta pay for the Z codes. You
have to allow them. You cannot
block them right now, you cannot
get family therapy or
relationship therapy paid for,
unless
You unless one of the
individuals has another DSM-5.
Diagnostic mental health code.
And so, again, I'm just trying
to see, um, and, and it's
Kind of coincidence, but it's
good, superintendent is here. Do
I need to do more clarity and is
this something that that we
should be pushing as a
preventive measure more than
we're doing now. Thank you.
If you have some thoughts on
that.
Madam Chair and senator, I, you
know, again, that's kind of out
of my wheel well, but I can tell
you from my vantage point that
New Mexico is not unique in
suffering from.
Um, behavioral health and mental
health services.
Deserts, if you will, um.
Uh, it's, it's, uh, a sad
commentary when the very thing
that may be preventative is.
Rarely available or not pro not
available in sufficient
quantities throughout our state
and in fact throughout the
country.
Um
My, my sense is that from the
standpoint of prevention.
Were those
Services available, substance
misuse treatment.
Um, behavioral health, mental
health treatments available
before it becomes a legal case.
Uh, that we would be cutting the
numbers of juvenile justice
cases in the numbers of child
welfare cases if that was
available.
That that's kind of the extent
of my observation from where I
sat in children's court, and
from what I've learned in
working with the National
Council of Juvenile and Family
Court Judges.
To do prevention.
Um
Uh, saves money and promotes
public, you know, public safety
down the road.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
there's this concept in child
and family welfare. We would
much rather keep people from
throwing babies into the river
than being down here pulling the
babies out of the river, so
sure, yes, anything that can
improve understanding, support
families as they struggle, um,
absolutely, we think prevention
is the best answer. Thank you
for that. Thank you, ma'am, just
one last observation. We
No
That in terms of uh identifying
and treating addiction and
mental health that we can cut
chronic disease exacerbation
cost and really the cost of
healthcare almost, if, if we
were to uh uh pay attention to
mental health issues early, uh,
only 11% of people with mental
health are identified and, and,
and treated and so again, it may
be that this
That you're experiences in the
courts are a place for us to
begin to go and look for where
can we, A, make it a state where
people want to come and do these
services and, and compensate
appropriately, but also, uh,
even look at and they kind of a
preventative public health kind
of way would just be an
intervention that would really
be beneficial from the pulling
them out downstream. Thank you
very much for your comments and
again, I want to thank you and
thank you, Madam Chair for the
education that uh has been
provided to us this afternoon.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Are there any other questions
from
Anyone else who hasn't spoken
yet?
Senator Pinto, we do have some
2nd.
persons who want to speak a
second time, but I prefer to let
those who haven't had an
opportunity to speak first
before we go back to 2nd time.
Senator Pinto
How many families are still in
need of court ordered services.
Madam Chair and Senator Pinto,
I'm.
Are you OK? Here, here's my
problem, uh,
Families in need of
court-ordered services is a
specific section of the
Children's code.
That has been used traditionally
when you've got a runaway kid.
When you've got a truant kid
when you've got a kid that's
just not settling in with the
family or is.
Etc. I think you're not asking
that distinct question, I I I
I'd like to clarify exactly what
you're asking.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I think there,
there's probably.
They need in general, all the
way around, which we need the
totality of 2.
That
If we're not, if we don't have
those services available.
Then they're waiting
Right?
And
You know, how, I mean we can say
all this like oh this is what,
what's there, but do we have
what it takes to really provide
those services. Thank you for
that distinguishing, Madam
Chair, Senator Pinto, um, no, we
do not have adequate mental or
even physical health services in
these, in this state, as we
know, this is a rough place to
get medical care. How many of us
have had to wait 6 months or
longer to see a dermatologist.
o log ist in one of the sunniest
states in the union. And that's
not even talking about mental
health needs. Mental health
needs are farther and fewer
between.
Absolutely we do not have the
services in the state in the
state to support these families
as we need.
And that's all of us. I mean,
it, it, I looked for therapy the
last couple of years. We had a
very difficult several years
around COVID in my family. I
needed support. It took me 4
months to even get an
appointment to talk to somebody
to see if they could and Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Just
I mean there were several bills,
all these ways to remedy things,
but there's still pushed back on
move some of this sport or open
it up.
Um, as far as competition.
But in that instance, too.
When you talked about children
being.
It seems like to the perpetrator
were were not, it's, it's not
enough, but we have in statute.
That there's still the
perpetrators still getting away.
With
Prostituting the children.
We're saying, yeah, we're not
gonna prosecute the children,
but what are we going to do to
raise the bar on the perpetrator
to make sure they don't continue
to do this, that we're really
making a dent, um, instead of
just saying, oh, and they take
this child and we'll replace it
with where, where is that in
where in here?
Thank you. uh, Senate, uh,
sorry, Madam Chair, Senator
Pinto, that would be more
specifically addressed in the
criminal code and we did not
touch the criminal code, we only
looked at the small portion
where we were the subject matter
experts about kids in the the
foster care system, the juvenile
justice system adoptions, that
sort of thing.
Thank you, but yes.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
You know, when he started trying
to advocate for domestic
violence, um, it was like victim
victim, the victim.
But yet on the batterer's side.
They might face some.
And I'll do some time or be in
jail.
But there wasn't anything as far
as the batter.
What, what, what, you know, as
far as anger anger management or
anything of mandatory treatment
for them or and when you talk
about generational trauma it
moving forward.
As a teacher,
Um
Amid school teacher.
And seeing our young boys.
Witness
Slippers.
In their family.
ing
It also has some of them.
They became physically
Able would start to be
That person, that the
grandmother, even though they
were.
The guardian love this child.
The the tide turned.
And they
When we're trying to wrap our
heads around this, you know,
it's a lot to.
I do
But it seems like we're still
um.
Very often.
Thank
Madam Chair, uh, make a comment,
uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Pinto, I think you bring up a
very important point that is as
impactful on our country and our
state in terms of the issues we
face.
And certainly with regard to sex
trafficking.
It can be argued that at least
In our state
Um, the penalties for being
Uh
A buyer of sex from teens or
even a bier of sex from adults.
And being a perpetrator, a
trafficker of kids or adults.
The penalties are mild by
comparison.
It's my understanding there's a
bill of winding its way through
the wood.
At least with regard to child
sex trafficking make that a
felony offense rather than a
misdemeanor, um.
I think that's a good thing, uh,
to
The kids that we work with, who
were traffic, say,
They get away with a slap on the
wrist, and we end up, you know,
being traumatized for life, we
end up being locked up in juvie
or in the adult system, and we
didn't do anything wrong. We
were the victims and they were
the exploiters and I, I think
too often in the arena of of
prostitution and child sex
trafficking, we think of the,
the pimp, for lack of a better
term.
Uh, and not enough about the
buyers.
And there is a program in
Washington state where they
worked with the buyers.
For treatment, and I, and I
think there's a move across the
country for working with
perpetrators of interpersonal
violence, you know, spouse on
spouse or boyfriend on a
girlfriend or girlfriend on
boyfriend, however that may
work.
Do not throw them out with the
bathwater, that they need
services as well. It's not
normal and natural.
To be violent in that way.
So, you know, we don't want to
Get to the point where those who
are perpetrators are
criminalized forever.
What can we do to change their
behaviors as well. How can we
assist them? We can't change
their behaviors. They have to
change themselves, but with
help, the help that
unfortunately in too many
jurisdictions is not available.
Thank you. And Madam Chair
members of the committee.
Oh
How does our education as we
know.
Past cases
That there were signs or there
might have been.
In some instances, discipline
against the student.
Um, instead of, you know, really
helping them.
Uh, we have anything in here
that kind of speaks to how our
education is going to work with
us.
To make sure our kids.
Because that technically, that's
one of the places they will be
seeing. I mean, your points of
contact are.
You know, Monday through Friday
8 to 3 o'clock or 5 o'clock
into, you know, like a regular
job, so that teachers are with
the students and really get to
know them.
But those sides, you know, we
talk about training, training
for everybody else.
But when we talk about children.
Uh, what kind of training will
our?
And I know when you go through
the school of education, there
are some.
Classes
But it's very minimal.
Very light.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Pinto, your questions and some
of the questions many of the
ones that I said I don't know
the answer to this speaks to the
need for a 3 branch approach
that all three branches of
government are working together
communicating, developing task
force, bringing in a PED
bringing in the Department of
Health, working collaborative.
Where are the holes in our
system that families and
children are falling through.
What do we need to make sure
that young people who've been
exposed to domestic violence in
their homes are presented with a
different path.
Um, and, and that goes to our
recommendations for that truly
collaborative work, uh, where
the courts where the judges,
where the attorneys that do the
work where the therapists, where
the foster families all come
together and have this
conversation about what do we
know that we are lacking. Thank
you for that opportunity.
Thank you, madam.
Any other questions from, I
haven't heard the word grooming.
Because when we talk about
retail crime of children, but
for the human trafficking.
What
But there's grooming also
happening.
You know, in other aspects.
Because
These adults know that the
children.
are not going to, you know, but
yet they're they're the ones
that benefit.
From it.
Mm
But yet they're not the ones um
committing the crime.
They're having others
or
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Pinto.
Uh, grooming is frequently a
part of what happens for young
people to be sexually
trafficked, it can happen within
a home. It can happen from
outside actors.
Um, we certainly did not have
the funding or time to address
that in our current iterations
of the task force.
Um, and that may be a much
bigger question than what can be
addressed, the children's code
is reactive more than.
Uh, preventative at this point
and, and that is part of what we
would like to look at is this
true collaboration and.
Prevention.
Oh, OK, thank you.
And
we'll start with.
Thank you, Madam Cha, the hour
is getting late. I will be very
brief.
With only a comment rather than
a question. I am aware of the
circumstance.
For a young family fostered a
baby.
It the family from.
Church.
For 3 years.
They loved and nurtured that
little one.
At which point
Mom cleaned up her act.
And wanted
That may be and you can only
imagine.
The heartbreak.
That occurred in that
circumstance.
I would hope
That the recommendations that
you have.
Promulgated here.
In your study.
would address
Those similar.
Thank you. Thank you for a 2nd
time, Senator Gallegos.
Thank you Madam Chair, and I'll
also be brief, uh, in, in
listing.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh.
Your Honor, and.
Connolly, uh, I was wondering if
the task force looked at.
The uh consideration of foster
parents last year I did a
Uh, tax credit.
For oca.
And that's at the end.
One of the considerations that
I've been asked to look at, is
at the beginning when they take
a child into their home, there's
some upfront costs that have to
go with that. I'm just wondering
if the task force, madam chair,
uh, looked at that direction on
that.
Madam Chair, Senator Gallego's,
uh, the task force did not look
into that. It's certainly
something that should be looked
into. I know that from the
federal perspective, there is an
adapt adoption tax credit.
Uh, for the year in which the
child was adopted.
Consequently, there's a big rush
usually in December to get
adoptions finalized so that
credit can be claimed for the
year in which the child was
adopted.
It seems appropriate that
something to that effect would
be considered for resource
parents, foster parents.
Because whatever they are
getting uh compensated for
fostering the children.
That's for the children's
benefit, and most foster
families.
Speak from experience because we
were one.
Pay for a lot of things that the
child needs out of our pocket
that never gets reimbursed and
you don't expect to be
reimbursed. That's not why you
do it.
But uh it's an act of love, I
think that.
Senator Block was talking about
and I think uh you mentioned as
well. Um, but, but it, it is
important that that that be a
consideration of the resources
are available to assist those
who are already sacrificing a
lot to provide.
and, you know, at least a
temporary home, if not a
permanent home for these
children who um are in the
system. Also want to comment. I,
I think if I heard you correctly
on um the court appointed
Special advocates program in
your jurisdiction and throughout
the state, very often they're an
overlooked resource.
That many folks don't realize
they're totally volunteers. They
don't get paid for that work.
And they're very often the most
consistent.
Person in a child's life from
the beginning of a child welfare
case to the end, which may be
adoption or not.
Thank you. Well, thank you for
that, Madam Chair.
Uh, I'll, my last question is,
and you'd made a comment, uh,
can you explain to me the
difference between resource
parent and foster parent. It's,
it's, it's a term of art.
Foster parents want to be called
foster parents, it appears.
When indeed
They are folks who are providing
a resource to families from
whose children from, you know,
children have been removed from
their families, and they are a
resource to work at the first
plan that is, that is, that is
addressed in the child welfare
system, reunification too often
foster parents have the bad rap.
I kind of alluded to earlier of
being foster parents just so
they can adopt a child. So you
can imagine their ultimate goal.
Of
Getting this child forever
rather than being a resource to
the entire family, including the
child, so it's, it's really
minutia if a family wants to be
called a foster family. God
bless him. That, that's how they
identify. If, if they, if they
believe that they're more of a
resource than just being a
foster family, quite frankly,
being a resource sounds to me
like it requires a whole lot
more than fostering a child, but
that's just yours truly
thinking, one size doesn't fit
all.
As you've heard me say before,
so I don't want to alienate
anybody by saying, why are you
calling yourself fuss family,
you're a resource family. Thank
you for being a foss family,
appreciate the service you
provided. If they call
themselves a resource family.
Thank you for being a resource
family. I appreciate the
sacrifices you're making. A
child will benefit and a family
will benefit.
Um, madam chair and Senator
Gallegos, again, this is another
question that is best addressed
to CYFD, however, a couple of
years ago, CYFD
Decided to start using the term
resource parent for exactly the
reason that Judge Romero has
pointed out, the hope is, and we
have heard from people who love
being resource families.
Who are able to truly love not
just the child, but this parent
who was at the lowest point in
their life when their kid got
brought into custody who wants
to do right, and I think it was
a a move away from that culture
of foster kids so you can adopt.
The real answer is foster a
child to help them be the best.
Child that they can be, have the
most supportive, loving life
regardless of where that is. One
of the things we have not talked
about and when we talk about
culture, etc. is kids lose
everything when they lose a
parent. They don't just lose mom
and dad when termination when
parental rights are terminated.
They lose grandmother,
grandfather, aunt, uncle, they
have nobody left to go home with
and fight at Thanksgiving,
there's.
Nobody out there to remember
their birthday or that their
favorite stuffed animal was the
blue dog, etc. and that is
hugely important that we keep
that.
Foremost, it may be that this
child desperately wants to go
home to mommy, who has that
beautiful tone in her voice when
she sings that lullaby and will
never fully settle with the
greatly loving adoptive family.
Sometimes that works beautifully
and it's much better.
I think one of the things that
happens here is that you hear
the term abuse and neglect.
That's what we call our
children's court dealing with
child and family welfare. It's a
horrible term. It's a horrible
term.
Only about what is it? 17% are
just abuse cases, most of these
are neglect.
And the neglect is very
frequently tied to substance
use, though substance users have
so many childhood a a um adverse
childhood experiences, they
themselves were abused or
neglected when they were kids
they're victims of domestic
violence, they have mental
illness or developmental delays,
etc.
These are not people who decide
to have a kid and think and oh
yeah, I'm gonna beat that kid
now, there's a few whack jobs
out there. Sorry, I'm using that
term very specifically.
With the hundreds of parents I
represented through the years
and the.
Dozens of kids, I probably had
50 kids I represented. I had two
cases where there were evil
parents, and there were a
couple, they were horrible, the
rest of them were pitiful.
Thank you.
Well, thank you for that and and
Madam chair and and um.
Miss Connelly and even Judge
Romero, I appreciate the
dialogue and I liked how Judge
Romero talked about it. It's an
act of love.
I truly believe we've hurt
foster parents.
In the last few years.
And it's made it harder. My
daughter stays in the Hobbs area
and baby sits at night, lives
sleeps in the office because
they do not have resource bars
anywhere.
And so that's something I think
we need to look at and how do we
give them what they need, I
think up front.
So they can protect our
children.
Because it's, that's the missing
link.
If if CYFD had placement.
Then we wouldn't have people in
the office and uh but I
appreciate that, Madam Chair,
thank you for allowing me for
the 2nd time. Uh, I also believe
in, uh, act of love. That's why
I don't look for salary for the
legislature. I think what I do
here serves our state. So with
that I'll think uh thank you no
you.
Thank you, um, everyone from the
committee and thank you, uh,
Judge Romero, um, and Miss
Connolly for
Your presentation today?
Um, I'm, I'm hoping that for
committee members is.
Uh, gives us an idea.
Of how complex.
Um
Just our conversation, but how
complex the children's code is.
It's not something that you come
in and make a change, I use that
lightly kind of.
Um, but it really does take time
for us to look through each of
the pieces and why we have the
children's code.
Um, it's, it's something I think
that we need to review, value,
update, but it takes time.
As it has for the the task force
over the last 2 years.
And it's only scratched the
surface, so.
Um, I want to say thank you.
And I know you're a resource so
we may be in contact with you as
the session goes on, but also
for the interim too.
So, thank you very, very much.
Thank you very much. It was an
honor to address you. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I echo, Ms.
Connolly's comments. Thank you
very much. Thank you for your
very thoughtful and probing
questions.
I hope that uh
More questions come, whether
it's in this committee or in the
work that you do, uh, because
unless we ask those questions,
we're not gonna be looking for
answers. So thank you all very
much for your attention and for
the questions that you posed to
us. Thank you.
Again, thank you.
Um, so,
As has been and and those who've
been watching and such, no.
Uh
We have Senate Bill 14, which.
Um, for the sponsor, just so you
know, and your expert witnesses,
we will start the presentation.
I know you have a committee
substitute.
So it's an introduction as we
have done even with Senator
Cedil Lopez's bill, um, for
those in favor or in opposition.
And uh the chair will, we will
stop about 6 o'clock.
Again, I'm still on a timed uh
medication thing.
I have to get home to take it on
time. So as time moves on in the
session, of course, we'll be
expanding a few more hours for.
with Senator Doig's bill at this
point.
And then the bill will be rolled
over for Wednesday I'll be first
on the list for us to finish.
On that day. So Senator Duha, if
you, uh, join us.
Yeah. Madam Chair, we just
received this.2 version.
Of the committee of
I got mine at.
During the session today, I
would respectfully ask that we
roll this.
Over until Wednesday.
To give us an opportunity to
review the changes because
We haven't had any chance.
To look over that committee sub.
Uh
OK, um,
I know that there was an
analysis done.
And I know that requests have
been made for a copy of the uh
committee substitute.
But the committee doesn't give
that out. That's something that
you have to go.
And the sponsor um has to
distribute, however, the
sponsor.
How would you say
Understands of how information
is to be given out.
So at this point, um.
But that sub was new today.
Yes. What um
What I would like to proceed
with is at least for the
introduction.
Um, we're not gonna act on.
The measure, it would still give
you an opportunity to go back
and review.
For questions, um, on the bill
itself because we're not gonna
get into debate or anything on
the measure at this point in
time.
So, um, I think we'll we'll go
forward with the measure at this
point, and adopt for purposes of
discussion.
And that still gives you time up
until Wednesday.
To review and such um for
questions or whatever else needs
to happen, um, as, as anybody
sees fit in the committee at
that point.
So
Senator Duhe, um,
I know you have Senate Bill 14
in front of us, but the proper
procedure for us to move forward
with.
I, um, for there to be a
Um
I move adoption of the committee
substitute um for Senate.
Well, actually, you'd have to be
a do not pass
I move, I forgot about that and
I move a do not pass on Senate
Bill 14.
Um
Yeah
And 14.
1 which is 2.
228786.2 SA uh would be
substituted with 0.230 for
purposes of discussion.
OK.
All right, and I'll second that
motion.
And if you would go ahead and
proceed, um,
On the point too.
Great thank you Madam Chair.
And found chair committee
members.
One of the major driver of
changes in healthcare in recent
decades has been consolidation
of healthcare entities through
transactions that result in a
change of control, things like
mergers and acquisitions.
And what we know is that.
Uh, consolid things that go hand
in hand when that happens our
price increases.
Um, and often, uh,
There was a, a, a just a recent
study by JAMA that also found
that there was an over 25%
increase in hospital acquired
conditions, such as falls and
infections, uh, when this kind
of consolidation happened with
private equity companies. And so
this is a trend around the
country.
Of consult.
Some of that's private equity
companies, some of it is his
insurance companies, some of it
is, is, is as other entities
that are going around and are
purchasing or acquiring in some
way, uh, healthcare in uh and
it's especially happening here,
here in New Mexico, we have the
highest percentage in the nation
of hospitals owned by private
equity companies.
Uh, and, and we see the effects
of it.
In New Mexico, hospital spending
per capita stands out amongst
our surrounding states, uh, the
Kaiser Family Foundation shows
that New Mexico spends about
$4000 a person on hospital care
compared to 27, I'm sorry, 4,
4000 compared to 2700 in Utah,
2800 in Nevada, 3000 in Texas,
and 3200 in Colorado and
Arizona.
And um and there are
What we see is that there are a
lot of practices that are
designed to maximize returns,
uh, things like reducing and
eliminating essential health
services, uh, often it's labor
and delivery services.
Um
And
And this is done regardless of
the impact on, on patient
outcomes.
Because Madam Chair
When someone like private equity
owns our healthcare, the
decisions that they're making
about what healthcare is
available to New Mexicans isn't
based on what New Mexicans need.
It's based on what is most
profitable.
To that company. In fact, they
have a fiduciary duty to do what
is most profitable to their
shareholders.
Um, so
What we, what this bill, and
I'll I'll back up a little bit.
Last year we passed Senate Bill
15.
Which was a, a band-aid to
temporarily address just
hospital transactions while we
did stakeholder engagement, uh,
around this issue.
Um, there was, it was very bare
bones, had zero transparency,
zero enforcement. It expires at
the end of June of this year.
Over the last year,
The superintendent of insurance
and myself and Representative
Sapansy, uh, and a whole lot of
other folks.
Went around the state, meeting
with people who are impacted by
these transactions. Uh, so
hospitals, healthcare providers,
patients, patient advocates.
And and and we've had since
we've had a lot of these
transactions happen, we really
got to see up close in the
communities that have been
impacted by them, what that
effect has been.
Uh, what we saw over and over
again were things like getting
rid of labor and delivery
services.
Uh, we've had multiple, um,
Medical providers.
Who would say to us, we.
We are too afraid to talk
publicly about this, but we will
tell you privately, but if we
talk about this in public, we're
gonna get fired.
Um
And as a result of of that
experience, we
One, we added in some
whistleblower protections or
medical providers into this
bill. Uh, but we also, we got a
lot of really good feedback,
especially from our rural
hospitals, um, that I think
really helped shape and right
size this bill.
And so
The purpose of this bill, and
I'm, I'm gonna be talking about
the subs specifically because
the sub is much more narrow.
than, than the original bill
was.
It is to give appropriate
oversight to transactions that
involve hospitals.
And to provide her transactions
only to the extent that they
involve health insurers.
Um, the superintendent of
insurance along with our, uh,
the healthcare authority and the
Attorney General and experts
will review transactions, and
the goal is not to stop or block
transactions. Uh, and it's not
too.
To stop the influx of capital
into New Mexico.
It's to make sure that when
these transactions take place,
it's not at the expense of New
Mexicans' health.
It's not at the expense of
essential services that are
offered or quality or
affordability.
And so
This bell that's before you, and
so then we also have the, we
have whistleblower protections
in here. We have
post-transaction oversight. We
have reporting requirements,
which is really important for us
as a body, understanding what
our healthcare environment
actually looks like.
So that when we are making
policy.
We have a really good
understanding of who it is, who
is practicing here, who they're
owned by.
Where the profits are going.
Um
And so,
That's kind of the the quick and
dirty Madam Chair. I will, I
think the, the superintendent
will go through kind of more
more technical parts of the
bill.
And then we will.
I think, I believe we have folks
here to to speak and support as
well. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee, I'm
Alice Kane. I'm the
superintendent of insurance, um,
thank you, uh.
Senator, for your support uh
over the stakeholder meetings
and for this bill, we have been
working on this since last year,
uh, together with the sponsors
and working with not only just
the communities, but with the
various stakeholders. We've had
numerous meetings with
The hospitals, the medical
association, um,
Insurance companies, so we sort
of bifurcated this the outreach
program. Uh, we went into the
communities, uh, which it had
some trend which turns out it
had some transactions. We were
in Gallup. We were in
Alamogordo, we were in Las
Cruces, uh, and we got input
from the communities about what
their concerns were and then we
heard from the stakeholder about
what the impact of the bill
should be and and how we could.
Right size it. Uh, this bill,
the first bill, uh, that you we
introduced was broader we
focused on hospitals, uh, and
then provide an individual
provider organizations that
might be where there might be a
change of control involving
insurance companies or insurance
affiliates.
The oversight process we heard a
lot about the oversight process
and we uh we focused this way,
uh, we want, uh, we wanted to
make a preliminary, well, first
people can come in if they think
there's a transaction and speak
with us and I have to see them
in a short time. I think it was
7 days after a request and they
we can talk about whether we
think the transaction is going
to come under this bill. If we
think it's gonna come under this
bill, then there'll be a
preliminary review and the
preliminary review would
I have the uh
I would include the major
documents, the major parties,
uh, we'd look at it and make a
decision about whether it should
go to comprehensive review. This
would be done in a short period
as well, but we would also get
community input. Uh, we wouldn't
be, uh, in person, but we'd have
community input and the basis of
the community input, uh, and
would be do we do does the
community feel like they they
should go to comprehensive
review. One of the things we
found out when we were in
especially I think Alan Magordo.
People had no idea that there
was gonna be a transaction and
had no.
And we're just sort of
Stunned and dazed after it
happened, so we really want
community input. I would say for
me that was the biggest
transformation in the
stakeholder meeting is
understanding how much the
communities wanted to give us
input, wanted to tell us what
they were concerned about and,
and frankly we found out a lot
of the trends that were
nationwide that uh Senator Do he
mentioned there was a reduction
in OBGYN services. There, there
was a reduction in sur surgical
coverage. Uh, there was an
impact on quality. I, I would
say the most heart rendering
thing why we put the
whistleblower piece in here is
the number of doctors that were
afraid to talk the first meeting
we had a doctor in Albuquerque
basically say, I'll tell you
what's going on, but don't use
my name. The last meeting we had
in Las Cruces, we had a doctor
that had just quit who said I
have to quit because I'm being
told how to practice medicine,
and I don't think it's it's
meeting the quality of care that
I think I need to give my
patience. So some of this went
on and along those lines. So
then we move.
if you go from preliminary
review and we feel that you need
a comprehensive review, that
would be a much longer longer
process, not much longer, but a
longer process where we get into
more depth and what we're really
gonna be looking at, you know,
obviously we're gonna look at
financials. We're gonna look at
the typical antitrust issues,
but we're also gonna be looking
at is, are you gonna change
services, that's gonna be one of
our questions. What's your
history if you're coming in in
uh providing services if you're
out of state. We had one trans
action that was here this year
under SB 15 and we, we had
actually, I think a very
successful outcome. But we did
see some issues that had come up
in other states and the and the
parties told us how they were
addressing them, so it's, it's,
it's important that we do that.
OSI is involved because we have
done in complex transactions in
the insurance industry, and I
think one of the things that
Senator Hickey mentioned in one
of our conversations is we would
be bringing in experts that
would have the same expertise
that the party that the parties
to the transactions have and and
others, uh, so that we can give
it the sophisticated review that
understanding the sophisticated
parties were up, we're dealing
with, and that would be paid by
the uh by the uh party.
themselves, which is typical
that we see in the insurance
transactions, um.
The comprehensive review would
end up with approval.
Uh, approval with conditions or
disapproval.
From what we've seen in other
states, disapproval is very
rare. Approval with conditions
is is not so rare and what we
need after that if we put
conditions in place, we need a
monitoring process, and we have
in here a monitoring process and
if it's a hospital, we're gonna
ask them in addition to give us
reports on a, a, you know,
annual 3 year and 5 year basis,
um.
I guess and and again, I guess I
would say the whistleblower
protection. It was very clear to
us that in the transactions that
had happened in the past that
they that the uh that the
writers in those in the involved
in those transactions, saw
problems and wanted someplace to
go to tell us what was going on
and the community saw problems
and wanted some place to come,
so that's really why we have the
monitoring process. And then
again, the new, the new pieces
that we put in as annual
disclosure of ownership. It was
very clear.
last year that that there wasn't
a a.
There wasn't a wide lens on what
was going on in the health care
um provider industry and
healthcare system and we're
trying to get a sense of who the
owners are of the various
entities and we want it on an
annual basis, so that's in
essence what we're trying to do.
And I, I look forward to your
questions, probably not tonight,
but maybe tomorrow.
OK, thank you, Senator, is that?
Your presentation?
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. OK, thank
you. So with that, we'll go to
the audience.
And then we'll go to Zoom after
the audience. Um, those in favor
of this measure.
OK. Um, if you'd like to come
forward and make a short
statement, please do identify
yourself.
And then your statement.
And then we'll go to those in
opposition afterward.
Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Kat
Sanchez. I work for Bold
Futures, we are a statewide
organization by and for black
indigenous women and people of
color. We first want to thank
the sponsor and superintendent
Kain for continuing the work of
listening to communities most
impacted by mergers after last
year's bill. Both futures began
the journey with consolidation,
community involvement, when
Christus merged with Gerald
Champion in Otero County, and as
mentioned, individuals and
community members were not
noticed.
ified and largely went unheard,
and this includes community
members from Mescalero Apache
tribe, Holloman Air Force Base
and differing immigra uh
immigrant communities that have
different documents, documented
statuses.
We appreciate the commitment to
make space for public comment
and community forums in the
bill, and we look forward to
continuing supporting the bill
and working with the sponsors.
And of course, Superintendent
Kain to ensure that community
input is maintained, including
in the pre-notice conference, if
at all possible. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Jasmine Tying Fong,
and I'm an attorney with the
ACLU of New Mexico. We ask that
you support this bill, the ACLU
has a long history of advocating
for community oriented oversight
of health care system
consolidations, because we know
that these partnerships and
consolidations often reduce or
significantly change access.
to care for both patients and
those employed by the healthcare
entity, especially in places
like rural New Mexico, where
access to healthcare is already
limited.
We support this initiative
because it does include
increased transparency and a
clear mechanism for community
participation in the
decision-making process. This is
crucial because it is those
community members who will be
directly impacted by the cost,
quality and access to care
available to them, and changes
to employee conditions and
benefits. Oversight of health
system consolidations with
direct community access.
It does not harm community
access, but rather improves
access to quality, affordable
healthcare services for all New
Mexicans. And we ask that you
support this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is
Murielldblum. I represent the
health security for New Mexicans
campaign, which is the largest
coalition in the history of our
state and thousands of New
Mexicans. Um, it's very hard,
Madam Chair, to so I was very
supportive of this bill.
But there are issues that I
would like to see personally to
know because I didn't get a
sense of how the substitute is
really different from the
original Senate Bill 14. What I
want to stress with you all is
that this is a huge national
issue.
It and it's the corporatization
of medicine was of great
concern and that how difficult
it is for various states, many
of whom have far greater
resources than our state.
To regulate these private equity
firms, and these other
corporations that are
essentially changing the way
health care is provided that are
experts um that presented to a
Harvard uh
Harvard for recently, and they
point out that that not only is
private equity increasing costs
and lower quality, but that
policymakers's attempts to
counter these threats can bear
and recently, Senator Grassley
and Senator Whitestone, who uh
for the budget.
That is really quite shocking.
About it comes to our nation's
hospitals.
A business model.
That prioritize and so we really
need to be careful.
The way we construct this bill,
but it's not going to solve
other problems. These lawyers
talk about corporate practice of
medicine, whistleblower, other
methods to try and control what
is happening to our medical and
uh finally, I just want to say
that there are solutions and,
and fortunately legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee is requesting funding
to continue to find out how we
can create a sustainable.
hospital system. And I'd like
to, you've probably never know,
do not know that North Dakota
has actually created a network
of hospitals.
Maybe about 24, 25. Their
purpose is to retain their
independence.
And to share resources together.
They do not want to be bought
out.
And so
We've got to make sure.
And I, I do not know if, if it
is. I have to read the
substitute to to find that out,
but we definitely support this
effort and are grateful to the
sponsor and the superintendent.
Thank you.
Anyone else in support? Yes.
Madam, Madam Chair, members of
committee, Julian Kub, I'm here
with the New Mexico Trial Lawyer
Association, and we stand in
support. This isn't everything
that we wanted. Um, we would
have pushed for more, but I
understand in this building that
that is the nature of
compromise. We really appreciate
the sponsors working so hard and
getting so much public testimony
and, and put on this bill. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
Anyone in opposition.
Forward and use the microphone,
identify yourself.
And make your statement.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington. Speaking on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce,
respectfully opposes Senate Bill
14.
The chamber opposes this bill
because it's concerned that this
bill will have the opposite
effect as it's intended.
Our hospitals, especially rural
hospitals are often cash starved
because the high percentage of
patients that aren't covered by
insurance and also because
they're located in low
population centers.
Sometimes the only solution for
local hospital staying out of
red in his acquisition.
By an entity that can bring
financial resources to the
table. It's that or potential
bankruptcy and we're not
referring to private equity
firms.
Senate Bill 14 could potentially
block or delay acquisitions that
are necessary to bring needed
solutions in our rural hospitals
are the backbone of healthcare
delivery and access in the
smaller communities. Chamber
believes it can't afford to have
them exposed to long term
finance, so the chamber
understands that this bill is
trying to be helpful.
Um, however, it thinks we will
have the opposite effect and it
urges you to not.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, public policy
director for the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce in
opposition to Senate Bill 14.
This bill places an
inappropriate burden on the
office of Superintendent of
Insurance, while OSI is
effective in regulating
insurance and ensuring financial
solvency, it does not have the
expertise in antitrust law.
Healthcare economics.
Or service delivery models
necessary to properly assess
healthcare, mergers and
acquisitions.
This bill would micromanage the
private sector and discourage
investment in smaller providers
rely on mergers to sustain their
workforce, manage costs, and
comply with complex regulations.
If healthcare companies fear
excessive government
intervention, they will take
their investment elsewhere.
Making it even harder to recruit
and retain medical professionals
that we so desperately need.
A more appropriate approach
would be to assign this
responsibility to an independent
body with the right Madam Chair,
members of the, my name is Drew
Sutter registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian Health Services.
Presbyterian Healthcare Services
supports oversight measures that
prioritize transparency, public
accountability. However, the
current draft of SP 14 grants
overly broad regulatory powers.
And imposes excessive
administrative burdens.
Creating barriers that could
limit, not improve healthcare
access into Mexico.
Medical services contracts
shouldn't be excluded from this
bill.
These agreements do not involve
ownership or control transfers
and should not be subjected to
unnecessary scrutiny.
That slow service delivery.
The scourges essential
partnerships and disrupts
patient care.
Particularly in rural
communities.
The current bill lacks clear
safeguards against indefinite
regulatory delays.
Creating a highly unpredictable
approval process that could
deter vital health care
investments and partnerships.
OSI has unchecked authority
request additional information
at any time after I notice is
deemed complete and all review
timelines are told until those
documents are received.
But these are other reasons we
asked you to oppose the bill.
Thank you.
Good evening. Good evening,
manager Al Park registered
lobbies on behalf of the New
Mexico Hospital Association. I
want to start by thanking the
superintendent and the sponsors
for working with us over the
last year on this legislation,
it really is a continuation of
the legislation, this
legislature passed last year.
Um, we stand in support of the
idea of transparency, but the
one of the concerns to the
hospital association in
particular, are unlike last
year's bill that was passed.
passed by this chamber is the
lack of confidentiality. Much of
the information that is asked to
being presented to the Office of
the Superintendent of Insurance
is proprietary, confidential,
and potentially trade secret
information. Uh, one of our
concerns is that there is
nothing in the legislation that
would protect this information
uh from the public and from uh
the inspection of public Records
Act. In addition, Madam Chair,
we are concerned about the
length of the regulatory review.
process and while the criteria
has been limited, there is a
catch-all provision in the
criteria that um would allow
The superintendent without any
oversight to seek additional
information deemed appropriate
by that superintendent. Now we
have a lot of respect for the
current superintendent, I think
she's excellent, she's willing
to work hard. The problem that
we have is that we have no
control over who may be future
superintendents, and while we
work on this legislation, it's
very important, it's critical
that we identify specifically
what is the scope and the role
and the authority of the
superintendent so that everyone
has a level playing field going.
Forward. For these reasons and
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Carrie
Robin Bruder with the New Mexico
Medical Society. This is one of
those days I wish there was a
third option for how we could
stand up, um, our concern is
very specific. First of all, we
want to say thank you to the
superintendent of insurance and
the sponsors, this bill has come
a very, very long way, um, in
becoming more narrow to target
hospitals and health and
healthcare organizations that
are affiliated with the health
plan. Our concern
is on page 4, the definition of
independent healthcare provider.
This definition says you are
only an independent healthcare
provider if you were entirely
owned or controlled by
healthcare providers who provide
healthcare services to patients
in New Mexico.
This is important because this
definition is used to exclude
independent practices from some
of the, we believe onerous parts
of the bill. I'll give you an
example. We have a physician
practice that had about 10
physicians that shareholders.
One of those physicians died in
a car accident, and he left the
shares of his practice to his
wife, who is not a physician,
not a healthcare provider,
doesn't provide services to
patients. So while that practice
is still very much independent,
um,
Because there's not a healthcare
provider that is entirely owning
and controlling that practice,
or controlling that practice,
they would now fall out of the
exemptions in the bill, so we
think that the standard should
be different there, and we hope
that if there's resolution, um,
that our concerns would be
addressed. But we do think the
sponsor, um, we are concerned
about some of the concerns our
hospital colleagues have. We
urge you to listen to those, um,
but our, our, our comments are
very specific. Thank you, thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Linda Siegel
represent the greater
Albuquerque Medical Association
and the um New Mexico nurse
practitioner counsel, and we
share some of this Harry just
mentioned.
I have a nurse practitioner who
has several clinics that she
owns, but her husband is also
the owner and he is not a nurse
practitioner, but she is the one
running the clinics. We also
have some in the reporting
requirements as to um who are
the entities that data about
their name and all the address
information. I mean, there's
some cute, it seems like certain
people are exempt, but then in
the next section it seems to.
Section
12 and through 14, I think.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Association for Home and
Hospice Care.
Um
We just have questions about the
legislation or we're sort of
surprised by the definition of
healthcare provider organization
that
You're probably as well pulled
into the reporting requirements
in the legislation.
Which we do do oppose and
believe. I mean, a lot of ours
are small, family-owned
businesses, the reporting
requirements.
Uh, we feel our burdensome,
especially given the low
Medicaid rates, uh, that we have
in the state of New Mexico here.
We do just have the same
question. I'll just put some
more specificity on it too, that
Ms. Siegel noted.
Um, I believe in the committee
substitute on page 30.
Uh, in Section A, it says each
hospital and healthcare provider
organization shall report the
following information.
Um, but then on page 31 and 32.
In section B, it lists the
following healthcare provider
organizations are exempt.
And in number 2, it says any
newly formed or existing
healthcare provider
organization.
Does that, does that mean we're
in or out, we're, we're rather
confused by that, um, part as
well.
Um, so thank you, madam.
Thank you very much, and I think
we still have a few persons on.
And Richard Mason.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member in the
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women voters of New
Mexico. The ligas prioritized
support for HB 14 and thanks to
sponsors for bringing it
forward.
The League of women voters of
New Mexico supports the
healthcare system that provides
a comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexico
residents.
In order to provide that
comprehensive level of care we
need to assure that we have
adequate providers and and
facilities. There have been
examples in other states of
entities absorbing healthcare
provider networks and
facilities, milking them for
profits and then closing them
down.
In my native state of
Massachusetts do with healthcare
firm purchased 6 community
hospitals, milked them for
profits, and then declared
bankruptcy, leaving the
viability of those hospitals in
question to of those hospitals
were forced to close. One was in
the community that I used to
live in.
It predominantly black and
Hispanic community, and on a
personal level was hospital. I
used to bring my stepdaughter to
when she had recurring, um,
Uh, severe, uh, earaches. Um,
so, uh, the SSB14 provides the
oversight sight of consolidation
of healthcare facilities to
minimize the threat of to the
health of New Mexicans. So we
urge you to give it a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Erica Sanchez.
Hi Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Erica Sanchez
with New Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty. We believe all New
Mexicans deserve access to
quality affordable health care,
and we therefore support Senate
Bill 14, as was presented during
interim committees, research
tells us that consolidation of
hospitals increases healthcare
costs, decreases access to
healthcare by eliminating
services not considered
profitable, has especially
severe
impacts on rural communities
where patients are forced to
travel long distances for care
and undermines local values,
priorities, and decision making
when out of state corporations
move management outside of New
Mexico.
Since consolidation happens
through confidential business
deals. Our state agencies and
communities have little
knowledge of major changes to
the healthcare system before
they happen. We really
appreciate the work of the
sponsors and the superintendent
to listen to a broad range of
stakeholders to develop this
well vetted bill that balances
confidentiality and transparency
in these.
Transactions and it will protect
the availability, accessibility,
affordability, and quality of
healthcare for New Mexicans. We
asked this committee to vote in
favor of Senate Bill 14. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Um, was there anyone in
opposition?
No? OK.
So with that, um, I appreciate
your indulgence.
And we will in committee right
now and you will be first again
where we get into the
particulars. It also gives
everybody a chance to review,
uh, the committee substitute and
um be prepared for any answers
on Wednesday.
On Wednesday, um, whenever we
get off the floor, 30 minutes
after.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
