Eight.
We we're going to ask that the
the prime sponsor and the prime
opponent if you can decipher who
your private phone and is.
Get out six people from your
group to speak to kind of
represent the full spectrum of
support for the full spectrum of
opposition to the bill.
And we're doing that because
we we really do have a heavy
agenda we want to get through
it.
The one of the things that.
So with that we'll get started
with today's agenda the first
item is Senate bill ninety nine
Senator Lopez and Representative
Roybal Caballero welcome.
Thank you for being here.
It's all yours I thank you very
much Mr chairman members of the
committee and I appreciate the
opportunity to be here in front
of you with Senate bill ninety
nine.
I'm Mr chairman it's a very
simple bill.
What Senate bill ninety nine is
proposing to do is remove the
prohibition.
For local government.
To either take up the issue or
not with regards to rent control
in local government.
Mr chairman members of the
committee is you know they've
been how many stories that have
been in the news that we read
about not just here in New
Mexico but across this country
about issues if people
who would I call or live in the
on the cliff.
If you earn too much money.
Even if it's over a hundred
dollars or so sometimes you get
off you get kicked off of
certain important programs that
offered base for our families Mr
chairman you know during our
time appear to Medicaid is one
of the issues if you earn too
much money the you kind of go up
that that letter of income which
is a good thing but then you get
cut off from accessing Medicaid
for health care coverage for
families it goes on to same for
many other programs that we have
that are supposed to offer when
I called the safety net Mr
chairman.
In over the years many of us may
have an email most recently even
during the COVID received
several phone calls from
constituents
who.
Because of rent increases.
We're unable to stay in that
particular place where they were
living but then of course to go
back and find another place to
live the costs are so
prohibitive to move of they had
to figure out how to find a way
to make ends meet and it was
very detrimental.
So in that discussion Mr
chairman and working with the
one of the representatives who's
here with us today and others in
the community not just in
Albuquerque but across the state
of New Mexico
we felt it was good for us to
bring this measure in front of
us for consideration.
So with that Mr chairman if I
could allow my co sponsored
house co sponsor representative
I don't to see a few words thank
you and we also have one of our
other persons who would like to
say a few words to the committee
very good thank you the start
with Representative Roybal
Caballero welcome thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee north you could
use the hand held Mike specially
with your mask it's going to be
a lot easier for people to pick
it up thank you.
So good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee it's
very nice to be before you again
in person I I remember multiple
times last session the session
before zooming in with you and
you you having to have a lot of
patience with us so thank you so
I I think Senator Lopez for
allowing me to join her on this
very important bill I I just
want to.
Make a brief statement about of
reminding us that historically
during times of economic
stresses Mr chair we also see a
rise in price gouging we see
rises and predatory practices we
see many lack of maintenance
like a repairs a lot of things
going on during times of
economic stress us.
With this house of
representatives the chamber the
Senate chamber state legislators
in general have a responsibility
to the people to ensure that
protections are in place so that
we can prevent exploitation and
prevent the rise of what I call
slum lord conditions housing
conditions because we also see
that the exploitation of home
and the tendency to.
Profit on the backs of poor
people on heightens during these
economic times the second point
I want to make and final point
Mr chair is that in the state of
New Mexico as well as throughout
southwest of part of the country
we know that
particularly Latino families
native American families.
Live in multiple families living
under one household.
Because of.
Having low wages.
Our wages that are insufficient
to meet basic housing needs.
This is.
A practice cultural practice a
tradition because we don't leave
people out in the streets our
families we just multiply we
just make more room and Spanish
there's a saying for them as
well so what that'll we just add
more water to the soup to make
adult and stretched we we
welcome our malt multiple
families until they can get
their feet off the ground and
they earn enough money if that's
possible because now we know Mr
chair that rents have of prices
have skyrocketed and so even the
basic increase and wages that we
instituted in twenty nineteen
or insufficient by far to meet
the needs of the high prices and
rents that are going up so for
those reasons and many others
that will be supported by those
to speak I stand in real strong
support with Senator Lopez and
on supporting house bill I mean
Senate bill ninety nine thank
you thank you and and let's have
your expert witness speak next
if you could I identify yourself
please hello my name's anally
disowning I live in and district
thirteen and I'm a volunteer
organizer with the people's
housing project thank you
members of the committee for
having me and we are eternally
thankful those of us organizing
on the ground fire Sanchez
I've heard some say that they
fear that this bill would be
shooting ourselves in the foot
but it's not the case I'm I
believe that we shot ourselves
in the foot in nineteen ninety
one when we allow to this law
that serves only six percent of
our population to be
implemented.
We shot ourselves in the foot by
enacting a law that incentivizes
developers to build housing that
we cannot afford we incentivize
to the destruction of
our cultural communities
incentivized homelessness and
incentivize poverty.
I'm here not only for myself my
future children my family.
Who have been in New Mexico for
generations of who want to stay
in New Mexico instead of
becoming priced out of their
cultural neighborhoods I'm here
for all people that I've talked
to going door to door and we've
knocked on thousands of dollars
and I can tell you that almost
every single person that we
talked to is burdened by the
house cat housing costs in the
state.
Senator is I'm sorry.
Excuse me thing is.
single mom's disabled folks they
it's been multiple times that
they break down in tears at the
door
there it.
Is really no need to fear this
housing but demand that might
happen if we repeal this law let
me tell you that I know that
this boogeyman is already here
and we are already seeing people
price gouged into homelessness I
drive through downtown
Albuquerque on a regular basis
and there are more and more and
more people living in their car
is every time I drive past we
personally know people who are
having to live in their cars us
so let me tell you that the
boogeyman like I said it's here
the housing crisis is already
here people are already
receiving three four five six
hundred double rent increases
and we are currently already in
the worst case scenario we are
in a housing crisis leaders in
the Democratic Party have
acknowledge this at every level
mayor Tim Keller has the
knowledge that there is a
housing crisis the White House
actually as a non is that
there's a housing crisis
recently
this is the new norm and we have
to do everything we can to stop
it to help New Mexicans stay in
their homes it's really a public
injustice to allow this law to
stand.
This issue is deeply personal.
I don't want any other woman to
have to go through what I've
been through I was born and
raised in Albuquerque and I'm a
proud New Mexican as a young
person I want to explore and I
lived in an unaffordable city.
I found myself an extremely
dangerous situation with an
abusive partner and I had
nowhere else to go because I was
living in a city that was on
affordable.
Please do not put New Mexican
women do this type of play I
still deal with the trauma of
that time in my life but haven't
been affordable.
I would have been able to leave
a lot sooner I ended months of
abuse that I shouldn't have the
longer this law stands the
longer you're subjecting women
to domestic violence so please
let's get this bill out of
committee let's continue this
conversation we have got to be
looking out for the majority of
New Mexicans and we've got to
stop building laws that only
benefit six percent of the
population that are landlords
and developers.
Every public official who cares
about the people of New Mexico
should have no problem sending
this bill out of committee and
getting it passed thank you.
Thank you very much mysticism
you're.
Anybody on the web devices
because this.
As we have.
Well there's a dilemma no I'm
not going to be able to take
anywhere near all of those but I
will we will take six here and
and each side and will take two
of the web on each side.
The so
go ahead who do we have in in
support of this bill let's get a
show of hands first how many are
here in support of this bill.
Okay very good how many are here
in opposition to this bill.
Okay then you've picked out your
six the speakers and have you
picked out your city okay let's
go for it the tricky part will
be the ones on the web but we'll
just a pick a couple of random I
guess.
So if you'd come up and use the
Mike as I said it because we
have to pick it up on on line.
Yes.
You have to press the button
grateful that you have to hold
them.
Good afternoon can you hear me.
I'm here today with my peers as
a member of this community to
implore the committee to end the
prohibition I reckon troll a
system of checks and balances is
needed to ensure affordable
housing for sustainable
communities as a thirty eight
roll film production worker I
move to Albuquerque from Los
Angeles a year and a half ago to
work in New Mexico's thriving
film industry I have a decade of
experience in a rather
impressive resume and I'm a
member of the local forty you
might craft is extremely
competitive on many levels the
work is demanding more the most
can understand I'm speaking on
this as a work extremely
extremely hard.
I battle many sos social and
economic battles but
unfortunately that is not enough
when rents are constantly being
raised and there is here a
checks and balances for
predatory developers and
landlords Furthermore without
rate controlled stabilization it
will be very difficult to
convince my film industry
appears that New Mexico offers a
sustainable lifestyle I move my
whole life to skip the housing
crisis in LA to lead right back
in the same circumstances New
Mexico is a beautiful place to
call home and I hope that we
work towards protecting its most
beautiful alright it's people
and the prohibition on rent
control people not profits I
would like to offer the rest of
my time to speak to the
committee and allow them to ask
any questions and engage in a
dialogue with the housing and
secure citizen I welcome any and
all questions about my
circumstances and Y. no ending
the prohibition I reckon troll
is the best decision for this
community me just ask you one
quick question.
Does Los Angeles have rent
control.
It does Sir it does.
It does it's not everywhere
obviously it's not every
building in Los Angeles but it
does have rent control and I've
lived in rent controlled
buildings and it absolutely
saved my life many times.
Thank you.
Okay next who's up next.
The on.
Can you hear me yes hi good
afternoon thank you committee
members my name is Christine
Winfield.
I'm a long time registered
voting renter and the zip code
of eight seven five oh five.
And I'm here today to speak on
behalf of supporting SB ninety
nine.
Long term renters are actually
better for the landlords I've
been in my place for almost ten
years now.
My landlords are the kind of
landlords that we want I'm
actually an exception that you
can be.
Fought full and humane.
And care about the people in the
city and still make money.
My landlords live in my
neighborhood and rent to other
houses there and they have never
raise my rent since I've lived
there.
However I'm trapped I cannot
move move because I cannot
afford to live anywhere else and
Santa Fe.
We have unchecked increases and
no pay increases.
I also have a poor volunteer at
Pete's place homeless shelter
and beyond when he does food
pantry.
And I work at a community health
center here in town.
I work and see these people the
working poor that are living on
the edge and hustling every day
and trying to see what programs
are out there so that they can
pay the rent.
Programs that we could use that
money for other things if they
weren't having to pay these
predatory let landlords for
increases on their rent.
At the community health center
where I work we can recruit much
needed providers for the
community because they cannot
afford to write and Santa Fe.
There are lots of housing
solutions that have been
proposed and passed on except
for this one and I'm asking you
to remove this barrier so that
we can begin the conversations
on how and the best way to
control the rents and New
Mexico.
If you have any questions for me
I'd love to hear them as well
thank you your typically we we
just let we do accept the COVID
rather than getting into a
dialogue but thank you very much
next.
Hurricane as Amy well.
US economic news service my name
is Jason Santos I live in
district twelve in Albuquerque
will volunteer with the people's
housing project and also grant
graduate student at UNM I came
to New Mexico six months ago to
further my education the first
person on my father's side of
the family to go to to get my
master's degree and hopefully my
doctor afterwards
but today I'm left wondering how
I'll be able to continue living
here with a high price
Representative.
But when I moved here.
I was roughly a hundred eighty
five pounds today I'm a hundred
and forty pounds I've been
skipping meals to make sure that
I can afford my rent and I'm not
the only one there are many
students like me who.
Having to choose between paying
rent and eating food we've had
to you know.
Skip out and it has made life
very difficult I am someone who
suffers from mental illness I
haven't been able to afford my
medications were to go see a
therapist.
I don't know how much longer I
could stay here in New Mexico.
With the rents the way they are
there is nowhere else for me to
go I've been looking for work
and it's very difficult to find
jobs that work around.
Anything they have to keep the
button pressed down over can can
you hear me.
It has been extremely difficult
to to get by here in New Mexico
and of like I said I'm not the
only one I've talked to many
students I've talked to many
people on campus and all of them
suffer from the same issues
There is just not enough
affordable housing here in New
Mexico rents keep going up and
we have to do something about
the.
The ban on rent control is
undemocratic and allows
landlords to increase rents as a
please under the guise of
keeping up of price of repairs.
As a volunteer with the people.
Local countless families who can
barely afford rent rent has
increased by forty percent in
the past few years wages have an
awful.
I'm again not only are rents
going up repairs not being done
specifically of.
We've been able to speak with
people in teensy properties of
who have suffered from on done
repairs for multiple years
someone that we spoke to mark.
Has had a rotten floor due to a
leaking toilet for over over
four years it wasn't until
recently that they decided it
was time to fix it.
And so if Representative has to
go up to keep up with the
repairs why they're not doing
these repairs the same people
who are going to speak to you
shortly or the same ones not
doing the repairs that people
need why are we paying more
money for places that are not
suitable for or living
conditions.
We cannot keep this undemocratic
policy in place we need to let
people decide democratically
will soar to measures to be put
in place to control the rents
housing should be human right
not an investment of and and not
a commodity thank thank you
Robert next.
I'm not sure professors are
allowed to tell it to testify
the.
That is a this is rule which I
respect.
Hi where guardian button.
At the chart again give you away
with the media.
In the field.
Good afternoon my name is Serge
Martinez I'm a professor at
university of New Mexico school
of law where I teach rates and
practice in the area of landlord
tenant law and I'm also the
president of a small nonprofit
called on par that focuses on
housing stability
Everything you hearing about the
housing crisis housing
affordability is real that is
happening in our state that is
happening in Albuquerque and
other cities I want to talk to
you today about it and more
professorial contacts as about
the history of this rule this
law and what it does and what it
doesn't do right this bill
before you would repeal eight a
the thirty year old prohibition
on rent control it it is a law
that was passed at a time when
there was no discussion in New
Mexico about rent control is not
a burning issue it came to New
Mexico as part of a wave of
similar laws around the country
from a group called Alec the
American legislative exchange
council I shop in Washington who
makes a living writing these
bills that try to take power
from local municipalities to you
know to pass certain types of
laws that they don't care for
it's a what closely related with
industry and supported very well
supported and has done this
around the country and like I
said in the late eighties early
nineties there was a wave of
this going around there was not
a demand for this in New Mexico
there wasn't a public discussion
about rent control it was a the.
That project developed to do
these in as many places as
possible and it succeeded here
they found some folks in the
legislature to support this and
convince the legislature to pass
this now thirty years later we
find that in a real crisis
top counties and cities are
being told you can't consider
all the possible tools for
resolving this crisis you can't
come up with your own solutions
to this process to this problem
rather because we took that
power away from the thirty years
ago right this is it's five in
the face of the home rule
jurisdictions that we have
around the state and the idea
that a hyper local problem of
rent affordability should not be
dealt cannot be dealt with with
at the local level who are not
allowed to have all the tools in
the toolbox at their disposal so
this this bill would simply
allow each locality to have its
own discussion make its own
determination about whether rent
control and many other things
that appropriate and create that
with the right mix of responses
to the housing crisis so I urge
you to pass it.
Thank you professor Martinez.
And.
And then to see this for I was I
your I.
Yeah so my name is Bex Hampton
just to make this really clear
we're all volunteers we really
may not be able to afford to
take off work again to come to
Santa Fe so I appreciate you all
having us I was born and raised
all across New Mexico my parents
actually from California they
left Orange County because it
was too expensive and for twelve
years I have been a tenant in
Albuquerque I live currently and
district twenty six and I'm here
to urge you to please vote yes
on SB ninety nine to expand the
democratic rights of tenants
organizing for controls on rents
we really need the right to
enact the control as thousands
of New Mexicans are being driven
into homelessness even worse
poverty being displaced from our
homes in Albuquerque at least
forty percent of residents are
tenants are just six percent of
the population is landlords and
that means that only a minute
portion of the population has a
say in what price right is set
out regardless of how much
people in need you need to have
housing to survive and for us
this is profoundly undemocratic
I wages haven't increased at the
same rates of rents and it just
created mass housing and
financial instability across the
board women in abusive
relationships are for streaming
in domestic violence situations
because they simply cannot
afford to move out and in the
name of profit campaigns
identification are targeting and
displacing residents across the
line the United States and
they're targeting communities of
color where people have lived
for their entire life or for
generations or even longer like
in New Mexico and we want New
Mexico to remain in place or
Latino indigenous black and for
white residents can continue to
live and not become displace in
these are homes this is
happening in Albuquerque right
now and we really need every
tool to stop it I have multiple
friends of moved into their cars
because they had can't afford
rent.
And I control is just one tool
to make housing more affordable
and we really needed at our
disposal I can also no longer
afford to liver I work nearby
UNM eyes struggle to find a
place recently where to live
after breaking up with my Pinay
I only make seventeen thousand
dollars a year I can't afford to
pay thirteen hundred dollars a
month for a one bedroom which is
the going rate most places my
income is only a hundred dollars
over that the only reason I was
able to find a new place to stay
because I happen to have a
friend who owns a home and is
renting a room to me but most
people you know we get I've
gotten hundreds of calls from
people terrified that when that
two hundred three hundred five
hundred rent increase comes
they're they're terrified of
becoming homeless and you know
this this bill it doesn't and I
can't control it just makes it
an option and if developers and
investors are saying they're
afraid to come to New Mexico
because of that I mean I think
that says a lot about like their
goals like what are they trying
to do in New Mexico I they
trying to extract exorbitant
profit or are they trying to you
know find something that is
needed which is housing and you
know if developers investors
cease to come just because rent
control as legal I think we need
to take things into my own hands
and urgently build and acquire
housing is safe clean dignified
and affordable for out all
housing in general should be a
public good and not an
investment to get rich from a
land lines in real estate agents
saw record profits in twenty
twenty one during the pandemic
with increases of one third net
profit what forty three percent
or even more top real estate
executive order pay increases of
over twenty two percent nobody's
wages went up twenty two percent
and and then making all of this
by extracting wealth from poor
people as but the CSN I'm so
remanence they have the right to
raise rent to evict us with
little to no reason the right to
not renewing leases to deny
applications to charge XO
exorbitant fees to denying
Large parts are that you know
it's not legal but they do
tonight damage deposits when not
applicables and to require
incomes that few New Mexicans
have and so much more and all
we're asking to do with this
bill is for us to have the right
to have rent control and you
know I I think it's fair to say
you know most rental units are
owned by large corporations not
small and Lawrence because
people do you know they purchase
small properties for investments
however sixty nine percent of
properties are twenty five or
more units are owned by for
profit businesses and we really
believe you know if someone's a
small landslide and there you
know buying a home to rent out
for their retirement so that
they can you know age with
dignity and safety and good
health I'm we don't think that's
to be determined on some are
derived from another person's
human need we think that are
retired and LFC the neighbors
should have expanded social
security pensions and other
social services to guarantee
their health and well being and
I just want to say SB ninety
nine it presents a really
amazing opportunity to set a
standard nationally saying that
reconcile should be legal it
should be an option the housing
crisis is so severe fifty
Democrats in Congress contacted
president bite in asking him to
act and act some sort of
nationwide rent control so this
issue it's it's really popular
across party lines of the rank
and file voters it's part of the
normal national conversation and
we we should pave the way in New
Mexico by saying renters should
have the right to organize
direct control please pass SB
ninety nine we need to be able
to stop New Mexico from becoming
a place where regional and
mentors and residents can no
longer afford to live thank you
so much thank you and finally.
Yes to all the.
In down here.
Thank you all for having us my
name's Jose and Rica's I'm a
renter and senators Gerald Ortiz
keep building those district
I'm also with the people's
housing project and I'm also a
carpenter with with the local
union thirteen nineteen as you
solve I just came in from work
Ridley has expecting to talk
because the humans are discussed
below one thirty but managed to
get to work
after eight of our ship them
working here the staff at the
Santa Fe says like teen center
for with jeans construction.
And.
Again thanks for having this
hearing and I'm speaking in
support of a Senate bill ninety
nine AM and we have a few
thoughts because I can think of
it's going to talk today.
select for construction workers
that that worked out of town
housing is a big deal
Usually the contracts does allow
for extra money for a per diem
for housing but even then it
could be hard to find a place to
rent with a few of your co
workers or even a hotel room.
some people are lucky to have
campers but that's not really
the case in fact in my you a lot
of members are but the name and
basically been the card is a lot
of time when they work out of
town
And you know it's really sad to
think that because you think
you're in a union your
construction you make good money
I'm it's still not enough even
though I worked in Santa Fe I
live in Albuquerque and you know
just to pay for gas right now to
go up up in that Monday through
Friday it's about a two hundred
one dollars weeks about I had
dollars a month goes to a gas
and right now I'm paying one
thousand four hundred dollars
for rent with me and my partner
and that went up from one
thousand to Anderson five
dollars of which is what we have
been playing a pain so that's a
hundred twenty five dollars.
More a month that's a that's a
ten percent increase and that
the City of Albuquerque I think
in the last two three years rent
has gone up forty percent so
even though this rate hike has
you know affect me personally it
has not been as much as other
people and.
You know I'd like I said with
the people's housing project I
go and knock on people's doors
and talk to them and the rent
has gone up a lot higher than
mine so even though it's hard to
on meet the twenty twenty five
dollars.
More a month it could be a lot
harder for.
Can be hard and it has been hard
for a lot of.
Of people thank you thank you
very much appreciate your coming
did you have something else you
wanted to
yeah and if you know let
blasting out I just want to say
is that there's a lot of these
new condos going up and the
really expensive like even
someone like me a construction
worker in the union
some of the developments like I
can afford to live there like a
place like the broad still not
hello I think rent is a thousand
seven hundred thousand six
hundred for a single unit
apartment and that's half my
income you carpeted income right
there and so the people who are
building these new condos they
can't even afford to live there
and that's the real tragedy.
Thank you very much.
now we'll go to six in the
audience who are opposed to this
bill and do you have some pick
up to address Mr chairman
members of the committee
findings but registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
realtors Mexico association of
realtors and they stand in
opposition to the bill and I
think that the the discussion
here really is the issue with
the problem that we have in New
Mexico one of four thousand
appreciate what the sponsors are
trying to go but we all know
that affordable housing in New
Mexico is the real underlying
issues and we need more of it
New Mexico struggles with lots
of problems and we need to think
of creative solutions to address
that problem introducing the
debate about rent control into
the discussion I think takes a
sim the long direction thank you
should try to refocus on the
initiatives that take us towards
more affordable housing and I
would point you to a I notice in
your FIR is pretty simple it's
on the second page what it says
is the Mexicos among thirty
seven states that prohibit.
The integrated control.
By introducing controlled into
New Mexico it would become part
of the minority of states that
allow for and with that stirs
are looking to build housing
it's more like it's likely that
they're going to go to the
majority of states that have
some type of preemption a
prohibition against rent control
it simply where is the best
place for us to try to start
dollars where's the best place
to try to create new housing I
don't think that the state of
New Mexico needs to go down this
path the real problem with rich
control is that it leads of
financially to stagnation
stagnation Bond less likely that
you're going to have affordable
housing build and it also locks
in owners in terms of
improvements to the building
there's there will work within
the set supposed to be using the
Mike.
Yeah project so well I forgot to
remaining that but on zoom they
will pick you up college eyes Mr
chair art all over just keep on
from that
I can do that I apologize Mister
chairman I'm used to in
projecting my voice the issue
with rent controls it leads to
stagnation supply but then it
also locks the owners into a set
amount that they had then have
to use for the purposes of
improving the property it leads
to a downward cycle there and
this would apply to large
housing owners but also small
owners as well and that should
be taken into consideration I
think the best thing that I
could point this committee to
and others in the legislature
is.
We need more housing that is the
issue introducing the one
solution of rent control into
this equation is simply the
wrong direction we would ask
that you would not vote for this
bill thank you.
then who's next this is.
Representative.
After.
Yeah both opponents and
supporters.
I'm gonna ask
of the present organize the
speakers for the of the support
to pick out to the people in the
zoom to speak and read to pick
out to the opponents to speak so
that I was going to do it but
it's just random and be better
to get let you know shut it
please introduce yourself to it
thank you Mr chairman Senators
my name is Kent Sampson I'm from
Los crucis New Mexico.
Then thank you for allowing me
to speak before you I'm a
realtor but I'm also a fourth
generation new Mexican whose
families have the same pharmacy
of valley for over ninety years.
I want to tell you about a
retired couple that lives just
down the street from me.
They are not one of the
corporations they do not own.
A giant apartment complexes in
fact those are very few and hard
but far between in New Mexico
you don't see that many fifty
unit two hundred unit thousand
unit apartment complexes like we
see in other cities like
Phoenix.
New Mexico's got mom and pop
landlords.
They own a modest home but it's
a very well kept home it's about
fifteen years old.
They're in their seventies and
they live on their pension from
the military and social
security.
Linda inherited a home that her
sister owned that's over near
the university.
In Los crucis near NMSU.
It's partial Adobe it's partial
slump lark it's nothing fancy
but it is three bedrooms.
When they inherited that
property they went in and added
a half bathroom so there would
be two bathrooms they thought
that was more appropriate for
them to have to rent out to
people people need to bathrooms
at least that's their thinking.
They didn't raise the rant they
just appreciate a little bit of
a boost in the income that they
get from having this rental
property.
For the next several years they
had a steady succession of
graduate students that lived in
our places tenants and they also
added a mini split air
conditioner down the road so
that they thought their students
would be better served by having
air conditioning instead of just
want cooler.
They did not raise the rent
again.
A couple years ago they had to
completely re roof the house at
a cost of over twelve thousand
dollars.
This couple had to cash in I. R.
A.'s.
To have the money to pay for the
rough.
They did have to raise the rent
they raised it a hundred dollars
because they just wanted to get
a little bit of cost recovery
for the rough not pay for the
whole thing all in one chunk but
they wanted to keep the rents
low because they knew they were
renting to students and made
them feel like they were helping
out their community.
COVID hit.
Right after they rented the
house after re roofing at.
All the students went home.
They were getting no money for
rent.
What what they told their
tenants this you know what don't
pay rent while you're not living
here it's not your fault you
went back home you had to go
back home.
But we're not gonna rent this
house out from underneath you
guys we're going to hold it for
you so when you do come back to
school you've got a place to
stay at an affordable price.
So it wouldn't fall that's the
kind of people that this couple
is.
They're good solid human beings
and there's a lot of them out
there.
The two thousand nineteen
Harvard study showed that across
the United States.
Over fifty percent of all rental
units in the US is owned by mom
and pop.
In the state of New Mexico
that's much higher.
I don't know what the exact
figure that's correct is but
I've heard upwards of eighty
eight percent I've heard eighty
percent of heard seventy
whatever the percentages mom and
pop own a significant amount of
rental properties.
Putting in rent control.
Will not allow them to continue
to be landlords they won't be
able to afford it.
During this time when they were
collecting no rent for this
house yet holding at so that
their tenants could come back
and have a house to live in one
school started up again.
There was a leak over in the
adobe portion of the house.
When they finally were alerted
to it by their neighbors they
women and watered so part of the
adobe and they had one crew go
in that fixed the leak pipe they
had to have another crew go in
to fix the adobe.
Unfortunately as they were
digging in and working on the
adobe that the contractor
performed a lead based paint
yes.
And they found lead based paint
so all work had to stop.
The crew had to put on full
bunny suits to work.
Respirators the whole shooting
match and they had to go out and
get a special permit.
Because the area that was
affected by the lead based paint
was over.
The rules and regulations I
think now it's two foot square
if you find lead based paint
everybody's going to be in bunny
suits.
Anyhow.
It became enormously expensive
and insurance did not pay for it
because they didn't have a
special rider that covered lead
paint remediation.
So they got to pay for the
expensive part of the repairs
and insurance got to pay for the
part being faxed.
As a result of this they had to
take out a loan on their house.
In order to pay for the repairs
you could if you could speed I
will quite a bit of time thank.
They raised the rent two hundred
dollars.
Because they did not want to go
over a thousand dollars because
they thought over a thousand
dollars was too much for the
student community.
These are the people that are
the landlords in New Mexico
Representative control.
Will force them to have to sell
the house and will be three more
bedrooms that are no longer
available for rent.
That'll go to some family.
Which is families are great
employees are wonderful but when
we have twenty thousand fewer
homes just in Albuquerque then
we need this is not the way to
bring this and it's gonna harm
New Mexico it's gonna harm mom
and pop it's going to harm your
neighbor it's going to harm your
brother when he graduates from
college and can't find a place
to rent because there are none
thank you very much thank you
very much this the next.
We go thank you.
Mr chair steam Senators my name
is Chuck Sheldon
I own TNC management we manage
about two thousand units in
Albuquerque.
We have
We've been in the business over
fifty years.
And I grew up in Los Angeles in
public housing tenement houses
to be specific.
And that was horrific.
So when you grow up like that
you watch impose out of building
and hose out for the next family
to come in and take over.
We were very hard never to have
something like that here in New
Mexico.
I move here
forty one years ago.
From Oregon.
I work for the department of
agriculture for service beyond I
was an executive with that with
that organization.
To learn how to deal with people
and work with people and help
them move forward.
You know just that that's a
little background so we don't
all come with somebody giving us
something and saying here it is
you got it you're going to be
able to take that away.
We talk about increases in rents
and yes they've been horrific.
Just as the record straight.
I won't property here in New
Mexico
since nineteen seventy nine.
Rents went up two and one half
percent over that time frame.
When COVID started.
Rents have gone up in nineteen
the start and twenty we froze
rents we froze people being able
to move.
Calder read holiday.
Because if you raise the rents
people just didn't pay.
And so now we have no income.
Are you looking able to fix
things with.
It's converse to people.
Your thumb slipped again here.
You just have to keep with that
okay thank you Sir.
Rental income is what pays the
salaries pays maintenance pays.
For the mortgage and all of
these things are what take place
with rent coming in.
We look at what has happened to
the cost structure.
We all know we've had inflation.
The cost structure is a furnace
they used to costs and prior to
nineteen.
Four hundred to five hundred
dollars is now a thousand eleven
hundred dollars this double.
To install a furnace runs you
around twenty eight to three
thousand dollars.
An evaporative cooler that we
use here in New Mexico was four
hundred dollars.
If you go down to home depot
there now seven fifty.
Plus installation so now you
around twelve to fourteen
hundred dollars to install
those.
We look at new rules coming in
for greening.
You can't buy it an existing
furnace that was prior to.
January one now you have to buy
an enhanced furnace and now that
adds another six seven hundred
dollars to the cost of the for
us plus installation requires
more.
So we're seeing cost escalations
across the board.
We have a bill that's being
proposed so we're going to
increase minimum wages we're
going to indexes.
And that's a good idea.
However you have to index rents.
Are you gonna pay for this.
You can't freeze rents increased
cost.
Utilities utilities have gone up
over forty five percent since
nineteen.
That these are facts these are
subjective feelings.
And so we look at this we look
at how do we handle those costs
coming about how do we handle
when we're trying to pay people
it was mentioned here here that
you know we don't take care of
maintenance.
You know the average cost for
somebody owning a building is
around forty percent you know we
and some of these buildings are
paying sixty percent for
maintenance.
Which is extremely high.
One of the buildings people are
talking about are rent
controlled because we bought the
tax credit property.
And it is controlled sixty
percent of median income.
So you can't raise rents.
The rental rates we get a raise
by hud hud raise the rent we can
do that it was mentioned that
president Biden's going to do
something yes he is he's going
to lean on Hyde to maintain
those federal loans can't raise
the rates.
Which is controlled by cut.
So people are living in rent
controlled properties just not
market rat that's important to
understand.
We do have these.
And there isn't enough money to
go make the thing work.
And when folks come by and say
you know we need to be able to
have fixed income I make
seventeen thousand a year that's
eight dollars an hour.
The minimum wage is twelve.
So that means we're working part
time.
You're not going to be able to
find a properties to live in
working part time and we're
affected by that.
We're not trying to be mean.
So what we're doing is we're
we're looking at Santa Fe is a
great example.
Ten years ago they passed a bill
to say you had to subsidize
housing.
There wasn't any housing built
in Santa Fe.
For ten years just repeal that
now there's housing being built
and people rushing in the bills.
So when you put more constraints
on as you limit.
How much how many more buildings
are going to build we're
currently twenty thousand units
short and Albuquerque.
So the point is.
We want to make it worse.
The following put freezing
grants and freezing controls and
see what we're going to be.
Thank you chair.
next and and if you could try to
keep your your comments to.
Which I'm just getting up above
you I'll be brief here.
All right mining chairman and co
committee members here my name
is on the second I'm the
executive director of the
department sociais Haitian in
New Mexico we represent about
sixty six thousand rental units
across the state I did want to
direct that guy quoted here it's
also in your FIR here on the
last page you know we had a
mortgage finance authority here
last week they put out a great
report I think it's been about
four months ago lots of
suggestions on how to build
housing have from curry housing
affordability rent control was
not one of those things listed
here on your FIR MFA recommends
developing and preserving
affordable housing in New Mexico
in order to maintain affordable
rents.
spend a little time on that
as mentioned eighty seven
percent of developers will not
develop in a place with rent
control so this really puts us
in the minority for development
as it's been mentioned many
times you know we have a supply
and demand issue you know to its
bonnet C. it's simple economics
we need more housing
and rent control does not build
more housing rent control takes
we eighty seven percent that's
what it says.
you know this last year in St
Paul Minnesota perfect example
they passed rent control within
the first three months they lost
eighty percent of their
developments in that includes
affordable housing cross river
in Minneapolis where there's no
rent control the construction
was up sixty percent we would
literally be pushing our new
housing out to other states.
you know I think that the thing
here though to remember is that
there is a good side already
here currently in Santa Fe and I
drove through these numbers up
this morning there's twenty one
hundred and eleven apartments
being built right now has
checked mentioned there was
nothing bills for the last ten
years essentially because of
constraints on the on the
industry in Albuquerque there's
thirty communities over forty
two hundred units are currently
under construction and there's
another four thousand in the
pipeline right now in
Albuquerque rent control will
stop that I mean that's the
thing to understand here is that
this even talking about this
we're already losing and we're
losing investors today because
we're having this conversation
here in Santa Fe.
Forty two percent of those
apartments being built now but
cookie affordable housing.
The solutions are here we just
need to let the private sector
do it I mean we have the answers
here it's just a matter of time
and I you know we understand you
know we are sensitive to the
fact that you know there's been
an increase in homelessness and
you know I think Senator
Gallegos you mentioned Portland
has a fifty percent increase in
homelessness they're under rent
control you was mentioned
earlier LA county they're under
rent control they have the
largest homeless population in
the state you know R. I. E. I.
we're very sensitive to that
this is a real issue the rent
control is not the answer rent
control does not build housing
rent control does not make rents
cheaper.
So please please vote no on this
bill thank you get thank you
Sir.
Next okay.
More.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marlys shows
registered lobbyist for nay up
real a commercial real estate
development association we stand
in opposition to Senate bill
ninety nine we believe the
proposed solution to affordable
housing is not rent control it
stifles construction jobs and
development as you previously
heard the problem is it again a
housing shortage the state needs
faster plan reviews approvals
inspections incentives for multi
family development and increased
multi family density we believe
that this is a solution to our
housing shortage in New Mexico
not rent control thank you thank
you Martha and you have a six
person.
Senator Cravens good to see you.
We have a lot under
consideration here that would
block you from lobbying the
legislature and but it does not
apply retroactively so your
state of I'll get it well I can
Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman of.
Then Senator of appreciate you
bringing the bill however we
will at respect we have to
propose my name is Kent Cravens
I'm with the greater Albuquerque
association of realtors
as well as a registered lobbyist
so I'm.
gonna say something you've
probably never heard before I'll
be brief
but I do want to just a I want
to go a different direction that
I want to save things you've
already heard and so I've been
making notes back there as a
been sitting there so you didn't
have to listen to it over and
over again.
it is true.
That the root cause really is
market driven by supply and
demand.
I don't know if you'll know this
is somebody that may the
Albuquerque city council had it
under consideration number weeks
ago I think goes back in October
to ask the state to lift the ban
on rent control.
obviously that's something we
took notice of very quickly and
knew that whether the
Albuquerque city council acted
on that or not it was probably
going to happen here during the
session and so we honestly just
got really busy doing everything
we could to try to come up with
a plan a plan we talked to city
councilors all the way through
that discussion and that led to
a lot of other discussion with
the mayor's office and our
illustrious smear Keller who was
a member of this August body at
one point in time
has come up with some very
innovative solutions that we can
actually get get going on things
that we can do together to solve
this problem.
And they involve a lot of things
that the city council can
control which is you know easing
up on some of the ordinance that
make it difficult for builders
and developers making it
possible for of abandoned hotels
to be refurbished and made
available I also sit on a board
called area the Albuquerque
regional economic alliance.
from time to time they asked me
to come in and share with
prospective companies are coming
to New Mexico of what the
housing situation looks like so
I get together all the
information I can we we create
reports for them out of a of a
database that reaches really
into the demographics and and to
to the deepest parts of our our
economy and we share that
information with them and the
one thing they say is our
workers can't afford to buy
houses in Albuquerque will for
for that matter they can't
afford to buy houses almost
anywhere in the country it's
just that the status quo these
days and it's unfortunate.
But I believe working together
we can come up with solutions
public private partnerships it's
not all going to be borne by the
by the government of I was in
and out meeting last week and
the the question was posed we're
talking about housing the
question was posed to developers
where are you guys on bring in
some of these apartments and
some of these old buildings and
some of these box stores into
compliance so that they could be
rented out as housing.
And the developers Hansard
without even hesitating would
jump all over that.
Would jump all over that if we
could just lift the regulations
and and have a path cleared for
us to be able to do that so
they're ready to go there ready
to dump money into it of I mean
lots of money.
End of the day during the city
council meeting of the
councillors decided it was a
better idea to probably give us
a chance to work with more
Keller on some of his really
good ideas and I gotta be honest
with you there's a few things of
that we're not gonna probably
agree on but we all know about
politics is the art of
compromise and so we will be
working with the mayor Keller's
office as a group not just gar
not just my organization
realtors up incidentally
realtors love buying properties
are they big box stores do they
take that money out of out of
town no but most realtors you
know if if they're thinking
about their their professional
development and and believing in
their in their craft they're out
there looking for properties to
buy to.
To me in positions too many
regulations on these owners of
will absolutely forced them to
sell pulling literally thousands
of units out of inventory almost
immediately I would say so for
those reasons and trying to tell
you things you might not of have
heard of previously of those of
the reasons that we stand
respectfully stand opposed you
Mr thank you.
Okay we'll go now to zoom.
And
We have a roll up here the two
that I'm gonna ask to speak
Roger cope.
And Ramona mulching ski.
They've been picked by the.
By the supporters.
So Mister cope.
That's right.
Yes.
Is.
Muted now.
Is this Roger cope yes is it is
the unlimited now yes we can
hear you.
Well that's good well what we
talking I want to say that.
I I I.
I have seen the I agree there.
Read accounts of how I'm with
the.
They see the growing number of
every few every week or so
there's more of them in my
neighborhood I live in the.
Over there in the area near
Pennsylvania and Central Avenue
in Albuquerque.
I'm lucky enough to have had a
landlord who would person the
very helpful for me.
I am disabled and living on
social security disability
pretty much my entire life.
And he's never raced haven't
raised a red to my mother and my
mother Nancy.
We care into this house in two
thousand and six.
He's done a great deal of
repair so one of the staff
doesn't is I'm very grateful for
because otherwise I'd be out on
the street.
But I was is I listen to this
about.
Some of these people with one
thousand of the apartment
building and apartment all of
the state.
They're hardly the mom the
little mom and pop.
Right realtors are women with
that that.
He may have and what state are
the majority of
this is not the case I really
think we need to pass this bill
and for and allow.
Easy the bill the rants the beef
freedom with the.
The rest of the.
Mexico up they need to be frozen
we need to support the S. ninety
nine whatever it's called now
thank you very much Roger we'll
go next to
Ramona Mel chin ski.
Thank you senator is for hearing
my comment I live in Senator
Ortiz Pinos district I can't see
very well but I think that
that's who was just speaking
I am I speaking and supported SB
ninety nine I was born and
raised in Albuquerque lived here
most of my life I actually
studied very hard and was able
to get into Stanford University
I studied abroad for Manasses
internationally and decided to
pursue my PhD here in
Albuquerque at the University of
New Mexico so we talk a lot
about brain drain and that our
people vote New Mexico don't
want to stay here but I can tell
you that many of my friends have
left and come back to Mexico
because they families a hearing
their support network say here
it's affordable to live here
but now that rents are going up
many of my friends a saying oh
we might have to move out of New
Mexico once again and all of
that talent that we try to keep
in New Mexico is just not going
to be able to afford to live
here I'm a PhD student you in
and I'm actually on the
coordinating committee at the
graduate workers union which
represents one thousand six
hundred graduate degrees at the
university I and I can tell you
that every single graduate work
I've spoken to.
Is in favor of as the ninety
nine and in nineteen can you not
hear me.
Is it all right anything else a
remote are you done they told
them that they can't but you
can't hear me no we can't do so.
Thanks to.
Try to pick up the the volume of
the if you could speak up loudly
as you can.
Yes I will so as I was saying
I'm a PhD student at the
university of New Mexico I'm on
the coordinating committee of
the graduate workers union which
represents one thousand six
hundred graduate workers at the
university and every single
graduate work I'd spoken to
support SB ninety nine and the
of the democratic right to
organize for housing regulations
like rent control in the City of
Albuquerque I also knocked on
hundreds of doors with the
people's housing project and the
working people of New Mexico
here in in eastern New Mexico
really Mexico where we have
visited support SB ninety nine
and support.
The rate of communities to have
the democratic right to control
and regulate housing as they see
fit.
This bill will not enact rent
control.
And it's just one tool in the
toolbox other things that we
need in the state including more
affordable housing.
But if we build more housing and
we don't have rent control
people will still not be able to
live in that house.
That's exactly what's happening
here in Albuquerque there are
dozens of empty buildings near
the university because no one
can afford to live there.
So we need multiple tools to be
able to solve our housing crisis
and I want to just speak to the
fact that
very many P. line this year
today and all of us are
volunteers we're working people
who take our time to come speak
about this because we are on the
verge of homeless homelessness
is skyrocketing in this state
and we need protection we need
health centers.
Please think about giving us the
democratic right to be able to
organize in our communities very
measures that we.
Thank you thank you very much
Ramona so the two people on zoom
they were picked by the
opponents are Todd Clark and
Jean vents if you could to you
could share your views with us
now please.
It.
First two and.
They're the first to you again.
But Clark and and Jean vents.
Mr chair can you hear me yes
thank you.
Mister Rogers you can't yes good
afternoon Mister chair madam
senator committee members I want
to thank you for deliberation on
this legislation today my name
is Todd Clark and I'm a fourth
generation commercial realtor
who was born in Deming and lives
in Albuquerque I propose Senate
bill ninety nine.
In the midst of a housing
shortage of thousand units we
seem to have forgotten what
created today's issue and that
it was one of our own making not
because individual owners or
landlords or property managers
the due to the phenomenal
success of our community's
ability to create new jobs this
is the job growth we've been
friends for for well over a
decade it relates to the
position of Amazon Netflix
Facebook and the expansion of
the Intel and many others these
new jobs have brought new people
who need new housing and
unfortunately our housing supply
has not kept up with the stroke
this is what's created today's
housing shortage and couple that
with the highest inflation seen
in forty years it's no wonder
we're seeing the appreciation in
home prices and rental rates the
only way to bring down housing
inflation increase the supply of
housing rent control does not
build a single unit in our local
markets the mere conversation
rent control is because many
developers ready to go projects
on hold as they contemplate
exiting the market entirely
relocating their capital
investment dollars to Texas or
Oklahoma state's the border just
to do not have rent control nor
do they have a sales tax on new
construction we look forward to
working with you in the local
and state leaders and anyone who
wants to develop new product and
has solutions to increase the
supply of housing for our kids
and grandkids this is a math
problem in the only solutions to
begin on market that has more
units than residents thank you
for your time but thank you Mr
Clark and then finally we have
gene Vance.
It's it's hi this is not letting
me on move you but I suspect
that it it actually is we can
hear.
Okay hi I'm Jean Vance I'm a I'm
an attorney in the real estate
areas and have been for in New
Mexico for over forty years I.
I understand.
The frustration people have with
with the tight market we have
right now this is the tightest
that I've seen in decades and we
do need to do something about
that we what we need to do about
it is to increase the number of
units.
When I have have been contacted
by someone looking to build
a park apartments or other
housing in New Mexico and for a
legal review of the first things
he asked me is about rent
control.
It's it's very clear that rent
control is.
One of the biggest deterrents to
people coming in and building
that I could I could point out
to them as a lawyer just giving
them the legal.
Surrounding.
Right as Todd.
Said right control doesn't build
a single unit in fact the
economic studies that have been
done by the Brookings
Institution and many other very
respected.
Economists say it does the
opposite.
That rural control looks like
it's going to to ease things up
for some people who are renters
right now.
But in the long term it actually
decreases affordability because
people sell their rental
properties and gentrify the area
up people don't build new
properties and.
People we end up with this
stagnated development and.
Price is actually going up and
it's I think it would would help
the committee a lot to look at
some of those economic analyses
because they really bear this
out across the country where
it's been happening with words
happened.
We actually decreased supply
when we put in rent control I've
seen it.
In my own experience my own
practice.
And
apparently it it's it's what
happens all over the country.
So.
I.
I oppose this
and I I think that the committee
if if the committee wants to
really help housing in New
Mexico the committee should
oppose it to there are so many
other ways that we can increase
the supply and and actually
solve this problem thank you
thank you thank you all very
much I know this is been longer
to we want to share as many
issues or we want to hear a few
issues over and over again
either way we want to give
everybody a chance budgets
because of the so members of the
committee will go to the
committee now for questions
anybody have a question Senator
gave us this chair I apologize I
was late do have just a couple
of questions and if you don't
mind Mr elected as to gentleman
from the you just real brief
question if you wouldn't mind.
Mr center from the you yes one
and gentleman yes I will both
wind okay.
Is a union member I don't think
he's a representative of the
union the correct that he works
for you so actually do work with
Janice corporation and I.
But Mr chair Senators and gentle
I work for a construction
company so I know that we give
an increase of compared to
Albuquerque how much do they
give you to come to Santa Fe as
far as your per diem rate.
I don't get a per diem right to
travel to Santa Fe and the
reason being is I think it's my
union contract F. to be working
more than I think Sentifi miles
away from home and.
I lived within fifty miles of my
job site so at on that pretty
and for that reason okay well
thank you for that Mr Chairman
center and I was just trying to
get clarification of what can
work to do Mr chair Senator.
Right now I'm doing general
carpentry work okay and I
appreciate that I was hoping to
get a
the amount of increase a a.
So typically Mr chairman centers
they reduce hotel right here
during session because I
understand how hard it is to get
somewhere to stay here so I
understand your plight when
you're coming from Santa Fe
Albuquerque Santa Fe so I I
appreciate that was my last
question on that Mr Sir now I
have some more questions for the
good senator and representative.
Thank you for that.
Mister chairman Senator
Representative I was gonna ask
you earlier the gentleman stood
up and talked about Portland so
we had a bill a few days ago
that were as increasing millions
more dollars money into housing
in in that discussion I'd ask
about because Portland Oregon
has had a real increase in
homelessness not wanting if
Mister chairman Senator
Representative if you guys would
look at that on.
What your bill would do to us in
my purview Mister chairman
Senator Representative ever
since we've had our marijuana
law we've had people influx
we've got immigration influx and
that creates a real hardship for
people that are already here and
I'm just wondering if you guys
done any kind studies Mister
chairman Senator Representative
off what your bill would do of
for the housing piece right now
there's a lady behind he's got
our hand up Mr and Sir thank you
Mr chairman if I could this is
only a few like to sit up here
please.
Thank you I could
That bill by the way was Senator
Rodriguez is built for a forty
eight there are three of them
yep yeah that's right there were
a total of three that.
The one for the for the housing
was forty eight million so
something I have forty eight
million for a in addition to the
affordable housing trust fund
which would be matched with tax
credit and other programs and so
on trying to build more
affordable housing good.
I'm not sure and how that part
plays in but I just wanted to
reiterate that we're not talking
about implementing rent control
so you know the I think that we
should get the discussion away
from we know okay how does this
rank control in this place where
how it work here that's not what
we're talking about actually if
we passed SB ninety nine nothing
would change yet.
It would be left up to local
communities the staff to have
those conversations but at the
moment we kind of can't even
have a conversation as to
addressing the affordability of
rent.
Thank you for that Mister
chairman Senator Representative
gentle lady I guess in my
discussion I was trying to find
out if you guys did any any any
any research on what this would
do to us and I yield with that
question I do have another
question Mr Senator
Representative I was just trying
to find out if
To me
If we look at it.
So so what I've seen here Mister
center representative in the
last few years we've made it
harder for contractors build up
by time you put in everything
for the electrical
considerations for your soul or
your
plugin for your vehicles up are
you guys considering Mr center
and Representative anything to
reduce the of burden on
construction to be able to make
affordable housing on the
comments earlier was it we need
for homes and I'm wondering if
you guys have looked at changing
regulations coach or in zoning
and if those discussion Mr chair
Senator Representative have been
at.
Mr chairman if I may and Senator
all we're proposing in this bill
is just to remove the
prohibition for local
communities to have this
discussion there's there's other
bills that it may be circulating
in the legislature this year all
we're proposing is to allow
local governments to have the
same conversation that we're
having that maybe to answer more
specifically in their own
locality as to what the concerns
are what the zoning changes and
everything else because every
community is very different.
So no I don't have that
information for you because
again it's based on local
government and what's happening
in local community.
Mr helpful of this be my final
comment Mr chair Senator
Representative what I'm
proposing a bill I try to look
back and try to figure out what
the intended consequences are
and that's why my questions are
if you look broader than just
your bill and all the kids with
that because I think
historically we make
consequences we won't know till
two for five ten years from now
and that's my career saw kids
with that thank you Mr thank you
senator judges I think senator
former senator Cravens mention
the work that's been going on in
Albuquerque with the
administration there the city
administration around relieving
some of the regulatory barriers
to to construction so the that
that conversation is going on
but it is separate from this
bill let's this bill doesn't
have anything to do with that.
Senator committees.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
presented
I have a couple questions I want
to know if you Albuquerque was
was brought up
Are there certain
municipalities that are
supporting this are endorsing
the bill.
Such as City of Santa Fe
Albuquerque it the
municipalities.
Mister chairman Senator at this
point I'm not aware of any we
anticipate all of these of
course because if they're going
to do so that they have to go
through the city council or even
if it's the county in there for
their local care County
commission for resolution of
some sort
I'm unaware if there is but
again we're here for us just to
again have this conversation Mr
chairman to allow local
communities to have this again a
similar type of discussion
within their own community right
now Mr chairman with the
prohibition up for rent control
I think you know there's there's
a I called a chilling effect
we're if they can't engage in
that so it's just a matter of of
I think a point for that local
communities to be able to have a
discussion with members and
there in a way this developers
or others to sit down and really
have a conversation about rent
control.
Thank you Mr chairman center and
I I a minute of yes I'm guilty
often of asking questions and
maybe of a fuzzy way so I I
maybe I can ask it a little
better is I realize that.
The municipality hasn't passed
an ordinance on rental because
they can't but I I my my
question was hopefully this came
across well is.
Are they are they wanting the
ability to to do that has have
they reached out so hopefully
that's what what you heard from
me and then but a follow up
question would be municipal
league do they have a position
that I didn't hear them are they
around have they said anything.
Mr chairman I'm unaware about
the municipal league okay no I
I'm aware of that but we who I
have heard a from armed persons
who live in the city of tech
house Los crucis we've heard
testimony in other committee
meetings and such from on the
side of the state I've had some
for ros will there's been some
concerns with Clovis in Gallup I
mean they're they're different
communities around the state Mr
chairman that there are some
concerns about the cost of
living if I make mention to from
those it's not just about
affordable housing for someone
to purchase a home also there
are some people who will never
purchase a home or be able to
afford so and if I say one more
thing Mr Chairman yeah there's a
lot of new users out there if
you do you know and most of us
to do the Google research
it it's a it's an issue of not
just availability but you know
it it costs and what are people
earning to be able to afford and
I live in apartment can Mr chair
Sir I know I want to get to that
and I I I do have something to
say about that I think is yours
your spot on there
I had another question about the
bill it says I noticed in the
title I didn't actually look up
that was repealed I probably
should have but in the Thailand
says privately owned property.
so my understanding is this
would allow municipalities if
they wanted to to enact rent
control on privately owned
property.
would that create a difference
between.
Properties that are not
privately owned and how would
those be treated.
I I honestly I thought was just
for all of you know just kind of
a flat but but it says private
property so would you be able to
tell me about that.
Mr Mr chair if I may take a stab
at this so there's from my
understanding I've been a long
time housing of coalition
advocate national housing
member.
Public housing is one thing and
it's governed under the set of
rules instead of by the.
Federal government and then
dictated to the states and then
the states through their all
public housing authorities and
through our
you know mortgage finance and
all the other entities that we
have manage the public housing
aspect of it private aspect
this we pray that those that are
private owners and those fall
under the purview of most likely
of local of government and
ordinances and those types of
things and I think going back to
help try to understand this Mr
chair is that we're hearing.
Tries from the population in
general which is the most
important population that we're
responding to and that is that
they cannot afford to live in
the house private housing as it
stands right now unless we
repeal and give them the
opportunity Mr chair because
they're the most important
actors and all of this the
families and students all those
people you heard from that have
the inability to afford to live
with skyrocketing prices because
their wages are not skyrocketing
if if you and so that's the
answer yes so that so that's
what I was trying to do Mr chair
just clarify that the regulatory
powers fall under two different
pervious and so we're just
trying to release and you're
correct the private the time as
the title of infers or alludes
to I think senator the point was
made earlier that the.
Hi properties which is for the
affordable housing money for the
most part comes from our rent
controlled they can't raise
their rents in the city can't
raise rents and the public
housing okay okay thank you and
thank you for that answer
I'm doing it I mean I'm good but
I mean did you I just wanted to
add a click of point about
public housing if that's okay
thank is that at.
You know.
Right now in Albuquerque we have
about over three hundred people
who have qualified for housing
vouchers who can't find a place
to live because when the rent is
higher than the certain amount
it makes the voucher invalid so
you know that sort of they have
to that structure we had true
that level yeah the the
structure that we had in place
for affordable housing is not
the it's not the feeling the
need and I think that's part of
why we're having this
conversation to.
Okay thank you Mr chair center
thank you for that
I
I think that's all my questions
I I do have some comments
and then listening very intently
to both sides I I will say I I
did I made a comment the other
day that I didn't like the tone
of the conversation in another
bill.
And I thought the tone was off
and I think I think the tone is
off and uncomfortable
uncomfortably so in this
discussion it gives me kind of
an us versus them mentality
that's what I'm dealing.
And I think we can all agree in
this room that.
We we want for our residents
everybody wants like I want you
to have good housing I want you
to have good housing what you
don't get as education I mean I
want everyone to have a good
housing situation that's because
I believe I with the logical
basis for that I believe
everyone was created because it
was a real everyone's equal
equal like no one has more
higher value anyone else
So that's kind of the driving
force between by that
but I I also want to you know
have you contribute you know
some thought since it sounds
like there is going to be some
meetings in some community
people committee organizes
groups organizations realty
groups and things that are going
to have discussions
in my neck of the woods and part
of my district is in Albuquerque
and I have east mountains.
and so I I think we need to be
very careful but bet because
because we I believe we have a
very common goal that every
human wants other people to have
good housing I think that our
solutions should match that and
it should not give me at least
maybe I'm being paranoid or mis
heard people but it it shouldn't
give us an us versus them
mentality I don't think there's
a need for that I think we can
overcome that.
And
So just a couple of of thoughts
on that I I had I just wrote
down I wasn't planning on doing
this I have one seven
principles that I think we
should probably in here too and
maybe there's one or two or
three that are bad that we can
throw out
but what I heard from the public
in from the experts in the
Sanchez one is we need to have
policies that address housing
that foster relationships I
heard from cut a comment on
either side these kind of good
stories right and the good
stories were they good they're
all good years is good because
there was a relationship between
the time the renter one of you
all's.
If she's still here hers was
good because she also left.
anyway her purse was good
because she had a good
relationship with her tennis
shoes a renter and she had a
good rule only mothers you are
yes thank you I was so yours is
good because you had a
relationship a good relationship
there
I I rented one time in my life.
It was when we moved overseas
and I owe it was my first first
home in my second home now.
and ironically so we had a
relationship with a renter we we
kind of knew them and and it was
it was pretty good ironically
they contacted me about halfway
through and they said we're
going to pay you a hundred ten
dollars more a month we we want
to pay you more.
And I will get into that but the
reason is because there is a
relationship so I think you know
everyone's once right is that
because I'm not going to be in a
lot of these meetings I don't
think but if we can develop
public policy that will foster
relationships somehow or reward
or incentivise relationships
that would be awesome can't make
we can't legislate people to be
kind for to love people or to
treat people with respect can't
really do that we can punish
when when you know people but we
can't really make we can't
legislate people's hearts right
but we can I think be
relationship focused and public
policy that's number one I move
the other ones through a little
quicker Mr Mr chair.
We need to incentivise local
investment.
In in actually driving principle
there is because relationships I
actually looked up in some other
room housing bill here too
though I can't remember I I
looked up multiple apartment
complexes in Bernalillo county
really kind of has is really
really good website you can look
at the satellite images you can
see what who owns the properties
of things and I look these up
and and it into a full study but
I look at four five apartment
complexes in a hundred percent
of them four five were owned by
out of state companies.
Why is that well the reason is
because regulation high
regulation this is a pretty
highly regulated state.
Regulations a commodity for big
corporations because they can
chew up they've got the CPA's
got the attorneys they can deal
with the audits and all that
stuff where is the mom and pop
can it's so that's that's at
least my idea of of why we have
all these kind of out of state
people owning the apartment
complexes and why is that a
problem because an understated
corporation that's in California
or New Jersey or Florida that
they don't know who you are no
relationship there okay so
that's number to incentivize
local investment not not the big
big big house that we have to
cut regulation to do that and
that this nuclear talking there
third of course is to increase
diverse supply that was a
honestly a word that was
probably missing from this side
of the of the aisle okay is is
that they said increase supply
but I think of this I want to
hear one of your we don't want
just the gentrification want the
high rise condos which I'm
concerned rent control do again
that just a minute but we need
diverse supply of housing okay
diverse supply not just public
housing not just highincome does
that are going up in my hometown
but diverse supply so that
should be another guiding
principle these discussions.
four out of seven keeping
families together
Representative right here
mention keeping families
together that is very near and
dear to my heart it is it is
very frustrating me when I ask
my patients from northern New
Mexico especially what's going
on with your family and they say
well my my nephew just moved
because he had to very very
frustrating for me so keeping
families together.
Then assign the same Welling but
in the same community.
Very important guiding principle
number five.
eliminating partiality or
partial treatment I I will have
time to get into this but I I
you know when it just says
privately owned property we've
got to I think there's there's a
role for the private to help
with their responsibility of
developing affordable housing
but it's also because this.
This issue is so.
Basic to human life.
we we we cannot we cannot do
this as you know the these
people are going to have more of
the responsibility or less
responsibility over here it's
got to be we we we cannot have
have partial treatment six out
of seven once again I'm going to
that more but we don't have time
the six one is we we have to be
prosperity focus and this is
what I think Center Lopez was
getting at is which I'm out
wages come out prosperity of
great frustration of mine is
we're not talking about
prosperity this legislative body
doesn't they may talk about
prosperity but really the goal
is is the quality over
prosperity the GDP per capita of
New Mexico has has stagnated
it's that it hasn't really gone
up if you look at inflation
really hasn't gone up may have
gone down we because we're all
connected.
We will not do better in this we
do better as a group we we can't
single out just a certain income
bracket and expect people to do
better the GDP per capita has to
go up it doesn't sound nice and
fancy but it is it is a basic
law of economics and if we don't
have once again public policy
that at least addresses that
concern are we more prosperous
together not necessarily looking
at the partial treatment
different groups but together if
we proved use more goods and
services as a state we're to do
better our housing last one
thank you for bearing with me I
didn't plan on doing this but
this is heavy last one that
Senator Lopez I'm very
appreciative of you brought this
up is you mentioned the cliff
effect.
The cliff effect is contribute
to homelessness it's it's
harming people it's a big pet
peeve of mine and actually my
neighbor right here sponsor
memorial that I think passed
unanimously in the Senate last
year some like that we passed it
unanimously to look at
eliminating the cliff effect so
once again these policies when
you all get together with with
more Keller and all those folks.
Remember that about is is this
policy contributing to a cliff
effect or is it a limiting to
put the and if it contributes to
click affect just cross it off
and move on please because what
we need to be doing instead of
incentivizing poverty work which
is what we do now.
we say Hey if you're poor next
year we'll give you vouchers
again if report to come back
again you're still poor will
reward you if you come back
again or not for now we're not
gonna help anymore instead we
should be incentivizing
behaviors that get people out of
poverty okay.
That's we should have got it I
got a bill that does that but
anyway okay so much try to wrap
this up Mr so those are the
seven things that I heard I
heard from you heard from you
and I think that we can come to
a more innovative solution than
this bill based on those seven
guiding principles and working
through it together
lastly also a couple of things
from I looked up research from
MIT from Stanford Brookings
institute this is the general
just what they this is from
Stanford it says well rent
control.
Prevents displacement of
incumbent renters in the short
term.
The lost rental housing supply
drug drives up market rents in
the long run ultimately
undermining the goals of the law
and the number there is fifteen
to twenty percent that's the
data that has come out from good
case control studies from rent
control it decreases the the
supply by fifteen to twenty
percent so this will certainly
help in can help incumbent
ranchers in the short term but I
I want to run for office for
long term sustainable solutions
not not bandaids and I I
apologize I'm not I'm not using
that word in a critical way but
I do believe it is a bandaid I
believe it's worth having the
conversation but I don't want to
put it in and I want to put law
these long term solutions to it
okay so that was a lot thank you
for being with me but I is so
important and and I I I just
really want to say those things
because I think both sides
there's no reason have an us and
them air about about the room
thank you very much thank you
so.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Lopez and
Representative column
Thank you for this
This bill.
when I first read it and and I I
would call chairman and senator
Representative.
I recall reading in the journal
that this bill was going to was
being prepared.
And I have to say I was really
relieved because a constituent
called me in March twenty twenty
one.
Hi this is a woman who told me
I'm calling you because my rent
has gone up forty three percent.
luckily I found a place however
many of my neighbors have not
they're not sure what they're
going to do and she was so
relieved she said now I'm I'm
able to afford this but I'm I'm
just one of my many neighbors
that can she was very concerned
because she wanted her son to
stay in the same school okay
Just a couple days ago our
chairman Ortiz Y. Pino shared
with us that the other day he
found out there's a ninety one
year old woman living in the
shelter on the west side of
Albuquerque because she could
not afford the increase of rent
even though she had an increase
in her social security.
A senior citizen group in
Albuquerque contacted me today.
and their members they have a
very limited income.
And they were told but they're
landlords told them.
We need to increase rent to keep
up quote with the current realty
market.
And I've heard this afternoon
chairman Senator Representative
that what would be great to
solve this.
Is New Mexico needs more
affordable homes but how about
the problems now how bout those
that are displaced now.
I've also heard chairman Senator
Representative that
Rent controls timely business.
Those that don't want to have
housing here in New Mexico and
have tenants they have that
choice.
Someone else will come here.
I also read a Chairman
representative and Senator that
the failure of.
Councilman feeble corns Bill.
she had a vote of two to seven I
believe.
Once I saw that outcome I knew
that this body would have to
continue the dialogue.
I've received many messages
chairman.
about SB ninety nine from across
the state.
And what concerns me number one
is that many folks are not
reading what is in this bill.
It's simply lifting the language
so that counties and
municipalities can take it upon
themselves to.
To pursue whether or not the
kind of rent control.
Something that's bothered me a
chairman Senator Representative
are those same folks who have
asked me not to support SB
ninety nine.
They're not offering any
substantive solutions that can
help the housing and secure now.
Yet they're using words with me
such as disaster and vehemently
and these folks are are real
estate brokers.
Associates a real estate firms.
Disaster the you know what those
that that I've talked about and
the test we've had here already
they're living a disaster.
Others chairman Senator
Representative have sent me
campaign emails.
I don't know who is responsible
for the campaign emails but is
the same statements over and
over.
the.
Making these very strong
statements about what's going to
happen if we have rent control
in our state and there's no
citation for up for me to look
up the data up to bat for me to
see where the statements are
coming from.
so with.
With that chairman
Senator Representative I will
absolutely vote for SB ninety
nine.
I heard in the past people say.
That's what's wrong the
government is the problem you
know what there's times like
this that government can do good
because some of its citizenry
are being.
Taking advantage of and being
over charged and that's called
usury.
And we took care of usury with
the.
The title loans last year and
this is another call to action
thank you chairman thank you
senator Representative thank you
Senator McKenna Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Lopez Representative a
covetable and I I really want to
think of.
Really when I think of
accidentally for visiting with
me and and and I want to thank
you Mr chairman I know we're
late today.
But the chair allowed up
photography from the from the
well of the committee and I
thought that was really really
gracious those records the
This issue came up this summer I
was at an event and someone
asked me what what's that asked
me but another elected official
account it rather what you're
just opinion on rent control I
freaked out I was like wow I've
never been I've never seen
anyone asked that question
before I mean it's it is a
But the idea that we've never
discussed that we've never
discussed up here in Santa Fe so
I I think the advocates and the
folks pushing this should
commend themselves for bringing
it to the table
Because it involved in during
World War two the vault during
when this country was in crisis
you know this because he was in
crisis and the federal
government put controls on
prices on inflation and on rent
control and believe they're not
up.
During the Nixon administration
there was also
a petition with rent control and
and price control because of
hyperinflation you know and so
we're also we're we're in a
crisis now you know a pandemic
because we're so resilient or
New Mexicans think we realized
how bad the last couple three
years were me we do but I know
they were horrible on they were
horrible horrible times and
we're not it even though it may
be in the review more
it's a crisis it's a national
crisis the pandemic.
Inflation you know building
shutting down folks not being
able to work you know we up did
what we could and had some very
impactful sessions the last
couple years.
and even did a little bit of
You know what what I call
universal.
Us what to call universal income
where we literally things were
so desperate we literally wrote
checks to people
and that's what I think if we
don't depleted the coffers with
the how can some other.
tax breaks and stuff we can
continue doing that the
Throughout the the recent
history Mr chairman the past
couple generations we try to
help renters with tax policy so
we we put up a lot to affect
that you can't property taxes
can go up more than three
percent a year and it was it was
awesome idea so that particular
folks in Santa Fe older
neighborhoods could could live
The Twilight of their lives in
in their in their homes that
they've lived in for generations
the
And then that then we learned
after ten twenty years that the
county governments are.
Depleted of.
Of resources you know depleted
of resources to to have a
functional government
What's a bummer Mr chairman
generally these Senator Lopez
Representative of a COVID was
that there's not really a
perfect market
in New Mexico regarding housing.
Because of.
Because folks folks want to live
here you know folks want to live
here wages are low
you know jobs are are low income
jobs for the for the most part
and then folks want to live here
so it's the market is skewed
it's not just New Mexicans
buying houses it's it's it's
folks from out of state wanting
to buy houses and then folks own
houses and we don't even.
distinguish in our tax code
between the house that someone
lives in and and the house that
they're renting Airbnb.
The tax goes to consider that
like a residential property I
mean so we got a like.
We got to get with the times you
know and so so this is a good
conversation to have the up in
Manhattan there's rent control
of that exists to this date for
multi generational situations.
And and as a result low income
people still live in Manhattan.
they wouldn't in Seattle where I
lived in in the golden age Mr
chairman in the nineties and
that was when the the reconciled
movie was kind of creeping up
and maybe gave rise to the
ninety one bill and other other
similar similar laws.
If Seattle would have done rent
control in the in the mid
nineties early nineties it would
be a couple.
That would be for people living
in Seattle which there there is
not Seattle is hyperinflation
and there is no way there's
folks that our work full time
and are homeless in Seattle
because it's just we just didn't
deal with that but there's
treatment had in Seattle as
investment was going to happen
anyway you know I mean do we New
York was.
No one of the biggest economies
of the world at the time in the
forties fifties Seattle is the
fastest growing city in the
country in the last twenty years
I don't know if that investment.
Would flourish in in in my
hometown of Albuquerque.
if the City of Albuquerque
started.
You know started considering
rent control that's that's just
my concern and and.
Mr Stewart what you know I'm I'm
I'm guilty of it right I'm
guilty of it a developer in my
district wanted to build
whatever seventy houses and it
was an ideal they were they
don't have big yards whatever on
this beautiful beautiful piece
of property that then Senator my
then Senator up and me and up
and up and several others and
many others you know fought it
negotiated with the developer
got capital money and bought the
property.
And now which which apologize
for I mean it's awesome open
space but they're seventy one
less units in Albuquerque
because of that struggle I mean
so I'm not I'm I'm just saying
we make choices we make choices
as policy makers we make choices
as citizens we we we have to.
come to grips with the fact
that.
If we're going to grow our
economy and our children are
going to stay in New Mexico.
We have to we have to grow our
economy you know and that's hard
because that means change that
means change and change is is
very very difficult but anyway I
just wanted a of I could go on
and on with regards to this but
I I think that.
What the law says Mister
chairman Senator the so this so
private entities.
are prohibited I'm sorry I'm
sorry locals counties and
municipalities are prohibited
from.
From having up controls that
would affect that would
effectively be rent controls for
privately owned real property.
But but we can control rents for
for federally subsidized
property can we like section
eight housing and things of that
nature is there some type of
rent control that that that
local governments can do or that
state federal and.
I guess operated across the
board is what I'm asking Mister
chairman Senator Lopez
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Is there a window for some types
of residential with regards to
non privately owned real
property.
Yeah I think people mentioned
you go through the chair just
Mister chairman Senator well I'm
so sorry Mister chairman Senator
I think we spoke about it
earlier about how yes you know
public housing the prices.
Obviously rate regulated as
opposed to public
and I mentioned earlier that
right now public housing is not
filling the housing need of our
population that there's you know
three hundred plus people with
housing vouchers who cannot find
places to live and there are
many many luxury units that are
staying empty the calling we
us will say you know Hey how
many vacancies to happen they
have you know a couple dozen so
you know while these codes and
different things that people
are.
saying could help
regardless if there isn't
something done specifically
pertaining to affordability it
won't matter we have units
available they're just too
expensive for us.
Got you know thank you for that
the
Yeah that's that's that's
interesting that there's
vouchers but not availability
you know there's a demand
there's a demand
So not just homeless folks that
can't afford housing but there's
folks that can't afford housing
there's not that low income
housing.
there's nothing that prohibits
the state of New Mexico from
getting into the housing
business you know
There's some really really good
federal tax credits there's a
marvelous housing development
just outside practice close to
the center Representative is
neck of the woods.
on central and Unser.
My brother's organizations
chairman and and settle
Washington Senator that I sat
did fantastic low income housing
in downtown just off downtown
Seattle right next to the light
rail
if Central Avenue had like four
or five of those housing units
it would just it would I think
would change the complexion of
our city and relate with the
with some of these concerns but
here's and I'll turn it back
over you Mr chairman but this
doesn't.
Find rent control as as
mentioned this doesn't do rent
control.
This merely allows a hundred
cities and thirty three counties
to fight about their own
individual rent control and and
and to me that's that's kind of
certain our responsibility what
we need to think about is what
we want to cap.
Rent from month to month above
inflation whether we want to
allow renters to renew long term
leases within sixty days we need
to we need to get that landlord
tenant bill across the finish
line that that was tried last
year that kind of may be reached
a little too far
we got to get the expenditures
in you know on the governor's
desk with regards to low income
housing and things that nature
that we got to do a kitchen sink
affect to to the housing crisis
in New Mexico but I think this
this I think would have an
opposite effect if because it's
not the it's not the the
ordinance.
That would drive away investment
it would be the thought of the
ordinance and the multiple
fights that each individual city
council and count and count and
county commission would have.
if and if if if investors watch
my local county commission on TV
for at least an hour.
They would like be like well I
don't know if I want to invest
in that in that adhoc butif home
town but
But anyway that's that's just
kind of kind of where I'm coming
from that I think preemption it
is a sound policy we do it for
kind of as we do it for
we do offer I'll call we do it
for a great many things and and
and preemption is is sound
public policy and wish we could
have landlord tenant laws on the
books statewide done by us in a
thoughtful manner with the
economists and and public policy
experts as opposed to.
Massive political fights that I
guarantee will happen in my home
town that will that will just.
They will just put a huge market
research and and economic growth
and maintain poverty
in my hometown thank you Mr
thank you senator Senator
Tallman you're next.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator bring
this bill forward.
What the literature we receive
says that the rents have gone up
forty two percent in the last
two years as
which is a.
Much greater amount to inflation
rise rents going up faster than
inflation.
Mr Chairman you're asking us why
it's gone up faster than
inflation.
his lawyer.
Well if anybody want to take on
that.
Did end.
Alright demand economics.
Just
so so they're taking advantage
of the fact that there's.
Shortage of of up for housing so
they can.
But thank you get the higher a
higher amount so what you're
saying.
Okay is it I just want to
confirm the fact that this is
not mandatory each individual
month that's a hello you have
the option of.
Of the enacting this is that
true.
Mister chairman Senator you're
correct.
Okay.
You know.
It's a real dilemma.
You can make that argument
about.
Records show is not the answer
it might be a cancer in the
short run.
But it is Senator she said we
need.
With a long term solution.
We obviously need to build more
housing will have but we were in
a free market system and
unfortunately the free market
system is not providing us.
With enough.
Is not working is not providing
this app providing a sufficient
amount of of housing only making
money and mid and high end
housing.
so you need government subsidies
and and we heard a lot of happy
talk really about to tweaking
the system with more calories
that's not going to work we're
talking about billions of
dollars tweaking that the code
for we're gonna have to systems
one code enforcement for
lowincome and I at a higher and
better.
code enforcement system for for
a
more expensive housing.
I don't think it's so there's no
cheap is not cheap the SCO if in
the room we talk a good game
but it's gonna take a lot of
money to provide.
Sufficient amount of low income
housing in order to bring down
the price of housing.
Here in this country where we
want to do everything on the
chief.
Infrastructure is a good example
in China that we spend eight
percent of their GMP on
infrastructure your spent five
percent United States Spence to
allows you to percent in Europe.
Infrastructures consider
investment in America is
considered an expense we don't
have one mile.
The high speed rail will thank
you so so what what's the big
deal well the big deal is if you
can't move goods and people
faster we're not going to be
competitive and you can add a
worldwide economy Europe's got
fifteen thousand miles a high
speed rail.
China's got twenty eight
thousand we don't we got zero so
how we in order to solve this
problem we're gonna have to
spend some money on public
subsidy I don't see that
happening and I don't see.
Representative control working
either so this one has one heck
of a dilemma.
I don't know.
Which way to vote.
It's this is you know we have
the same thing to the water
crisis we're not spending enough
money to of.
To a.
Alleviate the the lack of water
produce climate change I tell
everybody America's not going to
get excited about the water
crisis duly go to turn on the
faucet there's no water we're
not doing enough we need to
spend more money mental health.
Because so many people that need
treatment are getting it because
we're not going to have enough
money.
and infrastructure I just
pointed out without spending
enough money on no I'm not the
type of person like to throw
money at the problems but we
really these three things I just
mentioned were gaps we need to
spend more money or not and I
don't see.
I don't see rate control is the
answer might be in the short
term but I will so you know the
developers say we need more we
need more housing what what are
they willing to do it they
willing to pay a lot more in
taxes provide that subsidy that
we need in order to build the
sufficient amount of of.
Low income housing I don't this
is one heck of a dilemma I don't
there's no easy answers unless
we're willing to spend the money
and I don't see it happening in
this country so.
That's all I have.
Thank you senator Clemente and
on that note.
What's the will of the
committee.
Senator Ingle you want to make a
motion.
Yes thank you Mr Mr chairman I
think we've had a.
Very very good hearing on this
and talk about a lot of things
and I would now moved to the
table Senate bill ninety nine
motioned to table is non
debatable also.
It really does need one but
that's okay.
Senator my Estes here we we
lost.
Okay.
Is one of those okay said.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Maestas.
Senator McKenna.
No.
Senator smitteez.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Maestas table Mr the
motion to table by Senator
Ingle.
Yeah yes.
Senator to the piano that will
Senator can let you yes.
Yes yes yes.
Senator to the pandemic yes it
is like to explain my both
tubes.
So by motion of sixty viable
sixty two the motion to table
the Senate bill ninety nine
passes and have been the bill is
tabled and let me explain why I
voted against it I think you you
certainly have painted a great
picture of the problem.
The issue before us is what are
we going to do about it and and
this would tie us up I think
with Sandoval County getting all
the development Bernalillo
county getting none if they
enacted it or vice versa or
Valencia County we would have a
patchwork quilt of the.
Rules and regulations around the
state and so I think what we
really need to do is begin
incentivizing the development of
affordable housing and it's
going to take money but we have
money we've got we've got the
the bill that Senator Rodriguez
passed last year that commits
three percent of our capital
outlay every year for affordable
housing and if that's matched
with tax credit financing and
some others we can actually
start doing this now what
happened next week but this
isn't going to happen next week
is so I really thank you for
bringing this to our attention
it's a big issue we need to deal
with that but I think we need to
do is to.
Thank you senator thank you
Representative and thank you
advocates it was the committee
and if I may say this is part of
a discussion that we need to
have absolutely and it needs to
continue because people are
hurting.
Thank you thank you very much.
Senator souls was here you want
to just knock on his door
engagement.
Senator souls.
His office yes all right there
look in.
He's right he's right there I
thought it was you just put it
in.
One fifty here and so I have to
if you could if you could leave
the you know quickly and quietly
and we'd appreciate it.
Thank you for the.
No I think we've seen yet that's
one of the total of the season
we just got experts here for
file in a way.
What's the status of the list of
providers and offer to come off
as okay.
I'm going to put it on both.
All right.
This.
I want to change the number
we're gonna go to Senator
Sedillo Lopez is bill concerns
so.
Okay areas areas I'm sorry send
it think of sorry.
Yeah.
It'll go viral.
C. as in.
Sure thank you.
Senator souls this is your.
Senate bill one eleven yes Mr
chair and thank you for your
patience and
I know you all have been here a
long while this particular bill
came as part of the Education
Committee is talking about
career technical education and.
Most many businesses in New
Mexico we have a shortage of
licensed teachers licensed
administrators licensed nurse's
license but I address and the
list goes on and on and on and
on and on
for many.
That initial licensing fee.
Can be prohibitive in New Mexico
this is the pilot program to
suspend all of a national
license and that was when the
changes we were working on the
initial license for professions
in the state of New Mexico it
does have an appropriation.
Concern over the goes with it to
back fill for those agencies
that use the licensing fees for
some of their enforcement and
operational types of things I
don't know whether the of the
amount is appropriate that's
very difficult to get on the
we're trying to come in on
Monday I had a meeting with the
the secretary of license
Representative Nibert intended
license
Linda Trujillo who had some
concerns about some areas that
maybe shouldn't be in there it
was written that it was for all
licenses and we modified it so
it was initial licenses once
somebody's already in the
profession we got an income
coming in these are usually
people straight out of school
they've already got get and now
we're going to charge them to be
able to practice their
profession in New Mexico this is
a pilot to see whether we can
encourage more of those
professionals to stay in New
Mexico come to New Mexico set up
their profession in New Mexico
we've got a shortage in in many
of these areas and by waving the
license fee or essentially
having state government rate
their initial license.
Encourage them to stay.
Once they have an initial
license they would pay for any
renewals updates or other kinds
of things going forward.
I'm open for questions did you
include social workers yes Sir.
But to let the year so you have
this up yes and that were some
of the changes and and things
that we had so we need a motion
on the order.
Do not pass the original and of.
To pass this up for discussion
on the committee so I can't do
it for you so.
Was to make the motion almost
for discussion purposes our
discussion program to do not
pass the first.
We have a do not pass motion on
Senate bill one eleven and it do
pass on the substitute bill for
one love in discussion purposes
of.
Do you have anybody else is
going to speak this is anybody
in the audience in support of
this bill.
Yes sentence no it is your
vaguely in support of.
Trying to if you knew what it
was about to the more in support
of.
Okay let's do this all those in
favor of it in the audience
raise your hand.
Is there anybody here opposed to
it but we have several impose
okay so let's let's go.
Would anybody on soon.
What do it for against for.
Okay well we have nobody here
really to speak in favor did you
want to speak in favor of it we
have nobody here really speaking
for let's put him on and then
we'll hear the opponents.
The opponents should start
coming up here so you can use
the money.
Who is it.
Erin this are.
Carol the server Care caring
caring the server.
There is thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Karen the Cerro eyeing
representative from the American
physical therapy association
manager
excuse me Karen you start
upgrading and we've kind of lost
you can you speak right into the
Mike in real lovely.
Okay I'll see if I can turn it
up okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I am
currently Cerro and I am
representing the American
physical therapy association New
Mexico chapter we stand in
support of this bill we think it
will help encourage new
graduates and new
new people to come into the
state to fill the need for
physical therapist we also have
found that are licensing boards
generally have a surplus of
money from the license.
Rules and applications so we
think this would be well worth
it to encourage
people the start practicing in
the state rather than moving out
of state when they graduate
thank you.
Okay thank you Karen well what
we have the zoom in action let's
get the one person on the zoom
moves propose alternative.
user.
Yes Mr chair thank you I was
unable to get there for a minute
I had to get permission.
yes Mr chair I I am on the New
Mexico board of licensure for
professional juniors and
professional surveyors.
so I want to call that out up
front
I I I like the idea of the I I
will start with that I think
it's a good step
however I think that in not
having seen replacement bill I
don't know if we've already been
told I think first set your
Senators souls thing I are they
still in it or the doctor.
In their.
The professional engineers.
Yes Sir.
On page six line twelve twenty
six twenty six line fourteen
twenty seven engineering and
surveying practice act licensed
professional engineers
engineering intern to
professional surveyors and
surveying interns you're still
at.
Your appropriations is still in.
Thank thank you Mr chair of them
that I will continue with my
comments if I can
yes.
Largely I think with respect to
some professions specifically
engineers and surveyors
architects being another example
the feet the initial fee for
licensure really only occurs
after someone has been in
practice for four or five years
or even more so the concept that
there is a debt burden
associated with that you are
already a practicing
professional by the time you
apply for a license so I again I
appreciate the the thought here
but it it really does apply to
those professions also unlike
several professions mentioned
which I completely agree we are
in deficit Mexico.
Those types of professions
engineering surveying
architecture can be performed
out of state by a licensee.
The vast majority of our
licensees coming in at this time
are from out of state over
ninety percent for engineers so
the potential is there for work
to actually Mike right out of
state the higher paying jobs
move out of.
Thank you for all I think the I
think the a sponsor may be
willing to to delete engineering
from the from the thank you for
your comments now let's go to
the people who are here and want
to speak do you keep your
comments concise and pointed
that would be great.
Thank you I'm too much once on
the.
I'm the chair of the architects
board and for the same reason we
would I move to be struck from
the bill we are two thirds out
of state one third in state and
the bill as it's written
currently does not at least we
don't have the sub it does not
indicate that it would be first
time licensees only this okay
not in the first time in the
state initialize initial
licenses we have initialized and
sees coming from out of state as
well we feel this would be a
major burden to us financially.
To lose the to lose a revenue
lose the revenue I got you okay
indeed thank thank you so that
there are you open to that went
to.
Mr chair I would be open to that
and some of the clarified these
are initial license not initial
New Mexico license so these are
people yup just starting in the
profession but if there are
people who would not like to be
in this I I don't know I'm not
married to any of the particular
ones probably other than
education social workers.
Canceling yeah the you've got a
life you've got the thirty.
For.
Yes Mr chair if I could also
point out that we are in a ton
of this board we are not part of
our of the we operate off of our
income our funds and like to
Medical Board the date.
Thank you thank you well as
anybody else another feat any
other professions want to get us
yes.
This is a different one in the
big wants to be included in.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I've heard of all this
from the executive director for
the engineering and surveying
board and just add to with my
chair had stated
One of the concerns another
concern of this bill is we're
not sure how the funding would
be distributed since in the bill
it states that the money would
go to our audiences were
separate entity from the under
the same situation exactly we're
not sure how that would be even
appropriated and for us it would
be a loss of a hundred eighteen
thousand dollars a year so we're
we're not sure that million
dollars should be sufficient and
then lastly because I keep the
short.
As of may first of twenty twenty
two six missiles much about
initial licenses our board
decided to take action regarding
this and for all New Mexico
applicants who graduated within
five years from the New Mexico
university we're already waving
the initial license fee
application fees for those
individuals no well this is
still early to see what the
results of this has been we have
been receiving a lot of
applications from these
university students we're hoping
them trying to.
We can maintain these people
here with the New Mexico because
we do notice as far as licensees
go there is a shortage so we're
trying everything we can to help
them we've also established the
survey Fund excuse me is kosher
fund to assist the universities
with them as well so with that
thank you and I have a question
for the architecture do you also
deal with the landscape
architecture is a separate
entity.
Mr chair they are separate
entity from us they're not
asking to the
If you're that you're you're.
Your landscaping is looking
better and better.
Right so you want to make those
two amendment I'm happy to do so
Sir yes so they did you get
those Frank.
For the the page six line six
and seven.
Excellent thank you that's fine
if you anybody who somebody want
to move the amendment.
So moved is there any opposition
to dropping those two groups
they already have.
It's on page six lanes fourteen
through seventeen the C. in
juniors yep.
Yeah.
So the architects and the
engineers Representative you can
go home and have a nice dinner.
Think of us when you're eating.
Very good all right members of
the committee Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
By the way we adopted the
amendment let's just make it
formal we've adopted the
amendment on and of.
Nine zero those and eight zero
vote because he Q. six and
so we don't have an amended
bill.
Thank you Mr chair and I
apologize of because I was
taking a bathroom break so I
missed the first part but
whenever I read a bill I ask
what is the problem we're trying
to solve and you know what
policy are trying to further and
I
I can see the you know it it
just felt like a giveaway and I
didn't I didn't understand what
exactly we're trying to achieve
with this bill Senator they
maybe take the purpose statement
out no I'm just kidding.
I think it's important to start
there and I just see it lots of
this comes from a couple of
professions that I'm well aware
of social workers workers nurses
school teachers
Counselors that is the degree
they want to start in the
profession but they have to have
a license and that involves a
license fee there straight out
of school they don't have any
income yet the idea is we have a
shortage of all of them and
anything we can do to
incentivize them staying here
that we want to hear this bills
designed to address that it is
for I believe it's three years
is what the timeline is there
and so it's very much a pilot
demonstration does this result
in a separate keeping more
people here in these critical
professions within the state
that supports our state thank
you Mr chair and that's what I
didn't see this is the target.
but then if there was a purpose
it wouldn't match up thank you
know I think the teachers now
have going back because the
architects I thought it was good
that they that they
got out because that didn't
match to me you know with with
with what without particularly
particular purpose and then I
noticed in one of the.
The nurses association I believe
it was a nurses association
talked about the of lactation
consultants all tend to find
themselves so I just didn't and
I'm trying to the body art safe
practices that.
Landscape architects.
Are still in public accountants
I I just I feel like it's in the
real estate brokers
I just feel it's too broad and
and so I have a hard time
supporting it because I don't
see the I don't see the trucks
are we trying to encourage
teachers who just graduated we
trying to encourage medical
personnel who just graduated
Glad I didn't see lawyers here
because they're going to earn a
good income and it should be I
mean I had to take out a loan to
pay my bar fees and and but that
was fine because I could make a
good income and and so I just
didn't see the.
The particular.
The problem we're trying to fix
for the policy a coherent policy
we're trying to to pursue so for
that I I just have trouble with
this bill thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Clemente.
The.
Thank you Mr thank you for
bringing this bill forward how
much money we're talking about
really I mean what's a typical
fever social workers teachers Mr
chairman Senator they are all
over the place I have heard.
Some things have to be a
professional welder to get your
welding certificate.
There this is just what I've
heard I don't have hard data
it's six hundred dollars some of
them are seventy dollars
teachers for each license if
their license in a number of
different areas it's somewhere
around a hundred fifty dollars
each of nurses it's a couple
hundred dollars I mean.
It's not small change and again
it's it's important these are
only they're very first initial
license not their initial one in
New Mexico or other places but
this is really to get them
started in the state.
Mr chair as in the center you so
could you characterize these
fees is prohibited.
Mister chairman Senator in some
cases yes in all cases no but
it's hard to put in a some sort
of a standard for a sliding
scale or something of that sort.
So Mr chair says so we have to
eliminate all of them because.
It would make sense to draw a
line in a hundred dollars.
Mr chair Senator I don't think
that that makes sense to to do
so the in some of these areas
it's a fairly small number each
year other areas is
substantially larger Mr chair
Senator you're telling me I have
no sense.
Mr chair and senator I would
never tell you that.
All right well thanks for the
thank you Mr thank you for the
answers on.
I I I I have a question because
it just looking through this we
have the medical board is here
to and they're not in our the.
So as they waited on this is
there anybody here.
For.
Mr chair and senator I have not
talked to them specifically when
the bill was being drafted we
had some discussion back and
forth about some that were some
that work up quite frankly I
have no idea what the licensing
is for acupuncture and oriental
messes and massage therapy I
haven't talked to any of those
particular groups when I first
started looking at it if it was
more some areas that I knew we
had critical shortages that we
talk about regularly in the in
terms.
But as I learned through
regulation and licensing we
license with licensing fees a
wide range of professions.
And rather than singling out one
or two it's not that much money
in the big scheme of our budget
to just cover them all in your
neck finance yes I believe so.
Mr chair what's a total of.
The more money we generate fees
those million dollars or one
tenth of ten percent and five
percent.
The Mr chair Senator I don't
know I'm not sure if we've got
finance that data.
If you have the data about how
many how much the fees right
that I read in your of these the
whole yesterday revenue SB three
hundred fifty thousand but that
included well they don't lose
that to the idea that you guys
get it directly so three hundred
fifty thousand figures is that
the FY arson.
Thank you Mr chair thank.
Thank what will the committee.
Here it is in your.
Yep they are.
Let me see one of my last with
page seven line eight the
funeral services act licensing
direct disposes of bombers
funeral Rangers funeral services
in terms of funeral service
practitioners.
I think those with those of the
laces direct disposals.
With the will of the committee.
Senator I didn't give you to.
Chairman of thank you Mr Mr
souls repeal quick I'm looking
for the lines that are being
processed and underline and
there is none and I'm looking at
the words temporary provision of
this this is all new language
correct Mr chair Senator yes
okay fantastic and then also
just some housekeeping if I may.
Mr chairman of if we Amanda
committee sub I think we may
have to do a second committee so
point to version I think you're
right I think thank you Mr thank
you very.
And we amended that we have to
do a.
So what does that mean.
Okay very good with.
No you didn't take this to an
interim committee the.
No securing.
Mr chair no I this is actually
something that came up toward
the very end of the interim
processes.
What will the committee with.
In this will depend on on a five
oh four nine six Mr etcetera
Looking at at that be here in on
page two if we're looking at for
drawing people in but would you
be adopted an amendment that the
the person is actually the gets
the the fee waived that they're
actually living and working here
because my my she just wanted
said the you know two thirds are
are out of state well they're
not here paying G. R. T. and all
that stuff I understand they're
contributing to some work here
but I have a hard time waiving
the fee when they say oh no we
really don't want to live in New
Mexico and now legislative
helping us not live in New
Mexico I'd rather amended to say
that they're going to actually
come here and be a doctor that
lives here or of social worker
that lives here would you be
open to that Mr chair Senator
Steinborn were already making
things it has to be a new
committee set up I'd be very
open for that I think you've got
exactly the not of what this is
trying to solve is to get those
professions here into New Mexico
establish them here in New
Mexico early in their careers
and that we support that
possibly on page two line I.
after the semi.
Know before the so Michael.
Who reside in the state of New
Mexico.
I would that do it.
Mr decide plan how do you
regulate someone's plan.
They're living here will get
their income taxes.
Yes I appreciate.
Yeah I know so I.
We're we're reside in is that
the right way to phrase it the
Franklin the minute capture the
people that are in route you may
have to say something like if if
you don't have residency in that
calendar year you you are
responsible to pay the fee if
you didn't end up moving here
but then once again it let's get
to the floor it's a little bit
larger than on the so I think
residing in New Mexico is just
fine.
We think that the language used
to reside in okay list Senator
yes yes this will be your
amendment you're you're correct.
Who reside in.
Second seven seconded by Senator
Tallman Senator personal
questions and for dissecting
this on this on this amendment
does all of this secretary on
the amendment is there any
opposition to saying who reside
in New Mexico.
Senator yes.
What again rural struggling
is the chairman Senator.
Certainly we was support one's
graduating from New Mexico
schools but if somebody
graduated medical school
somewhere else I moved to New
Mexico to set up let's pay their
initial license that's part of
the point is we want them to
come here to set up businesses.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Seeing many of our point two is
getting more eager that is
still.
Senator Gallegos Mr chair and
just like to say it was was nice
I was on page four item maybe
starting line one it's giving
the nurse practice act in in
there I know there's a new
category look lactation care
providers the coming to help
mothers the morning if that's
something we want to include in
should exclude.
They in the nursing practices.
I don't know what they're in
there and currently.
Boards lactation providers for
lactation care providers.
Up with nursing the money it's
in.
Part of the reason got it.
Thank.
We haven't already on page three
line sixteen good deal thank you
this Medicine thank you.
Opposition.
Seeing none we've got it now
back to the bill flexibility.
Yeah and and it's in your face.
That we have a motion for
depression Senator Ingle
seconded from Sierra discussion
on the motion Senator by the.
Well I prefer.
Yes that's what I heard by the
very same.
You're hearing is very acute.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator my is this yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator street is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Tallman yes Senator two
yes by a vote of.
Seven seven two one you have a
due process thank you committee
and I appreciate the work on it
I think it's a better built and
I appreciate that thank you.
And now we'll do Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Not doing a psychologist nope we
we ruled the psychologist we
rule one twenty three and we
rolled one twenty four.
So we're a lot further along
that it looks at first glance it
looks like for.
Just getting started.
Almost went back towards I think
I think if it's okay with that.
We're gonna rule one thirty
tonight to the smoking in the
receipt does anybody here for
smoking in the receipt of.
I think we're gonna roll that to
live let's senator Lopez know
that we're not going to hear.
Some of the time we'll try to do
do X. two bills after in your
field thank you for that.
Do you want to do it and it
should be quick and okay very
quickly.
Senator you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I I hope this bill
is quick and the reason I hope
it's quick tonight is because
this is been the work of a of of
a task force the Senate memorial
task force a couple years ago we
up past a memorial asking for
the domestic violence Act the
the family violence protection
act to be reviewed and updated
because it's not it is not been
of it had been amended piecemeal
over the years and and judges
were doing different things that
are different from the bill and
the the latest practices and the
latest ideas about domestic
violence what reflected and it
also had some things like mutual
restraining orders listed in the
bill that don't even exist and
so they were problem and mostly
because of an amendment that
forgot to cross that out and so
that the committee the task
force met and the task force was
an incredible group of people
which included people from all
around the state and I want to
call them out because the the
amount of work they did Sherri
all apart from the New Mexico
Asian family center just judge
Gerald Baca from the court of
appeals Laura best seen from the
institute of public law you
school of law Charlie angel from
the coalition to stop violence
against native women Serra
coffee for New Mexico legal aid
Rosemary because provide you
love from the Bernalillo county
metro court a cam Cameron candle
from you in a minute the
emergency medicine funniest
provided from unless the
committee Dio to single window
from the administrative office
of the courts Mary Ellen Garcia
from the crime victims
reparation commission a Jessica
Johnson from animal protection
New Mexico when Kate is from the
New Mexico coalition against
domestic violence Diana loose
from the fifty additional
district attorney's office right
Linda on from peacekeepers Jeff
mims from the thirteenth
judicial District Court a Ron
Olson from the task committee.
He's against violent violence
Emily powers from a family law
practitioner Deborah maintenance
from the to the second judicial
family court David revert from
children youth and families
Ellen and Reuben field from the
New Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs and this break
from New Mexico legal aid Gail
star from Albuquerque saying
Eric throw kids from the Eddy
County sheriff's office and rose
merry tribe from the second
judicial family court so it is
an extremely oppressive
individuals who have done an
incredible amount of work and I
have the chair of the task force
with me who can talk a little
bit and maybe very briefly about
the process that went into this
bill and I also have not only
Garcia participated as a member
of the the task force and was
also available to answer
questions and
it will serve as my act these
individuals will serve as my
experts so with that I'll turn
it over to Daniel.
Briefly she is a professor at
UNM.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of this committee for
having us here today at I am
Daniel Albright I am associate
professor emergency medicine and
we were contracted at the health
Science Center by to the crime
victim reparations commission to
coordinate this task force I
have fifteen years of research
experience in domestic violence
intervention evaluation and I
also oversee the state's
intimate partner violence death
review team.
I just want to say that this was
a labor of love by by all of the
people involved in that
That it took thirty one meetings
from March of two thousand of
twenty twenty one through
December of twenty twenty two or
seven hundred and ninety eight
percent hours of work in
committee alone and that does
not count the work that people
did outside of those meetings
and so people really invested a
lot of time in this practice I
just briefly our methodology we
began by bringing in the
stakeholders who have a vast
knowledge of the issues and we
review the statute as a group
and discussed any problems or
gaps with implementation and
enforcement as well as access
issues related to the remedies
being provided by this bill by
the statute we after that we had
developed three working groups
that in in the fourth in three
different categories at
Judiciary provisions related to
the judiciary provisions related
to law enforcement and
provisions related to access.
inside those working groups we
asked people to consider what
information was needed and to
provide to explore best
practices for the provision
areas that they were exploring
we looked at other state
provisions and we had technical
assistance provided by the
national center for state courts
that allowed us to bring in
information about current
practices nationwide and am
really provided a lot of good
insights about where we were as
a state in terms of our
practice and also we're other
states were working I just
briefly I think the the creek
the crux of this review was that
we have a strong statute but at
the same time the what we ended
up doing a lot of what's
clarifying and cleaning up to
plain language a lot of the
things that are in the statute
and also strengthen the statute
by making a number of
substantive changes.
Thank you Mr chair I don't know
whether you with the you know
whether the review that's the
statute that you've already had
and the analysis is sufficient
or if you'd like me to go
through and talk about the kinds
of things that happens in that
statute of of note now abuse
toward an animal with the intent
of intimidating another
individual it will now be
considered abuse part of the
reason for for taking domestic
out of the of the statute is to
broaden the group of people who
are protected they might not
necessarily be family members
but they may they may constitute
the definition of a household
member because they live there
but they're not necessarily
family members animals are
protected we did a definition of
credible threat on page four
which I think is very
significant page I simply of.
Indeed cut it cut out mutual
order protection which is
something that does not exist in
the loss so it's just a another
fix and I could go through if
another significant their fire
yes I did if you could address
the significant issues they
raise that would be helpful.
The.
Can.
The one specially about the
district attorneys in the second
paragraph of the significant
issues.
Where is about the firearms.
We did not change anything about
the fire at all that was touched
by the commission because there
was not
There was no appetite for doing
that because that is just
another reason to sing with
these they're saying that there
is no need for the new language
and subsection C. has
repetitive.
I don't know what that is.
When when I read it
I just I chalked it up to the
the commission or the task force
decided not to touch what had
just been amended with with
regard to firearms so it was
simply not touched
And I've used it is merely
repetitive language now
Judiciary may want to take it
out of has repetitive but again
the the task force did not touch
any language regarding to fire
regarding firearms.
Yeah I I'm not sure with at all
times no that's the that's do I
don't know what they're I don't
know what they're referring to
I.
Frankly I didn't either and
I didn't think it was
significant no L. of the a
public defender.
Point to another section of
believed to be problematic.
Section ten of the bill requires
an officer making a warrantless
arrest.
To identify whether one of the
parties acted in self defense.
Well the officers in these
circumstances have to make a
quick judgment and this is a
move away it's it's best
practices to have the officers
determine
Who was the aggressor and who is
not and they as long as officers
are trained in that
if they are better able to to do
that
one of the things that used to
happen is officers would just
take both of them in.
And then the best practices not
to take both of them in but to
identify who was the primary
aggressor and if they both have
scratches or they both have
loans to I try to identify who
the primary aggressor is police
officers do that all the time
they review the facts make a
determination and with training
they're better able to to
identify the primary aggressor.
And then there's that little
technical suggestion did you see
that about that position should
be possessing and I'd be happy
to may seventeen line fifteen
absolutely and be happy if the
commission the committee would
like to make that change.
For you remember the committee
to move that amendment I move
that we of change page seventeen
line fifteen position to
possessing.
Second.
On page seventeen line fifteen.
It's just a dramatic I go from.
I think you have to do with no
change with.
Session in order.
From owning or possessing it's
processing right.
So yes that I I move that change
Senator Tallman record your
motion.
And is there any opposition to
adopting that.
Little tiny move and.
Let's go to the audience anybody
here in support of this measure.
Good.
What did you want to.
We can give you ten.
I thank you Mr chair I'm not
sick I took a COVID yes this is
all based on I apologize.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is merry on
Garcia I was until December
thirty first of this year the
bureau chief at the crime
victims reparation commission
and spends the honor of my
career this bill is the honor of
my career to to be tasked with
putting together revising
something that touches every
aspect of our lives intimate
partner and sexual violence and
and violence in our homes
I can personally say that the
the members of this committee
spent over a thousand dollars
working on really looking at
every single comma apparently we
missed and I NG right but really
looking at what the intent was
and how we as a society can
truly protect survivors of
intimate partner and sexual
violence in our communities and
create points of access I think
one of the things that this bill
has done and now I am the
director of policy at the New
Mexico coalition against
domestic violence I'm here on
behalf of the credit
interpretation commission
directors will be just sends me
here as well actually I
volunteered and here as the
director of policy for the
coalition to say we stand in
full support of this process
over two and a half years of
really looking at from all
aspects of the entire systemic
response and one of the
beautiful things that comes with
all of these changes to really
create explain to excess ability
is that it comes with an
accompanying document that is
going to look at policy and
procedure and practice in our
systems to truly and adequately
create points of accessibility
for survivors in our community
and so this is one of those
times in which I wish we could
do this for every single piece
of legislation that comes before
you because it's not a knee jerk
reaction it's truly a body of
individuals there were some to.
Ears there were some yelling
there were sometimes we were
angry and I wanted to to turn
the page but we didn't shy away
from it and I think that this
truly speaks to Senator Sedillo
Lopez is vision for creating a
society in which we're
addressing violence in our
communities and creating
accessibility and some of its
controversial and some of it we
left it as it is because we came
back to the decision that the
original language was in the
best interest of our state as a
whole I thank you for your time.
Did you want to say anything
reduce indicate support.
Come up to use the Mike those
echo.
Thank you good evening Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Alexandria Taylor and
executive director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs the changes to
SB eighteen are critically
important and necessary changes
and we think the sponsor for
leading in this effort first the
simple change of the name of the
axe from the family violence
protection act to the protection
against abuse and violence act
creates more clarity that the
act was always intended to
protect more than just victims
of domestic or family violence
including protections for
victims of sexual assault and
child abuse prior to my time at
the statewide coalition I was
the executive director at
Valencia shelter services in
Valencia County New Mexico where
we were a try agencies serving
victims of domestic violence
sexual assault and child abuse
and working in the thirteenth
judicial district there we had
two wonderful commissioners who
understood the true intent of
the act and clients were able to
access this necessary tool for
safety regardless of their
victimization unfortunately now
in my statewide role I hear from
our programs around the state
that they are not able to access
the more judicial district
protect orders of protection for
clients of sexual assault and
child abuse because
commissioners misinterpret the
statute as it currently stands
and so this clarification in
statute in the clean up that
this commission has done is
vitally vitally critical for
survivors of domestic violence
sexual assault child abuse and
other types of violence thank
you thank you okay.
Is there anybody here in
opposition to this measure.
The committee.
The.
Senator just a comment there is
another bill this reminds me of
we're talking about a threaded
Senate bill eighty four I have a
concern that it would
potentially it is it is a
separate issue so I won't spend
too much time on it but we're a
domestic abuser who is on
probation
is where they will violate the
conditions of release and we are
kind of lessening the
repercussions of that domestic
users are still.
In that bill and I love this
language the credible threat the
credible threat is not another
bill SB eighty four you know
it's also pretty good bill but I
I have the domestic abuse is
where I'm held up on that other
bill so I encourage everyone the
stakeholders to look at that he
could we possibly use this
language because I think the
credible threat is really good
and it's tailored for this topic
where is the the the word threat
is the only word that's in this
other bill it would effect once
again domestically is that have
been incarcerated for you on
probation or on parole so I I
have a hell of a hold up there
and it could potentially work
it's this legislation soon look
at that thank you for Senator
six eighty forty six.
Have you looked at that one I'm
just trying to do though Mr
chair I haven't seen that bill.
I tend not to review bills until
they're right in front of me.
For that.
Anybody else on the committee
with the question or discussion
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator Lopez
and thank you for all your work
and and this is a.
For me did a.
A bill of years back to try to
synchronize the.
Also member act and the family
by this protection act and it
was like this too much of it has
to what so I just noticed what
amount of work this must have
been to to just put much much
better language in this act some
very important act the I try to
read a script as I can
and I got halfway through so
I'll just page twelve so here's
my concern on page twelve.
One is real quick Mr chairman is
Senator Lopez on something like
this even those not a criminal
matter you may want to consider
putting a putting it into effect
on July first.
you know as opposed to.
Whenever but I guess you know
the course can send a memo as to
when it goes into effect but
instead of just ninety days from
the signing of the gov you put a
hard and fast date but you know
just a suggestion also
on up page twelve on the on the
filing of the petition for
protection.
These are ex parte orders which
is very very delicate matter
under current law it talks about
upon the filing a petition.
That the court shall immediately
grant or if the ex parte order
is not granted.
Blah blah blah I don't see any
language.
Okay never mind never mind on
the bottom of page thirteen it
talks about if the order is not
granted it is a yes okay thank
you let's put the ship on your
first suggestion do you what do
you think of that idea of an
effective date of July one I
know I was wondering if you'd
read the task force report of
that accompanied it because that
was a recommendation of the task
force report is to have a time
for police officers to be
trained for the judiciary to be
trained and so I would welcome
that amendment.
Thank you for July one enough
time Senator still of I'm not
suggesting we might bump it out
for training purposes I just
think for every lawyer in
judging cop in the state it's
always a good idea to put an
exact date with the law kicks in
well the reason they wanted it
is because that would give a
little bit more time for
education about it would only
give madam Mr Chairman only give
like two more weeks so if you
want to bump it to September
first I would be against that
but it.
We would you could do that in
the next you know to do that in
the next.
I read that you know as I read
the report that one of the
recommendations as they were
concerned about sufficient time
for training.
And so I was thinking you would
say another month but that's
true every time Mr chair that we
pass the statute I've noticed
when this when this a mess Act
has been amended there's always
been a lag time of with the
training of certainly that was
true with the firearms
amendments and several of the
other amendments I know what we
amended the child support bill
for the child custody bill to
add domestic violence there many
many judges for about a year who
did not realise domestic funds
as a factor so there's always
that lag time but I know that
the task force members are very
committed to educating the
judiciary and I've I think it
effective date is a good idea
for the reason you said and if
you would like if if Mister
chair if you would entertain
that amendment hi.
Welcome it as a friendly Monday.
July first.
July first is fine so I first.
Then Mr chairman Senator Lopez I
would move that we amend the
last paragraph to include
Secretary out of section fifteen
that the the bill so.
The **** laude July first twenty
twenty three the insert that on
page thirty line nine and
remember the next one.
The repeal of the old plus.
After that okay with you does it
does it go after nine eleven or
after line eight.
Okay great then up then yes Mr
chairman thank you so much a
Senator Lopez on a page thirty.
Between lines eight nine insert
a new section fifteen with a.
start date of July first twenty
twenty three.
Okay.
I I just I move that motion is
there a second.
Because second that motion.
Any any debate on the motion and
the the amendment any opposition
to the amendment.
Seeing none will consider it to
them and then the second time.
Any further discussion center I
I cut you off right before you
thank you thank you Mr
So if the court does not grant
the petition.
What happens.
If the court does grant to
petition
the court is going to have a
subsequent hearing to perhaps
take for evidence.
so that there because what
happens with a lot of these
initial purchase of conditions
and that was one of the reasons
we wanted to make this more
understandable to pro se
individuals a lot of these
people are pro se and they go in
and they don't allege enough in
in their initial filing and so
this isn't an opportunity if
there is more evidence sometimes
that's all the evidence it is
and it just is dismissed but if
there is more evidence because
many times they go in and they
don't tell the whole story.
And so that's that's Mister
chairman Senator we want to give
the petition up to a to amend
the petition or just have a
hearing.
And other courts okay with
seventy two hours.
This
Exists the hearing is already
going to happen this is just
waiting I am okay so
Mr chairman so so Mister
chairman Senator Lopez to date
if it's it's if it's granted
granted if it's not.
Okay I can address this very
well never mind I realize that
was I realize I was current law
it is it is all right sounds
good I thank you and then.
Age thirteen is.
Yes Mr chair it is Mr chairman
yes justices re written Mister
chair Senators.
Representative US senators.
This is to address what's been
happening the committee of the
task force recognized clerk law
is happening and often if
survivors are applying for an
order of protection the clerk is
denying their even the entry of
the application so this is to
clear the language up so that it
can actually get to the stage
where they can get in front of
the commissioner of the judge
and explain why they need the
order protection so this is to
address the barrier that are
survivors are already
experiencing in accessing that
temporary orders intimately
because they didn't.
They're not represented by
counsel they're doing
Mr chairman Senator Lopez is
there I recall that the law we
change a lot of years back that
if the respondent wanted to file
their own petition of a
protective order and make their
own allegations that out of that
granted like an automatic
continue as they could just at
the hearing start like making
allegations and and push for
their protective order what does
this allow for up.
That did more the wrist what's
the policy now under this bill
can the respondent also petition
or basically it's a race to the
courthouse
that is not that particular
issue hasn't changed with the.
Which.
I think this is existing policy.
Okay.
All right great I can go down a
big thanks for the time Mr
chairman Senator Lopez I can't
do the last ten pages but but I
mean congratulations on your
work I just want to attest to
the fact that we
That the that that they're set
is.
You can you can suggest there
such a thing as mutual combat
in domestic violence situations
but there's there's a primary
aggressor they can be determined
by you know trained officers of
like that we we talked back in
the day talk BCSO anybody not to
charge both of but to charge one
of them
and determine at the scene you
know who was the primary
aggressor because that back in
the you know nineties that they
would just arrest them both and
just you could possibly the one
because they both had a fifth
amendment right so so now I just
want to echo that sentiment
thank you thank you Mr.
Anybody else Senator Gallegos
just real quick question Mr
chair and senator in looking at
this on page seventeen line six
item ten in just thinking
through mental health and PTSD
why would we ask them not to
order treatment or counseling
related to the abuse.
What.
It's on page seventeen we line
six on.
Mr chair I was executive
director of the Los the
committee that you which is a
domestic violence agency that
serves all but focused are tried
out which would look.
At the new immigrants and there
is a federal law.
That
Deals with these issues and one
of the things that we've learned
is that forcing individuals who
are they recalling protected
parties of not victims but the
forcing these individuals to
participate in inappropriate
counseling convention actually
be damaging and that was
happening a lot of and so the
the group and I was not a member
of the task force but I'm sure
they're following the national
best practices in not forcing
counseling it's encouraged but
having the judge ordered
counseling can be a big burden
particularly since we don't have
appropriate counseling available
in many parts of the state and
even in Albuquerque is not
appropriate counseling but
certainly there are services
like and I think with that you
like shelter whatever with the
avail themselves but it's just
best not to force them into
potentially inappropriate
council thank you for that and I
think she's gonna have response
but Mr chair Senator can you
explain to me inappropriate
counts and I I I've just never
heard that my thought is if
you've got the message violence
you would have someone that has
a credentials in that area and
so when you made the statement
in appropriate caption it just
threw me.
Those of us so thank.
I'm it Mr chair members the
committee senator guy goes off
the provide an appropriate
counseling would be when and
this often happened historically
where they would force both
parties to participate and say
anchor management or couples
therapy right something that
places that power dynamic still
in place all also Senator guy
goes this is actually to
to force an individual who's
applying for an order protection
to participate in any accounting
or activity has been found by
the violence against women act
to compromise survivors safety
and would potentially jeopardize
all federal funding that the
state would receive if we were
to actually enforce.
Thank you for that Sir Mr center
and gentle lady of I did Rachel
law and it separated the.
Person from a victim from having
to be with the perpetrator in
the courtroom to hear that so
now I understand the that aspect
now the last question Mister
chairman Senator is this a heavy
lift I have any judges asked you
about them being as far as no
worship to the judges in their
jurisdiction four of you are
they good with this I know the
fifty additional district in Lee
County likes of Bill and I'm
just wondering if anyone else is
interject will my interest if
there were several judges as I
read through there were several
judges vertically family law
judges but also judges from
other jurisdictions that life
it in well this was a process
you know the a of go of going
back and forth and negotiation
process and I think of they're
they're fine with the bill I'm
not gonna speak for all ages is
that they like the bill but
certainly there was
Representative judicial
representation I don't believe
AOC is endorsing the bill but we
I would ask them for an
endorsement.
And they what they participated
they definitely participated but
I I'm not surprised that your
judge liked it because it it
provides a lot more
clarification than they have
before and most of the changes
were consistent with what they
how they were filling in the
gaps that appreciate I apologize
Mr etcetera I misspoke is our
dust that like the idea of of
what you were done and I
appreciate I guess in good
policy Mr center when all people
lose a little.
Is compromised so I think you
just want to have those
clarification so appreciate
thank thank you Senators we're
at the point where we need a
motion on this bill one or the
other put but through the
committee.
Senator Maestas thank you move
our Senate bill eighteen as
amended.
Seconded by Senator McKenna.
Any other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle.
Senator my is this yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator smitteez yes Senator.
Yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Thank you to provide aid to zero
go to other do passed from this
committee senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee said
ability thank you senator Tom
and chiropractic board changes.
Senate bill one ten.
If.
To connect that.
I.
On the.
It's going to be does is your
expert witness okay I'm just
here.
For me.
Do we have a an amendment or
something note the expert
witnesses on so Mister the
expert witness okay.
What's the.
Roger justice.
Dr justice.
And I'm.
This.
Development go ahead thank you
thank you Mr chair and the
members of the committee of this
bill will up.
Update a few outdated provisions
of the New Mexico chiropractic
physicians act.
While also providing greater
flexibility for doctors of
chiropractic to travel between
states and care for patients
this is accomplished by allowing
temporary licensure of doctors
and chiropractic.
Who for reasons beyond their
control are temporarily unable
to practice in their home state
then wish to temporarily provide
services in New Mexico.
It also provides those out of
state doctors of chiropractic to
come to New Mexico
and temporarily care for the
patients of a native
chiropractic physician who is
ill or injured and unable to
care for his or her existing
patients.
The bill also modernizes some
statutory provisions relating to
New Mexico board of chiropractic
examiners.
With that Mr Chairman are allow
my expert witness Dr rod
Justice.
To add a few comments and zoom
zoom Mr chair Dr justice
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the opportunity.
So yeah this bill we try to get
this bill passed in twenty
twenty one and like a lot of
other things that got Miner to
in Judiciary and we weren't able
to get it at the time we had run
the bill passed are.
Examiners granted passed the
other association and everybody
was approved everybody was happy
with it so there we were good to
go we just got caught up in the
excuse me doctor can you either
turn up your volume or move the
Mike closer to you because we're
having a hard time hearing.
All right you see here.
Because that is a better I think
a little better yeah.
Okay in goes to getting along in
years and his hearing is what.
Well as I can certainly identify
with that and I I apologize is.
So yeah we had try to get this
bill passed the twenty twenty
one and like everyone else we
got mired up in Judiciary.
Run the bill passed in the US
board of examiners just let them
know what we were doing grants
pass the other state association
so that they know what we were
doing and at the time everybody
approved as secretary for and we
just got stuck like a lot of
other people so we're back
we we've essentially unchanged
the bill there may be one or two
words that bring it up to code
statutory lies language wise
what the other than that we're
just trying to make provisions
for
other doctors who travel to
treat or travel to teach
to come in and
get in a issues with being able
to adjust at seminars to
demonstrate
for as far as sports teams or a
performance art somebody like a
football team or circus soleil
if they come in most of these
folks carry their own
chiropractor with them we just
want to get people out of any
kind of gray area and make it
okay important to do so.
also the.
we had a doctor a couple years
ago who got hurt very badly a
lot of office about eight or
nine months incident Clovis and
she had a lot of people that
live close by in Texas that
would have been able to come
over and take over practice and
help for long but they were able
to so
you're trying to make provisions
for that eventuality we're also
trying to make provisions for
any disaster issues when nine
eleven happened there were a lot
of chiropractors from all over
the country the New York City
and set up tables to to work on
the first responders so we just
wanna make that.
Make that happen as well.
Will will very thank you doctor
of so it is it is it an accurate
statement that the chiropractic
board supports this measure.
We ran it past them and we we
didn't ask for a vote but there
was certainly no complaints we
show what we were doing and
everybody nodded and said thank
you for bringing it up.
Okay.
Let's go to the audience
anything that you wanted at JD I
know Mr Chairman just to the
point a couple years ago this
this bill cleared the house
without any opposition that it
got bogged down and Senate
Judiciary want to crossed over
all we don't have any opposition
at that time no no she's from
the board thank you.
We we heard it in this committee
I think the new.
Read is yes Mr chairman it did
clear this committee and then at
the last committee was Senate
Judiciary the end of the session
that's correct.
Okay let's go to the audience
anyone here in support of the
bill just raise your hand.
Anyone here in opposition to the
bill just raise your hand.
Members of the committee.
We have a motion for due process
seconded by Senator my S. this
is the other discussion the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator there us.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
yes.
Senator my SSS Senator McKenna
yes Senator committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
The
not gonna buy yourself much
time.
Senator tells.
Yes.
It's a chiropractic.
We tested two years ago yes.
In center city Lopez yes.
Senator to the piano yes.
The test tone the state thank
you yeah.
Did you vote for okay great
congratulations your oratory one
is over.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
consent to do it.
The long awaited.
Child sex abuse statute of
limitations.
Yes thank you all for being here
Senate bill one twenty six.
If you brought the heavy
armored.
It is still there the artillery.
I have on my current here with
me is as my Steve for.
And I will go fast on this bill
and on the next one because I
know it's late and y'all would
probably like to have dinner.
so this is a pretty simple bill
what this does is we currently
have a statute of limitations
for civil cases that are brought
for childhood sexual abuse this
would eliminate that statute of
limitations just for the civil
case just for the civil cases
this would not diss would not
affect criminal cases at all
just civil cases this would
allow folks to get to the
courthouse door
whereas right now they either
have until the first person's
twenty fourth birthday or three
years after the date that they
disclose the childhood sexual
abuse to a licensed medical or
mental health care provider in
the context of receiving that
care.
And Mister chair members of the
committee we know from our
extensive saves the have been
done that the trauma that comes
along with child's childhood
sexual abuse can last for a long
time I am for too long now that
trump has had the ability to
outlive people's ability to seek
justice on and that's what this
bill seeks to fix with that I
will see if my part would like
to add anything.
Our.
Mr chair you guys been here a
long time
before you in in a similar vein
in the past and lesser questions
I'll I'll hold my comments thank
you thank you Mike
anybody in the audience is
support of this bill.
The if anybody feel constrained
to speak on this bill you just
willing to waive the.
Right okay anybody in opposition
to this bill pope okay Brett why
are you opposed to this bill.
Mr chairman members come up and
choose my focus is assumed.
UP Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore a
registered lobbyist for the
American property and casualty
insurance association of the
American property casualty
insurance association
we stand in a respectful
opposition to this bill enables
note the first part of my
comments is on a personal level
really have a ton of sympathy
for people who are in this
situation it's a horrible thing
and there's there's no real good
excuse for the actions of people
who engage in this behavior but
the bill raises concerns for the
property casualty insurers
because it does two things it
completely eliminates the
session limitations for bringing
these types of claims and you'll
see in the the last part of the
bill it makes the provisions of
this a new statue limited
absence of stature limitation
retroactive so what that means
for property and casualty
insurers who would be covering
these claims you've already
collected premium that was
covers that was provided in past
history and now you have this
new exposure and so that raises
a larger question for any
insurance company that was
providing coverage in this area
I do not know at this moment how
this compares to other stature
limitations across the country
I spoken to the sponsor and she
is committed to engaging in
discussions about where this a
piece of legislation is headed
and having discussions with some
experts in this area and so we
have large concerns about how
this affects insurers are
members who provided coverage
previously and with that and we
will stand.
And is there anyone here from
CYFD.
Wants to speak honestly they
made a comment in the.
In the FIR.
if you want to make do you know
what they said.
I'll tell you what they said
miss Martin is here on another
yeah I know she's on the next
bill that I I thought if there's
somebody here in New it is with
CYFD that they warned that
increased litigation authorized
by this bill may have a fiscal
impact on CYFD is risk exposures
settlements and judgments.
This concern may be true for
other state agencies
institutions public schools and
local public entities as well we
think.
Chair members of the committee I
would like.
Okay thank you for your time and
I'm happy to address that I
can't please Mr how will.
First of all as committees
probably aware.
Lawyers are for sure where the
only way claims can be brought
against a governmental entity
whether to see whether two FTE
department care corrections or
school district is under the New
Mexico tort claims act.
The New Mexico tort claims act
occupies the field that's the
only way and and there's nothing
in the New Mexico tort claims
act that.
to first to this statue
limitations so under that
there's no retroactive the with
Richmond Education possible
under the tort claims act me to
separate those two issues Mr
chairman the.
Representative two activities a
different issue the the the
ability to bring a claim just
the ability to reclaim whether
whether under the old statue
limitations a new statute any
statue limitations against bring
a claim against a governmental
entity.
Is is completely.
defined by the rules under the
New Mexico tort claims act so
what I'm suggesting I'm
certainly happy to work with
with CYFD about their concerns
no New Mexico Public School
Insurance Authority has has
raised certain concerns just
here tonight and we're happy to
work with with those people were
already working on gates and
that but that's that's just
that's the one and I think those
are those are you the litigated
against the government are
pretty familiar with the the
challenges of trying to get out
outside the New Mexico tort
claims act you just can't do it
under general negligence or a
claim the second retroactivity
that has been that
that Mr more rate raising
concerns retroactively is a
curious argument to me because.
There's I think the.
Under the current law.
The.
The claimant has three years
from the date.
Three years from the date of the
injury or three years of data
there twenty fourth birthday of
the fortieth birthday or the
ninetieth birthday is three
years of the date when they seek
treatment so I'm I'm happy to
work miss more but I can't once
you that your actuarial work
because there's no statute of
limitations that they can to
provide now.
What claims are are they are
they adjusting for and charging
premiums for that are not going
to be covered under under this
act and I I know I'm getting the
weeds a little bit I don't want
to do that but I I'm certainly
for here there were concerns
this is the first committee the
bills come to I believe so we
have opportunities to to work
with them but
but I just echo what if the
court if the if the senator
Senator chairman or answers of
any other questions or what I
just said does make sense I'm
happy try to clarify I think it
does.
Members of the.
Yeah we did.
Opposition the other one was a
nobody on soon members of the
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
There was no statue limitations
for for criminal cases as well I
believe if the evidence is there
people should be able to get
justice and so I am very happy
to see the bill I was concerned
about what the FIR said and this
isn't something I'm real
familiar with the.
Ex post facto of.
Revival of the claim so it's set
up.
Stop your V. California I thirty
nine US six of seven I have not
read that case but its says
it'll a law enacted after the
expiration of a previously
applicable limitations period
violates ex post facto clause
which is applied to revive a
previously time barred
prosecution so I just wondered
if you had addressed that
because that does seem
problematic but has a policy I
think we should eliminate
stature limitations period for.
For sexual abuse.
In Mr chair Senator I I'm not
familiar with that case either
but I would I will look forward
to have that conversation and
Judiciary because I'm sure that
will will come up and and this
bill the state to Judiciary.
Thank you Mr I'm not familiar
with the case but I did want to
highlight the things you want to
ask about that.
article four of New Mexico
constitution article four
section thirty four issue.
The ex post facto yes No act of
the legislature shall affect the
writer of the of the party and
or change the rules of evidence
or procedure any pending case
that in.
And so Mr chair Senator I I
think and in case there is
probably the the key language so
while this might not occurred
certain might not apply to it
says applies to all actions not
currently pending regardless of
the the date of the childhood
sexual abuse regardless of
whether at any session
limitations such actions have
expired we've covered language
arts yes specifically address
the current and.
But we also do have an exposed
back to look so I I'm just it's
important I think it is gonna be
raised again and any other any
other questions so that that
like I said I think it's really
great public policy Sierra thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
bringing this bill forward but
we do with the Spencer be
amenable to changing the three
years to six seven eight nine
ten.
They're doing away with the
totally yes Sir Mr chair Senator
no we want to eliminate the
session limitations period not
not extended to eliminate.
Three used to compromise.
And Mr chair Senator I think
that would be an unfriendly and.
I just suggesting.
Okay.
But so will the committee
Senator Maestas you have
questioned you thank you Mr
chairman they're doing thank you
start the is there any
Requirement that prior
obligations were made or that
there's that there's any of.
Any type of blood non
testimonial evidence at all Mr
chair just play out in the court
Mr chair Senator exactly all
this does is get someone to the
courthouse door and in the event
they're still gonna be hell to
all the same standards and all
the those the same checks and
balances that that our our
judicial process goes through on
any case all this does is is get
them in the door so they could
try to make that case and be
held to the same evidentiary
standards as any other case with
me and Curley Mister chairman
Senator twenty three years after
eighteen years of age.
And now Mr chair Senator you it
it's your twenty fourth birthday
or three years after you
disclose that in the context of
treatment whichever comes last
yes.
Okay great thank you.
Through the committee.
The motion for to pass seconded
by Senator sh committee.
Any other discussion.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator this is.
I'm so sorry right now I'm
confusing bills I'm sorry that.
Mexico is a thing sorry.
Thank you.
Senator Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman.
Yes.
Senator to the piano yes we have
a due pass thank you much thank
you and we'll go then to the
last bill of the night.
Children's protective custody
procedures.
Senate bill one twenty eight.
Thank you Mr chair and on this
one we have a a proposed some
four this committee we have a
close up okay which I just And I
believe is being handed out now
and we also have to small
changes to make to the substance
in front of you that food hoping
just be rolled into the subway
comes out of.
Our secretary as of this is a
big.
In our secretary did not receive
it and I haven't said anything
for a couple of these other ones
but this this is and I if we
have this that are our analysts
hasn't seen I think we should.
Good point Mr chair I'm I'm
happy to the changes in the
center actually pretty minimal
the only reason we did it as a
five and seven amendment was
because this is going to need
Judiciary Max and the care
Judiciary like seeing stuff come
into sobs but I'm happy to to go
through the changes that were
made by at obviously Mr chair
what it's at your discretion.
From the to the.
Rather wait till Friday.
What what would.
So Mr chair and senator.
We
so we put in two sections where
we specifically direct the
Supreme Court to promulgate
rules as necessary to implement
both the families in need of
court ordered services act and
the abuse and neglect act and
that's because it became clear
to us and having discussions
that there some forms that
probably need to be developed to
kind of streamline this whole
process for the folks for filing
petitions with CYFD as we wanted
to put that's really put in
there the court already can can
issue rules that's in there is a
flag to them to to do it into it
to do though is those forms
The sorry Mr the struggle is to
save of where the where is that
one so that is as the new
section five that's been added
which is on page fourteen.
Is one of the rulemaking
authority provisions the other
one is on the very last page
page thirty six lines seventeen
to nineteen those two and then.
So so so that there's there's a
couple a couple more small ones
that are made that I I can run
through on page seventeen.
Lines one into
We added the words are at the
time after alternative were.
No no I'm so it's wrong page six
I'm looking at the side and this
is refer was referring to the
original fell.
So what this was dealing with
was when the the per so one of
the things that we were hearing
it was that CYFD when they're
doing these initial ex parte
petitions they're doing these is
really extensive affidavits that
that take a lot of time and
frankly do not need to be done
at that stage we wanted to make
really clear that the affidavits
that CYFD employee or employees
are submitting to get next parte
order.
That they have to describe kind
all of the that they have there
are no less restrictive
alternatives of us a correct
correct language after that
they're aware of at the time
because we don't expect them to
have as a global knowledge of
the situation when they're
filing this kind of immediate up
front affidavit that would
probably be on the bottom of and
this up on the bottom of
sixteen.
line twenty three or twenty four
some room there
Page.
We this is what I have is
different you have a point one
point two so what you know what.
Because it's going to ask that
the sponsor could walk us
through the deadline yeah and
get into policy under the other
thing is I would love to look at
the audience have a chance to
look at this to.
Mr chair if you're working for
the limit that's respond I I put
could you set here lo these many
hours but I do think in it you
know rather than rush through it
and and connected to the full
benefit of the.
Thank you can see the
incredible.
with which we scrutinize this
legislation the.
What we really do will do with
it number one on Friday.
What we already have somebody
else we have three of the number
one time for.
Well let's roll the agenda over
and just deal with the roll over
to the bed.
Percent freeze of Mundy.
Representative.
Yeah and at this hour with the
with the committees of.
Intellectual capacity flagging I
think we better do this the.
Well so we will but now we have
it in hand we can pour over at
our leisure and and and Mr chair
let me just say if you want me
to because we'll get another sub
done that will there were two
small changes I was going to
make going to tell you what
those are so that you're aware
of that when you're looking at
the sub that you have and how we
have a couple of other little
ones yes the yeah and and those
we can do this at least you and
just just so you guys know
because this is an issue that I
believe came up where and when
this committee heard SB thirty
one it was the issue around the
definition effective can which
is both in that bill and is in
this bill on and the intention
of that definition in both bills
was not to applaud that not to
exclude former foster parents so
it would be adding the word
current on page three line three
that you see here
in the order that you all have.
Between child's entry and entry
child's current entry into
foster care which would ensure
that fire foster parents are are
able to the could be considered
affected can exactly and and
then the this this press over
the same ground we just try to
fund.
A little a little bit there's
there's definitely some overlap
agency okay
and then on page seventeen line
thirteen fifteen it's three
striking that old definition
effective can just just to keep
it consistent.
Sure page seventeen lines
thirteen fifteen.
Use the.
Current will be added to the new
definition effective can on page
three and the old definition
effective can on on page
seventeen replaced.
And we're also going to make
that same change additional
members now if to SO SB thirty
one is up on the Senate floor
we'll be making that same change
to that bill on the floor.
So the with the Mattel has a
current emotionally significant
relationship that's with that we
were no it would be
So
fictive kin is a person who is
not a relative but Senators
family member of a child and to
have a significant family like
relationship with the child of a
child family which relationship
existed prior to the child's
current entry into foster care
so.
That's the definition of the
Indian penal folks month for
others I think we just the
current entry this is the
definition you're gonna use on
page seventeen so on page
seventeen there were were just
striking at it there does not
need to be a definition of
fictive kin you're already
action because we're doing it
okay.
Well what will I apologize for
the for thank you sit here but
on the other hand you've learned
a lot about a whole wealth of
others.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
with that we will turn off our
microphones so we don't have but
