And
then Nova present Senator Pinto.
The scope.
Iserio Lopez.
Here Senator Hickey. Senator
Lopez.
here.
Our quorum is established and
We will pick up where we left
off, um, just a few days ago,
and Senator Pinto, um, and
Senator Samuel Lopez, if you
would.
Uh, please present Senate Bill
356.
Madam Chair, before we get
started, but to express a point
of personal privilege.
Sure.
Madam Chair, I think my side
recognizes.
The futility of trying to change
anyone's mind on this committee.
We will not be asking a lot of
questions.
During this
Today's hearing
Other than perhaps to explain
why we voted the way we did.
Everything will go through the
way you guys want it to go
through.
And we'll sort it out when it
gets to the floor.
Maybe we can get to go home a
little earlier than 8 o'clock.
Thank you.
I think, excuse me, thank you,
Senator Scott. I
I appreciate you sharing that
information, that message.
And also, before we begin, what
I will say the intent of the
chair is hopefully to be able to
finish your around 5:30 today.
For us to be able to go home and
have a nice dinner.
No, thank you. It's the intent,
we'll see.
Senator, please.
They came out of chair members
of the committee.
Then I built 356, known as a
diversity act.
is to create a diversity officer
position within the in lympho in
Mexico State Personnel Office,
authorizing the creation of
diversity and inclusion liaisons
within every state agency
establishes a workforce
diversity and inclusion council.
To develop a comprehensive
diversity, equity and inclusion
strategic plan.
And we've
You do have the
Some questions that were posed
before.
It's not to really exclude. It's
to include.
So that's um my basis and
senators Dia Lopez, if you would
like to add to that, you may.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
delighted to co-sponsor this
bill because um
What we're seeing is attacks.
On diversity, equity and
inclusion, and we are a majority
minority state.
That is, we are a state, um,
that is severely under,
underrepresented given our
population in all in all facets.
education, employment, state
employment, leadership,
politics.
And so, while strides have been
made over the last
few decades, and actually, I
should say since Brown v. Board
of Education, um, we're
beginning to see reversals, huge
reversals on that, um,
particularly in other states and
at the national level. And so
this is, this is an important
bill to me personally because
It attempts to
Provide equity and inclusion.
Within state government, which
is funded by taxpayers, and I
think that our taxpayers deserve
to see themselves in state
government, uh, with that, we
stand for request for any
questions.
Thank you, senators.
So without the scope to the
audience, is there anyone here
in support of Senate Bill 356.
Is there anyone in opposition?
see none. Is there anyone on
there?
I'm sorry?
Mm
Did they wish to see.
Uh, good afternoon.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Anna Hanson. I am the register
lobbyist for the Pueblo Opoake
and out of respect for your
health and my health, Madam
Chair, I am
Speaking online, um,
The pueblo stands in support of
this type bill as people who
have been discriminated against
for years. It is really
important since we are a
multicultural state that we have
some kind of diversity, um, and
this is really important, Bill.
So, I want to thank Senator
Pinto and Dio Lopez and all the
sponsors for bringing this
forward. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Commissioner. Good
to, good to hear from you.
Is there anyone else that was
on?
OK. So with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
No.
Uh, the chair would entertain a
due pass motion from Senator
Pinto.
With the 2nd from Senator Silvio
Lopez, and I just wanted to make
mention, I appreciate.
You're bringing this measure
forward, senators.
Of course, this has been brought
up for a few years, um, some of
the history it was brought up of
New Mexico was the first state
to pass the memorial, um, almost
a decade ago.
to support this type of of
movement, um, making sure that
we would begin to honor.
Uh, the diversity of the state
of New Mexico.
So we continue.
So with that, if you could call
the role please Sen block.
Senator Boone. Senator Charlie.
Diego Nova, yes.
And I think
And scope.
No.
Inner city of Lopez.
Yes
And Hickey.
Senator Lopez, yes.
And to explain your vote,
Senator Scott.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair of
DEI.
This bill is really late to the
party.
DEI has been discredited both in
government service in the
private sector now in that
pendulum is swinging back the
other way toward.
Merrit-based
Employment decisions.
It's a bad idea.
Thank
Thank you, Senator, and with a
vote of 6 to 3, you have a Du
pass recommendation, Senator,
Senators, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Next, Senate Bill 217, Senator
Paria.
This is a dot role in
procurement.
And welcome, Mr. Secretary.
Welcome.
Senator, the largers.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, and Mr. Ranking
member and members of the
committee. I'm Senator Michael
Padilla, and I have here with me
as an expert witness on San Bill
217, um, our new, newly minted
Secretary of the Department of
Information Technology, Benny
Perreras, and I am uh very
pleased to be with him, as you
know, I
Get a lot of these bills, Madam
Chair, as I know you have in the
past as well, but um after
chairing that science intent
committee for 10 years, somehow
these land in my lap. And I
think this is an important step
that we need to take as a state
here. We have our Department of
Information Technology Managing
implementations and doing any
number of other things including
um IBMV work and all sorts of
things, also managing uh to keep
all of us abreast of, of the
cost of implementations across
every essentially every state
department and what we're
seeking to do here is delineate.
and enhance the role of the
Department of Information
Technology in the state's
procurement process. The bill
aims to centralize and
streamline IT related
procurements to improve
efficiency.
Oversight and integration across
state agencies, you know, we did
make a decision a couple of
years ago when I sponsored the
bill to create the Office of
Cybersecurity. That's a terrific
example of why this legislation
is needed, Madam Chair and
members, um, if we have
disparate departments out there
implementing all sorts of
different things, and they're
not adhering to the Office of
Cybersecurity's minimum
standards, and that's when we we
set ourselves up for problems
because they might not be doing
anything wrong or or tech
challenging individually, but
they are.
across uh they they could affect
state government that way. The
key provisions in the
legislation are centralized IT
procurement now.
Standardization processes,
enhanced oversight and
collaboration with the various
agencies, but now you have a
sort of a centralized view
across the enterprise to make
sure we're doing it the right
way and that we're implementing
things that actually work well
with existing state government.
Why do we want to do this?
Again, improved efficiency.
Cost savings consistency and
compatibility.
Um, enhanced security and
strategic alignment.
That's about my part of the swim
lane, Madam President, and Madam
Chair, I'm going to ask the Mr.
Secretary to say why this is
just so entirely critical.
Sorry, Madam Chair, committee
members, Manny Barreras, cabinet
secretary, New Mexico do it?
Hope you all having a good day
today.
So the key focus here is IT
contracting, making it easier
and faster for agencies.
When I say agencies, executive
agencies.
the uh Enterprise project
management office EPMO under the
Department of Information
Technology is committed to
improving agency operation and
IT project success by
streamlining processes and
focusing on efficiency.
Modernization highlights. These
will be quick bullet points
here. IT IT procurement moves
transitioning IT procurement and
contracts to the state
purchasing division at the
General Services Department.
Uh, Current challenges is that
EPMO spends a significant amount
of time on IT document review,
limiting project oversight and
causing approvals and delays,
uh.
Just elaborate a little bit more
there, uh, RETMO has project
managers that are currently
doing uh extensive reviews of
contracts, red lines, and we
feel that that
A particular function is better
handled in the GST department
where they do this on a day to
day basis. So that, that's
really the transition here.
Impact on the agencies is faster
approvals, streamlined processes
mean quicker contract and
project execution for all
agencies, more support, EPMO
will focus on helping agencies
with oversight, training and
project successes, uh, data
driven decisions enhanced
analytics provide actionable
insights for future planning and
risk mitigation.
Uh, future state of this overall
uh transition is proactive
planning begin IT strategic
planning in April, May instead
of July. So we'll catch up in a
few months there. Uh,
streamlined PCC meetings, uh,
submit documents earlier, 2
weeks before PCC meetings,
members can access questions,
documents in advance.
By modernizing and transitioning
processes, uh, New Mexico do it
ensures that agencies can
deliver.
IT projects more efficiently,
effectively, and on time. Thank
you.
Madam Charais will wrap up our
opening statement with that and,
you know, when I chaired that
committee for 10 years, one of
the most frustrating things was
to see implementations uh cost
be like a runaway train, um, and
I think that you're gonna see a
lot more efficiency and cost
management and cost containment
with these implementations. I'm
sure Madam Chair, you remember
the epics implement
implementation of the previous
administration took them 8 years
and they didn't even quite get
it done. The Aspen
implementation, those are all
very important things for state
government, but we really need
some real oversight here
instead, so we stay on time.
On budget.
OK, thank you, Senator.
Um, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
Um, this measure.
Anyone in opposition?
See none. Anyone on you?
Favor or an opposition.
OK.
OK, I, I'm riveting through, um,
we'll go with that and to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Senators at the office.
Thank you. Um, I get why this
would enhance efficiency, which
is, is a great thing. But why
were these different layers of
approval put in in the first
place.
I'm chairing and senator. I
don't think either one of us
could maybe tell you that. I
think it was, but, but my, my
estimate or my, my thoughts are
that there was very little bend
strength um in the legislature
at the time when, when a lot of
this was coming together and in
state government, we had a
tremendous amount of movement uh
when the department was created
back during the uh Richardson
administration.
I don't know, ma'am sure you
carried that list. I think you
did, right? Yeah. And so it took
like anything else, it takes
time to build these things. So I
think there was
were on a full court press at
the time and now we're trying to
streamline it and make it
better.
Um, is any rulemaking required
for this or, or just OK
Um, is any rulemaking required
for this or, or just oh
and there will be a rulemaking,
absolutely, um, and that'll be
done by the department in in
coordination with GST, the
General Services Department.
The procurement office within
general Services department.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm all
for efficiency.
Thank you.
Senator Pinto and then Senator
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for the
bill. The pre-procurement
process, do we know if there's
any delays at the moment or any
barriers that need to be
tighten.
Neither one of us can take it,
but yes, there are.
Massive delays and massive cost
overruns, and I really believe
this is gonna be one of the
biggest tools to help us avoid
that. I will say that again, the
ethics implementation that would
have positively affected CYFD as
an example, Madam Chair and
senator who you and I talked
about this many, many times. Um,
that implementation was to take
place over about a 2, 2.5 year
period. It was, uh, last I
checked, it was well over 8
years to implement it and the
cost.
estimates started at about 16
million to implement it was
something like 134 million the
last time I looked.
And Madam chair and sponsors so
the um
You know how many of our
departments are gonna.
a streamline and sense because
I'm pretty sure every department
has to do procurement.
But you experience delays in
others.
gonna be something.
uniformity in all the
departments or we just saying
just you guys.
And so, Madam Chair and there's
this will positively affect, I'm
guessing somewhere between 76
and 78 uh state agencies, all
the executive as you heard from
the secretary before all of the
executive agencies and all of
the sub.
You know, so within as an
example,
the Department of Information
Technology, you also have the
broadband office and the
cybersecurity office. So that's
3, essentially in all in one
area.
And Madam Chair and the members
of the committee and I just want
to add on record because we know
we have a lot of reading
versions and reauthorizations,
but I think part of that is that
we own some of that.
Delay too.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Block. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator, and, um.
Good to see you again, Mr.
Secretary.
So, real quick, I, uh, Senator
Padilla, you were talking about
cost overruns, was that across?
Um, 75 or 76 state agencies on
Managing programs and projects,
did I hear that correctly? Madam
Chair and and Senator Block, um,
when I chaired the Science and
Tech Committee, one of the
things I asked the secretary at
the time, not the secretary, but
I would say maybe.
to swing out and trying to
think.
47 secretaries ago, um, I wanted
to have a, I want the way I
manage projects in my company, a
red, yellow, green, that, you
know, report that, that bubbles
up the reds, then the yellows
and then the greens and of the
project implementation, uh,
project, what was the name of
the project? What department did
it affect your agency? What was
the original cost of it? What's
the current cost of it? Um,
what's the timeline of it? Is it
slipping? Why is the slippage
occurring and what can we do to
mitigate it? So I would say that
at any given time, there were
probably
of
The 30 or 40 implementations
going on at one time, we'd have
them bring in the top 10, if you
will, and I would say that
probably 1/3 of them were
slipping.
And that helped us to avoid a
lot of that because it was all
out in the light of day, and
it's on the website. It's still
on the website for for do it if
you want to take a look at it.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
uh, Madam Chair. So,
Basically, uh, in industry and
the private sector, you care
about cost schedule performance,
you would agree with that,
correct?
Yes, Madam Chair and Senator and
there's to me that we stay on
track and on time. Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Is there something wrong with
this mic or?
Seems to be a little echoy. It's
your magnetic energy, Senator. I
know, I know. Thanks, sorry, no
brown nosing today. All right,
let's go. Um, I showed up with
the so Madam Chair, Senator, um,
There's an industry standard
that we use called PMP.
Project, uh, I think it's
project management professional,
um, and we look at when we're
doing.
Large projects, small projects,
programs, whatever, we look at
PMP certifications to do exactly
what you just talked about to
ensure cost scheduled
performance. So what I hear you
say that we have about 3 in
state government that are
Pass overrun schedule is late,
requirements for performance
might not be there.
Um, my question is, what type of
training are we doing across
state government to
Train these people managing
these projects. So let me add,
Madam Chair and Senator, uh, a
little more uh detail to what I
said of the top 10 that they
would present to us about 1/3 of
those at 3 or 4 of them.
You didn't wind up on the top 10
list if you were on track. So
the vast majority were humming
along, but we wanted to know,
like, you know, what, what is
the what the top 10
implementations on cost on, on
effect or whatever. Where were
they? So I would say 3 or 4 of
them. So I wouldn't say that a
third of all implementations.
That were going on at the time
were, were, were off track, just
the top, a third of the top 2.
OK, so, um, Madam Chair and
Senator, is there some type of
certification or training for
state employees to be certified
to manage projects.
I have to ask the secretary on
that. I know they do have a
project management office.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
thank you for the question.
Currently, um, our EPMO, uh,
team.
is uh
100% certified to to run
projects. I think in this
particular situation, the goal
here is to remove them from all
contracts and procurements and,
and from doing, you know,
looking at terms and conditions
and go and redlining. I mean, we
see a significant amount of
time, almost going from 8, you
know, this change will go from
like 8 months to 60 days, maybe
even quicker and faster. I'm
currently uh in the process of
firing a deputy cabinet.
Secretary, he actually has over
20 plus years with Boeing in the
industry. He's 6 Sigma
certified, and basically what
we're looking to do is um
You get some additional
trainings and actually implement
more training programs for our
program project management.
Throughout the entire state with
all the executive agencies
there's probably over 111 uh
program project managers in in
my organization, we probably
have about 11.
So with that being said, we are
looking at
putting some processes in place
so that we get more highly
qualified, real true program
project managers that are gonna
be working with.
The
External agencies, the executive
agencies, their program project
managers putting in like,
getting, getting involved with
the internal kickoff calls, the
external kickoff calls, and then
obviously.
Um, overseeing all the, the
milestones and deliverables. So
it's really important that we
try to get this process in
place, and I think it's a really
good step for the state.
Uh, to move away from contracts
and procurement because we
already have a division that
does it on a day to day basis.
This will streamline and reduce
costs of along all agencies
Madam Chair and Senator, I think
what you're gonna also find is,
again, you know, being a
business owner myself, I mean,
there, there's certain times
where I wouldn't do business or
even attempt to do business with
various agencies, um, you know,
not in New Mexico, but outside
of New Mexico because it's just
so tedious and cumbersome. There
is so much back and forth we're
we're gonna streamline this.
You know, so it's gonna look a
lot more attractive and we'll
have more bidders basically,
kind of, you know, get this
work, so it's really naturally
going to bring costs down also.
Thank you, thank you both, uh,
Madam Chair and Mr. Secretary,
uh, your answer, especially was
You're speaking my language
because that's
What I had to go through for.
Training certification to do
acquisition program management
in the Air Force.
programs of, you know, the
hundreds of millions of dollars
to, to lead. So, but what I'm
hearing though is there are some
issues like you talked about.
I
I'm also hearing some training
as well. I don't know if there's
some training gaps or if you
guys are doing root cause
analysis on why some of these
particular programs are um not
meeting cost schedule
performance, but that's, that's
another topic. Getting back to
the bill.
Just one question on page 4.
19.
Uh, C3, Charlie 3.
Um, it says approved agency
information technology, then
everything's lined up projects
prior to procurement.
Are, are you talking about
Different projects going through
like a test and evaluation to
see how they're doing, if
they're gonna meet the, the
needs of of the state, and then,
OK, we, we went through our
little milestones, everything
checks out, it's good, and then,
is that what you're talking
about there?
Madam Chair, and Senator Bloch,
thank you for the question.
Actually, what this really is
saying is that we go through an
entire process, so in, in the,
uh, usually in the July time
frame, uh, each agency has the
opportunity to, to put a
business fine in front of us.
So they'll come in, they'll
they'll talk to the project,
they'll talk to the objective,
talk to the scope, they'll talk
to, you know, kind of the
budget, uh, that they're looking
to do. So in going through that
process, they have, uh, they go
through a C2 process and we have
a, a committee that meets and
will and the agency will uh
present to us what the overall
project is going to look like
whether it's a one-year project,
2-year project, 3-year, uh,
project, and what we'll try to
do is, as we are
Eevaluating cause we have
various different resources on
that team from LFC to DFA to tax
and Rev is we'll go through and
evaluate if it's has something
to do with cloud hosting or
data, um, conversion of some
sort, we'll get our technical
folks get involved, but
basically what we're trying to
do is before we enter into uh in
this procurement phase is to
really identify and and close
all the gaps.
From a technical perspective so
that the project that we approve
is, you know, meets the
statement of work. It has a good
equipment list and can then go
into contracting and procurement
which would then go into GSD.
the overall contract review.
Once the contract review is done
in GSD, the agency in GST will
then send back the documentation
and then we'll go into a a
project for project
implementation for, you know.
Um
The deliverables milestones of
of the overall project.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. That, that,
that's a perfect answer.
I hope with your background.
Coming into this department that
use a lot of those.
Project program management, best
practices to spread that spread
the wealth around.
Uh, to other departments
because.
You know, like, like the senator
next to you said.
There's there's a lot of cost
overruns.
Potentially mismanagement.
And uh if we don't have trained.
Project management killers.
That are, uh, understand this um
the technical process and and
understand the milestones and
how to get there, holding the
contractor accountable.
can get screwed.
So
greatly appreciate your answer
and I'll support the bill. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Any other
questions?
See them.
Mature and entertain a do pass
motion from Senatorero Lopez.
The 2nd from Senator Hickey.
And I just wanted to make one
comment, and I think this is the
right thing to do, as I've
always said, general services
department GST is the heart of
state government.
And actually I think needs to be
appreciated more in the role
that they do play.
Especially when contracting and
all the other important
functions that they perform.
This is a good idea.
Definitely you can call the
roll, please.
Senator Block.
Senator Boone.
Senator Charlie.
Is.
I know, yes, the Pinto.
And.
Oh
Centerio Lopez, yes,
Senator Hickey,
Senator Lopez.
Yes, and Senator, you have a do
pass motion.
By a vote of 9 to 1. Thank you.
Senator Trujillo.
See that you're here.
to present Senate Bill 203.
Massage therapy licensure and
welcome Senator Bergman also.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
good morning members of the
committee. It's nice to see you
all. Um, today we're presenting
Senate Bill 203, which is a
massage therapy establishment,
license requirement if the bill
is to pass. Individuals who
practice massage therapy are
required to be licensed.
But not the businesses where
they work.
Not requiring licenses for the
establishment where massage
therapy is delivered has
resulted in a gap.
of the industry regulators to
inspect those establishments to
make certain that basic
standards for hygiene, safety,
and privacy for customers is
being met.
In comparison, establishment,
enterprises and clinics where
barbers and cosmetologists
provide services have been
required to be licensed in New
Mexico for more than 30 years.
We believe the need for proper
hygiene practices and safety for
customers is just as great as
the establishments where massage
therapy is being practiced as
where a person gets their hair
trimmed.
The intent of Senate Bill 203 is
to require safe, hygienic, and
appropriately private conditions
at facilities where massage
therapy services are delivered.
While helping make certain the
professionalism of this valuable
and legitimate industry is
protected against those who
would masquerade the offerings
of massage.
Disguised the facility where
illegal conduct such as human
trafficking and or prostitution
takes place.
By requiring licensure of
establishments were massage
therapy services are provided.
Senate Bill 203 makes certain
that industry inspectors will
have full access to those
premises and can be on the
lookout for violations like
safety, hygiene, privacy
standards and other rules.
enforced in our state.
Send a 203 though has been
crafted to focus its um
Establishment licensing
provision to avoid additional
licensing requirements for
things like medical facilities
that are already subject to
other inspections and official
approved standards. Similarly,
the bill has been crafted to
avoid overreach in its license
licensing requirements by
exempting establishments that
are owned or physically operated
by an individual who already
holds licensure in a medical
field.
such as a doctor's office, um,
where you might go to see your
uh nurse practitioner.
An exemption is provided for
mobile delivery of a massage
therapy services. That means
there's no fixed establishment
that the massage therapist goes
to a location and for situations
where no more than 2 licensed
massage therapists are
delivering massage services to
customers.
At their own residence.
One important change is made in
Senate Bill 203 to current
licensing practices for
individuals with a massage
therapy license, and this is to
require a photograph of each
licensee to be placed on the
license document itself.
Current law already requires
licensed massage therapists to
display their license at the
locations where their services
are being provided, but does not
require a photo. This new photo
requirement, which is very
similar, exactly the same as
barbers and cosmetologists will
make it easy for customers and
inspectors to quickly verify
that a person delivering massage
therapy services is properly
licensed, and I'd like to thank
my co-sponsor um for helping.
with this, Senator Bergman, and
I'm gonna give her just an
opportunity to speak, um, and
then I have with me the general
counsel for the regulation and
licensing department who is here
to help with questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I don't have
much to add to Senator
Trujillo's excellent opening,
just that this was a bill that
Then Representative Trujillo
brought in 2019, when I was just
an analyst in the house and I
have wanted to help pass this
since then. I think it's
something that we really need
and should be doing, so I'm
excited to have it before you
today.
And Madam Chair, I will just
close with saying that on the
massage therapy board held a
special meeting on June 30th of
this year, and they voted
unanimously to support this
legislation and with that we
stand for questions. January I'm
sorry, January.
I don't know where I'm.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Let's go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in the
audience and support of this
measure.
Yes
You'd like to come forward and
identify yourself and make your
statement a couple of minutes
please each.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the legal women voters of New
Mexico and the American
Association of University Women,
um, and I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this forth,
um, this is, uh, this industry
has been unregulated for a long,
long time, and we've seen
abuses, we've seen abuse of
women, um, in this industry, uh,
they go back, it goes back.
Probably centuries, but it's
gotten really bad, um, and, uh,
I think it's really important
and I wanna uh recognize the
sponsors um service as the
department secretary of um of
regulation and licensing. She
knows all this, uh, backwards
and forwards and having a
picture, a photo on the card.
It's so important and, you know,
so it's simple, it's part of the
procedure, as she says in um in
other
industries, it's not gonna be an
unfair burden, I think all of
the aspects of this bill are so
important and um and I think the
compacts are very important, you
know, in general, but uh but
this is uh we're really seeing a
lot of human trafficking in the
massage area. So thank you very,
very much.
Thank you. I would just make
mention this is not one of the
compact bills,
just FYI
it's OK. Um, it's, it's right.
But yes, please. Uh, good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. Uh my name is
Mandy Guterres. I am a major
with the New Mexico State
Police, regulating massage
therapy establishments is
critical for both regulation and
licensing uh licensing
department and law enforcement
agencies in New Mexico.
These businesses are often
linked to human trafficking,
organized criminal activity, and
prostitution.
By implementing regulation, RLD
and law enforcement will be
better equipped with the
necessary intelligence when
conducting investigations for
law enforcement officers
entering an investigation
without prior knowledge or
awareness of potential threats
can significantly increase the
risk and hinder effective
operation.
Regulation would provide crucial
insights, allowing officers to
better prepare and safeguard
their efforts when addressing
criminal activity in these
established establishments.
Therefore, uh, DPS does support
a due passage of the spill, uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you and have.
Thank you. There we go.
Anyone else in favor? Is there
anyone in opposition here in the
audience?
is there anyone?
Are in favor or opposition.
No? OK.
So with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Senator Pinto
I think you might chair members
of the um um thank you for the
bill.
Is this the only industry that's
um
Not really
But
The inspection or anybody going
through to as far as safety.
Madam Chair, Senator, this is
not the only industry that
doesn't have inspections. This
is just an industry that, as has
already been said, this is an
important industry.
There are many of us, and I
cannot wait for this session to
be over so I can have a massage
because I really need it. There
are incredible places. This is a
very professional business. They
provide services at doctor's
office, at hospitals, they, uh,
they're
What they provide the services
they they provide have been
found to be very helpful in many
ways.
Unfortunately, there are some
that we have that have been,
there's been great concern about
over the years, and as the
senator said, I carried this
years ago, but we had hundreds
of people in opposition.
And my email blew up, and the
reason is because we hadn't made
the exceptions for the one, the
exceptions that we have in here
now. So no, there are other
industries that don't have this
kind of inspection, but this is
one that has been kind of rising
to the top, and we've been
trying to figure out how to do
it in a respectful manner to
really professionalize the
industry itself.
Thank you, Madam Chair and um,
thank you, uh, Senator for your
answer.
Because I think there are
Let's take, for example, the um
canvas.
centuries.
Because I don't think we're able
to keep up either with
inspections or making sure that
they're safe.
Um, there's other entities in
which there's um
Contact me physically. I can't
think of any, but um,
The leading on to the uh
I guess the, the health, safety
and welfare of our citizens, it
seems like any industry that is
going to have human contact or
even um
Because we do it for food, the
consumption, but yet cannabis is
not, um, I don't think help to
that standard in that sense.
And yet we're gonna
Add some more
Um
Because we got offended to
enforce it has to be someone out
there to do the inspections, and
we didn't even do that when we
legalized marijuana, to make
sure that we are meeting the
criteria for the safety and
welfare of our citizens out
there.
I think many of the facilities
have not really gone inspected
or um even in wait from state
walk through.
And
To on the national level, is
there anything that uh with this
particular industry that
trickles down, or is this just
something that nobody's even
touched.
Madame Chair, Senator, um, are
you asking whether or not this
is uh other states uh license
establishments for massage
therapy, the national level as
far as the Office of
Environmental Health or any
other kind of entity within the
national US government, um, they
don't fall under any kind of
inspection in this particular,
in this, this uh for this
industry.
Madam Chair Senator, no, there's
no, there's no federal oversight
of massage therapists or massage
therapy establishments. Um,
there is oversight at the local
level, um, as there is for any
business, um, you know, business
licenses are issued locally, um,
but that's each local
jurisdiction and they license
all businesses that function
within their jurisdiction, but
that would be the only oversight
that there is at this time.
Mearian members of the
committee.
How can we don't have any, do
we, do we, is there any
awareness of any legislation
that requires that if there is
physical contact made.
Um, in the profiling time.
That uh they have to be
inspected or regulated in our
state.
Madam Chair, I'm, um, Senator,
I'm, I'm not sure. Um, I, uh,
I'm really, the massage therapy
is what this will be limited to,
um, whether there's other
license types that need to have
um inspection, uh, I kinda have
become kind of the licensed
queen, I guess. Um, so, you
know, I'm always open for those
suggestions, uh, but this is
really uh a number one priority.
Um, this is a state agency.
Bill and um as I said, there's
been a number of us that have
had some concerns about this and
have been trying to figure out
how to make it.
They
And professional.
Senator Pinto, Kevin Graham,
regulation and licensing
department's general counsel. I
was just gonna point out that
the barbers and cosmetologists
Act and the Body Art
Practitioners Act, those both
already required not only
licenses for the practitioner
but for the facility as well.
That's what we're doing here is
moving massage to so that we're
licensing both people who are
delivering the massage are
lawful, good, licensed, you
know, massage therapists are not
our problem here. We're talking
about facilities that may have a
number of people working.
there who have no license at all
or that are, you know,
completely misusing the, even
the title of massage therapy,
they're actually doing something
very different. Um, we want to
make sure that we can get into
those facilities and put our
eyes on, on the equipment, the
facilities, who else might be
there as well as the individuals
performing services.
And Madam Chair and uh sponsor
arts and build it. I'm supposing
there's gonna be some kind of
database too, that's gonna be be
required of us to uh
Mm, uh, initially.
Madam Chair, Senator, the
regulation and licensing
department has gone completely
digital. Um, there's only a few
things that are not, not under
the licensing for professions,
um, but under securities and
under the financial
institutions. RLD has 7
different industries that they
regulate, but all of the
professional licenses are now of
digitized, and so there's
databases for all of them. This
license type would be created.
as a digital license application
and renewal.
So Madame Chair and members of
the committee, so
I foresee that there's going to
be a compact for this too.
Madam Chair, um, Senator No,
there is, there, there actually
is a massage therapy contact,
but we are not in the process
of, of, of moving that forward
at this time. I will say that
your question about the database
though, um, and I will say we
did get social work out of uh
judiciary yesterday, so thank
you, Senator Lopez, um, Sadia
Lopez, um, the cool thing about
it being digital is that before
you go get.
A massage or before you decide
to call up and establishment
and, and set up an appointment,
you'll be able to look on the
website and see whether or not
it's actually a licensed
establishment, and that should
give you more, um, uh,
You know, comfort that the
department, the agency knows
that they're out there and is
taking the time to go and make
sure that anybody that's
providing services there is
properly licensed because it is
illegal in New Mexico to provide
massage therapy services without
being licensed by the board.
And Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
So we're going mostly after the
business owners.
But we know on the other part,
there's those proponents that
were um visiting these entities
and in a purposeful way seeking
out something that in some sense
is illegal.
Um
So are, are we supposing that
this is gonna alleviate that
issue?
Madam Chair, Senator, um, the
regulation and licensing
department works very closely
with law enforcement, and if
there is illegal activity
happening at any of the sites
that we do have authority to
inspect. I say we, I'm not there
anymore. Um, that, that the
department has authority to
inspect, um, then that's
immediately reported to law
enforcement, and uh, you know,
we track that we, we keep track
of where we've made where
complaints.
have been made, and we've turned
those over. The board then has
the ability to take, you know,
to take disciplinary action if
necessary.
Yeah, Madam Cha and, um, thank
you for the legislation. I think
this is more just of a comment.
Because I'm not, I know.
Our infusion centers now.
That are out there.
Um, do we know if there's any,
yes it is kind of a question. Do
we regulate that too because
there's uh
Contact and
You know, there, there's
Ma
Madam Chair and senator, that's
licensed by another entity, um,
it, it is licensed by, um, if
there's a nurse there by the
nursing board, if there's a, a
doctor or someone under the doc,
then it would be the medical
board, and then the environment
department for um that kind of
safety. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair. No other questions.
Thank you, Senator.
Any other questions, Senator
Senio Lopez.
Thank you. You probably, this
may be
Beyond the scope and if it is
just got me.
So we have um
A human trafficking bill.
And one aspect of our bill is a
stash house. I don't know if
you've had a, uh
An opportunity to look that
could a massage therapy.
Outfit
That has prostitutes or, or, or
uh
Could that be a stash house?
Man
Ma'am center C Lopez, Kevin
Graham again. Uh, I can tell you
that we were have been working
at the RLD with the governor's
office and Ben Baker advisor on
criminal justice issues, um, and
this was a discussion that he
and I had my career before
coming to the regulation
licensing Forum was largely in
law enforcement, and most of it
is a prosecutor. So that is
certainly something that's been
on my mind as part of this bill,
um, by putting inspectors in a
position where a license is
required to let us in the door,
which is not the case right now.
because we don't license
establishments, and one of the
things we train our inspectors
is to be good witnesses and to
see things, look for things like
why does this massage
establishment have a room that
has 2 or 3 cots in it where it
looks like people sleep, or why
doesn't have a kitchen where it
looks like there's a lot of
people eating, uh, all those
types of things, the stuff that
we would report back to law
enforcement and give them
probable cause then if there is
probable cause to go get a
search warrant and be able to
prosecute that matter.
That's yet another reason for
this bill.
I, I think that's terrific. Um,
When you're ready for motion,
Madam Chair, I'd be happy to
move through.
Emotion.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Senator, Senator.
Sir
What, what do we do for um
Acupuncture.
This kind of the same here.
Madam Chair, Senator,
acupuncture is not part of this
bill.
I understand, but do we like the
same inspection process
procedures for uh place where
they do acupuncture. Madam
Chair, Senator, I, I can tell
you about the licensing, but I,
I just wanna, I really would
like to stay on the bill. Could
we have that conversation
offline. Sure. Thank you. Yep,
absolutely.
Um
So, Madam Chair, in, and
Senator, you mentioned some
other professions that are
exempt. Could you tell us what
those are, please?
Madam Chair, Senator, um, it's
not the Air Force or the Marines
or the navies, I can assure you.
Um, however, uh, we do have
exemptions if you'll take a
look, that was the Air Force you
were missing on the last we
discussed, and I hope that's
gonna get fixed. None of that is
exempt, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
So we did exempt home
established businesses, and the
reason that I, I worked hard to
get that one added in is because
these are people's homes.
And the idea of the inspection
is to be able to go into the
establishment to see if there's
any nefarious activity, make
sure that they're clean, that
they're the hygiene, all of that
is taken care of. And, and, and
that's at any time that they're
open.
And so, uh, it would be kind of
invasive, in my opinion, to go
and, you know, knock on the door
of a home establishment at even
5 o'clock in the evening or, um,
you know, when they're having
their dinner, so I was, I really
tried, and that was the biggest,
you know, heartache that people
had with this bill in the
beginning. Um, so we've got that
and then we have the medical
professions.
Yes
So all the way on, if you look
at page 6, that's really where
it is. So number one is the
public.
As what public or private
hospitals.
Uh, paragraph 2 is US
facilities, so one could say
that the Air Force is included
in there. Um, and number 3 is
state health institutions, um,
and number 4 is healthcare
offices that are owned or
directly managed on a daily
basis by these medical
professionals. Number 5 is the
home-based establishment and
under the definitions we have a
um information about what
actually is a home.
establishment, so it's, it's not
open, um, there is a definition
for that and then for the home
for the travel, and that's for
individuals who just really
don't have a location. You can
call them up, they'll come over
to your house, um, and, uh, when
my son was in a car accident.
The desperately, uh, he was hit
on his motorcycle. He
desperately needed to have a
massage immediately to try to
loosen up some of that. We were
able to get a massage therapist
to come to our house and give
him treatment, um, just, uh,
within hours of the accident,
and it really helped with his
healing.
So those would be the kinds of
individuals that would be
traveling massage therapist.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Senator. I hope your son's
doing, he's well. Thank you.
So
Let's, let's talk about local,
um, municipalities and counties.
Did they do any type of health
inspections at the local level
or municipality or county level.
Madam Chair Senator, what we
understand and what I am aware
of just because I do have a
history with economic
development is that your
business license, they do have
the authority to do some
inspections. I don't think they
have the resources to do the
inspections. Law enforcement
also has the authority to come
in, you know, if with probable
cause, their challenge that they
have, you know, shared with us
is that they don't have trouble
cause cause they don't have any
reason.
to go in. And so if, if
regulation and licensing
department inspectors, um, would
be the first in, and as Mr.
Graham said, they'll have their
eyes open, they'll be listening,
they'll be documenting, they
will be the ones who will have
the ability to see if there's
anything unusual that they don't
think should be go, you know,
uh, at a massage establishment.
And so it's really gonna be
Uh, relationship between the
regulation and licensing
department inspectors and the
local law enforcement because it
would be local law enforcement
that we would reach out to
first.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, because I thought a
lot and I'm torn on this one. I
really am torn on this.
The the majors uh testimony back
there.
Is, is compelling to me.
But I don't like treating
everybody differently. That's,
that's where I'm touring you and
I for that conversation.
But on, on what you just said,
We've, we've seen, I've seen in
Rio Rancho.
Local law enforcement will do a
um an undercover in some of
these places and uh arrest um
these people who are engaged in
this particular activity. So
they do that already.
I don't think they do that.
Where the state goes in from
what I understand.
I could be wrong, but they do
undercover operations at these
places already, so.
Um
There's that.
So it sounds to me
Madam Chair Senator, this is
really about
Prostitution, human trafficking.
It's what I understand. So,
lastly, on page 8, line 4.
The, uh, let me just read it
here.
Inspections of massage
establishments may be conducted
at any time.
Including when the massage
establishment is in operation or
customers are present.
the licensee or operator of an
establishment shall be given the
opportunity to
Accompanying the official
conducting the inspection to
receive a report of the
inspection within 14 days. Do
we, do we do that at other
Um
Places of business.
Uh
Inspections at any time whether
customers are there or not.
Madam Chair, Senator, we do, and
the most likely is um the hair
salons and nail salons, and um
that is a that is something that
happens on a regular basis.
Or the Barbers and cosmetology
Board, for example. Um, it also
happens regularly for the
Used to be called Thanaoactive.
Funeral Services Act.
It happens for the body art, um,
practitioner, so they can go
into uh a tattoo parlors, um,
mortgage loan companies, they
can go and inspect the books,
the small loan companies, credit
union, the Banking Act, um, and
the trust Company Act. So, the
department has pretty
Limited authority for
inspection, cause that's a
really small list of the 550,000
people that are licensed, um,
but again, this has become a
priority.
Because of the concern and, and
I, I, I just, I hate having this
conversation. It's really hard
for me because I'd know that
there are so the vast majority
of massage therapy places are
very valid. Well, there's Madam
Chair and senator's bad actors
and and whatever profession or
establishment, there's always
the bad apples. I, I, I get
that.
The, the one thing that concerns
me about the bill though is
So
I think what's gonna happen to
some of these places that are
probably operating.
During the various activities.
is they're gonna go to the home
place.
And, and they're, they're gonna
skirt around the law by doing
these home establishments, which
I think you're exempting, is
that correct?
Yeah
Madam Chair, Senator Block.
There is always the chance that
they will try to be smart
criminals. I mean, I, I get that
and that if we start cracking
down on the more blatant
violators and be able to shut
those down that they're going to
try to scurry someplace else,
but I will say two things that
regard your, the home exemption
is only for people who live in
the house. It has to be their
residence and a maximum of 2.
So if we were to, you know, have
a situation, we get a report, a
complaint where, you know,
there's a bunch of people going
to this house or there's, you
know, some suspicion that
there's more than that going on
under the Uniform Licensing Act,
we can go out to do inspect for
unlicensed conduct. So if there
were more than 2 people
operating there or if there was
a large volume of traffic there.
We can try to get our inspectors
in, but that would also be then
reported to law enforcement for
suspicion, uh, this issue. So is
there some possibility?
Yes, there always is, but we've
tried to address that by the way
we've crafted that provision.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, because when you
knock on the door of a of a home
place where there's
Moral activities going on.
You know, they're not gonna let
you in or they're gonna clear
the place out or they're gonna
say these people are my friends
they're visiting, whatever, I
mean it's just.
It's
I'm just torn
I mean, people are gonna do what
they're gonna do, you know, the
more regulation you put down
there, go around and we've seen
it here in Mexico with cannabis.
I mean there's a big black
market with marijuana.
Here in New Mexico.
So
Uh, that guy there is, is really
I don't know what to do. I don't
even want to vote.
Madam Chair, senator, I will
just say that.
I agree with what the
Major. Yes, Major said, but
This is my guy. This is who I
trust.
And, and he has helped me walk
through this. I appreciate that,
Madam Chair and Senator. He's a
lawyer though.
Um
All right, Madam chair.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, I think the
intention of this bill is great,
and we will inevitably find
victims of human trafficking. So
have we talked to
Organizations, Lifelink, and
victims are.
But is that possible?
Look like whatever
I'm sure Senator Charlie, and I
will say I I mentioned before
that we've been working with the
governor's office on this, the
governor's office considers this
bill to be part and parcel with
the Human Trafficking Act bills,
you know, we're also working on
this session and so it is
something that is being
considered. We're really trying
to get, you know, good eyes in
the rooms to be able to spot
these things once we spot them,
we turn them over to law
enforcement, we make sure that
we are notifying the proper
resources there. So the RLD, our
inspectors wouldn't be those
people.
But we will be the ones spotting
the, the, the, the evidence and
passing that along to people who
do have that expertise.
Thank you. Any other questions?
And
I'm a a dope. There's a motion
for a due pass from Senator
Silvio Lopez with the second
from.
Senator Hickey, and if you could
call the roll please.
Senator Black.
No, explained my vote.
boon.
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos.
In her novel.
Yes, the pain down.
Scott
Centerero Lopez.
Yes,
yes. Lopez.
Yes, and to explain your vote,
Senator Scott.
I'm sorry, Senator Black will go
first. Yes, you know, Madam
Chair, it, it would be nice if
we mixed it up a little bit just
because my name starts with a B
doesn't mean I have to go.
Uh
Uh
Changing my name or something.
So the
the reason I, there's two things
that uh I'm a little bit
concerned of um
One is
The exemption of the home.
That's, that's an issue to me.
The other is
Local law enforcement is already
Working some of this undercover
as well, and I know they
coordinate with with the state,
so.
Um, this was a really tough
vote.
really tough vote because it it
is a problem and I know Senator
Sail Lopez has got the human
trafficking bill.
Uh, as well, which I think
Um
It is a pretty good bill, so.
Uh, the home one just.
I can't get around treating
those guys differently because I
think they're going to be going
there and and you guys are gonna
have an issue.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Make most of the tools already
exist.
With respect to
Human trafficking.
just looks like
An additional barrier to entry.
And if you don't like your
massage, if you got a bad one.
Don't go back.
That easy.
Thank you on on a vote of 6 to
4, you have a recommendation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Thank you.
Uh, Senate Bill 146 will be
carried over for tomorrow?
Senator Procast that being
carried over for tomorrow.
By chance, the Senator Sanchez
here.
Or Senator Hamlin, I don't see
her.
I was hoping to have a
conversation about state bread.
That would have been a really
appropriate.
But we'll, we'll put that on for
tomorrow.
So with that, uh, we go on out
to new bills, House Bill 12.
Extreme risk firearm protection
order changes Representative
Garrett.
Please join us and
At a chair Chandler.
Welcome to the Senate Health and
Public Affairs.
Senator Bergman.
OK.
And Representative welcome.
Madam Chair, welcome.
Senator, welcome again.
Um, if you, if I know.
Um, you may have some other
expert witnesses who wish to
make a statement or answer
questions.
Um, you know, there's another
chair being brought up if you
wish.
Um, but we also have a
microphone if they wish to just.
The questions too.
It's kind of a compact place
right.
Representative Garrett, please.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Um, I'm going to just tell you
who the witnesses are, but, um,
for answering questions, uh, our
co-sponsors include
Uh
Representative Chandler,
Senator.
Uh, Bergman and Senator uh Katie
Duke, who couldn't be with us
here today.
And then sitting right here is
Sergeant Matt Tinney, the crisis
intervention unit with the
Albuquerque Police Department,
Lieutenant Janice Madrid, who
was on the Urbo task force, uh,
Deputy Chief Carolyn Wynn, who's
with the deputy chief of the New
Mexico State Police, and from
the Department of Justice, Laura
Sunderman, who trains law
enforcement in Urpo
implementation that I'll, I'll
briefly introduce our bill of
extreme risk firearm protection.
order changes, uh, responds to
the extreme risk firearm
protection Order Act that became
law in our state in 2020, and
I'll abbreviate it as Ubo from
now on.
The changes proposed in House
Bill 12 are a direct result.
Of law enforcement officers
implementing the URL Act in
several 100 instances around the
state. This has been um
implemented in at least 19 of
our 33 counties.
And this is over the last 5
years, they've identified needed
changes.
As the Department of Public
Safety notes the bill clarifies
that law enforcement officers
can file petitions for IPOs
based on credible information
gathered during their official
duties, removing the necessity
of relying solely on a reporting
party, and this change empowers
our officers to act more swiftly
to prevent potential harm and
high risk situations. This
aligns with what, 16 of the
other uh 20 jurisdictions
already have.
long. It also clarifies the
differences between the 1st and
2nd judicial district
interpretations. The second
judicial, um,
Court has always allowed
officers to file petitions.
The first, uh, did not, and so
there's been conflicts when
officers wanted to file them.
The DOJ and the AG previously
stated that they could, but this
will make it in statute instead
of open to 13 different judicial
district interpretations.
Also, the bill mandates the
immediate relinquishment of
firearms upon service of a
protection order replacing the
prior um 48 hour choice, which
in practice hasn't been used.
The default has been to do it
immediately. The change reduces
the risk of harm during the
interim period and ensures more
immediate protection of
individuals and the community.
As already in statute petitions
have to be supported by specific
sworn evidence of danger, and
within 10 days, a judge is
mandated to have a hearing with
the reporting party, law
enforcement and the person, the
respondent who's having the
petition delivered against them.
uh, and with that, I'll ask, uh,
one of my co-sponsors to add
anything to anything.
was that we stand for questions.
bet I'm sure if there's just one
quick thing I could add.
Um, the FIR does mention.
That there might be an increased
cost for training for these
situations, but there is already
extensive training happening.
And we have our experts here who
can answer those questions also.
Thank you very much.
Uh, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
House Bill 12?
I will ask for it looks like
there's only 5 hands going up,
so if you'd like to stand, um,
you can identify yourself.
and make your statement, and I
asked for at least a couple of
minutes for each person to make
your statement. Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Miranda Vascoli,
executive director of New
Mexicans to Prevent Gun
Violence. We have been pushing
for these amendments now for 3
years. They are extremely
important. They give law
enforcement another tool to get
guns out of unsafe hands, and I
really hope that we can make
that happen, not only to keep
our communities safer, but to
make it easier for law
enforcement. In addition to
that, I'm not
I'm gonna be honest, I'm losing
sleep over that 48 hours when we
passed this piece of legislation
3 years ago or 4, is it 4
whatever the time is that deeply
concerned me because what could
possibly happen in those 48
hours, and we saw it play out in
Farmington, where the domestic
abuser.
Took those 48 hours to shoot up
his ex-partner's house. Luckily
she wasn't home. It is extremely
important that we pass these two
simple amendments. I know it's
not the most exciting piece of
legislation out there, but I
think it's one of the most
important pieces of legislation
in terms of crime reduction that
we're seeing this session. Thank
you very much.
Now what that bewa Doctor Alexis
Jimenez Tatutakidi Pai Tachikaku
Rio Rancho.
Greetings. My name is Alexis
Jimenez. I am Skidi Pawnee. I
live in Rio Rancho.
I'm a volunteer with Moms Demand
Action.
Less than 2 years ago, a man in
my neighborhood shot and killed
his housemate. Only an hour
before police had been summoned
to the home on a domestic
violence call.
The housemate told police she
feared for her life and that
there were guns in the house.
The man told police he was going
to kill her if they didn't get
her out of the house and
acknowledged that there were
guns in the home.
The police left. An hour later
they were back, and the woman
had been murdered. Could the
changes in in the bill have
saved her life by making it
possible then for police to file
an extreme risk order and remove
guns from the home.
We'll never know for sure, but
almost certainly can save other
lives. We stand in support of HB
12 Nama ii.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee on Meredith
Machin speaking on behalf of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico and the American
Association of University Women,
and as we've heard, um, this
bill has been worked on for
several years now, and it's
because law enforcement felt so
helpless, um, that they weren't
able to use the law as it was
currently written that so much
work has gone into this.
the Attorney General's office to
law enforcement, to legislators
to advocates, experts, and so
on, and it's time, it's time to
listen.
Um, uh, for several years now,
um, we've been seeing uh people
uh killed and suicides,
homicides, and so on. So this is
a common sense bill we urge the
committee to support it and save
more lives. Thank you so much.
Thank you, sponsors.
And law enforcement.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Cindy
Benedict, and I also live in Rio
Rancho. Now, we've been seeing
increased incidents of shootings
and school lockdowns. I'm sure
Senator Block is aware of this,
because nowhere is safe from gun
violence. I decided to engage in
solutions and became active in
mom's demand action supporting
common sense laws, practices,
and legislators.
To decrease gun violence.
Legislators were wise.
Excuse me, when they enacted
URPO, and you will be equally
wise to listen to those who've
been working with it to improve
it.
It is natural for a family to
ask this question.
So I report my loved one.
That is, they are at risk and
there are guns.
And then I'll leave.
And he has firearms for 2 days.
Am I safe?
Are other people safe in that
period.
I was so grateful that Urpo
existed on December 18th when a
depressed and drunk gentleman,
terrorized his Rio Rancho
neighborhood by shooting
hundreds of rounds of ammunition
in the air to take out a street
light that was bothering him.
Bullets went everywhere.
Including at a police
helicopter.
And URO was issued in his
weapons were removed.
Luckily, he was in a hospital
during those two days.
Let's make this bill better by
supporting our public safety
officers and enacting common
sense improvements. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Janet Williams
with the National Organization
for Women and Moms Demand
Action, and I believe that this
bill will be strengthened by
these amendments and help law
enforcement have better tools to
work with. Please, please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition here in the room?
No
Um, I have two persons from Zoom
who are in favor.
Uh, Elaine.
I think it's Elaine Miller. Yes,
there you are.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
the committee. My name is Elaine
Miller, and I am a psychiatric
nurse. I support the change from
relinquishment within 48 hours
to immediate relinquishment on
surface of the order. New Mexico
law is an outlier in this regard
of the 19 states with Ubo laws,
only 4 do not require immediate
relinquishment. 3 require
relinquishment within 24 hours.
Only New Mexico allows 4.
8 hours. Updating the law may
encourage more petition requests
and thereby save more lives, I
ask that you support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. And then we have um
I think it's Doctor Lisa.
Christofferson
That's correct.
Yes, yes, that is correct.
Hi, hello. My name is Doctor
Lisa Christopherson, and I'm a
proud New Mexican public school
teacher. I had a former student
reach out to me after her ex,
um, had shown up to her work
with brandishing a gun in his
waistband, she had reached out
to the police several, several
times in Albuquerque. He had
shot up her home. She had left
the state for 3 weeks attempting
to hopefully cool things down
before she reached out to me. I
had in that
Uh, time span, um, made the
acquaintance of Teresa Garcia
and the Albuquerque domestic
violence sexual assault
committee and had grown and
learned information when my
former student called me to her
workplace because the young man
was back with a gun, um, I
happened to be on the phone with
these individuals from the
domestic violence commission,
and we learned that we could ask
for an UO had never heard of it
before. Unfortunately, um, it
took several, several
police
contacts, the city even uh
fortunately put some uh police
officers to go back and forth
for 48 hours. He had multiple
guns she knew about that were
unlicensed. He drove several
cars with false license plates,
fortunately, out of 1 out of the
8 police contacts had filed the
Earlpo. He was caught by the New
Mexico State Police on a DWI and
because that EO he was finally
put in jail. She had been in a
house. I urge you, please do not
put in a 48 hour waiting period,
the trauma that my former
student, who is now a thriving
uh CNM college student after
hiding for a year, please,
please, please do not add in a
48 hour waiting period. Thank
you.
Thank you. And then was there
anyone in opposition? No? OK. So
with that, we'll go to questions
or comments from committee
members. Senator Pinto, thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you, sponsors.
So I see on page 2 lines 6
through.
8
Is that uh our 78 that day, um,
they responded well.
Not be able to purchase,
receive, or attempt to purchase.
I receive any firearm while the
order is in effect.
So
This is gonna require some kind
of uh database or it's just this
gonna be some part of the
background check if they go in
to purchase.
Madam Chair and Senator, this,
that is that part of the
legislation is current law. So
we are not adjusting that in in
any way through our proposed
amendments, and Senate.
So madam chair uh sponsors. So
that already exists.
And if there is no, so I'm
understanding this is for one
year.
Um, yes, ma'am. Yes, madam Chair
and senator.
And then they will be taken off
the list, or will their history
still remained in that that they
received this uh protection
order.
Uh, Madam Chair and senators, am
I supposed to use this one?
It, it's automatically taken
off. The administrative Office
of courts, if it's granted, they
submit it that day into the
Knicks index.
And so that's a, a federal
index. So if you're going to
purchase a gun, you get stopped
there. And the moment that it's
expired, it's taken off the same
day.
Madam chairing uh members.
Someone poses a risk.
And then the history of it is
just gonna disappear.
I mean, what if this is a
multiple, they wait a year,
they're back on the list, come
back in another, do the same
thing, get off another year and
come back to it again another
year, um, so we're not going to
Just let it continue in this
cycle.
I mean, we're not gonna require
them to take any kind of
behavioral health.
Um, issue with it.
Or we just say they relinquish
their firearms and then they
just have to sit for a year
without any intervention.
Oh, I think it is done, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, the,
the statute itself does, I
believe, have a provision that
it can be reinstated. So before
the year is up, a month before
the year expires, if that, um,
threats is still pending or if
that threat is still there, the
law enforcement with this change
or the petitioners can ask that
that be extended, so you don't
have, you would have to keep
coming back to extend it, but
not keep coming back with a new
petition.
So Madam Chair and sponsors.
So they don't threaten the
people that petitioned this,
they don't come back and say,
well, we're still feel
threatened. Uh, they can just go
after your, go do this to
somebody else.
Basically, we're not requiring
to, uh, we take receipt of their
firearm, oh, OK, this is what we
impounded or what you guys call
it, was relinquished, um, after
the year is over, give it back
to them.
And then they can go ahead and
do it to somebody else.
And we don't know if it's the
same firearm they're using or
they go out and shoot somebody
else. There's no record, um, so
when we talked about repeat
offenders.
People who are out there in a
threat to society, and we're
just gonna, seems like we're
just letting this cycle go
around again for this particular
person, if we're just going to
expand the record after a year
and have no record of them being
someone that is um historically
have some kind of issue.
Um, that there's no.
Uh
intervention, I guess in some
sense that kind of bothers me,
especially if we're gonna say.
We're gonna take your firearms
because you are unsafe, but that
we're not gonna require you to
take 40 hours of firearm safety,
especially if it's not locked
up, especially if they're under
the influence of a substance at
the time by those that petition,
um.
It's, it just seems um like
we're just kind of slapping them
on the wrist and say, you know,
stand in the corridor for a
year. Don't look at anybody, and
we'll give everything back to
you and let you come back to the
classroom.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator.
This bill addresses the
specifics of how one can
retrieve firearms from a person
who at the time presents a
significant threat to themselves
or other.
that this law does not preclude
law enforcement from charging an
individual under some other
crime, potentially, if that
person has threatened or
otherwise violated the law
through certain conduct.
So
This law is fairly narrow. I
agree with you, Madam Chair and
senator, because it has to
addresses simply um how one
obtains firearms from someone
who has addressed. That does not
limit the ability of law
enforcement to seek other
redress as appropriate depending
on the circumstances of the
case, Madam Chair and senator.
The chair we're going to leave
that up to the judge or law
enforcement or who's actually
gonna have to stay on that as it
is well if there's an issue with
this particular person, Madam
Chair and senator, as with all
crimes, it starts with a police
officer or potentially a victim
if they bring charges, but
As with all crimes, it starts
with a police officer, Madam
Chair, and senator.
So Madam Chairs in the
committee, and one of the FIRs
did the New Mexico Department of
Justice, there was something
noted in there that this is a
willful seizure mechanism.
That it is something that the um
Whoever has the arms.
As to wilfully do that there's
not where you go in and actually
You know, searching easier and
stuff that, am I correct?
Madam, uh, Chair and senators,
that is correct. If for some
reason and knock on wood in our
jurisdiction, we have not had
this happen, but if someone was
still having the firearm and
they refuses to obtain it, we
would get a warrant off of this
law to then go in and get it.
But as when you are served, you
willfully turn over to the
firearms.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Um
So my assumption is to or I'm
not a lawyer. I knew that, uh.
That if the weapon is
discharged.
That will create other
consequences. This is not gonna
cover that goes to a different
level.
That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gallegos.
I'm sure, thank you,
Representatives, uh, just a
couple of questions, sort of
paying off of.
Pinto's questions that I don't
think were answered.
Um
We know that this bill
accomplishes its purposes.
Are they keeping stats or are
they keeping
I guess my thing is talking.
listened to her on some of the
behavioral health issues.
And some concerns.
How do we know your bill?
Accomplishes what it's asked to.
I chairing centers.
Representatives
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, as of right now,
there's no measure on
preventative measures, right?
It's hard to know whether or not
it's working or not. However,
documentation does show that
people are engaging with the
voluntary relinquishment once an
order is in place, and they are
seeking the means to get the
help that they do need, and
we're utilizing the courts to
better assist us to help
facilitate that.
Whatever mental health they
concerned that maybe they be in
crisis on, so documentation does
show that it is positive, and
it's a great preventative tool.
And
Madam Chair, and senators, um,
in Albuquerque, I think we've
had the most. We have a little
over 80. A lot of ours are
mainly related to behavioral
health crisis, and in those
ones, I mean, the individuals we
have.
Petition, have successfully, I
don't know if successful is the
right word, but they have not
completed suicide. We have
unfortunately had two
individuals that were on our
case load that did really well
for that year. We gave them a, a
year of hope, and, and
afterwards they did complete
suicide by firearm.
Thank you, madam chair.
And representatives of takes me
another question then, uh, a lot
of what we do here is try to
solve.
Albuquerque's problem.
Um, do you have any numbers
between
Metro and rural.
On how those lay.
I
sir.
I'll have a Lieutenant Madrid
answer that, but again, this has
been used in 19 of our 33
counties, including rural and
other areas.
In turn representative I heard
that.
I'm just trying to find out if
we're documenting.
A distinction between metro of
Turkish problems have not been
solved.
We've not done our crime bills
this year are watered down so
that we're not solving it.
If it's behavioral health, we
should be working on behavioral
health issues.
Not fire me.
They are two separate
categories, but I'm trying to
find out, I'm sure.
and representative are tracking
the difference between
Albuquerque only.
And the restless state.
Yes, sir, currently right now in
Mexico State Police Department
of Public Safety and the
Earthboat Task Force tracks
every earthbo that is filed, no
matter what judicial district it
is in, and it is taking place in
the rural communities and
Albuquerque. Last year we had uh
11, and this year we already
have 13.
And these are in rural
communities, but the majority of
earth poles are being filed in
Bernalillo County.
Thank you for that my turn
senator and representative my
last question then is, we see
state police here.
L R City and county officers.
Dealing with this and why are
they not here that this is good
for them.
I.
Madam Chair and senator,
actually they have appeared in
hearings, um, in support of this
piece of legislation and
amendments to ERO and have so to
name a few, um, the Donana
sheriff.
The police chief in Taos.
angel Fire, Farmington police
chief have spoken in support,
and I'm trying to think of
others, but it is not just the
city, the municipal chiefs that
have spoken up also sheriffs and
others. I think Aztec as well,
if I remember correctly on Madam
Chair and Senate.
I think the Madam Chair and
senator and represents, I guess
when they're on the payroll,
it's important.
It's a Sunday. It's not. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Nova.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senators, uh,
representatives for bringing the
bill forward.
I, uh, have a question in
regards to the FIR.
Specifically, um,
Noting that well the, I mean,
the amendment really increases
the autonomy of law enforcement.
Uh, my question is about the
clarity in terms of the single
whether a single officer can
serve as a petitioner and as the
reporting party, um, and just if
you can expand on procedural
consistency and the separation
of roles.
Um
Madam Chair and senator, yes,
um, the bill specifically
permits, um, a law enforcement
officer to be the petitioner, so
I guess one could say that the
roles are the same, um,
certainly they are supervised by
their their supervisors to
ensure that they're acting
appropriately, but um,
As, as has been noted, uh, the
things that they need to do are
provide evidence within the
position, and that's, that's the
check on, on the question of
whether or not they they might
act.
I don't know, without adequate
foundation, Madam Chair and
senator, and as you can see,
there's a number of things on
page 4 that the the um law
enforcement officer must
identify, which is not, um,
Madam Chair, and Senator
unusual. Law enforcement
officers are used to filing out
petitions, complaints, and so
on. They're trained to establish
facts and they're trained to
understand what credible
evidence is, Madam Chair and and
senator. So think of this, I
would think of it pretty much.
In the same way when one is
considering any sort of uh
facts-based situation where some
uh law enforcement officers
asked, asked to act. They are
trained to understand evidence
and rely on that and what.
I'm chairing senator.
And I'm sure, thank you, thank
you, Senator. Um, I would like
to add, um, and thank you for
the clarification. I would like
to add, I think it's important
to look at this also from the
lens of victims, right? Um, and
the
The importance of timing and
situations such as this. And I
think, and if I don't know, when
I shared this with you all, but
I had a cousin who had a
awful domestic violence
situation in Albuquerque.
And
Her partner had weapons. Um,
those 48 hours are excruciating,
and I think for the victims who
may not be in the room, I think
they are the best spokespeople
for this, um, and I believe that
law enforcement who has seen
this happen over and over again.
I think they are our most
trusted allies. So I appreciate
uh the bill and I appreciate you
bringing it forward. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senators
and representatives.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Representatives.
Um, are we tracking
The initiating crime, so I want
to differentiate a behavioral
health call in removing a
firearm from a home.
Specifically against a domestic
violence.
Do we have that data?
Sure, uh, Madam Chair and
senators, we do not, uh,
have data that shows the
difference. Most of these cases
with extreme risk fire
protection or they're not
associated with the crime. If
there is a crime associated with
a firearm, we would charge that
appropriate crime and go about
obtaining that that weapon as
evidence.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and expert
representatives and experts.
Um
I find that a little, I very
concerning actually. Um,
Madam Cha senators
representatives, and
specifically to our law
enforcement.
Um, who are here, how many hours
of domestic violence training
does your agency receive
annually.
Is it still 2 hours, Madam Chan
representatives, I believe that
the NAC codes is 2 hours,
correct.
Uh, Madam Chair and panel.
You know
For years we've advocated, um,
the 2 hours is not enough.
Many of the crimes.
And interventions around
removing firearms from a home.
Um
Have an intersection.
With intimate partner violence.
And domestic violence.
We also know that mass
shootings.
That individual more often than
not, has a history of domestic
violence. There's a correlation
that I think we should be and
need to be tracking around
those.
Um, and I say that from years of
advocacy.
But also having a daughter.
Who's in college now.
It was an intimate partner of
violent relationship.
He called the police
We asked them to intervene. We
asked them for a lethality
assessment because there were
guns in the home.
Nothing was done.
The young man was allowed to
leave.
And for all of the reasons that
I know, our daughter stayed in
that relationship. Thankfully,
we were able to get her out in
the weeks after.
That individual shot and killed
his two roommates.
Within weeks of those calls.
And so there's, there's too big
of a correlation between
domestic violence.
And
firearms in the home, and I, I
just, I have to emphasize that
we need that.
Especially around this issue,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Senator, thanks for bringing
that. I just want to mention
that is
The positive.
Repercussions of this work is
sergeant who works.
In the crisis intervention unit.
Now the Burley sheriff has a
crisis unit. Now the Rio Rancho
has a crisis unit. The state
police, you know, they have 40
and 80 hour crisis courses.
So you're really bringing up a
good point that is is directly
related to what we're doing
here. Thank you.
OK. Any other questions?
Senator Sio Lopez and then
Senator Block, and then Senator
Pinto, you're still on the list
for
questions.
Um, thank you for bringing this
bill. I think it's, it's very
important and um I know you're
gonna deal with this in
judiciary, probably, probably
already dealt with it in-house
judiciary, but I wanted to say
even under the moving target
that is the Supreme Court
jurisprudence on the 2nd
Amendment.
I think that this bill satisfies
the constitutional amendment
because of the tight connection
between the harm and, and the
action, and that's what you look
for in constitutional analysis
is basically that nexus and I
applaud this bill, um, good luck
in judiciary, um, and if you
need any help.
Um
But it is, it's, it's gotten so
hard to predict what the Supreme
Court will do.
But
Again, traditional jurisprudence
is there's a very tight nexus
between the arm and the and the
state action.
Thank you, ma'am. Madam
President, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Representatives and senators and
Law enforcement, uh, LG, let me
ask you a quick question.
Um, when you respond to a um
some type of crisis situation,
domestic violence or whatever it
may be.
Um, are you allowed to take the
weapons out of the house or
apartment currently.
What, what would, what, what
would allow you to take the
weapons.
Firearms out of the um
A residence right now.
So right now there'd have to be
imminent danger.
There'd have to be an imminent
danger transpiring, where there
is a firearm nexus, not all
calls that we respond to relate
to a firearm.
So it would be handled
differently.
Madam Chair, um, L, I wanna make
sure I understand that. I mean,
if you are shot at
It's a totally different ball
game.
Correct. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, serious. You're
going to defend yourself
situation ends and you're gonna
take whatever you're gonna go
into the residence and, and, and
take whatever you need to do,
right?
Madam Chair of the committee,
yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
El, tell me what imminent is to
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, imminent means.
Somebody's life is in danger at
that moment, that there's an
emergency situation transpiring
where there's a firearm, uh,
again, has to be a firearm
nexus, right?
What does that mean that next
foreign nexus.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we may go to a call
for service where there's an
inmate, an imminent danger where
there is
Maybe they're utilizing a bat.
Versus a firearm. This is a
firearm protection order Act and
ex parte order, or a firearm
nexus. The basis has to be
firearm related.
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I'm
gonna stick with you because
it's law enforcement that are
the ones going to be executing.
This.
So
If this becomes law,
Um, you will file, you shall
file a petition for an extreme
risk fire and protection were
upon receipt of.
Incredible information from a
reporting party.
Tell me what credible, what's
the definition or the threshold
for credible information.
Madam Chair, it has to, it has
to hold water. There has to be
weight. There has to be more
than just hearsay.
Um, we, there's a lot of
investigation that goes.
Into these types of
investigating of any type of
crime or civil issue. So
credible meaning it has to
there, there has to be some type
of persuasion that something did
occur versus something didn't
occur.
We have to have evidence.
Madam Chair, LT uh.
Give me some time, give me some
type of evidence, say myself and
Senator Boone, we're neighbors,
and we have a dispute.
he's wrong.
Um
And
And, uh, you know, we're arguing
about something.
And he, he threatens me.
He's like
I'm gonna kill you.
I call you.
And Madam Chair and LT I say,
hey,
There's, I've been threatened by
my neighbor. He said he's gonna
kill me. I know he has firearms.
come over, you take my
statement.
And then you talk to Senator
Boone, correct?
Correct, Madam Chair, members of
the committee we talked to all
parties involved.
And then, uh, Madam Chair, uh
LT, how, how do you, how do you
take that as a credible threat.
Well, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. There's a lot
that goes into it, right? Every,
every investigation is unique in
its in its own fashion, right?
Um, law enforcement has the
tools and the ability to look up
history between the two parties
involved, um, how many calls for
service in that area. We would
also not just speak to you and.
additional party that is the
crimes being alleged upon,
right? Because at this point, if
somebody threatened somebody's
life, um, that's, that's a
crime. Yeah, harass or threaten.
So we would look at it in a
different perspective.
versus somebody just calling to
Complained of
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thanks, LT so.
If I know he has firearms in his
house and he tells you.
I don't have any.
What, what happens then?
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Well, one, we have to
establish that an event did
transpire. Do we have enough
evidence to move forward.
If the person says they do not
have firearms, we cannot just go
into the home and do a search
for the firearms. We have to
then obtain as much information
as possible so we can petition
the courts, if it rises to that
degree.
So Madam Char LT, let's just say
it does rise to that degree,
like you, you know.
You believe me for some reason
that Senator Boone threatened my
life.
So you take that as credible.
He's lying about the amount of
weapons that he has. He says he
has none.
So, how do you, how does that
process work?
Uh, Madam Chair and senators,
when we presented one with my
detectives. We had an individual
very similar to this that we had
pro cause believe that he did
pose a threat with a firearm. We
petitioned it and it went in
front of a judge, and he advised
the judge that he no longer had
the guns, um, and there was no
way to prove one way or the
other, and we rely on the
judge's order and at that point
the judge ordered that it was
fine to stay where it was. So we
did not go in to do any kind of
search, um,
If it ever came to that point,
like a lieutenant was mentioning
and before we would have to
write a search warrant to to go
in and search for it, but we'd
have to have
Like photos, real sufficient
evidence to bring that in front
of a court for them to allow us
to go into a home.
OK. Thank you. I'm sure, thank
you, sir. So,
Let's just assume that.
He didn't really threaten me,
but I, I lied to you.
And you thought it was credible.
He's denied everything.
And he's also denied having
weapons, but you suspect there
is, and now you're going through
the courts. I mean, this happens
all the time with Maryland
enacted their red flag law,
there was over 700 false
accusations against gun owners
in Maryland.
And the reason I know that is
that we, um,
Looked at that in 2019 when the
red flag laws were being passed
here in the state house.
Uh, and now it looks like we're
lowering the threshold a little
bit here.
Uh, on that. So what happens,
Madam Chair, uh, LT, you find
out.
It was really a false.
False report. I know I'm held
accountable now, but
You know, let's just say
He, he does let you in the
house. He does have weapons, he
loses his weapons.
And he's trying to petition the
petition to get his weapons
back.
And he didn't do anything wrong.
He did nothing wrong. It was me
who was the problem because I
don't like them.
I like him in real life, he's a
good man.
But he did nothing wrong. I had
an ax to grind against him.
And now he's gone through all
this stuff of the police
entering his house, searching
his house, getting his guns.
And now
He's got a
He's on this list.
And he's got to basically
Um
It's got this
Temporary
Um, extreme risk fire protection
order.
What happens then?
Madam Chair and senator, the um
once the the the firearms are
relinquished, there is a ten-day
period in which.
person who was the object of the
relinquishment order, there will
be a hearing in that individual
may be able.
They're, you know, they're their
ability to retain the firearm.
So it's a very short period of
time when that individual can
say this is a personal vendetta,
you know, all those kinds of
things, and that's, that's why
we have that mandatory 10 day
hearing in place.
To allow the individual to
establish that that that they
are not a risk to themselves,
Madam Chair and senator. So
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. So now he has to
prove his innocence cause he's
automatically assumed guilty.
That's, that's what it is. You
took his firearms away, really
without
I mean, with a low threshold
here on a lie.
And now he doesn't have his
firearms.
He's got to go through this
process. He has to prove himself
that he's capable of retaining
his firearms.
And he's got to get the 2nd
Amendment right back because he
can't, he can't purchase a
firearm right now, he's on some
bad boy list.
So
What do we do about
That
Um, Madam Chair and senator, um,
first of all, this is not a
criminal proceeding, so question
of guilt.
It is simply um a civil
proceeding that upon which a law
an individual who feels
threatened or a law enforcement
officer may petition our bill
focused not on the entire
statute, not on the entire
process, but simply Madam Chair,
on whether we wish to amend the
statute to law to allow law
enforcement officers to petition
directly.
Um, and I think we're, we've
raised the bar, madam, um.
and Senator, because all of us
in this room have confidence in
our law enforcement, do we not?
So we're relying on law
enforcement to establish with
credible evidence that there is
a reasonable basis to from which
To ask that individual to
relinquish the fire.
Well, thank, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that. Well,
he is.
he is going through
The process to get a 2nd
Amendment rights back because
they're wrongly taken away.
And he has to convince a court
or some type of authority. Hey,
I'm wrongly accused. This is
wrong.
And now I'm going through this
for 10 days or whatever, or a
year even, um, on that, Madam
Chair, what type of costs are
there to the
Uh, responding. Are there any
costs at all that the respondent
has to do to get his, his or her
firearms back.
No.
No cost at all.
No, madam Chair.
A person may appear in court.
address the issue on their own,
Madam Chair and Senate.
Well, uh, Madam chair, panel, I,
I gotta tell you, um,
Sandoval County.
Uh, they're not here advocating
for it. They're, they're against
it, Rio Rancho's against it.
Um
I mean, they're, they're not.
They also didn't support the red
flag law in 2019 as well, and I
think this, Madam Chair, puts
officers in a very dangerous, a
very dangerous position. Um,
Because they're going into a
heated situation where someone's
gonna be a little bit even more
heated if you're gonna take away
their firearms.
So, um, I appreciate you
bringing the bill forward and um
look forward to hearing more
debate. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and Madam Chan representatives,
I just want to clarify, I meet
with Riar Rancho in Sandoval
Weekly. They are in support of
this bill. I work with their
police department. I was just
texting back there about a new
case that they're bringing
forward on an earth after the
tragedy they mentioned before,
they were struggling with the
wording and their city legal on
that, and since then that we sit
with them and file EFOs weekly
with them. Madam chair, sir, I
can tell you.
Rio Rancho does not favor this.
Unless, unless I'm wrong, I just
talked to the mayor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, for a second
time, Senator Pinto. Thank you,
Madam Chair and sponsors.
What about those that need to
carry firearms, that's if
they're officers or security.
Are you gonna allow them to keep
their
issued firearm from an entity.
Uh
Because if there is there an
appeal process in that sense
too.
Madam Chair, member of the
committees.
There are administrative
processes in place for law
enforcement officers with each
department. However, um, the
Attorney General's office and
the district attorney's office
has the ability to
Seek an earthful against the law
enforcement officer if they pose
a danger to themselves or
others.
Nobody is above the law. So
everybody, it's the bar is set.
Of this process goes through,
then the officer on duties not
gonna be able to go out on
patrol because you'd be sending
them out unarmed.
Um, cause I'm also speaking to
those that are in the military.
that has a
By your arms, especially if
they're part of some security
force.
In that sense, there's no
exemption for anybody or what is
there anything in this uh
process as far as.
Madam Chair, so your job's not
jeopardizing well, um, madam,
uh, chair and senator as as when
we were talking to Senator
Block, you know, the point is
there is a hearing, mandatory
hearing in place upon the
relinquishment of the firearms
within 10 days, of course, so
that would be the period of time
when that individual could
establish whether or not
The petition or the order was
justified, Madam Chair, um, and
senator.
Madam chair and um
sponsors, one to the other
issues that um was brought to me
was if.
The person
Continues to violate and the
firearms are taken.
was that the um
Law enforcement entities that
Confiscated the the arms that
they were.
Um
Also, in some sense, hindering.
The
The aspect of them getting them,
getting them back.
That there was a time period or
something that went through, um,
even when they um were seen as
not.
Um
Being in in
As far as harm that they had to
have their actual um
Officers or whoever was in
charge of the empty town we need
their firearms back cause they
got to go back to work.
In that sense, so.
Making that comment there. Thank
you, madam chair. That's it.
Thank you, Senator.
Any other questions?
another.
There was a motion for a due
pass from Senator Nava
with a second from Senator
Senvio Lopez.
And first I'd like to say thank
you for bringing this measure
forward. We had a good hearing
in courts corrections and
justice over the interim, and I
think it was very explanatory,
very straightforward.
About the need for the changes
that are proposed today, so
thank you.
We call the place.
In her luck. No.
in her boon.
and Charlie.
And ours.
And no, yes, and our pinto.
And her sco
And said of Lopez, yes, and
Hickey, yes, and I love this.
Yes.
The vote of 6 to 4, you have a
Du pass recommendation on the
judiciary.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
chair.
OK, um,
Moving on to Senate Bill 489
Behavioral Health for abused
children and Senator Lopez have
the floor.
I thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
I am here in front of you with
Senate Bill 489.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee what this bill is
attempting to do.
is to um
At a new section that outlines
that a child who's been
determined.
Um
Who, who's he's been determined
to have been abused, um, and who
are neglected and who was under
the jurisdiction of the
Children's Court and be
compelled to participate in
court-ordered behavioral health
services.
Um, Mr. Chair, this bill was
brought forward to me um by
Um, CYFD.
To try and address some of the
issues um around
Um, when there's a child who
again as it's as I just stated,
has an issue.
Um, mental health issue that um
The court if the child was sent
to the jurisdiction of the court
and then uh be ordered to go to
mandatory services to receive
services.
Um, and Mr. Chair, it's, it's a
simple proposal and I'll stand
for any questions.
Thank you. Do we have anyone in
the audience in support. Do we
have one online?
We have anyone in opposition.
anyone online.
I'm sorry.
Thank you.
Oh, either way, go ahead and put
them online.
And, and what is the name?
Jim Jackson, Jim Jackson, uh, we
don't know if you're in support
or opposition, but uh you have
the floor for
a minute, uh, maybe 2.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Jim Jackson
for disability rights in New
Mexico. Um, we do appreciate the
sponsor's interest in trying to
get mental health treatment to
children who need it, but um I
stand today respectfully in
opposition to Senate Bill 489.
Uh, as you may know, the current
law allows, uh, older children
to make their own decisions
around mental health treatment.
Um, and this bill would allow
the courts to override those
decisions, but only for
those children who are under
court supervision due to abuse
or neglect by others. So those
children would actually have
fewer rights than any other
children, and it's important to
remember that these are children
that haven't themselves
misbehaved or shown bad judgment
there in the situation due to
the behaviors of others. It's
our understanding that there are
some mechanisms that are already
available for compelling
treatment under the Children's
code, um,
Uh, so because this does
implicate the rights of uh
children about mental health
issues. We respectfully oppose
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, we'll go to committee.
OK
Senator Cedillo.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, um
I'm trying to figure out how to
fix the bill because it's um
He says a child 14 years of age
or older is presumed to have
capacity to consent.
The treatment
What you want, you want the
child to have autonomy to to
consent to treatment.
Or to reject treatment. And then
The amendment says a child who's
been adjudicated.
Would would it be a friendly
amendment to say a child who is
under?
Age 14,
Who has been adjudicated or
abused?
Because in that case,
If you're under 14, your
guardian.
And consent for you.
You know, that, and so what I'm
thinking is, it's the parents
patria, right? It's the state
who has
Found
That this child has abused or
neglected and and believes.
Because it it it that it would
be in his best in the child's
best interest to get.
Therapy
Uh, would that be a friendly
amendment? I, I'm just thinking
out loud. I'm sorry. But would
that be a friendly amendment to
add a child who is under the age
of 14.
who has been adjudicated, has
abused and neglected.
And, and I think that that um is
also
It's consistent with the first
part, but it's also consistent
with what parents are able to do
for their children, which is to
make decisions about their
treatment.
But here you have the court
stepping into the parental role
because of the abuse and
neglect.
Um, so I just ask, Mr. Chair, if
that's a friendly amendment.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair and
Senator, I appreciate what
you're consideration proposal
is, but what we're trying to do
with this particular measures
for those children who are over
the age of 14.
Um, specifically because there
have been some issues that have
come up.
And a child who is 14 years or
older does have currently can
refuse or accept.
Um, the offer of treatment.
But what we are trying to do
here is to make sure that, of
course, through a hearing, it
has to still go through the
court.
To make sure that the judge can
then order that this child.
It has to go through treatment.
Um,
And it's a process, Mr. Chair,
Senator, that is not used very
often in the system, but this is
actually stating um what we're
trying to do here is a little
little bit more clear where the
child who again, who is 14 or
over may say I don't want to do
it. I don't wanna go. Then
again, the court then it has the
opportunity to through a
hearing, of course, Mister
Chair, uh, to order that that
child receive treatment.
OK, mister uh mister um
Then I think that the amendment
has to be in the first part.
Um, except as provided in
Section D.
A child 14 years older, of age
or older is presumed to have
capacity to consent to
treatment.
Um
I'm just trying to make the
bill.
Hang together
Because it's got two provisions
that
The conflict.
In my mind, they conflict. You
presume they're their ability to
to consent or to decline, and
then you're saying, well, they
can't decline if the judge
unless the judge says so.
So
So it would just be clear for me
if it says
Somewhere except his provided.
In subsection D below.
A child 14 years older, cause I
don't want to get rid of that
section. I think that's
important.
But I, but in understanding what
you're, what you're attempting
to do, I think that would make
it.
Clear.
Um
Mr. Chair Senator, I think I
know where you're going with
this, um, but
frankly, I just like the way
it's written.
Just to be honest, so if you
wish to propose, that's fine,
but.
I know if this moves on to
judiciary, that's gonna be some
more tweaking anyway.
Just, just, we know how um
And to give them something to
do. I'm sorry, just to give them
something to do.
Yeah, I know. And anyway, just,
that's just a joke, you're not
hearing me, it's just a joke,
um.
It just bothers my sense of
Um
I don't, it, it that that
conflict uh bothers me. I
understand what you're trying to
do.
Um, is there any data that shows
that children who are ordered um
into services.
Whether they want them or not.
Benefit
Mr. Chair, I don't have anything
with me at this point.
My, um, I know CYFD is not
present with me today.
But I, I'm assuming that in an
assumption because I don't have
the data in front. Is that the
reason why this bill is brought
forward is there are cases
currently in existence within
our state.
Um, that.
This has become maybe not a
problem, but it's an issue that
has risen to the importance of
how um
We really need to make sure that
if a child does need some.
Uh, some guidance, counseling,
whatever it may be that the
court that must become involved.
Um, and, and I could go into
more Mr. Chair, where I know
even currently at the youth
services center, there's a lot
of issues of what's going on at
that point.
This may be just another tool in
the toolbox for our courses to
utilize so that these children
can get the care and help that
they need.
Who is under the jurisdiction of
the Children's Court may.
He requires, so that would be up
to the court.
Mr. Terry, yes, it's not saying
it shall. It is still leading up
to the courts, but at least
Mister Chair, the courts will be
involved.
In this
Determination
OK, uh, Mr. Chair, I, um,
understand what, what you're
trying to do. I'm gonna support
it at this point, um, but I, I
do.
think that you're gonna have to
deal with that.
Conflict in the law of
In judiciary or.
Or somewhere, but it does just
um
Yeah, I just feel it's a
conflict, but I, um, I'll
support what you're trying to
do.
Thank you, Senators.
De Lopez.
Yeah sure it's a good place to
go. I think I have emotion on
the table unless someone else
wants to speak.
Oh, I'm sorry.
And, thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
thank you, Madam Chair. real
quick on the underlying piece
here on page 2.
The, the part you just read.
may be required to participate
in court-ordered behavioral
health services or treatment.
What, what is, what is treatment
exactly? Is it some type of
medical procedure or what is it?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator,
behavioral health services or
treatment.
Um, treatment could be, um,
Medicine, it could be some type
of process, whatever the mental
health.
Provider determines with work
and best help that child.
So, um, I'm not a
Uh a fighter of that type of
mental health service, so, um,
in, in conversations, Mr. Chair,
um, you know, it
Services and treatment is
Uh services provided by mental
health provider, it could be um
the treatment where they go on
a, on monthly um
Um, appointment to see this
particular person, there's,
there's just different types of
treatments that we can receive
uh for mental health services.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chair,
would it be?
Could it be surgeries? Um, I
don't know if that would be, um,
normally it deals what I have
been told, of course, is dealing
with um uh some drugs that that,
that would help.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I know that there
have been some
Um, medicines that have been,
um,
tried to be administered at the
youth services center for some
of these um
children over the age of 14.
And uh it actually may have been
even some of the medication that
have been given to them before
they entered the facility, but
once they're in the facility,
they don't want to take it
anymore.
Uh, so this is trying to
address, um, Mr. Cha, some of
those concerns that are raised
again for
For the safety of that child
too.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other?
We have a motion
Senator Pinto.
And a second.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All the old
block.
No.
And Charlie,
no, and exclaimed my vote.
Sen
And another one.
Yes.
Pinto.
And hers.
Center City of Lopez, yes.
The hickey.
And our lovers
Yes.
The vote is 5 to 5, so the uh
bill does not move on.
Thank you.
S
It.
Um
Mr. Tur and Madam Senator, thank
you for bringing this forward.
Um, the
Analysis, so it's all the the
whole thing just kind of
outlies.
Outlines, um,
How court-order treatment may
impact outcomes, um, and all of
the concerns from the family
representation and advocacy.
And then having um
The department not here or youth
not here to talk about their
experience formerly in system
impacted youth, um, it's hard
for me to
report. Thank you.
Thank you if I may also say Mr.
Chair, this was a discussion
that we had in the Children's
code task force over the last 2
years.
And it's a strong, a big concern
and
Um, it's just how we work with
our children and making sure
that they have services that
will help them.
So I appreciate the dialogue
here, but um I know this will
still come up, um, again and
again. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hey
Moving on to Senate Bill 511
audit audit act changes Senator
Thompson.
Senator.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
it's great to go ahead and be
here before you uh uh Sunday
afternoon as we all move forward
with so many different pieces of
legislation, uh, Adam Chair,
members of the committee, Senate
Bill 11 amends the auto act to
restructure audit requirements
for state agencies and small
local public bodies.
Some of the key provisions
include expanding the definition
of agency to include additional
entities such as organizations
supporting uh public
postsecondary institutions such
as foundations. It also
Replaces the current tiered
system of agreed upon procedures
for entities that do not require
a full financial audit, such as
small local public bodies also
establishes a requirement for a
statewide federal single audit
beginning in fiscal year 28 and
then it updates terminology and
modifying provisions related to
the audit fund, uh, madam chair
members of the committee with me
today is the state auditor and
others, and I would ask them
that the uh
introduce themselves and then
make a statement if it's allowed
by the chair.
Welcome.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
I'm Joseph Maestas, uh, state
auditor. I wanna just recognize
my team to my left is my deputy
auditor, Mr. Ricky Bejarano. We
also have Mr. David Pena.
Policy director.
And then, as many of you know,
we're helping small local public
bodies become compliant.
Thanks to your appropriations,
our program manager for our
small local public bodies is a
Mr. Manuel Luna.
There he is.
So, Madam Chair, this, this, um,
legislation has been a long time
coming. Um,
Uh, on, on the first part
regarding small local public
bodies we're talking about
bodies that have
Under a half a million dollars
in revenue.
This tiered system was
established, I think during the
Hector Valderas, um,
administration when he was state
auditor.
But what we're finding is these
tears that they're subjected to,
um, requires some reforms, so
we've consolidated the tiers.
to reflect
Reality and our experience in
terms of.
For most of the small local
public bodies fall in terms of
their revenues that kind of
determines in part.
Their tier designation and
These tears require what's
called agreed upon procedures.
It's, it's a less rigorous
financial compliance short of an
audit.
But we feel this part will
provide relief.
to small local public bodies.
Um, many of them are under
resourced. They don't have the
funds to hire um accounting
firms to do their audits many
times there's no one willing to
go out there and and perform the
audit, so.
That's the first part is
reforming the tears that small
local public bodies.
are subjected to
The second part is to really
have New Mexico join the rest of
the country in terms of uh how
we consolidate.
Federal financial information,
um, particularly by state
agencies.
There's two elements of an
audit, kind of the financial
statement on it and then the
second element.
It is called a federal single
audit.
Now
What we're proposing in this
bill is to stop being the only
country that doesn't have a
consolidation of all the federal
single audits.
Of any public entity in New
Mexico that receives more than
$750,000. That threshold is
going to go up.
So, um,
We commissioned a study by UNM
Bureau of Business and Economic
Research.
And uh so we're taking a very
methodical approach.
To making these changes in the
industry.
Uh, we're dealing with a major
contraction in the industry in
the form of fewer and fewer
public accounting firms, but yet
the workload remains.
And so we feel that the state
would
I think be better received by
the feds.
If they could see how their
money spent in one document.
And that document would be
called a statewide federal
single audit.
It would remove
The federal portion of that
audit in state agencies and
consolidated by program.
across the state.
What would be the advantages,
the advantages would be that
Agency audits would be done
quicker because they will no
longer have the federal single
audit. It'll be consolidated
statewide.
By program.
So, Madam Chair, I mean, it's,
it's all in your
In the fiscal impact report, but
we feel that this is badly
needed reform.
And we realized that it could be
a shock to to an industry that
really hasn't changed very much.
It's very parochial, very
antiquated, and so we're asking
that this changed.
To, um, incorporate a federal
statewide single audit that
wouldn't take effect until
fiscal year 28.
We are prepared. We have an
appropriation pending to hire
UNM Bureau of Business and
Economic Research a second time.
To actually study the
transition.
What will be the impacts?
How can we get there by fiscal
year 28.
Um, to have a consolidated.
Um, federal single audit across
the state by program, and I want
to end by saying that we have
about 133 state agencies.
Only about 50 would be impacted.
So it's not like the impacts are
going to be felt.
across all state agencies.
So with that, Madam Chair, uh, I
want to invite my deputy if you
have any, anything that I left
out, any remarks?
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
were available for questions.
Thank you very much.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
Senate Bill 511 in the audience.
Is there anyone in opposition?
The Senate Bill 511
If you'd like to come forward
and then uh please.
Introduce yourself.
A couple of minutes for your
statements.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Daniel Trujil. I serve
as the vice chair of the Public
Accountancy Board and is a
member elect of the Auditing
Standards Board. However, today,
I speak before you in my
capacity as a New Mexico state
government auditor. I
respectfully oppose Senate Bill
511 because it threatens
financial accountability and
transparency in our local
communities.
By eliminating the requirement
for all governmental entities to
undergo an annual audit or a
test engagement. This bill will,
whether intentionally or not,
open the door to fraud, waste,
and abuse across our great
state. The communities you
represent will become vulnerable
to financial mismanagement and
misappropriation of funds. The
policy change of this magnitude
must not proceed without a
thorough dialogue, careful
analysis of its consequences and
unwa.
offering commitment to fiscal
oversight. I strongly urge this
committee to vote no to Senate
Bill 511 and instead advocate
for a more transparent,
responsible and inclusive
approach to financial governance
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Chris Garner. I'm
a CPA. I've audited in 5
different states.
And
All 5 of those states,
municipalities, counties, small
agencies have always had their
own separate single audit, so
I'm not sure.
What we're talking about when
we're saying one single audit.
when we take one single audit
across the state, there's going
to be organizations that might
be immaterial to the overall.
State and those.
Entities will probably not have
their transactions tested to the
degree that they would
currently. So I feel that there
would be, as Daniel mentioned, a
lot of opportunities for fraud,
waste, and abuse by not looking
at all these organizations
thoroughly. I feel that you
should not support this, um,
this particular legislation and
that it would be harmful to the
government throughout the state
of New Mexico.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, um,
senators. My name is Scott
Eliasson. I'm a partner with
Home Accounting Group, and I've
been in uh public accounting
quite a long time, um, when my
first single audits was actually
the audit of the um AFDC program
at Human Services Department
back in the mid-nineties, which
became Tanna. Um, what I'm here
to talk about today is, is just
specifically related to the, the
statewide um.
Federal single audit. So it is
true that there would be less
programs audited. Right now
there is about 50 state agencies
like the state auditor mentioned
that have federal single eyes.
If you do a statewide audit, um,
that number would be reduced to
somewhere between 6 and 10, a
single audits, um.
In that threshold, if you looked
at the 2023 statewide CAF or
that threshold would be about
$38 million
might be a little bit less,
might be a little bit more
depending on the federal
revenues by the time you get out
to the year, um, for which the
statewide audit that they've
been talking about. So what does
that mean? That means a whole
lot of
Um, audits would not be federal
audits would not be audited or
federal programs would not be
audited.
The Medicaid program is a
high-risk program.
billions of dollars, that would
always be audited.
Um, but if we just looked at HSD
by itself, HSD by itself had
about $8.5 billion of federal
programs in 2023. And so, you
know, the TAA program and
Medicaid take up a big portion
of that, they would probably be
for sure two of those programs
that be in there. Um, my concern
more is those lower programs, so
for example, um, the foster care
program at CYFD. That was $34
million. That would
fall under that number. Um, the
foster the uh adoptions program
was $29 million and I know CYFD
is important to everybody here
at the table. They would.
most likely not be picked up in
the statewide audit because
their federal program is not
large enough. So that's, that's
really my concern, not only as a
CPA but also as a as a taxpayer,
I want those those programs to
be audited, the federal programs
be audited. I want those
compliance areas looked at every
year are, are the agencies in
compliance. Currently, the state
does not have a statewide
internal audit department, um,
and, and I'm just worried about
those compliance.
experiments that would not be
looked at in these large federal
programs. That's what I wanted
to talk about. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
senators, um, auditor Maestus
and respectfully, um, in
opposition to this, and uh
deputy auditor Bejeano, have
great respect, just, um, there
are a lot of problems with this
bill.
Um, I have 27 years and
government auditing here in the
state of New Mexico. I have a
woman owned small business, Jag
or how to accounting group, um,
I've also served on your side of
the table for 14 years as
elected official in various
capacities, so I know the impact
that this will have. And today,
Um
Beyond just saying that this
would be have a devastating
impact to New Mexico local
firms, um, I think that there
just isn't quite enough
information presented to make a
decision today. So for example,
the impact reports um to me
seem not to present the true
impacts. For example, how many
private sector jobs would be
moving over to government jobs.
How many federal audits will be
no more, like CYFDs and others
because of the type A threshold.
How many other agency audit
audits would be no more.
Um
US IPAs are really the training
grounds, um, for.
Some of the best leaders, um, in
government accounting is if you
remove jobs away from the New
Mexico CPA firms, um, and push
them into government, they're
not gonna have that valuable
deep and um awesome training
that we provide to the
government accounting workers.
Um,
We also are independent of
politics, and so, taking audits
away from the smaller firms or
just not having the audits at
all. Um, I think lends it very
dangerous landscape for politics
to be involved.
Um, you heard earlier, a lot of
arguments, um, for transparency,
accountability, cost management
and increased oversight on the
other bills. And so I think what
you are doing if you were to
vote for this to pass today
would be in direct opposition
running the opposite way of
accountability and transparency.
Because there will be so many
less audits, um, and I do have a
question as well as to the legal
part of um designating
foundations as agencies or local
political subdivisions of the
state when they are nonprofits.
So while I agree that they
should be audited as a component
unit and be included in the
audits. I don't know that it's
legal to designate them as a
Political subdivision of the
state.
Um
There are many alternatives if
you're interested to this plan,
um, a lot of us were surprised
by this bill and didn't have the
chance to give those
alternatives, um, but one of
them would be allowing the local
New Mexico CPA firms to do the
federal audits by March 31st, so
instead of um moving it over
into government, um.
Just allowing us to be able to
continue to do those audits. We
also don't have information
right now as to the amount of
money that the auditor is
requesting to be put into the
stove, um, audit fund. So I just
think there's a lot of
information missing and um
That we don't have enough right
now today to make that decision.
Thank you.
Ma'am, if I could ask you to
identify yourself.
Yeah
Your name, please?
Audrey had a meal.
OK.
Thank you.
All right. Is there anyone else
online, either in favor or in
opposition?
No one else on Zoom.
Right, we'll go to questions or
comments from committee members.
Are there any questions, any
questions?
No question.
What is the will of the
committee?
That said.
Thank you, Madam Chair, this is
a question, I guess, what
exactly is the problem that
we're trying to solve with this
piece of legislation.
Up, Madam Chair, um, Senator, uh
Lopez.
Uh, every year the state has to
compile what's called an annual
comprehensive financial report.
It's a consolidation of all
financial statements of all
public entities that.
That are subjected to submitting
to this.
This a, that's the acronym for
it, but
The state has been chronically
late, um, about half the states
in the country.
Uh complete their um annual
comprehensive financial report.
On time, which is 6 months after
the end of the fiscal year.
New Mexico is chronically
completing its act.
9 to 10 months after the end of
the fiscal year. So this is
directly addressing the
timeliness.
And completion of the annual
comprehensive Financial report.
So by taking out the federal
single audit portion of those
public entities audits.
Consolidating it into a
statewide audit would make it
easier.
To develop the aquifer, not just
the, the a, but it would make it
easier to complete the
individual agency budgets since
it won't have that federal
portion of their annual audit.
So it's
It's, it's improving the
timeliness of the a it's.
Improving the timeliness of the
audits of state agencies.
Uh, and that's all good, as you
know, our state is probably #1
or #2 in terms of federal funds
per capita.
And we even feel that there
could be a possibility that the
state could realize a better
bonding uh terms and lower
rates.
With a statewide federal single
audit.
In terms of
Uh, dialogue, the industry
really doesn't have a robust
forum, uh, to talk about these
issues, the society's board, I,
I don't think it has any kind of
policy instrument that guides
its legislative agenda, so
Uh, I've taken it upon myself as
state auditor to be a leader in
reforming this industry. So
It's not like we're deciding we
want to do this willy-nilly, um,
and we just
We just had Bureau of Business
and Economic Research to a very
robust study, and this is one of
the recommendations.
That came out of it.
In terms of
This idea that this is gonna
create additional fraud waste
and abuse.
To me is disingenuous.
Um
We, uh,
These independent public
accounting firms that they're,
we just experienced two smaller
firms being acquired by two
larger ones.
So,
Only the strong survive. Well,
that's the case in the public
accounting industry. There are
very few firms that now do
agreed upon uh procedures. How
many Ricky do we have?
Pre-approved independent public
accounting firms that only do
AUPs.
About 66 out of about 46.
So the industry is, is
contracting.
Um
This is, this is a uh an
argument to maintain the status
quo even though many of these
firms have more clients.
Then they know what to do with.
Why do I say that?
More and more audits are coming
in late or intervening in
disputes between the public
entity and the accounting firms.
Um
Allegation by the public entity
is the firm is making their
their audit late.
The firm is saying
No, they're not giving us the
information that we require on
time and so
We're seeing the industry, it's,
it's busting at the seams and uh
and by the way, we're one of the
few states that audits every
single entity every year.
Every year.
States like Nevada don't even do
annual audits.
They only do performance audits
on a select basis, so.
Trust me, uh, the way New Mexico
stacks up nationwide.
It's pretty good in terms of
accountability.
And in terms of investigating
fraud, waste, and abuse, you all
know my office.
Handel's intake of anonymous
allegations of fraud, waste, and
abuse.
So that function is not going to
go away.
So I hope that answered your
question, uh, Madam Chair, um,
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, cause
that's the first thing I always
ask myself when I uh contemplate
legislation. What is it that
we're, what benefit are we
trying to, to give or what
problem are we trying to solve?
And of course, this isn't my
area, so I had some trouble.
Trying to figure out exactly
what the problem is we're trying
to, to solve and you're trying
to improve timeliness, um, to
support, um,
The entities that have problems.
And what is the purpose of on
page 3.
Uh, uh, line 7, any organization
subject to the requirements of
Section 65A1 that supports a
public post-secondary
educational institutions. Those
are
Um
Those are foundations?
That's correct.
So, Madam Chair, that would be
um
They would be subject to an
audit by the state.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
It's really, it's already
established that university
foundations are considered
component units.
Of the primary government, which
is the university.
And our audit rule requires that
the auditor that does the audit
of the, the primary entity or
government has to audit the
component unit.
But we're putting it in the
audit act.
emphasis because we have a lot
of foundations out there that,
that think that they're not a
component unit.
And, and that should not be
audited along with with the
primary uh government or public
entity, which is the university
in this case.
That, uh, man, I'm sure that's
really interesting because I
remember when the UNM Foundation
separated itself from, from UNM.
I didn't really understand why.
Um, could this have been one of
the reasons why, or were there
other reasons, do you think?
take that.
Because there was a formal
separation.
Madam chair, uh, Senator C
Lopez.
Um
I wasn't around at that time or
engaged with them. However,
There's this misconceived notion
on the part of foundations that
they aren't completely separate
because they're 501c3s and that
they don't qualify as component
units.
The standards are very clear
that they are.
And that they need to be
audited.
as the uh
entity.
So I'm sorry
if I may.
Uh, this is to make a certain,
make it clarify that.
They are subject to audit. We've
had a couple of universities
push back or a university
foundations.
Um, they're even pushing back
against their.
Mothership against the
university itself.
And those resulted in
disclaimers, which is, which
doesn't help.
is of no use to anyone.
So I see that, Madam Chair, I,
cause I did think it was just
odd that all of a sudden the
foundation separated itself from
the university, even though the
staff was exactly the same that,
you know, it just seemed strange
to me and I didn't understand it
and this would just clarify,
they get audited.
Um
And then, what's the difference
between
generally accepted auditing
standards and generally accepted
government auditing standards.
What is the difference in, in
the standards there?
Madam Chair, Senator Seria
Lopez.
The difference is that the
Uh, general except auditing
standards are issued as what we
refer to as the yellow book.
Issued by the federal
government.
And they raised the threshold
for for audiences specific to
federal funding.
Uh we've, we consider ourselves
a yellow book state.
So it
Essentially addresses all the
internal controls that have to
be in place and audited for.
And uh generally accepted.
Uh, auditing standards are
issued by ASCPA.
We follow both.
Excellent. And so it would
The generals of learning
standards. So this just
clarifies.
That you follow both.
It is how I interpret that
provision.
OK.
Um, yeah, I remember getting a
federally
Because we received federal
funds at in Lasa Communitario,
and I remember getting a, a
federally qualified audit.
And because we didn't stamp aid
on our receipts, which was our
policy to do it, but we didn't
do it. We had a finding. I mean
it wasn't a big, a big deal, but
I remember um
That the first time we got a
federal audit, it just had a
higher level of detail in terms
of what they, you know, batching
our procedures with what we,
what they did.
I am
Madam Chair, I trust the auditor
to uh to know um what he needs
and I
From what I can tell, this will,
um,
will be a good thing. It, it
does give me a little bit of, of
pus.
That um
I mean, I really didn't
understand the hostility to it.
Um, I, I really didn't
understand the source of that
hostility to it, but I, I mean,
I think that we
Elected the state auditor, Madam
Chair, and, um,
And this, this seems.
And it seems to be helpful.
And, and address
The timeliness problems that,
that he had, that were
identified. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Any other questions, Senator
Finto?
Madam chair on the FIR is that
the um
Auditors can be the one who
selects an agency or local.
Independent
And that's gonna be in charge of
the contract.
This
is true.
I think that Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Pinto.
I, I believe state law already.
Uh, authorizes me to select an
auditing firm to audit a public
entity.
Under certain conditions.
And I think this clarifies it,
right? If they can't find a
firm.
Within 60 days, um, then I have
the authority to select an
accounting firm.
So in general, but you approve
who they
Work with.
Absolutely, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Pinto, uh, every year my
office reviews and vets
independent public accounting
firms to ensure that they, they
have the necessary training and
that they're qualified to do the
audits that they're requesting
to audit.
And, and so if we're a
regulator, we regulate the
independent public accounting
firms.
Uh, I authorize them.
to go out after we approved
them.
To contract the public entities
all across the state.
So they, they subsist off the
authority that I grant them.
So you're the licensing body and
inspector, what do you?
No, we just
We, we manage them. We want to
make sure that if they're gonna
represent my office.
And go audit a public entity,
they have to be qualified and
meet all the.
The necessary educational
requirements.
Um, before they go and sign
contracts with public entities.
We approve those contracts every
single audit contract.
Of a public entity has to go
through my office.
And no, no more questions,
madam.
Oh, thank you.
Senator
There's a most encouraging
passed from Senator Hickey.
2nd from Senator Fiel Lopez. Any
other discussions?
You know, you could call the
role, I mean, call for the vote.
And.
No! exclaimed my vote and.
Charlie.
And very.
than another.
Yes.
Pinto.
No.
Senator Scott
Center of Lopez.
Yes, I know hicky. Yes.
entirely.
And I Lopez.
No.
I, um, uh.
83, you're bill did not pass.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
we appreciate your time. Thank
you.
We'll move on to Senate Bill
247.
And I know Senator Ramos is not
here with us today. The Senator
Gallegos is gonna step in.
For Senator Ramos.
And I know Representative now
you were here, but
By tradition, you have to have a
senator present a Senate bill
just as in the house, it would
have to be a
For the first presentation, a
House member to present, so.
Welcome to the Senate, Senator
Gallegos, and he would.
The introduction for Senate
bill.
247.
publication of certain
educational.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
it's an honor to be before you
today. Um, this bill is
establishing deadlines for
publication of testing of
students, it establishes a
deadline for September 1st and
put some parameters around what
would be uh reported because
right now, what we have is the
student performance data is
inconsistent sometimes. It's
come out as early as June and
sometimes as late as December.
And so that limits our ability
as lawmakers to make informed
policy and budget decisions.
And that's, we need to be able
to best serve our students. So
we're asking for consistency,
and we went with the date in
which the data is always
available and I do have an
expert witness here, Amanda
Aragon. I don't know if you want
to add anything, Senator.
Representative Doo, I was asking
Senator Gallegos to first do the
introduction of the bill. I'm
sorry. That's why I was saying
I, I appreciate you being here,
but there's still a procedure
that we follow in the Senate.
Thank, thank you, I know you've
already introduced the Senators,
if you could say a few words
too.
Well, thank you, Maitarian
senators.
I am sitting for center Ramos,
and we do want to present Senate
Bill 247, uh, it does amend
public Schools Act, and I will
refer to our expert witness.
Thank you, Ma.
No, I appreciate it. Thank you.
It's just a procedure that we do
follow.
And if the expert witness would
like to say a few words, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm a
made out of one. I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
Kids can, and I'm just here if
you have questions.
OK, thank you. Is that all,
Senator, for your presentation?
And turned, uh, we have a
substitute.
Uh, do we wanna enter that now
or?
How would you like us to handle
it?
Um
again, he goes, we were unaware
that you have a committee
substitute.
So if there's a committee
substitute.
I'm sorry.
Oh,
if we can hear the bill, she'll
push the community, the
substitute to the next
committee.
OK, um,
Where does this go go to next?
Yeah, without and the procedure
here is Senator Ramos needs to
be here.
If you have a committee
substitute that needs to be
presented as Senator Gallego's.
We have a 24 hour rule.
For a committee substitute to be
presented, but we usually don't
do, I mean,
I think we just need to have
Senator Ramos here.
What I'll do is I'll make sure
that the bill is on for
tomorrow.
That Senator Ramos can present
the bill, but if you have a
substitute.
That was already need to be for
back committee substitute.
Um, I don't know, have we
received anything at this?
OK.
So
I would feel more comfortable
for us to do that if Senator
Ramos because I, I don't.
I don't, we just want to state
that the subject being given to
analysts.
Uh, quite a while back.
Oh February, February 18th.
It was mailed out.
Email
OK.
Let me just go ahead and do
this. Let's have Senator Ramos
tomorrow's our next day.
So, let me just put this over
for tomorrow.
And they will wait for Senator
Ramos to present it.
If there was to be a committee
substitute that needs to be
given to our secretary by the
time we leave today.
So that we could have something
to evaluate and also for um are
you all for, you know, the
minority um person.
analysts to be able to review
also.
So that way at least we could,
if there's an amendment.
But it has to be a Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee
substitute.
Yes.
I
All right, there's some
confusion.
If we have one or if we don't.
So
OK.
Let's just hold, and we'll wait
until tomorrow. There's some
confusion about where we have,
what we don't.
So, we'll just put this on, it
goes on a carryover for
tomorrow.
Because I need to make sure that
my committee secretary is
keeping track of the paperwork.
I have to clarify, do you have
the sub or do you need it?
Yes,
if they can you have it.
I
Let's just wait until tomorrow
when Senator Ramos is here.
Um, just so we can make sure
that we're all
Connected together with what we
have. So I apologize, do we need
to resend it or you're
apparently it's some here
let's find it.
We'll find it and then tomorrow
we'll just, it's on the
carryover so it'll be heard um
before the other bills that will
be on the list. Thank, thank
you, Madam Chair. I apologize,
but I just need to make sure we
keep it all.
Making sure my secretary has the
correct information.
Thank you.
So for that carryover.
Senatoredil Lopez.
Senator Lopezen Senate Bill 450.
Would you wish to present that?
OK.
That there's a committee
substitute or other amendments I
always like to make sure that
this, the bill sponsor is
present.
With us, just making sure that
we're keeping
Everything in life.
No, thank you.
OK
Center Cio Lopez, please.
Thank you, Madam President.
So I live in Knob Hill, which
some people call ill Hill
because there are so many uh
physicians.
In uh
In my district, and they've been
meeting with me and complaining
about various things, but one of
the things that was most
disturbing to me was the
The fact that their hospitals,
the hospitals in which they've
been working were bought up by
private equity firms, and then
interfering with their decision
making.
And so I raised that at one of
these hearings.
And um my expert Mary Feldman
said,
Yeah
The bloom. OK. Spell Bloom. I, I
knew I had gotten the wrong Phil
Bloom had said, hey, would you
be interested in interested in
addressing that problem.
And I was particularly struck
because as a lawyer.
We have an ethical obligation
not to have non-lawyers
interfere with our decisions.
You could only have a lawyer
supervise.
Your work and only a lawyer can,
you know,
Uh, evaluate your performance,
only a lawyer can um question
what you're doing.
And that's, that's in his firms
that are now uh
It's kind of a new thing that
are now owned by non-lawyers.
Sort of a similar kind of thing
happening, um, and so that
ethical prohibition.
Protects our professional
independence, his lawyers, and
so I thought this bill was very
important to, to bring forth,
especially in this era where
we're having all these um
corporate entities.
Um
Gobbling up our local hotel, our
local uh hospitals. So I, um,
Have my statement, my written
statement here, um.
So, so that's why I brought this
bill, um.
And it's interesting because if
you look at corporate practice
of medicine laws around the
state around the country, the
original originally created to
prevent corporate ownership of
medical practices. That's
lawyers fought that too, um, but
lawyers, neither lawyers nor
doctors when that, when that um
case.
But serious questions were
raised because these entities
are not licensed to practice
medicine, but they were engaged
in driving decisions that were
negatively affecting patient
care.
So recently, more states have
strengthened these corporate
medicine laws to reflect the
growing concern about corporate
control over decisions about
appropriate medical care.
According to a recent Law Review
article, 33 states have
regulations that prohibit the
corporate practice of medicine
in varying degrees. The article
points out the California,
Texas, New York, and Carolina
have the strongest enforcement
measures.
Now, New Mexico is not included
in the list of 35, but there is
an AG opinion uh written by then
Attorney General Al Stratton Hal
Stratton, which is published on
July 30th.
At a time when H HMOs were
expanding, the Attorney General
was asked the following
question. May a corporation
organize and controlled by
non-physicians provide medical
services to the general public
through employed physicians, and
the AG's conclusion was, yes,
unless it is prohibited by
statute or it exercises
non-physician or lay control of
medical judgment or engages in
lay exploitation of the medical
profession in a manner
prohibited by public.
Policy.
Of course, an attorney general
opinion does not have the force
of law.
Um, and the superintendent of
insurance is stated in public
testimony that she received
numerous complaints from health
professionals regarding
corporate influence in how to
best care for their patients, as
I said to you, that was
something that I found in
meetings that I had with several
physicians that came to talk to
me.
The New Mexico Attorney General
has also reported concerns made
a group of Las Cruces Memorial
Health Center health
professionals he met with in
July of last year.
So I believe that New Mexico
needs to pass a statute that
prohibits interference in the
judgments of those who are
licensed to practice medicine.
They spent a long time getting
their license and their
independent uh judgment is
crucial to promote uh patient
health.
When physicians quit these
hospitals that are trying to
control them.
Um
They and and they choose to
remain in New Mexico and they
try to set up their own
independent practice, they are
often denied local hospital
privileges as in the case in in
Santa Fe with Christian Saint
Vincent inex Health.
So the purpose of this corporate
prac practice of Medicine Act is
to enable those who are licensed
to practice medicine to do so
without interference.
It's, so this bill does the
following. It includes licensed
health professionals, not only
physicians, it makes clear that
a health care entity shall not
indirectly or directly interfere
with control or otherwise direct
the professional judgment or
clinical decisions of a
healthcare provider.
It excludes independent medical
practices and clinics because
they're run by doctors, so you
don't need the same, the same
kind of uh.
You don't have the same kind of
concern.
Um, and then we, we relied on
recommendations from the
National Academy for State
Health Policy to define what is
meant by clinical interference,
I see from the FIR that it could
be clearer.
Um
And then we called the New
Mexico Attorney General about uh
whether they would be interested
in supporting and enforcing this
law because otherwise it would
just be a statement of policy,
um, and the New Mexico Attorney
general, um, uh,
didn't call me back personally,
but they did in their FIR put
what it would take for them to
do it is basically one more, one
position that they need um
extra.
So
Um, the corporate practice.
Of medicine is not only
dangerous.
For morale of the physicians,
it's also harmful to the care of
their patients. Um, Kathy Mesov,
a retired Gallup pediatrician
stated to the legislative Health
and Human Services on July 10,
2023. The stark reality is that
our broken medical system does
not allow clinicians to practice
as we were trained to be.
As we were trained.
It doesn't help us be
responsible for the best care of
our patients. We are dealing
with moral inju injury. We do
not have enough time to deeply
connect with our patients.
Keep relevant medical records
and deal with different
requirements of numerous
insurance plans. In fact, we
feel betrayed by a system which
interferes with our professional
integrity, corporate interests
are now undermining our ability
to deliver the care that our
patients expect and deserve.
And the reality, uh, Madam
Chair, is doctors don't want to
come and testify about this
against their employers.
Uh, because of fear.
So I was with that, I'd like to
introduce Mary Fel Feldblum, um,
who is my expert on this and if
she has a few words to say.
Good afternoon members members
of the committee. My name is
Mary Feldblum. I'm the executive
director of the Camp in.
It's a huge organization.
170 verse organizations from
around the state, along with
thousands of New Mexicans from
all over.
And I am a former academic.
And I've worked on healthcare
issues, healthcare reform, and
uh
real passion of mine is how do
we control rising health.
The corporate practice of
medicine.
It has been around for a long
time, and I think that it's, and
as, as the senator said, it's
originally was introduced.
With uh the intent to that, that
medical professionals didn't
feel that companies that were
offering medical services and um
that with the growth of HMOs,
it's interesting that in 1987.
Uh, Republican Attorney General
Hal Stratton clearly said, yes,
these these companies, HMOs can
offer health services, but they
cannot interfere.
In the clinical decisions.
professional.
And what I find interesting is
their surveys, um, 33 uh.
They have some form of a
corporate practice of medicine
Act.
Some conservative states, some
liberal states.
And the 4 outstanding ones
according to a recent legal
journal includes uh Texas and
California, which we probably
would expect.
But then there's North Carolina
and Texas.
And um I have from the Texas
Medical Association, a statement
they made about how important
the corporate practice of
medicine is, and it ensures that
physicians are able to exercise
professional medical judgment.
Relating to a patient's health
care needs.
Without financial or other
outside pressure.
The corporate practice of
medicine doctrine pushes back
against the pressure.
To ensure that physicians have
space.
To exercise independent judgment
in the best interests of the
patient.
Instead of the corporate bottom
line.
And
So, uh, if you have any
questions, I'd be very pleased
to answer.
because I have really looked at
this. I mean, I think it's
important for our state to be
number 34.
Is that all, Senator? Um, yes, I
do have.
Um, I, for some reason I didn't
get the fur, the FIR until this
morning. I think it just came
out. And so I do have a couple
of amendments, um,
At first I thought that that it
was misreading the, the statute,
but then I realized, well, we
could make it clearer that this
is, this is not um
To protect incompetent
physicians, um, and so we could
make that clear.
Um
So I, I, with that, I'll just uh
see if there's anybody in
support, I believe OSI was gonna
be here.
But I don't see them.
Um, but yes.
We're, we're done.
Thank you, Senator. Is there
anyone in the audience in
support of Senate bill?
450
Anyone in opposition?
none will go to Zoom.
And we do have
Uh, Barbara McEnany, doctor.
Like any
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I wish to support this uh bill
so that Bill 45 to limit the
corporate practice of medicine.
My group has had many many
physicians come to us to escape
hospitals and escape working for
insurance companies because they
find that they are limited. We
find this in many ways. The
prior authorization process,
says you.
You have to use this drug rather
than the one you want for your
patients, and it's generally
because that drug makes more
money for the corporate owners
of that insurance company. We
find that hospitals want to
require this instead of that,
and don't let us adjust what we
want to do in the patient's best
interest. This is burning out
physicians and frustrating them
and making them want to, to
leave. My practice has benefited
because we have had a number of
people leave.
the hospitals and leave Optum,
for example, so that they can
come and work in an environment
where we let them use their
professional judgment. This is
an important way to keep doctors
in New Mexico and keep us
available to do the right thing
for patients. They will tell you
that it's to save money that
they tell us to use one thing or
another, but I don't believe
that. I think it is because it
will make more money for the
corporate entity that is making
that decision.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. And then,
uh, in opposition, Julia.
I think it's rotten.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Julia
Ritten, and I'm the senior
director of government affairs
with the New Mexico Hospital
Association. On behalf of our 47
community hospitals and the more
than 50% of the state's
providers that they currently
employ, we stand in a strong
opposition to Senate Bill 450.
This bill will have nearly
immediate and devastating
consequences for hospital-based
care, healthcare providers, and
patients in our state due to the
prohibitions on the role of
hospitals as outlined.
On page 5, section 2, which
conflict with the federal
Medicare conditions of
participation. It is important
to note that only individuals
licensed by the New Mexico
Medical Board can practice
medicine. Under this bill,
physicians will lose their
hospital paid salaries because
they will be prohibited from
being employed by hospitals
because of their because their
employment cannot be based on
clinical competency. Let me
repeat that. The hospital
employment cannot be based on
their clinical competency.
Additionally, they'll be forced
to pay.
For their own medical
malpractice insurance, some of
the highest in the nation and to
stand up their own contracting
and billing services.
Additionally, collaboration
between hospital leaders and
physicians to invest in new, new
services will also be chilled.
This bill will push doctors to
practice in other states,
leaving New Mexicans with even
less access to hospital-based
care. Please vote no on SB 450.
Thank you.
Thank you. And then Nat Dean.
Thank you. Excuse me. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, Mr. Vice Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
not going to stand an exact
opposition or an exact support,
but it happened to me when my
hematology oncologist, which,
um, excuse me, which practice is
a very specialized form of
hematology oncology desire to
leave Christa Saint Vincent's
Cancer Center.
And go out on their own. There
was some limits as to what
Then the cancer center could
offer me as a patient of a rare
form of blood cancer, and I even
have gone out of state to
Huntsman Cancer Center in Salt
Lake City, Utah, for the leading
specialists was in the country,
but that is not always an
option. My hematology oncologist
is now with nexus and I'm not
trying to stand and support our
exact opposition, but the
challenge I faced as a patient,
not knowing whether I would be
able to have a continuum of
care.
For a cancer diagnosis I've had
since the age of 42 and I'm now
nearing 70s, so luckily I'm
still here, but the challenges
can be confusing for the patient
at best. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, Mr. Vice Chair,
members of the committee and
sponsor.
Thank you now.
That, that was all that we had
on the Zoom. So with that, we go
to questions from committee,
Madam Chair, may I, um,
It, uh, well, I may I say a
couple of things. One, the
disasters described by the
hospital association has not
occurred in Texas, California,
or any other state that has
adopted a corporate practice
rule, and I do uh want to
propose.
Um, amendments, as I said, I
didn't have time to get them in
advance to make it clear, so on
page 5.
On line 13.
Um, subsection B, which says
select, hire or fire healthcare
providers allied health staff
for medical assistance based in
all in part on clinical
competency or or proficiency
without the majority
involvement.
Of medical professionals on
staff.
So the intent was not to, that
they would be protected despite
incompetence, but I see how that
could be read that way with the
intent was to make sure that
medical professionals were
involved in these decisions in a
majority context.
Um, and then the second, uh, the
2nd Amendment, just a minute,
Senator, hang on one at a time
here, OK.
So, you're looking on page 5.
Yes, line 13.
At the, is it after proficiency
after after proficiency, yeah,
it without.
The majority involvement.
Of medical professionals on
staff.
Without the majority involvement
of
Medical professionals on staff.
In other words, it shouldn't be
a corporate decision that this
should be a decision in which
physicians are involved.
Physicians or or nurses, if it's
a nurse, nurse issue, and that's
to prevent um this kind of
analysis of competence without
having
Uh, colleagues and peers
involved in that analysis, which
I understand uh has happened.
Um, and then on, well, and I
don't know if you want to vote
on these amendments. Let's just
take it one time that way it
also makes it easier for
secretary to keep track, of
course, so.
He will move the amendment. I, I
move that amendment.
I will second it for purposes of
discussion.
And is there any discussion on
the proposed amendment?
And there will be some
discussion.
Senator Buck, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator, and
uh Doctor Feldman, good to see
you.
So, um, the wording here
without, I want to make sure I
got it right.
Um, without the majority
involvement of medical.
Professionals on staff.
Right. What?
So what, what's a medical, is a
X-ray tech a medical
professional.
There's a definition in the
On page
Healthcare provider means on
page 2, subsection D.
Health care provider means, or
maybe we should say healthcare
provider. Yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah, I'm sorry. Let's change
medical professional to
healthcare provider means a
person certified registered
licensed or otherwise authorized
pursuant to state law to perform
or provide healthcare services
to individuals in the state.
So, um, so if we could change
that amendment manager, you're
wise to go one at a time, uh,
without the majority involvement
of healthcare providers.
So if I could withdraw the First
Amendment and uh corrected to be
without the majority involvement
of healthcare providers.
Madam Chair, Senator on staff or
Yes.
OK, so then your amendment has
been amended.
So it'll read without the
majority involvement of
healthcare.
Providers on staff, on staff.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Senator, if we take a look at
Rust Hospital.
Um
In my district
How, how would that
How would that work? Because
it's a large hospital, you have
a
Large amount of medical or
healthcare providers that are
working 24 hours a day. What's
the process on how, how that
would work.
Well, if there's evaluations,
the hospitals usually have some
kind of process for evaluations.
And um all this does is require
that um like say you were
evaluating the physi physician
for competency that another
physician, that a physician be
involved in a majority way on
about that that uh physician. So
let's say there was a committee
of 3 people. One would be a
corporate administrator and then
2 physicians.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Senator, it's, it's going to be
the majority you're talking
about is gonna be a dynamic
group all the time. Is that
correct? Yes.
OK. So, Madam Chair and Senator,
Um
So
So the, the, um
The majority rules on on this
particular thing, so
Uh, again, how do you, how do
you pick which which people are
gonna be on this committee
that's gonna be flexible all the
time.
Maybe I, I'm sorry, um, Madam
Chair, Senator, if I, if I go in
for
Skin cancer.
Um, how, how does that work?
What I'm talking about is, uh,
Madam Chair.
In relation to the patient is
the patient gonna be involved
in, in some of these decisions
then.
Is that your vision? No.
No, madam chair, um, in the
hiring process.
Um
So it's selection higher or fire
healthcare providers. Let's just
say that there is, well, um,
I got you. I'll, I'll tell the
horror story of what happened to
my mom, but
Um, let's just say that there's
an incompetent physician on
staff.
And um the
I really likes this position
because he generates a lot of
money.
And um the other two physicians
with him.
Really don't like what he's
doing cause it's, it's not.
It's not good, but it's
generating money. Um, the
physicians' decision on whether
this individual's competence
should prevail.
OK, not, not the corporate, um,
non-physician. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator for
for straightening me out, um.
got a bunch of notes.
OK, so what, what's the standard
though?
If they want I mean there's,
isn't there already some
internal processes with
Firing or firing already.
Um, Madam Chair, they're
probably is, but I've heard of
uh summarily dismissed, Sama.
Um, summary dismissal of
individuals um
That they believe were
unwarranted without any kind of
review by a physician of their
work.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Now we're still on the
amendment. Thank you, Senator
Block.
And Senator Hickey on
So, um, could we have the
amendment read one more time,
um, Madam Chair.
But I have, um, senator who says
on page 5, line 13, after the
word proficiency, the words
without the majority involvement
of healthcare providers on
staff.
Then it goes to the semi.
OK.
So without the majority of the
medical providers.
And yeah, that's, no, no,
without majority involvement.
Not the majority of the health
members on staff without
majority involvement. So if it
was.
made a chair and Senator, what
does majority involvement mean?
That if there were a committee
of 3 doing this, that 2 of them
would be healthcare providers.
They're a committee of 53 of
them would be healthcare
providers.
And so on.
So that, that's still
I, I, I don't see the word
committee here or agent or
whatever the agency is in that I
wouldn't as a hospital, I
wouldn't even have an idea.
I mean, I, I've spent my life.
Managing
Personnel and huge.
Medical systems and
You know, uh
You, uh, uh,
This, this is so vague and, and
you have medical assistance, I
mean, like a, a, a nurse,
medical assistant has to go
through.
Some sort of, I mean, you want
to take up a physician's time in
hiring medical assistants when
we can barely have enough
physicians who are, I mean,
it's, it's, it's what you're
proposing is a very vague, which
then with the penalties you're
putting in here.
Uh, really, uh,
Puts hospitals at risk, and we
will review all the risk and the
risk that the Attorney General
has provided and the case is
decided, if this were to go into
effect.
Um, in the FIR, they're pretty
thorough. Um, but I, I'm just,
I'm
Select higher fire, healthcare
providers, allied health staff,
which is allied health staff or
or.
Technicians and, and whatever.
Um
Without a majority of medical
providers, um, on a committee. I
mean, all that is delegated out
that you met met him share, if I
may explain, um,
I would assume that that's why
we were not trying to
micromanage how hospitals do
this, but let's just say one
person does this. The
expectation would be that one
that one person would be a um
healthcare provider.
Now
I would imagine that hospitals
and the idea here is to give
them leeway. I would imagine
that hospitals have a process.
Um, whether it's one person
makes that decision, 3 persons
make that decision, and so with
this, with majority involvement
means is that a majority of
those making the decision, uh
will be healthcare providers. We
could rewrite that and say,
Um, let's see, select.
Only based
On a decision a decision by oh.
Hard to write.
That's why I put majority
involvement, um, because some
hospitals do this by committee,
some hospitals do it by one
administrator, but they consult
with the doctor. So what it
would be, for example, if an
administrator was doing it, they
would consult with two doctors
about, about getting rid of a
doctor. The hospital
administrator would consult with
two nurses about getting rid of
a nurse.
Um, and that would protect
That health care provider from
From an evaluation of their work
that did not include a peer.
And that is the intent. And so I
tried to clarify that with the
amendment because I could see
how
Um
Be without that has some of the,
the commenters and as the FIR
noted,
That could, that looks like they
were not that they would just be
protected indefinitely, whatever
their clinical competency was,
and that is not the intent. The
intent is you could only be
fired if you work was reviewed
by a peer.
Yeah, it doesn't say that here.
And um, and two nurses may not
like the one nurse. This is,
this, I mean, this, this is so
vague. Um, I'm, I'm actually
instead of really, I mean, there
are more substantive issues to
get to here. I would um make a
motion, Madam Chair, to reject
the amendment.
Senator, we're on a do pass
again for purposes of
discussion.
Um. Oh.
So you wish to make a
Do not deficiency on the
on the amendment.
I think what we could do,
Senator,
is it OK that,
that would be fine we could take
care of that.
Regular process.
Um, but they're still
unquestioned.
for the amendment?
Are there any other questions?
OK.
So
Is there a we're on a
No more dialogue on that and
Senator, before we go, can I
just clarify cause you said
there was a word difference I
had read.
It says without the majority
involvement, you did not have
the word that in there.
It would be just without
majority involvement without the
um majority involvement, but
I'm, this is awful to we're like
we're acting like um.
Judiciary by without without.
The involvement of
A peer review process.
Senator, may I ask, may I just
ask for something?
Sure. Maybe
Um
If you have some other
amendments that you would like
to propose. Would you like to
just go ahead and work with your
expert.
And maybe come back tomorrow
with some amendments that you'd
like to propose so that we're
not doing this on the fly that
that would work because I have
33, and again, I only got the
FIR this morning. I don't know.
I believe it's posted last
night. Just, just so that raise
these issues, just so it's a
little smoother
if you'd like, we'll just do it
on a carryover for tomorrow.
But I think that would give you
since you just had a chance to
look at the FIR today. That way.
I don't like to do this on the
fly, um, it's not proper
procedure. I don't like to do
it.
Yeah, I know. We're acting like
judiciary. Judiciary does this
all the time, and I, and I
apologize, Madam Chair, again, I
just saw the FIR this morning.
So what we'll do is we'll hold
this over for tomorrow.
Um, that way you can work on
whatever amendments, um, that
need to be.
Proposed.
OK. All right. So with that, um,
we'll put you on the carryover
for tomorrow and we'll pick up.
where we left off.
Thank you. Um, wow, we finished
early.
Everybody gets to go get dinner
early.
Um thank you, everybody, and
we'll see you tomorrow
afternoon.
