Tatian network companies we all
know home is lifted over in
those kind of companies can do
medical non emergency medical
transport of of of patients it
would remove the duplicate
process they have to go through
with PRC and of whatever whoever
else they have to do the age of.
Gary thank the P. it will yeah
the pierced ears and TNCs Wells
anyway the that's the yes what
is the right basically that's
the essence of the bill it to
it's Maury economical for people
to get transport going to
doctors for the second thanks so
I think most of you know Kerry
she's my expert witness if you
have any additional comments
Kerry go ahead.
And did you want to.
So I think there should we just
go right to the of substitute
okay yeah we have a motion on
the side of.
Senator Tallman.
Okay.
I move it do not do that pass
on.
Senate Bill.
I introduce to pass on the
so for the Senate Public Health
and Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
and it was technical change
changes are some errors made in
some of the drafting and it's
fixed hopefully in the office of
the then change into the bill.
Okay and Kerry are you here in
your capacity with the medical
society or and also with as the
rest of this from left for the
record.
So that's so it's it's the gist
of it and so so let's go to the
audience is there anyone in the
audience is supports this bill.
Hello thank you.
Okay yeah we'll do what we take
but you have to come up so the
the Michael pick you up but we
take three or four of you I try
to keep it under a minute or
two.
If women like one.
Good morning members of the
committee well actually good
afternoon my name is Dr Robert
B. Bo I'm a doctor of oriental
medicine here in New Mexico I'm
also the department commander
for the military order of the
Purple Heart which means I run
that organization for the entire
state of New Mexico to veterans
service organization I'm also
their national surgeon this
legislation came across my desk
the a couple days ago I guess it
was maybe yesterday in this you
may not know but veterans
receive only about thirty
percent of veterans the nation
wide receive their care at VA
only about thirty percent that
that's those numbers seem to be
the same for the state of New
Mexico as well so the rest of
veterans get their care through
Medicare Medicaid or a a sort of
a collection of Medicare
Medicaid and and private
insurance this legislation makes
it a lot easier for veterans who
are not receiving care at VA to
make access to their medical
appointments and so the military
order of the Purple Heart is
very much in support this
legislation would encourage do
pass and I appreciate your time.
Just one quick question yes Sir
but if they could also take him
to the VA couldn't think well it
would depend if if that veteran
has the ability to receive
treatment at VA and according to
rand only about is only about
sixty percent of that orange or
even eligible for care at VA
thirty percent of those I'm
sorry half of those so thirty
percent of Americans American
veterans are receiving care at
VA so it's it's an
infinitesimally small number but
if somebody lived in Rio Rancho
need to get to the VA your bill
that that passed that would be
correct yes okay good.
Thank you it is it is not
emergency room downstairs.
First to support.
Good afternoon chairman members
my name's Matt Thompson
registered lobbyist for uber
technologies we're we appreciate
the opportunity to support
Senate bill four eighty five
access to cost efficient
transportation is a common
challenge across the country
nearly four million medical
appointments are annually missed
because of transportation issues
in research to show that miss
doctor's appointments can lead
to great health care
complications and a greater risk
of premature death New Mexico
has an important chance to help
correct this problem.
There were health
Hipper supported solutions have
operated since twenty eighteen
using overslept logistics
expertise and help connect
millions across the country to
the care they need we urge you
to strongly to support for
eighty five thank you thank you
Sir.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Kim looking
at I am the registered lobbyists
for a more ambulance we stand in
full support of this bill we
think that it will not only
increase access to care but it
will ease the burden and for the
public and private ambulance
providers throughout the state
thank you so much thank you can.
good morning or good afternoon
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for lift and I won't
be repetitive but this is
another tool in the toolbox
brokers often use ride share for
short term
on demand rights and plus New
Mexico just desperately needs
more drivers and more services
like this to up to help the
citizens of New Mexico we
appreciate your support very
good.
Anybody else we have one person
online and support
to people in line okay these are
Russ Peterson you'll go first
with you.
Great hi can you hear me into
any yes I don't know we can hear
you fine Russ.
Right so my name's Ross Peterson
I appreciate this opportunity I
serve as vice president of
transportation insights and
strategy of motive Care where I
oversee our alternative
transportation programs so that
includes rideshare or TNC ease
as well as public transportation
and mileage reimbursement right
here is an important part of our
diverse portfolio of
transportation options I want to
tell you just a little bit about
motive Care and then tell you
why it is that we support this
bill so motive here is the
nation's largest non emergency
medical transportation broker
each year we coordinate over
sixty three million trips for
more than twenty four million
Americans the any anti benefit
as you know is important in
ensuring that low income
beneficiaries and
seniors and people with
disabilities who have no other
way to get to their medical
appointments have access
motive Care Services serves as a
critical link between these
members in the care they need to
achieve a better quality of
life.
In the last two years motive
cares provided over one point
one million rides in the state
of New Mexico with the ninety
nine percent compared.
Ninety nine percent fulfillment
right we accomplish this through
our partnerships with over
twenty seven transportation
providers who operate a fleet of
nearly three hundred vehicles in
the state.
We are enthusiastic in our
support for Senate bill four
eighty five and the intent to
make it easier for companies
like uber lift provide non
emergency medical services
medical transportation services
New Mexico doing so will allow
brokers like motive Care to use
a more appropriate level of
service it's for those
individuals who only need an
ambulatory curb to curb I in
turn this will help free up
critical space on a more
specialized fleet for those who
really need that higher level of
service.
Appan able to ride share
services or TNC services are an
important part of our members
Senator strategy in our
experience the customers we
serve often have fewer
complaints per ride for
ride share fourteen sees
compared to our traditional any
empty providers for who are for
the same level of service.
Part of this is the flexibility
and ease of use that ride share
provides us because we're able
to tap into uber and left API's
we're able to offer real time
services that those that you and
I enjoy when we're able to use
uber left on our apps we want to
be able to provide that same
type of experience to the
members to seek access to
medical services through the in
the empty program thank you for
sharing on thank you thank you
Terry Cole you're next.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Terry Cole I am the president
and CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we commend senator Neville for
hearing bill you know what
should we as a state allow and
encourage transportation network
of venues like left to provide
non emergency medical
transportation to Medicare
patients surely this is
something we can all get behind
with this bill we are failing
and transportation gap that
exists for many people in New
Mexico we will help reduce no
shows for appointments and the
tendency of vulnerable
populations to the late getting
the medical care they need we're
also helping Medicaid patients
get a reasonable lowcost ride to
the doctor as opposed to when
unnecessarily expensive one.
We're insuring that ambulances
are available and use to
transport those mysterious
emergency medical conditions all
of that is good for patients and
taxpayers a lot and it's helpful
for improving access across the
board it is a great bill we urge
your support thank you.
Thank you Terry okay though
anybody in the audience opposed
to this bill.
Yes Mr such as.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee my name
is Raymond Sanchez I'm gonna
turn in Albuquerque I'm not a
registered lobbyist under this
of us to yes I want to give you
some information regarding this
bill
My practice in Albuquerque is
pretty much limited to
transportation work before the
PRC dealing in matters of
transporting people with medical
problems up.
This bill came to my attention
just yesterday.
And I'd like you to pay specific
attention when you get a chance.
To the section under the
transportation act dealing with.
With the word left the
interesting thing is that are
six five seven twelve if you
look at the requirements that
they have for their drivers.
None of of include anything
dealing with medical background
I'm really concerned that what
you're doing is you're opening
this up even though there's
going to be rules promulgated at
some time.
That a lot of these people are
not going to have that
experience.
One thing I will tell you.
Is that once a month at least
once a month I get a notice.
Of a company us to become.
A carrier under non emergency
medical conditions for
transport.
They all passed ask for
statewide authority every single
one of them.
One month most of them are
located in Albuquerque I've seen
two or three in the Farmington
Gallup area and I've seen
several of them here in Santa
Fe.
I am somewhat concerned that
what you're going to do here.
Is end up with a bunch of uber
drivers.
Whose only background check has
to do with their criminal
background rather their their
medical background picking up
and transporting individuals
even though it's under non
medical emergency a lot of these
folks are elderly they do have
disabilities and if they if they
end up having some sort of a
medical difficulty.
Are these over drivers lift
drivers going to be prepared to
take care of any emergencies
situation I'm just bring this to
your attention because it's it
concerns me deeply I do not want
to be Representative a lot of
people with.
Lawsuits against uber lift for
that purpose thank you very much
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you anybody else
in the audience and in
opposition.
And nobody online.
Okay members of the committee.
About I've got a couple of
questions.
Currently anybody who need to go
to the doctor can call of the.
And they just have to pay
themselves.
I think this has more to do with
reimbursement reimbursement yes
so so.
It did it doesn't effectively a
actually does.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee what's happening
right now is it specific for
Medicaid and for the NCOs that
are operating operating under
Medicaid so every and CEO that
has a contract to be able to
find Medicaid services in the
state of New Mexico has to me
transportation network adequacy
standards they are not currently
needing those and so what the
NCOs and what's happened in
twenty other states of the union
is they will allow a ride share
opportunity for non emergency
medical transport for a patient
to go to their check up and if
there Medicaid patients they can
then bill Medicaid for the
reimbursement from Medicaid
that's why then the Medicaid
office has to promulgate all the
rules around how this works
under the Medicaid MCO contracts
for that reimbursement purpose I
think that the interplay that
has with the VA is many of our
veterans qualify for Medicaid
and they get services there and
so that's why it would help the
veteran population as well
because of those veterans who
are paid.
Okay that that explains that so
this would not apply to Medicare
either just Medicaid just Mr
chairman members of the
committee people sometimes our
tool right qualified under
Medicare and Medicaid it would
be the Medicaid ones reimbursing
correct and one of the questions
on that
they have to be it doesn't say
they have to be part of it says
they may.
May require that prior to
facilitating this is on page
three the line six.
The medical assistance division
of the Human Services Department
may require that prior to
facilitating these services for
a Medicaid recipient the
transportation network company
be under contract with the
transportation broker.
Is that each individual driver
or is it lift Hoover.
Mr chairman members the
committee under that T. and see
which is the transportation
network company act the actual
transportation company is the
one that David has to meet all
of the qualifications under the
law for each one of their
drivers and so what this bill is
doing is saying if there is a
transportation network company
that is not all of those
qualifications under the TNC
administrative code they've been
approved by the PRC for all of
their drivers to then meet those
requirements that then would
qualify then to go to Medicaid
and then be approved by the
Medicaid office to become part
of the transportation network
adequacy standard in the
transportation contractor so
they still have to me all those
requirements under the
transportation network company
code which is how you actually
bring in all of their drivers
under the fireman said they
needed that code so Senator in
Kerry if there are all these
companies that Mr such as
mentioned that are getting the
applications to P. Garcia to
become
Whatever they're called the
transportation.
Network companies.
Do we need more I mean it is
there still shortage even with
all of them.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the problem right now
is that even though there are
companies that are trying to
become qualified as a TNC their
qualification under the TMC is
not allowing them to become part
of the Medicaid transportation
network so even though we're
trying to get in there maybe
more applications happening for
just a normal I was out on a
Friday night and I need to get a
ride share home that is not
allowable under Medicaid right
now so would only be those
companies who can then actually
meet the requirements under
Medicaid that would actually be
able to find the non emergency
medical transport not just the
normal I need a ride on a Friday
night and and one last question
how come.
How come the other companies
have to go through the PRC but
these would both of them both do
they all do they all do they're
already under yes yes any other
members of the committee with
the senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman Senate
bill thank you thanks for pre
to be on the bill but I
Just reading the committee so.
And it says a.
That the transportation network
company shall not find.
you know medical transportation
This.
Prior to completing
I'm looking at page two Mr
Chairman up line twenty one
twenty two we just jump back
here.
the background check.
Yes so it says
I'm trying to prepare got see
what it reads kind of funky
Just a moment yes.
Usually it says like a
transportation network company
shall not find unless comping a
comma one two three so it just
so it let's just say it like
that it says
you know number number you know
number three number two and then
it says number one a criminal
background check of the driver.
Pursuant to state law.
But it doesn't have anything
after that it the words.
I got a background check here's
my background check.
What does that mean.
In the state in the in the
committee substitute so Mr
chairman members of the
committee under the
transportation network company
act which is the act that
regulates ride share you have to
meet a criminal background check
pass a criminal background check
in order to be able to become a
driver with in the actual
transportation network company
so what this is saying is it's
referring back to that statute
of law that outlines you have to
actually pass that background
check become a qualified driver
within the right sure network
before you can participate in
any kind of transportation which
is just making sure we're
meeting those requirements thank
you Mr so in other words sixty
five dash seven dash twelve.
You don't.
Articulates what you just said
correct okay great and is there
get any distinction between.
Driving folks home from a party
or driving.
Someone.
To the hospital or to a
chiropractic appointment or
whatever in that in that act Mr
chairman members of the
committee not in that act this
is why we would need to make
sure that there was a two step
approval process process number
one is you have to go to the PRC
to get your certification to
even be able to be part of a
ride share program to be
approved by the state all of
those companies that go through
that process to be approved by
the PRC they then go through the
process with Medicaid to meet
the rules and regulations
promulgated by Medicaid to then
be able to provide non emergency
medical transport so if I were
list and I said I don't want to
do non emergency medical
transport I just want to
continue to take people home on
a Friday night I would not go
through the Medicaid process and
I would not therefore be
eligible for any kind of
Medicaid reimbursement for
transpennine emergency medical
transport of patients it's only
the companies that go through
PRC and then also go through
Medicaid.
Thank you.
The
Essentially I think I think the
uber and left statute was
imperative when we did back in
two thousand sixteen we're kind
of falling behind the times it
was was a tough up.
You know those things are very
difficult on the status for
businesses and things that
nature
I know that.
A lot of entrepreneurs and
companies are emerging post
comment I don't essentially I'm
I'm not convinced.
There's a.
There's a gap in the market I
want to learn more about that
before if this bill goes to the
floor if it does.
and whether it's necessary to
fill that gap with with with.
With companies such as this I
think it's I think it's a cool
idea I I just don't know if
there's
Second if there's a gap in the
market is what I'm saying
And so the I don't want to learn
more about that as a as this
bill goes it goes to taxed
business next if we passes of
your understaffing you Mr thank
you for.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman to pass
the motion for it to pass we
have we have a quorum.
yes do not yes
Nope do not pass on.
Senate bill forty five and a do
pass on Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
two forty five is there a
second.
Second it second so we have a
promotion secretary will call
the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
Senator McKenna.
Yes Senator smitteez Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator AUMENT
this center to subpoena yes so
you have it do passing on to
taxed business thank you
committee appreciate it is
Senator Shendo then we'll do is
you Senator Maestas.
Acupuncturist licensing why are
we getting so many letters about
acupuncture.
I
is it.
This is Senate bill for twenty
one.
The.
Already the.
Of the thank you a.
Chairman members of the
committee.
Senate bill four twenty one.
Was brought to me by one of of
my constituents and Amos valley.
Acupuncturists that the.
does contract work for our our
he was pueblo health the.
Clinic and so forth so what what
the what we're doing here is
adding a new tier for licensed
acupuncturists.
Under the statute we have now
and also it's eliminating the
need for verbal of Chinese
herbal Education Sir to
certificate.
With me here is my expert
witness is not not the Almelo
lien see is a DOM and I will
however displaying in in in the
detail about the point of this
thank you senator test drive
could.
Then good afternoon Mister chair
and senator thank you very much
for your time today I'm a don't
turn on to oriental medicine
I've been license since nineteen
ninety nine I also have a
masters in public health from U.
N. M. and was a research
scientist at UNM for seven years
I founded the nonprofit public
health acupuncture off New
Mexico in order to teach and
supervise your acupuncture for
addictions specialists around
the state
I run a busy low cost high
volume clinic in Albuquerque
community acupuncture clinic
which provided six to seven
thousand treatments annually pre
COVID.
I'm advocating for affordable
acupuncture to be available
across the state for the people
that I work with in Shiprock
Zuni
Espanola to meio there's a dire
need for health care in those
communities and acupuncture is
really valuable medicine for
them.
Currently the board the
acupuncture board website says
this about six hundred and
seventy active licensees there
are in fact about four hundred
well four hundred and eighty six
in state licensees.
and three hundred and fifty of
those practice in the great to
Albuquerque and Santa Fe areas
seventy two practice elsewhere
in the state.
So you can see that the there is
a lot.
More scope to to expand in the
rural areas.
Over the last ten years it's
been difficult for clinics like
money to provide employees
because of the small pool of
licensees here.
I know of clinics in Rio Rancho
support of Los crucis on my own
clinic in Albuquerque we need a
conduit for new practitioners to
come into the state and we need
to make it easier for them to
get licensed.
New Mexico is one of only seven
states that required that herbal
certificate and exams in order
to practice acupuncture three
states are unregulated thirty
three states require the
acupuncture National Board.
Seven of the other states
require that the herbal
certificate in order to
prescribed herbal medicine.
New Mexico is only one of seven
states that requires the herbal
exam and certificate in order to
practice acupuncture.
As well as the herbal system as
well as the acupuncture
certificates the cost of an
extra year of education is
varies by school but it's around
twenty nine thousand dollars per
year in tuition and fees and
thirty six thousand dollars for
a single person living out of
state for a total of an extra
seventy five thousand dollars
for that year of herbal
education added on to people's
student loan debt which is
already high.
The one affordable acupuncture
school in the country where
tuition is capped at twenty
thousand for the three year
program has turned away three
New Mexico students because they
would not be eligible to be
licensed here in New Mexico
without that verbal
certificates.
The very final last acupuncture
school is closing in August in
New Mexico and with them closing
and then the intrusion due to
the pandemic and retirements
there will be many few a
acupuncturists in this situation
will just get a lot worse over
the next five years we.
Okay.
Yes so we need an easier way for
licensing for out of state
people for our residents who go
out of state we we need them to
be able to come back in the
state without this extra burden
of student loan for one more
year of schooling thank you for
your time.
Go to the audience is there
anyone here in support of the.
Here in opposition to the.
What a lot of time will take
three four of you.
He.
People.
Thank you to speak to my office
people can thank you the whole.
Can you hear me.
Well I
yeah that hold up but and.
Right there okay good my name is
Dr my name is Dr Yvonne lost and
I'm also a doctor of oriental
medicine and I'm president of
the New Mexico New Mexico
Society of acupuncture and Asian
Medicine and you each have some
hand it's with the map on it
and this map will show you the
states that include herbal
medicine in their in their scope
of practice for acupuncture and
M. D. friend of mine who looked
at this map and she was
delighted to see that there's
regulation of the herbal
medicine so the.
So our board of acupuncture in
order of our board of and I'm
Sam The New Mexico Society of
acupuncture and Asian Medicine
is totally opposed when you're
not agency unanimously opposed
to this bill
It this a B. including one bill
would include herbs and one
would not include herbs with
with the tiered licensure.
And basically this they're the
same licenses except for one
would have the Gen one would
not.
So we have been licensed in New
Mexico for forty two years now
as of this legislature and and
forty two years ago we were
licensed acupuncturists and we
did not have herbs herbs are
added economy became doctors
oriental medicine.
Generally around the country
other states are working to
become more like New Mexico
we're one of the leaders in the
United States.
And if you look on the back of
that page.
We'll see some statistics there
the summary of those statistics
that you see on the map.
Thirteen states require the
herbal exam nine states have a
tiered system of acupuncture and
herbs three states have no
license thirty five states have
herbs in their scope of practice
now you'll note that Florida
move to requiring the herbs
because of the difficulty of
regulating a tiered system it is
especially significant that
Florida we're acupuncture and
herbal medicine has been
progressing rapidly into the
twenty first century now finds
that it is not feasible to
regulate a tiered system they
learn from New Mexico in their
own growth now it is time for
New Mexico to learn from
Florida.
Our secretaries been receiving
letters from colleagues whose
patients are reading these bills
their patients believe that New
Mexico is the only state that
requires the oral exam which is
incorrect they also seem to
think that without just before
twenty one or four sixty one
they will not be able to receive
treatment with acupressure
anymore or their access will be
limited also in correct.
Licenses are made to protect
public.
And sorry sovereign nations
already the the
The pueblos are already order
sovereign nations and they can
bring in their their own
acupuncturists with LIC's we
already have D. O. Ms working
out at the hammers Pueblo ahead
DO and working at the hammers
Pueblo.
And we recognize we recognize
that both those who are opposing
and are are wanting this bill
are wanting to increase increase
medicine for the whole state and
we all Hartle hardly so hard
hardly support that we all want
that and there there is a good
way to
there's a good way to increase
access and that is to have
Medicare and Medicaid which
we're working on as well but
it's time to move into the
twenty first century with that.
Thank you very much thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee reintroducing myself
I'm doctor Robert B. both I'm a
doctor of oriental medicine here
in New Mexico I am also the
national surgeon for the
military order of the Purple
Heart and the department
commander for that same
organization and I run that
veterans service organization
for the entire state of New
Mexico just to be clear I'm not
a member of the VA I don't
represent them in any way but I
do represent veterans
my organization I'm also a board
member of the New Mexico side
effect puncture and Asian
Medicine so lot of hats
my organization Montoya the
Purple Heart is vehemently
opposed to this legislation we
do believe and I want to say we
believe it Senator Shendo as
well as the similar legislation
Senate bill for sixty once
introduced by Senator Hamblen we
believe they were introduced in
good faith but we believe that
they are dangerous for the care
of of New Mexicans because
diluting the standard necessary
to provide this important health
care is not going to make access
better.
The notion that New Mexico is
somehow behind other states in
that it's one of only seven
which requires this I recently
completed a doctoral program
it's professional doctorate at
the Pacific college of health
and science.
This organization that college I
I was I was involved in that
program and there would often be
sixty sixty students per class
so the idea that acupuncturist
direct pressure schools are
diminishing is is is inaccurate
at best I I also have to say New
Mexico it is not behind in these
risk regards each member of this
program because I wasn't
attending it with nationwide
students actually in some cases
worldwide students.
Each member of my classes were
envious of the scope of practice
here in New Mexico and the
demand for the inclusion of
herbs so we are not behind other
states we lead the nation and
indeed we lead the world in the
access to care that oriental
medicine provides in in New
Mexico our scope of practice is
the best in the world exceeding
even China because the safety
obligations this is amazing New
Mexico doesn't lead in much but
we lead in this so this is
important backroom are
demanding.
Better access to acupuncture or
in medicine and integrative
health care
in the demand that their their
providers be fully credentialed
some of these yes we'll take one
more thank you and there's a
whole thank you Mr secretary
chairman RTZ Pino an audible can
you hear me.
Okay chairman or to participate
on a real members of the Senate
committee my name is Dr Brandon
Taylor and I'm also a licensed
DO and since two thousand four
and currently serving my second
term as chair of the NM BO and.
In addition to the excellent
points already made in
opposition to this bill I ask
you to consider the following
facts.
The New Mexico board of
acupuncture into medicine this
is their primary obligation is
to protect the public current
state law protects public safety
as evinced by very low rates of
official complaints filed
against you Ms and low
malpractice liability insurance
rates for DO Ms the National
Board certified body for
acupuncture was established four
decades ago to protect the
public by ensuring all
acupuncturists have demonstrated
competence and safety.
In to longstanding New Mexico
law only those fully board
certified by the NCCA I'm
qualify to obtain an MDO license
and only license to enter
legally permitted to practice
acupuncture in New Mexico.
Current and then law requires
changes to minimum standards of
acupuncture competency to pass
through the New Mexico
legislature section sixty one
fourteen A. thirteen
requirements for expedited
licensing alone as proposed here
would eliminate any and all
requirements for national board
certification in acupuncture.
And permit individuals with
similar trading hours a massage
therapist even those lacking the
basic accredited diploma in a
and potentially to call
themselves acupuncturists in
place needles at nearly any
possible death into a person's
body.
These bills would almost
completely by passed the New
Mexico legislature going forward
the minimum standards of
practice in the Seoul hands of
the BA OS.
A body not elected by the people
of New Mexico holding a simple
rules hearing with almost no
members of the public present
could instantly redefine what it
means to be a licensed
acupuncturist in New Mexico
whatever that is or whatever it
it becomes and I'm saying that
as the chair of the board of
acupuncture in order to.
Practically everyone knows the
New Mexico needs more doctors
nurse practitioners and
physician assistants however in
stark contrast to the doctor and
the numbers quoted by Dr Lee and
which is not been validated in
any open session of the
acupuncture board we enjoyed
plenty of New Mexico license
deal wins according to research
published in peer review
journals New Mexico is within
the top ninetieth percentile of
acupuncturist per capita and
they put those articles for you
in my email to the committee.
Furthermore if that figure is
likely right now in the process
of going even higher in
compliance with each B. one
ninety one professional an
occupational license for changes
excuse me licensure changes
signed into law just last year
the NBA and has acted just two
months ago to ensure that we now
have many thousands more US
acupuncturists eligible for
potential New Mexico dealing
licensure.
All without having to take any
further legislative action least
of all one like this page
dangerously could risk public
safety.
I'm almost done I promise.
There are multiple U. S. states
in which licensed acupuncturists
are mere technicians some
require work on the referral of
the supervision of another
medical provider this bill
insurance into law the right of
these minimally trained
technicians to be known as both
physicians and primary care
providers license to diagnose
treat and prescribed for any
disease illness injury pain or
other physical or mental
condition have a scope including
all areas of diagnostic testing
with an extensive array of
treatment options including
physical medicine manipulation
and some procedures categorized
as surgical at least six passed
B. A. O. in chairs include in
addition to myself including Dr
VK Duckworth David can zoning
Caroline Colonna barber Matix
Alex Bjorklund and Glenn Wilcox
all have verbally and or in
writing expressed clear and
complete opposition to these
bills for all the above I ask
you to oppose thank you thank
you okay we have somebody on
zoom who supports it that's a.
Sabrina strong.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
So I am an act I'm sure patient
a former your acupuncturist and
also
so I also work and provide
administrative support to
community acupuncture
Albuquerque I don't belong to
any kind of financing lobby
organization or that have a high
degree of education but I can
tell you that I was very
interested in becoming a
licensed acupuncturist at one
point until I found out how much
it cost and how difficult it was
or how much more expensive it
would be to try to get educated
in another state and then come
back here so I I think of two
things about this bill the
reason I support it one being
that student loan that is really
what is in the public
consciousness right now tacking
on another year year and a half
or training to provide
additional support of learning
about and to become an
herbalist.
I'm might not necessarily be the
thing that people need to
specialize in my understanding
of this bill is not that we're
not going to regulate herbs and
let people just do whatever it
is that they want they would
have to be certified as an
herbalist even venture into that
scope of practice.
Second of I for example looked
into the do it.
Massachusetts college of
pharmacy and health sciences for
their acupuncture project
you can become a licensed
acupuncturist in the state of
Massachusetts but you have to be
a master's level commission and
this idea that it's somehow not
safe folks from that universe
that college or luck to go
internet mass General Hospital
some not really sure why
Why we would make this a safety
issue one more time acupuncture
I absolutely understand that we
wouldn't want people practicing
outside their scope of practice
but that's not my understanding
of what this bill would do.
Very good thank you Mr.
Okay members of the anything
else you want to add or remove.
You still want to support yes we
do have a twenty do you Ms that
have supported this bill we have
eleven written lettuce of
supports line by email I also
want to touch on H. B. one nine
one last year's bill that was
supposed posed to make expedited
licensing for health care
professionals that I think talk
to Taylor referred to
the RLD analysis
Set that for states are eligible
for expedited licensing only
only four states are are
eligible because of the D. O. M.
designation if we had had a
licensed acupuncturist
designation than likely the
other thirty three states that
have LHC would have been
eligible very good thank you the
numbers of the committee.
I've got a couple of questions
you indicated that the school is
about to close yeah that's the
only school in the state that's
correct miss is that what's in
it is that's not southwestern
they're about to close.
That's terrible.
Okay.
Nonviable liabilities they're
expected.
It's too expensive to provide
the care none of people can
afford tuition that makes it
possible to
help.
Well this bill yeah so so the
question senator Tom is this how
would this bill help that.
This bill would allow.
Acupuncturists to come in from
out of state much more easily
currently and acupuncturists
from another state that does not
have the herbal certification
would have to take one year of
oracle certification and the
exams as well as the New Mexico
practical exam.
So the the extra one here is a
Baria to many many people.
So.
On that point Senator Mr.
Much Turner my because of the
so.
Thank you for coming from out of
state would have to take more
training if they're not if they
don't already have the only have
the and yeah let me clarify this
first three years of training is
identical for at licensed
acupuncturists and doctors of
oriental medicine the only
difference in training is that
extra number of hours which
makes up approximately one year
the for the herbal come for the
herbal components sorry.
How crucial is the herbal
component to the acupuncture is
it is it a nice addition or is
it critically important.
It's a nice addition it does not
critically important to
acupuncture acupuncture is very
effective medicine on the on
standalone.
Members of the committee any
other questions discussion
senator Munoz to thank you so do
you feel the people are opposing
this so just trying to restrict
competition.
I I feel that they don't really
understand the dire situation in
our state.
I think that people believe that
there are six hundred and
seventy five active licensees
however I downloaded the list
from the Board website in
September and there are
four hundred and eighty six
active licensees in the state I
don't think people realize.
I also did an informal survey to
try to find out how many was
still in practice
and I have a number for that but
it's based on a random sample of
forty nine people.
so Mister chair it's followed by
what you said so.
It would just lowering the
standards.
Care it's just that.
Without the extra Fe they just
won't be able to receive the
herbal treatments is that is
that is it does that equity
statement yes it would be a
short to training but not to low
lowest and training it would be
identical.
Thank you for the answer that
I'm done that's all I have to
Senator McKenna chairman and
moved to pass we have a motion
for a do passes second.
Senator Maestas seconds at any
other discussion of this.
Yes the.
I keep I apologize
I'm I'm multi.
The tracks.
and I think for the first time
I.
Tears the scope of practice.
for me it's.
That I do have a question.
And your.
I I I I've had.
Hello the.
Where and and I **** of the
proponents the of the opponents
is about the opponents of Bill.
And why why.
Why is herbal medicine and and
acupuncture as I understand
some.
Why they need to go together I
just and I'm not a program just
as the assistance so I can
understand the system is as the
chair of the board about to come
up to the Mike please.
As the chair of the board of
acupuncture oriental medicine I
think that there's some
confusion about the actual
minimum standards that this bill
could create.
For example the bill says that
there's expedited licensure for
anyone who's ever been licensed
in the U. S. as an acupuncturist
essential.
Are states where some
chiropractors have gone to one
hundred hours of training as an
acupuncturist and are now
licensed acupuncturists in those
states this bill says that if
you've been a licensed
acupuncturist I quoted this
section for look for expedited
licensure then you would be
expedited which means that the
board of acupuncture Medicine
would have to render you a
license within thirty days of
receiving your application so
long as you ever had a license
fee with a hundred hours of
training in acupuncture this is
a lot of hubris that can happen
in medicine and has nationally
acupuncture is unique it's and
it's been practiced for
thousands of years but it's only
been regulated in the US well
now for actually about fifty
years and as I mentioned before
the NCCA when is the gold
standard making sure that their
safety this bill does not
actually require someone to be a
licensed acupuncturist that is
board certified by the excuse me
a board certified acupuncturist
so there's there's some
loopholes that I'm not saying
we're intended I'm not saying
that that was an intended
consequence this is the problem
of wind there's a bill that's
not discussed openly and deeply
with the whole professional
Things Considered when it's
filed so late in the game it
just it makes it very difficult
to understand all of the
unintended consequences that
could happen and I think there
are many great strictly.
Thank you so.
Thank you still the floor thank
you Mr chairman
The I just didn't hear the
herbal of our.
That I'm gonna.
Question that that that can come
with the.
As as we in Medicine Hat
As we get that we've done it
because we have such a shortage
of five percent and they're well
trained for nine percent stuff
and western
it and I have worked with that
throughout my entire career I've
trained with advanced.
But I am getting concerned that.
When I was trying back in the
day we all have to be broadcast
for hospitals the at peer review
we had quality review now we've
got people have been practices
and this is includes physicians
and nobody's looking over their
shoulder and as a principal I
think that's wrong I think
anyone has any type of.
Licensed professional.
Health.
Treatment of our diagnosis
treatment center health.
Should be involved in some
quality peer review program
other than for certification
which.
That there is nothing.
Straight out there.
Drug thousand come along and say
Hey.
Right now it's looking at that
fact putting this on the
schedule.
This is so I guess it yeah and
and I hear you say in this.
Have an exam and this and that
to look at satellite.
Also
I I Y. herbal
I believe.
Senator I.
At the risk of perhaps setting a
bitter inner or a degree of
hubris
I I may be among the the
nation's leading most
authorities on on this matter
I can tell you that the from a
baseline aspect of of the
herbalism one of the reasons
that New Mexico eight is that.
Herbs are not simply
nice to haves it would be
tantamount to performing surgery
without some component of
pharmaceutical grade
intervention post surgically it
is the in in pay I I practice in
an evidence informed manner the.
I can not imagine not looking at
the evidence because to your
point Senator the idea that that
there's not a degree of peer
review I believe that you are
absolutely correct and it's not
simply that peer review prevents
the hubris is Dr Taylor
mentioned it is a safety net for
our patients I have to admit to
you I am distraught that as a
physician a primary care
physician and I'm catching
really important things that a
patient who came to me recently
thinking it gastrointestinal
sorry but we just yes I'm may I
think you made your point the if
I answered your question Sir
than thank you.
Rhetorical I apologize Mister
chair there hours late I want to
get my bill on so.
You help me thank you very yes
Sir mmhm.
Okay Mister I'm down okay any
other discussion.
UP I would just I would just say
that the the thing about the
expedited license there are some
protections in is not wide open
as far as I can tell and
similarly with the with the
temporary licensing the there
are the board may may grant
those in and can set of
regulations it's not a matter.
I think that that.
And this.
Disrespectful I just.
From my reading.
Licensure with the.
Yes anywhere in the US there are
many people licensed with the
state that they that they would
grant the license if there
licenses an acupuncturist in
Massachusetts they were granted
a license here as an
acupuncturist not not a DO and.
Which is extremely but but but
if that state requires that you
be a chiropractor and then a
hundred hours that's different
from saying some guy walking up
the street in getting under
hours I mean it it just seems to
me that your chiropractic
training should amount to
something.
You know I I I understand the I
understand concerns but I mean
that the board is still
responsible for setting the
standards and and that doesn't
change the face.
Many have the any other
discussion with.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So tell me if this statement
after.
Because states is so different
so different stand.
Some of which you may accept
some that we can are the.
Find someone just because
they're certified someplace
other legislative.
Thank you are you dressing me
Senator yeah yes I can answer
that
three states are unregulated all
the rest of the states are
regulated almost all of them
except the California requires
the national certification
commission acupuncture XM.
Senator this is the same except
for the three other regulated
staysail make the New Mexico
state under
they all meet the acupuncture
New Mexico stand it they do not
hold require a the herbal
certification.
I want to okay any others
secretary will call the roll the
motion is a due pass motion
Senator Tallman seconded not
from Senator McKenna seconded by
Senator Maestas.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
out.
Senator I of Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes centers committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Clemente.
Center to the piano yes so you
have a tie vote.
Three to three.
And it just we'll set there
I I would suggest you keep
working with the with the
opponents to try to find some
way to to meet some of their
objections I'm concerned that we
don't have a school in the state
any longer after the
southwestern closes and and that
that's going to be we're gonna
have to find some way to
locating people coming in from
the person yeah exactly.
Okay I think yeah to explain as
well as senator and Mr chairman
you explain I of.
Thank you the chairman and
members of the committee okay
thank you Senator my SS and then
the last bill of the day will be
Senator Hickey right.
Everything else has been pulled
up.
Thank you for.
Senator messes three eighty nine
thank you very much thank you
very much Mr chairman honorable
members this is Senate bill
three hundred eighty nine it
deals with the sports authority
division of the tourism
department and it makes the
changes to the statutory
Obligations of the division by
debt by lowering them it takes
the sports advisory committee
from twenty five members down to
eleven nineteen public members
of down to ten and it does away
with the rulemaking
responsibilities in
In paragraph B. with that I'll
stand for questions it just
makes it in advisory board.
I know Mr chairman honorable
members are just diminishes that
doesn't change the duties of the
by Rick committee it just lowers
the members and it cuts the
duties of the of the director
of.
In light of limited funding and
house bill two but if you're not
going regulations.
What do you do thank you Mr
chairman the duties are
articulated in up the top bottom
of page one top of page two
essentially develop over strikes
this is current law develop an
overall strategy plan for
recruiting and retaining various
forms of professional and
amateur sporting events for the
purpose of tourism okay.
And then the other ones all
right let's go to the audience
no we can't there's nobody.
is there is an audience are you
in favor or against this bill.
The audiences of the torn she's
torn about.
Nobody online users members of
the committee.
You have.
Sport we heard this in rules so
we we were familiar with it.
The sport do wants it to us okay
in one sentence or less the
sponsor will tell us this
division within the state
tourism department promotes of
sports tourism.
It invite market that.
Do marketing that's what tourism
does in general but this is more
of like a like a broker of
sports tourism up identifying
infrastructure building
relationships with up with
entrepreneurs and fostering
relationships among sporting
event organizers and event
sponsor okay The New Mexico bowl
is their big event that they've
done some other things to this
is current law we're just
diminishing the duties in light
of limited funding
is going to Representative
Albuquerque Mr chairman
honorable members has.
But it's not in statute which
that's all I have please turn
your make up we can heard.
We have a motion.
Doing thank seconded by Thomas
secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yeah Senator Ingle.
Center mass this yes please
Senator McKenna yes Senators
maintenance Senator Sedillo
Lopez Senator AUMENT yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Thank you Mr and apologies for
missing the dinner I gotta go
carry a bunch of stuff and we
have your steak for the party
yes please all right thank you.
The final bill of the night
Senator Hickey which one is it
the four fifty three correct.
Mr chairman and committee I'm
coming before you today with one
clarification
Bill for eighty four I am
withdrawing and we have
consolidated some of that into
this out for okay four fifty
three and as Mr Chairman knows
and
those who might have been
through the LHS this summer we
want to make our health care of
that is provided to teachers and
state employees and the
municipalities who come into
those the name say APS Rick the
retiree health care us already
and the
GS do risk management division
anyway
they have not been taking
advantage of really doing the
ninety seven law where they were
asked to come together they
relied more on an older law and
have been doing contracting
independently in any event I've
had discussions with each of
these agencies at great length
about my the I should say my
consultants actually wrote this
fifty one page bill doing the
analysis of what other states
are doing to have more effective
contracting better health
outcomes and actually saving
money and then the differences
between the all these different
agencies in the budget is really
unfair all across the board and
particularly to the Nipsey a
beneficiaries the teachers who
are paying much more of their
salary on a percentage basis
then are APS and
the the the department so this
this paper did go to that the
governor's office of Debbie
Armstrong wrote you heard us
discuss it back and forth the
other night we need to Paul all
of our.
Public employees together into
one pool which then allows the
state to have much much better
negotiating capability and to
get to have better health care
costs
Other states that were headed
that are well ahead of us
include Oregon we're our new
director of the secretary's
Department health has come from
those who've moved into these
modern methodologies the the the
methodologies basically we've
been using kind of a track in
the time of wifi so what this
bill specifically does is to is
that it's a temporary zing bill
until the health care authority
can pull things together and
and been very specifically AB of
just quickly go through we
haven't had fully insured
contract bids it's only been
self insured contract bids the
problem with self insured
contract bids is that there is
no
no incentive for the that the I.
back agencies for the vendors
who do the contracting to
provide incentives and so we
have rapidly most of the
contracts between the the
vendors Presbyterian BlueCross
and now cigna
And their their contracts with
hospitals in particular are
percent of bill charges and as I
pointed out the other night the
rand health care study just done
on all hospitals across the
country and including New Mexico
showed that
the equivalency when that
windfall bill charges a
percentage there up is drawn
into a a standard of percent of
Medicare we're paying five
hundred percent and more to a
number of hospitals which is
unbelievable as a as a cost
where as I can tell you when I
was running a health plan we are
our percent of Medicare which we
contracted out we're running
between the particularly with
health systems and hospitals a
hundred and fifty and and
maximum two hundred fifty
percent so what this bill does
is it just to get a fully
insured bid as well as a self
insured bid it limits
the contracting as we go through
the development of the health
care sorority and the
consolidation of all these so
there the current four year
contract is up and so it limits
them to one year of a new
contract that they're going out
for and I do have an amendment
to that which would state and I
with this would be taken on the
advice of your analyst to the
Legislative Council that this
subsection E. limiting them to
one year
would sunset after December
thirty first twenty twenty four
so that they don't have to come
back every year and say what
we've got this other bill we got
take care of they can then once
they pull together and all these
other reforms that occur through
the health care authority they
would be able to do the usual
for here.
renewal process so we would add
that at the end of the very last
at the end of the yes.
we put it there not at the end
of.
Okay Mr chair analysts have
elevated purchasing she'll be
duration no longer than one year
this kid in we would sunset that
section the work with the
council of section the.
And then one.
Remind the committee that this
is a sub the.
This.
What.
We also have okay so of of of
moving do not pass on them.
the full Senate bill four fifty
three and a due pass for
discussion purposes on Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for four
fifty three.
And now we want to make an
amendment to that so Rep which
would add on page two line
sixteen.
A sense of cloth.
Just on that section V. line
nineteen at the end of the line
nineteen ninety nineteen year
right.
I.
Just just to subsection.
than than any future contracts
that any of these agencies
entered into again under this
new health care authority would
require them to use that the any
betters any vendors Presbyterian
blue crosses state agency would
have to negotiate contracts on
Medicare reference pricing no no
but you're still talking about.
The possibility of four distinct
contract.
For this one for this it should
be with it should be one but
they have to go out for contract
we we we thought of putting it
has requiring absolutely just
one contract across the board
that gets very difficult in
dealing with Rebecca because
they have the chair and the non
Medicare so it's okay go out for
one more year is you have gone
because we can't get all these
things in place by the time the
the con the R. F. P. those out
on January first I'm sorry the
private sector July first of
twenty three so we're so that
they're gonna be operate within
after an after after that the
one could be one contract yeah.
they would have to there was in
the seventies and the ninety
seven law
David at of that they could do a
JPA at JP joint powers agreement
was never done this requires
that they shall do a joint
powers agreement
this year and and that I have
one other word on line to I am
page for
we talk about that they have to
present the joint powers
agreement to the department of
finance and administration and
the legislative town finance
committee I inadvertently left
out for approval they're so or
approval for approval right and
the reason we're doing this is
that one of the things that that
has not been done as if uniform
set of measurement standards
requirements that all claims
data to be analyzed what have
you and so the LFC in the DFA
can't through their approval of
this joint powers agreement get
all that done rather than that
clouding up this bill with a
loan is giving them just three
months to get this.
Three cars you can't it's not
hard.
Okay so the Representative Jim
and has two aspects.
On page two after line nineteen
will insert is sunset clause.
And on page for online to after
committee will insert for
approval correct.
Okay thank you hello.
Okay.
And then finally this of this
deal with enrollment is there
another change I know there's
another change okay well let's
let's do with the amendment
first
is there a motion for the
amendment Senator Ingle moves
the MML seconded any opposition
to that to part amendment to
tiny little things.
Seeing none will consider the
bill amendment now what about
the open enrollment okay and
this one of the big problems is
that back in the day I actually
signed the very first contract
as CEO of the of the state that
the I. back came up with and
back at that time they had open
enrollments at every school and
so so and health plan really
could be competitive right now
you can just sign a thing saying
yeah same as last year and the
problem is that the third
entity signal came in only got
like four hundred members out of
a hundred and forty thousand
because they had no chance
really to get their products in
front of people and so this
requires yes going through that
difficulty but date in order to
have good competition you got to
have the open enrollment where
people are hearing and seeing it
so it requires that and then
finally this is an House Bill to
but you know some of us say well
this is going to cost us only
for one year and two hundred
thousand dollars this last piece
is that they are required to do
and a pay claims payment
integrity Review and what that
does cause a self insured
the hospitals are really good at
unbundling and maximizing the
claim payments and except for my
understanding I think we're hit
the may have done one
they think they're doing it and
and for pharmacy they're not
they're just I mean there's a
lot a lot of unbundling and
stuff the board of pharmacy
contracts and the name see it
did it just for one contractor
every here not each contractor
for all the years so this
requires in this will bring them
back tens of millions of
dollars.
So let me ask you a question
about the thing you just said in
connection is open enrollment.
The plans will put up the the
request for proposals.
They would select more than one.
And then leave it up to the
individual of employee or
retiree to select which of those
they wanted is actually works
yes and but but but with the
cost very then for the
individual employee well there
again Mr Chairman in this paper
we have a whole number of
reforms that need to be put into
what will be the subsequent
contracting cycle
but so we're saying yes for this
year they they can build the
plants the way they want to
they're not built particularly
fairly or efficiently but again
to write this all in this very
short period this the study
wasn't finished until November
to get that into the bill it was
just it was going to it is a
bridge too far but that's the
system that they're not going to
be picking a insurance company
to handle this they'll be
picking a number that that meet
their criteria yes and then make
that available to all the men I
and then within the the
insurance companies will have
different types of plans HMO PPO
hi HM of low PPO in the future
we want to have health savings
accounts we don't have that for
people who would like to get
them so there's a whole lot as I
said we're basically running
eight track tapes right now and
have been since nineteen ninety
seven and we're in the area why
I with the health care sorority
and with the knowledge of
Patrick Allen and and we could
be in a nut we will bring this
contracting into the twenty
twenties how much is the state
spending on the for contracts
now.
close to a billion dollars and
in that with I mean and and a
lot of that is just being
pocketed into hospital up bank
accounts and that needs to end
in this in the state I have
estimated some swag there's yeah
and and there's another thing we
could do with the chips program
in the state but there there are
somewhere between two and four
hundred million dollars of
savings when this new when that
the new contracting criterion so
forth comes forward thank
members of the committee.
Let's go to the audience I've
got to go to the audience
anybody here want to speak on
this bill either for or against
we only have four people in the
audience of.
I'm for okay you're all for it
good.
So Dr people in actual surgeon
military or the purple heart
The somewhat embarrassingly I
can't access my notes I don't
recall exactly what my
organization is saying that
we're in support of this war but
we do I do recall that we view
this is as reducing the burden
to individual patients at an
payers which is quite beneficial
obviously and if you already
have spoken on how the only
thirty percent of voters receive
their care in VA so anything
that you do that is good for
veterans who are receiving care
through Medicare Medicaid or
even private insurance even
state funded insurances of any
variety is good for all New
Mexicans in Indy drive good for
all Americans New Mexico gets to
a chance to set the model yet
again so it's just actually look
at it need my notes that's the
reason we're supports the bank
very good thank you doctor
anybody else did you want to say
anything about it from the.
There were at the risk of you
know our comment on one more
count.
On the other.
I'll put on the table
there was a technical concerns
raised by GSD that I think it's
worth addressing this issue for
you press that section.
That is that on page four
one to one is to
Is the LFC.
No role to play.
Thanks committee questions were
amending that section it's a
friendly I want to take that one
out so that for early right want
the legislature to have a hand
in the thing.
Yes
I.
Who says that.
Yes.
I.
Whether they know it that I I I
I believe that and and if and I
will talk with Randall Cherry
and if we need to make
legislation in the next
committee up to it there.
Budget goes to finance.
Yep talk to Randall talked
Randall you see with yeah I mean
there's really no finance part
to this that accept money
savings but we will make the if
we need to make well it is joint
powers agreement that they that
you have of getting approved so.
Okay good point thanks very.
But we have somebody nobody else
here in the audience are you
notice anything about this of.
We have somebody online who is
opposed to it nobody online and
support.
Jennifer bureau or BB are you
there.
Can you speak up or hold the
Mike right before your mouth
because we have a hard time
hearing you.
Yes is that better much better.
Thank you thank you many thank
you for hearing me my name's
Jennifer baby I've been in
insurance over twenty years
at.
Sanchez said this in the fifty
one page bill that's been put
together way too fast this
affects over ninety five
thousand plus New Mexicans
and in talking about fully
insured you know the sponsor
says there are
It fully insured the way to go.
Anybody
that works in insurance or for
large employers no you don't get
any savings in a fully insured
market strictly in a self
insured market which is why the
state of New Mexico Nancy APS
all large groups
Sandia labs Southwest Airlines
American Airlines you name it or
all of their self insured market
I don't think that this bill has
been given enough time to really
consider open enrollment on a
yearly basis the administrative
headache the time that that
would cost out of out of
taxpayer dollars for the
administration that that would
require would just be crazy and
the other big concern that I
have and it's been talked about
a lot this session and it was
brought up again with this bill
specifically the savings keeps
coming from well we're gonna
require Medicaid reimbursement
rates Medicaid reimbursement
rates we already have a huge
problem with doctors staying in
New Mexico we have a huge
problem with access to care if
we start cutting the commercial
contracts to be Medicaid
contracts we're gonna have a
huge problem in the state and
that's not all in affect public
sector employees that's going to
affect private sector employees
well my deal with on a day to
day basis thank you.
Thank you Miss Vigil and and
would you say you work for I'm
sorry.
I'm just I'm just here as a
private citizen I I own my own
company.
You own your own company.
Ideal okay probably a broker
okay.
So.
this is good for brokers all
right the the eight track works
well for brokers all right.
We I I would like to correct
some of her observations yes out
of fifty one page billets of
five people right it's a fifty
one page study and we aren't
talking about Medicaid rates
we're talking about Medicare
rates and percentages of
Medicare rates and for the
doctors say be somewhere one two
hundred next year I'm going to
bring a bill for three hundred
percent for primary care anymore
for commercial just because
we've got to deal with that
issue so it's Medicare rates
number two a number of large
employers are seeing how they're
getting taking in the with the I
mean they're they're seeing the
the the percentage of bill
charges contracts yeah they're
just going out and why why
should the state take the risk
when the insurer should take the
risk then they're going to care
then we are going to have to go
back and do claims reviews and
get and pull the money back and
so a number of large insurers
are starting to move and about
two states are also waking up to
that fact that put they risk
with the insurer and not with
the state to run around and
manage the sort of thing.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Then I.
The resemblance of.
Sixty one thank you once again
you turn your Mike.
Thank you
and so is that is that
problematic.
No I've been yes that do they
have to put in effort and the in
the first years of the bill they
did I myself was in schools all
over the state yeah I you know
if his pain as I was the CEO of
an organization going to school
selling loveless but what this
does then this creates
competition if you know there's
gonna be no competition you
don't really care you too is
that let it go so people need to
be informed of what their
options are much better than all
I just do what I did last year.
So so yes it does require but
the onus is on the the health
plans to go out and sell
themselves that's their expense
is not not the state's expense
or the individual employee is
not a complication for the
individual employee I mean they
just have to decide which plan
they want.
I am I and I don't know I I
again and just dealing with of
thinking about it and and what
she said because
I remember I changed health
plans when I left the university
and the year it was a.
By the time you all get your new
providers and everything.
It then the years up in the you
have to think about again and it
was I I I I thought here was too
soon because I had to do that
when they switched but.
It but I this is just she raised
it I thought I'd ask your
response that and good enough
response for me and Mr chair and
and then Senator
You know it may be that it goes
to every two years I mean what
we're trying to do is bring
efficiency the other night when
I spoke about that Massachusetts
is already experiencing only a
three percent increase in annual
care where is this state is
anywhere between six and twelve
percent a year sometimes
fourteen percent so these these
are things practice by other
states are actually being down
the cost of care and when you
put the metrics and you'll also
require them to prove that they
are improving health and that
would be part of again way too
fast to get it into a bill this
year it needs to be studied I
supported the health care
authority because I know the
person who hopefully is running
at its they're listening up
stairs
who knows how to do this in the
the materials I passed around
Massachusetts General is now
under a requirement to lower
their health care costs because
they're so out of cerrada Faso
this all depends on building
that database the comparisons
and the knowledgeable people it
will save everyone a huge amount
of money out of their pocket and
make it fair across the state I
did want to give the brief
retiree health care thirty the
chance to say something about
how much come up use of my.
Looking for an executive or tile
for thirty but sure it's on if
the.
That is an understatement okay
but we're the building isn't it
Madam on the opens with general
meant was we are actually open
enrollment we do have a switch
enrollment every year so members
do have the opportunity to
switch however I will state the
board did put in about four
years back that we have every
other year of open enrollment
for medical that's actually do
just due to a fiduciary aspect
for the authority because we are
different then like active
plants who are under you know
pre tax plans where they're
subject to section one twenty
five where they can just cannot
add and drop plans we're it'll
be different a retiree health
care thirty our members could
drop at any point and then come
back to our plan at the
beginning of the year and we
would be responsible for all
those costs I don't know that's
quite fair to some of the other
people who are paying those
insurance premiums you know
using the health care when they
need it rather ones that maybe
are coming on and off so we do
have a switch every year as far
as relates to medical and then
we do have a every other year
for the open enrollment and that
was a mystery to action taken by
the board just protect this
petition early and I guess it
does relate to pre Medicare and
Medicare great thank you.
Okay and and and one reason
we're doing this year hiatus is
they've got a lot of exceptions
that need to be built in and I
want to give them the
opportunity to do that.
But so will the committee or any
other discussion of the due
process the motion for due
process.
Second seconded by Senator
McKenna any other discussion.
Senator Clemente.
So.
For
seven.
What's federal law why isn't
this before.
You have provided I am sending
you my fifty one page paper and
the first half explains what
happened why things didn't move
from a track of wind actually
why I was coming in about two
thousand and eight the that that
LFC has done for reports what
everyone missed was the full
bill charges percentage of four
bill charges contracting going
on with the hospitals which is
where they're in the rand health
care report I will show you I
mean I I'm not gonna name of
they know who they are but
they're getting five hundred
percent of Medicare average a
number of them and that
basically is the taxpayers of
New Mexico have been building
their fund balances and whether
it's a national company or a
local company and that's we just
want to bring fairness.
Thank you for the.
Very good secretary will call
the roll Senator Gallegos
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senate committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes Senator is if you
know yes No let me just say
before over to six six zero you
have to do best we have the
dinner tonight at PF Chama I
hope you all can make it staff
and everybody welcome to come
and Sunday afternoon one thirty
what rumor we and here right
here right back here in our one
thirty one thirty Sunday
afternoon and we have three
survive this bills and then a
whole series of house House
Bills.
