Excuse.
It was.
Yes it is.
Yes.
The fifty.
Going to go ahead and get
started as a sub committee we
think senator McCain is under
way we think of senators to
Ingle a guy it goes and she
committee have have the
the left I have gone home for
the weekend and so will just
start as a subcommittee when
Senator McKenna gets here we'll
have a quorum and we can at take
official action so the first
bill that will be Senate bill
one ninety one Senator Gonzales
your approach to the.
Imponderable daylight savings
time.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think you committee of.
Mr chairman and members the
some.
We have been working with this
for you know a few years and in
the process you know we have
learned a lot and also you know
it has to be no to or
A lot of research has been done
also.
And one of the parts that I see
this you know
is that adjustment you know
twice a year.
And where I'm coming from more
is with the building in
education for thirty years I saw
how it really affected students.
And then the other part is that.
Seeing how.
You know several you know
several variables and several
things that happened you know in
this part will just for now this
past week we have seen of the
inclement weather that has being
no for example Intel's it will
so one day it was twenty five
below.
So by having the daylight saving
time that means students would
be.
In a position to to ride a bus
one hour earlier and the one
hour earlier in the winter is a
big difference you know very big
difference the other part is
towards the change from daylight
saving time two months standard
time in the fall that the last
few weeks students are in the
dark you know waiting for the
bus.
And that is one one portion of
it the other one is some the
adjustment that he takes to them
the adjustment that he takes to
the adults the adjustment that
it takes to the entire you know
all feature cation now the other
part that I have always looked
at this very serious is
We see where our rating is us in
education in New Mexico.
And
Right at the time when we come
in when we change from the
standard time to the daylight in
the spring.
A lot of the schools at this
time this is when they're
implementing in their annual
assessment achievement test you
know and that takes a big gulp
part because so the students
have being the you know with to
schedule Sen of part of their
reading this in part of their
rest you know at home and also
with the family members you know
how you know how it affects them
to.
So I see this you know
You know in many parts you know
how it really does affect this
part the other part is so with
counterparts of the state of
Arizona I have had a lot of
communication with and they're
just in one time there on the
standard time and it works very
well for them you know that the.
Arizona has very much stabilized
and this is what they use and
how he how it works so with that
Mr chairman of the research part
you know I do want to have a we
have a I have an expert witness
and he is Mr Jeff gentry Ph.D
professor of communications from
eastern New Mexico university
and he just of some facts for us
from the research part right
thank you senator the doctor
gentry go ahead.
Thank you very much Senator
Gonzales Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you very
much for the opportunity.
More people die if they live
under artificial time according
to new research published in the
journal time in society R. E. N.
M. U. research team.
Found evidence that indicated a
twenty two percent higher death
rate on the roads where people's
clock time is divorced from
natural time.
This corroboration includes a
large amount of evidence from
the field of chronobiology which
is the science of twenty four
hour physiological processes as
well as neurology.
R. E. N. M. U. based study is
only part of the picture.
We found not only is.
Artificial time a problem during
a daylight savings change over
but throughout the eight months
a year that the United States is
on daylight saving time and that
includes New Mexico we found
more than one thousand excess
deaths per year on the roads
attributable to artificial time.
And it isn't just the total
hours of sleep and this is
something that the chronobiology
community has been trying to
communicate but has had a
difficult time reaching the
public and policymakers it isn't
just the total number of hours
of sleep it is when those hours
occur in relation to the
movement of the sun.
It isn't just a temporary spike
during the change over to and
from daylight saving time but
road fatalities are reserves are
just the newest development in
this research only the newest
malady linked to artificial
time.
Daylight saving time is the
worst insult to human sleep
timing which as I mentioned
occurs for almost eight months
out of every year.
The problem is called social jet
lag which of professor till
Ronneburg of Germany has been
instrumental in developing this
line of research that as Senator
Gonzales said is very
established now over the last
twenty years.
Yes T..
Is a contributor to social jet
lag and social jet lag has been
found to increase the risk of
stroke heart disease obesity
dementia and cancer.
Permanent daylight saving time
in nineteen seventy four kids
children trying to walk to
school in the dark I was one of
those children a fifth grader
trying to walk to school in
Montana which was very dark in
the winter and this.
Brief experiment was quickly
discarded by Congress and was
not renewed for the next year.
Daylight saving time is
unnecessary.
It is we spring forward
precisely when the days are
getting longer anyway.
It's a convenience for some and
a detriment to other others.
The promise to energy savings
that went behind the nineteen
sixty six law have not panned
out in the least the most recent
study which studied Indiana
which was a perfect case because
they went from standard time to
daylight saving time in the mid
two thousands and they found
that energy use went up by one
percent rather than down by
anything.
Evening leisure is one of the
arguments made in favour of
daylight saving time and
permanent daylight saving time
however it comes at a heavy
price in terms of biliary eyed
mornings.
This is not the Truman show we
cannot Q. the sun.
Daylight saving time does not
add even a minute of daylight
during the summer or any other
time.
In conclusion I suggest the
chronobiology research drives
the final nail in the coffin of
the case for daylight saving
time much less permanent
daylight saving time.
If we care about the health and
safety of all New Mexicans we
will embrace permanent standard
time.
Thank you doctor.
Anything else Senator let's go
to the audience said just give
it a show of hands those who
favor.
keeping daylight savings time
away from New Mexico raise your
hand.
You do but you don't.
You do okay personally.
Do not official statement of the
social work organization.
Mr.
Is not working so we don't I'm
sorry the zoom is stopped
working so we're we're just kind
of waiting around to the
expected will it be up soon this
call.
And we do have
the list we have a.
Two people in zoom or propose is
there anybody here who opposes
this.
Okay we have to assume who do so
when we get back I will listen
to them and then we'll go to the
committee.
These.
The call
center was there are.
Except for the.
The.
Mr.
Senator percent.
Things to do.
Okay.
Given that consumed with
limited.
We go to say I.
Okay.
Because my daughter teaches the
thing I.
Representative you were just
we're back on so we have two
people assume who want to speak
in opposition and the first is
the.
Josh will order school.
Go ahead Mister Ross Perrot
School.
Thank you Mr chairman
members of the the committee my
name is structural spoke with
the Board industrials
disassociation is on that so
I have concerns with this
building because for periods of
the year it would produce out of
sync with with the time in the
past so and more importantly to
all of Mexico.
if you could imagine our port of
entry
is is one of the most important
things we have in our region and
if our time is incongruent there
would be an hour out of the day
there are four will be closed
business hours we vote into law
to have trucks waiting at the
port to cross into the United
States this will make our port
less attracted to Mexican
companies and investors looking
to Senator reset for investing.
Another issue with this bill.
Is with reguards workforce if
you can imagine if you are a
unemployed.
Here in some of the rest of.
But you live in all facets of
your child care options because
a little bit more complicated
when the timing that you have to
come in to work does not sync
with the time and I'll pass so
and the same goes with the other
way
that would affect current
employees now for potential
employees if you can imagine
like most other places a lot of
work places are having
difficulty finding employees and
this will make our region less
attractive for potential clients
so for those reasons we
sentences flow thank you Mr
chairman.
Good okay thank you Mr otoscope
and next we have the Jerry I
check of.
Also I think with the border
Authority.
Mr chairman members need can you
hear me yes we can hear you but
you have to hold the Mike real
close your mouth and really
project.
Okay so thank you for let me see
we are I'm the president of the
board national association we
have we represent the state's
largest industrial base about a
hundred and thirty members of
more than twenty years ago all
council and wanted made the
decision to go on Mexico on the
like seating times we can truly
be a four plex region and we
could grow this region it's been
highly successful R. for
centuries now the sixth largest
on the entire U. S. special more
stated spent millions and the
private sector billion in
investing in Santa Theresa
What's going to happen if this
bill passes is several things
number one companies that are
leasing their space in Santa
Theresa are can be and how we're
different now different time
zone from their suppliers or
buyers want us well past four
months of the year we will see
those leases dry up and we will
see those companies will tell
pasal and I'm I'm all right I
tell you because I've been in
this business thirty two years
the our competition possible
uses against any prospect that
come to the region saying you
don't want to be there the
reason you're coming here to be
tied into the other side of the
border plus when we recruit
companies it's going to be a
hard sell to say Hey come to
southern New Mexico would not
run in different time zones once
that in the year but you know
that one second that's
absolutely going to be a killer
and so we spent so much money
and so much time building this
industry based and without
understanding the implications
for what we're doing down here
this this is disastrous.
Okay thank you Mr but.
We'll go to the committee next
to anybody with questions from
the committee.
Senator gave us.
Mr chair Senator I think the
last time we brought this I
brought up same type questions
my why.
I would rather stay on daylight
savings time but in in in
listening to the to an
opposition of you had any other
discussions with any of the
other businesses on how this
would affect them I understand
you're trying to look out for
the safety of the kids are in
late driving of from morning put
it does the standard businesses
to have to change time to adjust
to to the schedule.
Well Mister chairman no central
guide so the mobile to my expert
witness.
I I have a very happy update for
those who care about trade with
the nation of Mexico Mexico no
longer observes daylight saving
time as of a bill passed there
last year if we want good
business with Mexico then we
will stay with standard time in
other words or get off of
daylight saving time The New
Mexico stays on standard time
the nation.
I'm sorry you can just yeah well
I mean I have this here from I
mean I already knew about this
because it was well known that
Mexico has joined Arizona in
observing standard time but I
you know I have this here from.
Well from time yet from a
daylight savings time website on
Sunday October thirtieth twenty
twenty two the central zone in
the mountains New Mexico
including see you to see Dodd
what is and Ojinaga turn the
clock back one hour for the last
time at two AM it was one it one
AM Mexico has dumped a daylight
saving time now as far as el
Paso you know I would say join
us because our study found that
West Texas aside from el Paso
which is in mountain time
suffered eighty five percent
well that was
that was Amarillo eighty five
percent more deaths over a
twelve year period than the
national average Midland Odessa
three times the national
average.
Mr chair Senator gentle so I
just think through the
discussion about Mexico what's
is due to the Navajo Nation in
Arizona.
Mr speaker.
Though.
The Navajo Nation is the only
part of Arizona that does
observe daylight saving time and
as far as I know they do all
right we would be but yeah we
would be joining the rest of
Arizona going on permanent
standard time Miss Mister
chairman Senator then we would
be in conflict with that portion
of the Navajo Nation that's why
in just thank you for that Mr
arms etcetera I think we are
trying to stir in the part of
the to is here this year
daylight in there that because
they will I guess they they they
would swing back and forth that
go ahead right Mr chairman I
apologize but yes I mean just as
I would.
Urge Texas to form standard time
because two thirds of Texas
should be in mountain time so
they are among the worst but I
would also encourage them to
join Mexico in Arizona and New
of the Navajo Nation in
observing standard time.
Thank you for that Mr one more
question I'm gonna apologize
because I don't have time to
watch for this thank you tell me
what the federal looking to do.
Mr center.
Hello Mr chairman of senator the
meal to a witness Hey yes Mr
chairman of the US Senate
unconsciously with no discussion
and with no debate passed
permanent daylight saving time
the house has not touched it and
is not planning to touch it.
Thank you Mr chairman like say a
public give more lap that I
didn't have time to watch it but
I appreciate the discussion.
Thank you just to follow up on
that.
Is it true that to.
Stay on standard time we don't
need congressional approval the
to go this two year round
daylight savings time we would.
Is that the case.
Mr chairman of the of the yes
that that is correct the default
is standard time if we want to
so any state can adopt standard
time there there's a collection
a small number of states that
have passed resolution saying
once the federal government
allows it which is you know like
at a certain number of states
then it will kick in but no
without congressional approval
they cannot however states can.
Revert to standard time
permanently by the state.
Anything else Senator Gallegos
is the the.
Anybody else what's will the
committee senator Maestas thank
you thank you Mr chairman thank
you Senator Gonzales thank you
gentlemen we should bring this
work site I agree that we should
have one time.
but I'm I'm I I lean towards
daylight savings time.
for two reasons one I think up
more daylight in the evening
cuts down on crime.
And more time in the evening
gives parents more time with
their kids in the daylight
setting.
But but but students would have
to go to school and at night
time essentially do you
Would anything prohibits school
districts or states.
Changing that the start time of
the school how do you see that
play out has has any states
adopt adapted to that reality.
What are your thoughts thank you
Mr Mr chairman of the Senator
Maestas some.
When no superintendent will
first of all when I was in
school we did have a later start
I remember that very clearly you
know we just start earlier and
then we would pretty much we
would invite like three thirty.
And what does superintendent
this is one of the things that
came up that they wanted to
adjust the time.
The the boy did of the New
Mexico activities association
came unglued.
Because right away would
completely conflict with the
sports car portion.
And the you know so we never did
you know but with the something
like this we would be you know
On the schedule that we would
have to work with the.
New Mexico activities
association.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman Senator Gonzales but
the state theoretically could
move everything.
Together
so let me just get this clear if
we.
Tell me about the but I'm saying
this correctly so state
government could go to standard
time.
We have full authority go to
standard time if we want our
state to go to daylight savings
time we would we would need the
federal government to do that
for us Mr chairman that is
correct.
And then the Texas Mr Evans
center with the Texas government
within petition the federal
government on behalf of the Paso
county.
well yes this is the state of
Texas could
You're you're saying have I'm
sorry Mr chairman I believe the
center saying that the state of
Texas might exempt el Paso.
From daylight saving time.
I'm not sure I'm sorry I'm not
sure if they can do that but all
of Texas really should
get rid of daylight saving time
Mr Chairman because they have a
severe problem with highway
deaths as we find as we found.
Understand Mr chairman a third
without it but el Paso county is
on mountain time right and then
the rest Texas is on central
time I'm just curious as to
whether the Texas government
can.
Control the time can can have
apostle County go to standard
mountain time without the
federal government involved.
Will Mr chairman of Senator mais
the some.
I would hate to answer for
another state but I'm willing to
follow up you know and see what
we can find out.
Okay thanks for it on and the
default to standard it sounds to
me like they could fit I would
defer to the expert on the and
I'm not
How they could do it legally and
quickly right.
If you want me to speak to the
sure okay yes Mr chairman I I
can now that I've thought about
that yes states are allowed to
have different time zones within
their state just as they do now
so there would be nothing
precluding el Paso from adopting
mountain standard time.
It's my understanding that mako
went to one time zone with the
exception of the border states
that the that but that's not
your understanding gentleman Mr
Chairman.
Well Mister chairman Senator of
let me defer to.
Right feeding thank you Mr
chairman the the central and
mountain time zones in Mexico
are very similar to ours the
only difference is that they no
longer spring forward I see.
That includes Mr that includes
the border states so so for four
months out of the year to what
was a different time than
apostle in New Mexico.
Mr chairman that would fall.
Okay yeah so it's new to me as I
was always taught that to all
was simple because of the border
because of the border trade but
anyway thank you so much thank
you Mr.
Anybody else what's the will of
the committee.
I had suggested that we that we
temporarily to table this so
that we could hear center for
the version of this on Monday
does anybody want to follow
through on the.
Or you have.
Yes.
Is that all right to temporarily
table is that a motion the
debate with the senator yet you
have this gentleman what.
We could do if we table it would
have to then take it off the
table so this is just keep it on
the calendar is just yes just
just hold off and that reminds
me cut thank you this is I would
suggest we just just up keep it
on the counter.
This is rolled over rolled over
from a different but we've had
the debate I think you you you
and the economic for the expert
witness to make the trek back
and if you want to go skiing
this weekend or something other
than otherwise if you find the
best.
The representative Mr chairman
that is fine.
Which reminds we've been
requests with the no smoking in
the scene is filled with the
number that was.
Photo today but if the committee
wants to pull that off.
Reconsider.
Montoya.
The ten.
LFC on number.
Number.
With the number of.
This number.
One one thirty.
Thank you.
Know somebody who yep that is
somebody who voted in favor of
tabling it needs to make the
motion.
And does anybody have you voted
for it I think.
We have the count on the we do
not know I I know I did so let
me make the motion I I move that
we we take it off the table and
it and of but it takes a
committee vote to do that so
called the can you call the
roll.
This is the this is the bill
that would outlaw smoking in
racinos and we don't we won't
hear it today we would we would
then put it on Monday's agenda.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you for your vote I just
want to be sure of the words
right yes to put it back yes
take it out there to take it off
the table and have it be
because.
Senator.
Senator Maestas no.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez he's a
future Senator Thomas yes
Senator T. fifteen yes okay so
we'll we'll take it will
reconsider it on Monday.
That doesn't mean we necessarily
will pass it on Monday but will
reconsider them so now we'll go
to my bill of crisis triage.
Senate Bill.
Three ten.
And we have in the and we do
have an amendment I think.
Twenty two.
No I.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee of this bill is a
product of the requests made to
the interim committee when we
had a hearing in it was actually
in Los crucis was the he was in
Los crucis at the Los crucis
meeting of the interim health
and Human Services Committee and
that was brought to us by the
Jamie Michael who's the head of
the Dona Ana County Human
Services health and Human
Services department and and they
have the first crisis triage
center in the state is located
in Los crucis is actually up in
operating and I understand now
Santa Fe is as one and
Albuquerque is very close to
having one those are the only
three crisis triage centers in
the state what what is a crisis
triage center well.
It's a health facility that has
to be licensed by the department
of health.
It provides the.
As of as the name indicates in a
crisis a place for people can be
taken and and and and stabilized
and a decision made about what
the next step would be whether
they need to be admitted to a
the the the.
A full blown Hospital or if if
they could be dealt with in a
detox facility or if they need
to just to be allowed to sober
up or or come down from their
high and then be sent home with
some kind of treatment plan in
order but that the ideas the
focuses on the word triage this
is a place where they're taken
and an assessment is made whats
what do they need.
And
it it's it it ties into the use
of of.
Crisis response teams instead of
sending police out necessarily
on all these cases of somebody
who's acting weird in a store or
in the neighborhood and and
causing a disruption instead of
sending police who are
necessarily wealth train for
that the send of the crisis
response team they try to hold
the person in in in some kind of
a the the the.
Much of moderating situation and
then they they they can be taken
to the when you have one they
can be taken to a crisis triage
center.
So that's what this was in the
issue was that the EMTs under
the M. T. law we're had didn't
have the choice of taking them
to crisis triage centers they
had to take them to the either
they only they only had two
choices jail for emergency room
and so we wanted to add to
crisis triage centers to the
options for the empties.
And for please yes not not just
CMT's built for please so
that was so we drew up this bill
and we had some comments and
we're trying to deal with the
comments in the amendment so
can I go through the amendment
than.
The state.
So what we've done is maybe
maybe the
the comments were in the line of
well you're just a crisis triage
center you can at you know you
can mandate people to go to a
crisis trio said so it because
the language in the in in the M.
T. love jails and emergency
rooms show was a shell so we're
trying to make it clear that
this is this this is a may that
they don't have to take into a
crisis triage center that just
adds an option to and we're
trying to make that clear and
then on page seven line twenty.
So we had it in our therapist.
And and my expert witness it was
Jamie Michael from the Dona Ana
County health and Human Services
department can explain why we've
added in our therapist.
Thank you senator
Mr chair the reason we've added
our therapist is so this
language will be consistent with
the Medicaid rules so the
Medicaid behavioral health rule
they listed the specialized
behavioral health providers and
they have a list of the
providers by license type and
this provider type was missing
from this bill so we're making a
match we know that workforce
shortage in New Mexico so we
want to take advantage of as
many licensed providers as we
can so it's just making it
aligned with what New Mexico
Medicaid will reimburse and
recognize licensed providers
that can do this work.
Then with that Mr chairman I
would move the amendment.
The.
The second.
And.
There's no opposition.
Right.
And and anything else you want
to add about the bill in general
what we needed.
Thank you senator Mr chair just
up briefly again we want to make
sure that when someone is in an
extreme crisis and law
enforcement or EMS has been
engaged that they have a choice
and they can also go to crisis
triage centers I think many of
us have been to an emergency
department and the environment
there is not an environment for
someone who's experiencing
emotional distress or some kind
of mental health crisis crisis
triage centers on the other hand
people come in there's no
waiting room there's no wait
time so they are immediately
greeted by appear by someone
who's had a similar experience
it's a very common place it
doesn't look like a hospital so
it's not scary and we have
evidence in real world
experiences for decades that
show that pathway into the
treatment system is much more
effective for patient outcomes
so it's a better place for
people to be treated and we want
to make sure that people have
access to crisis triage centers
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman with that
will stand for questions.
Opposition to this bill.
The thing I want to support.
That.
You don't have your wheelchair.
Early.
The Mr chairman members of the
committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyists for the
county of Dona Ana this effort
has been under way for I don't
know the last ten years or so.
And you know they got the
building and and now finally
they get an access to the
resources I I presented this
bill before New Mexico counties
and the one thing that they had
to say was you know currently
and and these are all the
sheriff office's the one thing
that we don't know is that we're
taking these people to the wrong
place.
And now we have a better
solution so we we Stanislavsky.
Thank you for all anyone else in
support of this.
The gentleman.
Mr chair of my name's Andrew
Lindstrom the former director
The New Mexico behavioral health
services division and the former
CEO of the New Mexico behavioral
health collaborative and help
promulgate of the rules and
regulations throughout crisis
triage centers and a series
initiatives we made was enabling
law enforcement and emergency
medical services to drop off at
a crisis triage center
I'm one of the contributors site
currently work with our I
international and we work with
the department of health and
Human Services substance abuse
mental health services
administration in a publishing
best practice guidelines for
behavioral health crisis care
and what is in this bill is
correct the one of the things
that we didn't get right the
first time when we did this
ritual statute and the follow up
regulations law enforcement is
very quick to tell you that they
spend a great deal of time with
that they refer to as wall time
an emergency departments if
they've got somebody who's
actively suffering from
psychosis course educated
eccentric they have to stay in
the the with that person and
tell they are triage should have
an appropriate disposition
within the crisis triage centers
we basically say no all right to
have these we don't say no we
say yes a hundred percent of the
time it's no wrong door does
require advance medical
clearance were adequately
staffed for the anticipated
acuity level and typically law
enforcement is off the premises
in under five minutes and in
Maricopa county a couple of
years ago we did a study and we
say third the equivalent of
thirty seven full time
equivalent police officer time.
With them on their public safety
mission back on the streets
rather than having to do rest
Brookings and detention as well
as wall time in an emergency
department so I strongly urge
support of this legislation
thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in strong support of
this any time we can divert
behavioral health crises from
either jail or from the hospital
we consider that to be a very
good thing we really like this
thank you very much.
Okay.
The
Members of the committee.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr just a
few questions so
just trying to understand.
In in the Los crucis area they
have this we have a statewide
program on this triage Mr Mr.
You can.
Mr chair Senator grey ghost
there are three licensed triage
centers in New Mexico but there
is a state plan to build out
similar services across the
state it's going to be more
difficult to have free standing
crisis triage centers and some
of the rural areas so we want to
make these facilities regional
and the state's behavioral
health services division has a
plan to make them regional and
to build up similar types of
services so if you don't have a
facility maybe that we can have
a partnership with hospital or
clinic have mobile services or
on call services so there is a
statewide plan so everyone has
access to crisis care that is
more appropriate than a jail or
emergency department Mister
chair Mister and.
all tell the Ameren Hobbs has a
hospital that's been vacated and
they're looking to try to have
some kind of behavioral health
center there so this would work
really well with the that Mr Mr
my next question and is training
for your first responders is our
separate training for this I I
just could perceive that
regardless what you do they're
gonna be aggravated and agitated
I just didn't want them to be in
the front line not be prepared
Mr Mr.
That Mr Mr chairman again I'll
let the agency Michael's
because.
Mr chair Senator the the beauty
of this model is that it's been
studied for over a decade and
Senator hundreds of thousands
encounters have been studied and
it it's just such a different
model and one specific
differences that it includes
peer support workers and when
someone who's in crisis engages
with the peer support worker
someone who has some some
similar experience just that
alone de escalates the situation
where sometimes having a law
enforcement officer who's in
uniform and has a different
presence about them can escalate
a situation so the the training
for the people that work within
the facility is all about that
type of engagement and the
training for law enforcement is
very simple bring everyone here
we don't ask law enforcement to
make clinical decisions in the
field we don't ask them to make
medical decisions and it's not a
if then do this and if that do
this it's a triage center so
they come to the facility and if
the nurse who's doing the triage
determines that that the
individual needs a higher level
of care than they take action to
get them to the next level of
care so it's really simple for
law enforcement and that's why
law enforcement like the
international C. I. T. group
endorses this model and other
associations related to law
enforcement work thank you for
that Mr stern
then just to other assumed
question just Santa Fe have this
in place here.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos Santa
Fe has a similar crisis triage
center they don't operate twenty
four seven yet it takes a while
and communities to staff up to
to these facilities we do work
closely with Santa Fe they also
want to receive more referrals
from law enforcement and EMS but
again every facility is a little
different that's why we don't
want it to be a mandate you have
to take voluntary or you can't
take voluntary one every
facility to have the option
thank you for that Mr chairman
chairman in his Michael's
yesterday there's a lady there's
very unruly hair and left the
capital and got arrested with at
this in present she would go on
to a facility to be evaluated
instead of to jail is that
correct Mr.
Mr chair Senator absolutely this
is all about transforming how we
respond to people who are having
a medical emergency it shouldn't
be a crime to have an illness
some of the symptoms exhibited
are so frightening so we
automatically want to call law
enforcement but is not a public
safety issue it's not a criminal
issue it's a health care issue
and now the behavioral health
community is standing up and
able to provide these resources
so we can respond better so
that's a great example thank you
for that Mr chair of promises my
last question and so if.
The police officer who bring you
a person and then it their
valuations and they part in a
dramatic situation this
Metal then they would take
control and put him in in a jail
is that how that would work if
they don't have the trees up
triage need Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair Senator Lumix from
understanding so you're talking
about someone who has committed
a crime but is also experiencing
a behavioral health crisis not
necessarily so just think in the
lady yesterday.
very I'm really having a hard
time if when they took part here
Mister chair Mister to your
facility and you Valerie
valuation and it wasn't a mental
instability it wasn't anything
like that it could have been
just an anger issue maybe
lashing out of someone what
happens that person then if it's
not in triage condition.
This chair Mr chair US senator.
Anyone who comes to the the
facility will be evaluated for a
quick medical and then there's a
clinical and psychiatric
evaluation and like you're
saying if there is no need for
further behavioral health
services it is still a place for
the person to take a deep breath
have a moment to to calm down
have a glass of water just have
some some quiet time so as they
leave the facility in back into
the community they're no longer
agitated exhibiting those
behaviors and often times people
will remember that experience so
maybe the next time before it
gets to that level of distress
they know that there's a safe
place that they can go take a
deep breath see some familiar
faces and hopefully avoid those
levels of prices in our
community.
Thank you Mr chairman problems
of my last question I do have
other thoughts but all yield
with that thank you.
More than Mr
I just some questions about this
so you mentioned we're not
asking law enforcement or EMTs
to make a clinical decision in
the field and I understand that
how to the how this devilish
consent of the individual you
know we're talking about if it's
voluntary involuntary and
someone that is having a fair a
crisis they're not really in a
state of mind to give consent so
can you talk about the.
The Mr Chairman I'm gonna go
ahead Lee Jamie answer that's a
critical question
Mr chair Senator so this is bill
the the original.
Law allows law enforcement
officers to take people into
custody and transport them
somewhere for psychiatric
evaluation.
During certain circumstances so
when they can't consent because
it's for their their own good
and it meets these these
definitions it has it's pretty
strict that the definition in
the circumstances so it would be
the same process for the law
enforcement agency and law
enforcement agencies all have
different internal process these
for how they handled this type
of situation but on the side of
the crisis triage center it
would be the same as an
emergency department you walk in
you get services that person is
now seen as a patient or guest
within that that facility.
Just if I could add in something
that it did.
Where the bill is right now it
does not require that the person
be voluntarily asking to be
taken.
The the policemen or the empty
can decide this person is in no
condition to to walk away from
this in jail is not appropriate
we are going to take you whether
you like it or not and they will
then evaluate whether their
condition requires
hospitalization for or not was a
come down maybe they no longer
need to be held there but it
we've taken out the purely
voluntary aspect of it.
Mr chair and senator where I'm
going with this is maybe I can
be more specific so someone's
having a crisis law enforcement
you know they they can't really
consent in the bill it really
goes back to the amendment right
so these these CTE CD's what if
they adopt a policy that says
well we're only taking voluntary
patients would be because not
says may so we're on taking
voluntary but.
So this is what in other words
we're not taking involuntary but
then law enforcement picks them
up how do we how do we tell that
their involuntary it around
they're going to are they gonna
say I can't take you here
because I can't establish
consent because the CDC says
we're only doing voluntary DC
where I'm getting.
The.
Mr chair Senator so in those
situations law enforcement would
do what they've always done it
take the individual to the
emergency department so in
different communities so Santa
Fe is going to have to
communicate with their law
enforcement agencies whether
they're crisis triage center is
going to serve both Dona ana
county is going to have to
communicate with our law
enforcement and let them know
who the the population is that
we serve in the in Mr chair
Senator I and I I kind of
thought you you would go there
and so I you guys clearly have
had a lot of a lot of meetings
about this I.
It's not having into these
meetings I mean it'll be my
preference to to just to
standardize them and to say if
you can be licensed by the O.
H..
Take the involuntary once
because then you're gonna have
this issue in the field where
did we establish consent or not
did we establish bonds it
voluntary or involuntary in a
lot of these advocates that
comes present here today with a
common they say no you can't
take these people because you
can't sessions heard all those
talks and so it would just be
I'm gonna move on from this line
but I
I was gonna bring up during the
amendment I probably should have
but I I just wonder I mean do
you will me just ask you do you
think it needs to be more
standardized where they can just
say all of them are taking
involuntary that way the the
cops don't have to worry about
establishing consent we're
trying to figure out if it's a
voluntary involuntary we just
bring them all because that's
what you want you want to bring
them all to the CDC's so but if
we if we do a may.
Then there's going to be this
judge we're we're saying well we
don't want them to make a
clinical decision well they're
gonna have to make some kind of
established okay the places
Senate doesn't take involuntary
summertime of the are the the
rest of the cop to make a
decision there.
Will the Mr chairman and senator
and senator the the decision is
made by the facility ahead of
time and they I mean it's it's
not like it's you know the
secret information that or for
will vary from patient to
patient it'll be clear in Santa
Fe the problem is if you're not
staff twenty four seven.
And you don't have
highly skilled staff available
to make to accept people and not
an involuntary basis then you
you probably have to say will
will only take you if you're
willing to come involuntarily
and that's fine and if so but
but but it it wouldn't be left
to the individual police officer
to decide if if this person says
I don't want to go there that's
fine they then in Santa Fe they
know they have to take him to
the emergency room.
Mr etcetera I mean that I'm fine
with that I just I I just think
in a lot of these scenarios the
on some of they're just having a
hard time or they just had some
crazy thing happened and they're
very volunteer that's clear but
I think we want a lot of these
other folks to go to the CDC's
also and so all I guess that I
can move on from that I just
think
For uniformity it maybe I could
respond to stir Mr chair Senator
I agree and in doing Ana County
our contract says.
Once this is changed our
contract will say you will
accept both voluntary and
involuntary and they will have
to do some additional training
and I think we have the
resources and Anjana county to
have a facility that staff
twenty four seven and can do
this I wouldn't want another
community to have to close their
facility because they couldn't
meet this standard so in some
communities having a triage
center that can serve most
people is better than having no
crisis triage center and I think
over time the the state's effort
is to go towards this model
everywhere so I think as we
build capacity in our local
communities we will get there
but I wouldn't want to
unintentionally have to close
the facility because they can't
do this that's why I like having
the option to no I I see that Mr
chair Senator I I understand
that I just.
and what about liability would
about liability for the centers
upon discharging patients.
That that certain in their
delays lessons that that meet
certain criteria for discharging
contaminants for.
Mr chair Senator yes they have
to meet criteria for discharging
and their dish charges more than
just a piece of paper that's a
referral it's usually a let's
call and make sure you have an
appointment scheduled they have
transportation services so they
can physically drive and
individual to another level of
service.
Most of the the folks who dished
charge more crisis triage center
discharge into outpatient
treatment and again it's an
established some of them are
discharged into inpatient
treatment and again they give
them the right they give them
the transportation over so it's
a great place to be connected to
care and those standards are
built in the licensing and the
model and all of the the the
guidelines that are part of this
work thank you Mr chair Senator
the my last line of questioning
is
treatments that are offered
are they are they are they
equipped to provide acute
medical treatment as well and if
so could you give me just maybe
not a comprehensive list but a
few examples.
To
Mr chair Senator I don't work in
our facility and I don't have
the medical background but they
do they are staffed twenty four
seven with the nurse a
registered nurse so the
registered nurse does the
medical assessment just like
they would in an emergency
department and then they also
have independently licensed
clinicians and peers so they are
able to find all of the
evaluation and and assessment
they also licensed to administer
medication so they can help
people who are detoxing and help
medically manage that process so
there there.
A lot of the medical
intervention is very similar to
what somebody would receive.
At a hospital.
And Mr chair Senator and and
that's where I was kind of going
so just let me give you a
specific example someone that
has
of potentially life threatening
condition like alcohol detox
if if if a person is in DTE's
and they present to CDC can the
nurse just right then and there
give them the treatment for that
just like an injection or some
kind of by mouth medication some
of like the yes it Mr chair
Senator and they don't have to
call the the physician of the
call some other some other
advanced practice provider or
anything like that they can just
kind of do it or house at work
the the nurse and the the
pharmacy license that they have
but the crisis triage centers
allows them to immediately
administer medication in
absolutely that that exact
situation to help with safety
talks and help people who are
intoxicated.
Our great thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
thank you senator Ortiz Pino
for bringing this to the
committee and to follow up on a
couple of points
Right my oldest child has been
involved in every stage of this
and to running complete to
rehabilitation a rehab programs
for folks for over a year and
essentially what what what would
happen and and a crisis
situation and particularly Ed.D
tax situation if it was going to
go into realty tax and that the
individual there's a long
standing history but you but
this gives them the time to calm
down and voluntarily want to go
to that
rebuilt RTC and but if they need
to do detox I'm imagining I just
want to get confirmation that
they would then go to the
hospital for prolong the tax to
keep them out of the deities
which could be two to three days
and then they would go to the
appropriate
placement hopefully and an RTC
and that kind of situation.
Mr chair Senator Hickey you're
absolutely correct so if the the
nurse does the assessment and
there's a higher level of
medical care needed at that
moment they're safe they're
under the nurses care they have
the medication but they will
immediately transition to a
hospital that can provide that
higher level of care correct
thank you another question a
little bit different Mr chair
and Senator the
the the the pier.
Professional and and as you say
the ten year history and and
anyone wants to go into debt to
this doctors of down is from the
university can can take you
there the and that's incredible
programs ideas tablets in
western Massachusetts and
particularly the pier programs
are these peers who are working
with them are they licensed or
are they do they go through a
voluntary.
I mean are they just kind of a a
good dude working for some money
but I have a license.
Mr chair Senator they are all
certified in New Mexico they are
certified peer support workers
and I appreciate the the
qualifying word that you use
professional peers they
absolutely are professional
peers so they have the training
to go along with their
experience.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
and an additional question
related to that
Because these individuals who
are certified care professionals
really are becoming the standard
of care for treatment with
individuals of substance use
disorder
it's important that we attract
and retain them so as they get
their certification are we in is
there some standard borders
something that is going to
oversee how they get compensated
so that they're not just working
for a nickel that are in a way
that means that in particularly
if they get good at this you
know that this can become a real
career for a number of people
and it has people do sober
housing so I want to be sure
that it's a career that that can
sustain their livelihood.
Mr chair Senator New Mexico has
the office of peer recovery in
support and they provide the
certification in the training
they're also providing support
for employers because employers
need to know how to be good
employers of for people who are
certified peer support workers I
do not know if there's anything
that mandates the hourly wages
for for this this profession.
Up thank you and Mr chair where
we're I again where I'm moving
here I mean right they can't do
that
but again you know as we're
dealing with our behavior health
professional shortage in in on
where we're going to get a
little help out of our Medicaid
plan you know it's nice hundred
twenty percent but a hundred
twenty percent of Medicare New
Mexico is like about sixty
percent of Medicare in Texas so
they're gonna get you know I was
that was a nice idea there
wasn't far enough in the state
needs to go further and again
I'm concerned that we're going
to be able to attract and retain
this talent which leads to my
last question and something to
be coming up in the bill that
I'll be bringing forward are
these crisis centers
credentialed by insurance plans
so that if some of these
individuals either through
Medicaid if they're on it or
getting amount of Medicaid or at
and you know we we all think
it's only Medicaid you know it's
all the rest of this is the
other million people in the
state we're on the same boat
sometimes and so will they be
able to be credentialed by
health insurers so that the
senders can charge for the
service.
Mr chair Senator right now
Medicaid hasn't established
right and reimburses for for the
services unfortunately private
insurance has not caught up yet
so in our community the county's
Health Care indigent program
covers that gap but because
these facilities are licensed by
the New Mexico department of
health they can get credentialed
and would only behoove the
insurance companies because a
visit to a crisis triage center
is a lot less expensive than a
visit to an emergency department
up Mr chairman if I if I may
offer a little advice having
lived inside that industry for
awhile the different times
the the crisis centers need to
approach the insurance companies
to become credentialed and to
establish reimbursement rates
and if I am at and others sigh
and many in the house get our
bill of mental health parity
through
they the insurance companies
will not have a choice but to if
if if if they meet the
credentialing are to have to pay
for the services and and the
other critical thing is is that.
Senator puts him in line for the
additional services is
everyone's heard me say here a
hundred times there isn't
sobriety without a year of
sobriety so it's all got to be
connected out for that entire
year but I encourage you as you
move these programs forward to
get that credentialing from the
insurers out we'll do our part
here to make sure through the
OSI that they are hearing to
mental health parity laws and
and that there is finances that
support this and so finances are
such a going back to where it
was before that we turn this
into a viable profession for
fear counselors.
Thank you very much.
On that point I would offer just
a different idea I would I would
keep in state funded
Just a different idea I think
the state and the public has a
vested interest in these
facilities and I think they
should be funding it directly
not just different you know
we're we're different finance no
I just want to throw it out
there that there are people are
legislators in New Mexico that
will different I'm I'm I'm my
point on your point
Hi I'm I am not at all
suggesting that the state and
the counties and cities do not
help fund these absolutely have
to do that because so many or
even I I mean somebody is these
folks are uninsured but also you
know more than we who are
insured like to admit we need
the centers as well as a number
of times a lot of families just
don't even know where to turn
and I think as time goes on they
will they will turn to this so
I'm just saying let's get as
much money in to keep these
going but absolutely have to
keep the government of thank you
for allowing my point and your
point Sir and and Mr chairman
Mike on on both of their point
there are a number of bills in
this session that would expand
the availability of the.
Hello call tax money matched
with Medicaid to make it
possible for local communities
to.
To access those funds to expand
the service.
Same with plug for my bill to
raise the excise tax.
Such statements.
Mr chair the one in Bernalillo
county is also twenty four seven
but it's licensed as a fourteen
day facility so there's two
types of crisis triage center
license in New Mexico you can be
twenty three hour stays where
you can be fourteen day stays
and and for both in Bernalillo
county they're the the fourteen
day but they are they open
operate twenty four seven
obviously and there is a
facility under construction on
the campus of you and them that
would who will of within a year
to.
How long it takes to build but
they're here to those little be
up and and and have a much
greater capacity.
Senator I don't know the number
of facilities but I do know the
goal is that everyone should be
within ninety minutes of this
type of service.
Have.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
All.
Yes.
Thank you thank you.
This is
move and I guess you have some
other expert witness zoom zoom
the yeah thank you Mr chairman
and committee members I'm here
to present Senate bill two one
five and my colleague senator
mark Morris would be here but he
is not available hopefully yes
parental leave and hopefully
he's listening in but I'm sure
he's real busy right now
so chairman I would
before I talk about what the
bill proposed bill does.
I like to introduce my expert
witnesses with me today
on the zoom.
I'm we should have ms M. Jenny
Edwards who's a criminologist
and member of the American
psychology law society and the
American psychological
association human animal
interaction Division.
I also have right beside me here
is miss Jessica Johnson she is
chief government affairs officer
for animal protection voters New
Mexico and lastly we have agency
of the council let me say
councilwoman's Tammy feeble corn
she's with the Albuquerque city
council and she's also president
of positive links chairman and
and members I was so Senate bill
two one five chairman and
members.
Tackles a problem that's really
difficult to talk about.
But it's important because it
has so many consequences because
it happens in our society.
Sexual abuse of animals is not
only cruel but is often it is
more often than than not
connected to other abort crimes
such as animal abuse of
children.
And the statistics are
staggering.
Up to thirty eight percent of of
child sex abusers.
Also have sexually abused
animals.
One third of those arrested for
animal related **** also
possessed child ****.
Thirty seven percent of ****
offenders had prior records
including child sexual assault
domestic violence rape and
murder.
And we'll victims of sexual
abuse experience sometimes
extreme levels of physical harm
and psychological harm.
Studies show that half of the
animal victims belong to the
offender one fourth of the
victims belong to someone the
offender knows.
Twenty six percent of ****
victims are significantly
injured or killed.
Animal sexual abuse is
notoriously under reported and
under counted but the FBI also
takes it seriously.
In twenty sixteen the F. B. I.
bi Act began collecting
statistics nationwide on animal
sexual abuse in its national
incident based reporting system.
The bill I'm I'm presenting
today that's B. two one I would
bring our state of New Mexico up
to the standards of forty eight
other states in the U. S. and
with the US armed forces code
which I've already established
**** as a crime.
The chairman and members we owe
it to our fellow citizens in New
Mexico and those animals that we
care for to take this very
seriously.
By establishing **** is a crime
and requiring that those
convicted are registered as sex
offenders.
Cannot own or live with animals
and can be ordered to undergo
counseling we can protect our
most vulnerable from this abuse.
And with that chairman yes I
make clear for the committee the
committee's sub it's being
passed around is not the one of
the sponsors I don't think
you've agreed to the committee
so that's what I was proposing
in the and I will propose the so
it's the it's the yeah.
We're still operating on the
original bill as it introduced.
Okay.
So yes did you what did you want
to say anything in this job.
Thank you Senator McKenna and
the wanted to use the you're
you're very soft spoken to good
use that.
I didn't know I was a second
okay.
I thank you Mr chair and
committee members Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters
you heard Senator McKenna just
to mention a statistic that New
Mexico is one of two states in
the country that still does not
have a law making animal sexual
abuse a crime state rankings are
are just rankings but it really
hit home for us a couple of
years ago when our
animal protection New Mexico
cruelty helpline was alerted to
an advertisement in the
Albuquerque Craigslist website
of and individuals soliciting to
have sexual contact with a horse
was looking for someone to
connect them with a our
the individual that reported
this add to us had emailed in
response to the poster and tried
to clarify what this person was
looking for and at that person
said that they were looking for
sexual contact with a horse and
that they heard it was legal
here and that people do it here
and they were looking for like
minded individuals if at you all
have received our factsheet
which may have been distributed
by the committee secretary there
is a copy of this ad on the back
page of that as well as another
added that we have become privy
to from just last fall of the a
similar solicitation for a dog
Knowing that when we receive the
report of the Craigslist ad.
Because it was a horse that we
contacted the appropriate law
enforcement agency which is the
New Mexico livestock board and
they informed us that there was
nothing that they could do
because the listening for sexual
contact with a horse is not a
crime
knowing the likelihood of the
animals having severe injury or
experiencing death and also the
likelihood that this person is
also committing sexual abuse of
children I think makes it really
important that in the future law
enforcement and the judiciary
can respond to these cases.
It is common to have emotional
and moral reactions to this
subject matter but I I want to
make clear that
we are not just on a hunt for
villains here we're we're trying
to close a gap in our law so
that we can appropriately
respond to real harm that
happens the bill has a growing
list of supporters which
includes a Bernalillo county
sheriff John Allen Attorney
General wrote Thorez
we're in talks with the district
attorney's and as well as the
livestock for the New Mexico
veterinary medical association
and animal welfare and
sheltering professionals
The bill establishes a crime of
**** aggravated **** which come
with varying levels of felony
level penalties
and
as well as other sentencing
provisions which were mentioned
by Senator McKenna thank you so
much for the opportunity to
discuss this before the
committee.
Very good at this people going
to do a because the people
currently on use and then
they'll make up.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and Tammy people
corn I am the founder and board
president of positive links
we're nonprofit organization
that works on the link between
animal abuse and human violence
and for the past fifteen years
I've been doing trainings around
the state for law enforcement
the court systems and social
workers on this topic of the
link between animal abuse and
human violence and there is a
large crossover between people
who are willing to harm an
animal and people who are
willing to harm humans in this
case a large crossover between
people who were willing to harm
an animal and people who are
willing to harm children in
particular and so while I
believe that animal abuse is a
serious crime in and of itself
this co existence of an animal
abuse and child abuse really
warrants strong attention by the
legal professionals and I have
over these fifteen years talked
to many many many law
enforcement officials and
everyone seems to agree that
they would like to have another
tool in their tool belt so that
they can address the situations
when they arise because right
now they have to say to the
public I'm sorry that's
happening there's nothing I can
do so that's why we're here
before you tonight this is a
serious crime and we really want
to make sure that it's treated
as such in New Mexico okay we'll
go now and soon to the other
expert witness
and Jenny Edwards.
Hello.
Yes go ahead.
Hi this is Jenny Edwards I just
so you can hear me okay I I
let me know if they need to
speak louder hi my name is Jenny
Edwards and I'm as as I was
introduced on the formal justice
consultant specializing in
deviant sexual behavior
involving animals in addition to
publishing research articles I
do a lot of work on legislation
such as the the bill that's
before you I actually worked on
earlier drafts of this bill
several years ago that for
whatever reason it didn't fly
the bill that's in front of you
is very comprehensive but even
more important most important to
me it's not only enforceable but
it provides a very significant
tool for law enforcement and
your district attorneys to catch
the bad guys
My understanding is that there's
been some discussion of re
writing the bill that that isn't
in front of you to move those
language to the animal cruelty
codes and also reduce the level
of this offense to a misdemeanor
I highly discourage you from
doing that and I'm going to give
you some reasons why.
On the first of all there's a
lot of misinformation
misunderstanding about animal
sexual abuse it's not a thing a
lot of people want to white
about a research for dig into
and the problem with that is
that it it it did because of
this misunderstanding is kind of
a common misnomer to think that
it only happens in rural
communities that it only happens
if there's only it only occurs
because people have an image of
some kind of mental illness or
that it doesn't happen very
often and frankly none of those
things right on this is a form
of animal cruelty however
primarily it is a crime of
sexual deviants and sexual
deviance is one of the primary
criteria for designating someone
as a sexually dangerous section
by predator and there's a good
reason for that.
As a crime of sexual assault
**** can actually be a gateway.
To sexual abuse or violence of
people in fact some of those the
statistics that was quoted
earlier most of those I think
come from a report that I
published in twenty nineteen
that that demonstrates that very
fact that there are significant
links to other crimes that are
that are being committed by the
same.
Have a propensity for committing
sex acts against animals.
it might surprise you to know
that there is no single profile
of a person who commits this
crime it happens there were
there women perpetrators
perpetrators all the.
Jordy white males make up the
majority of the offenders that
is because we haven't been
staffing those kinds of
statistics and I can tell you of
the work that I've done over the
last almost twenty years now the
number of women as well as the
number of other.
Ethnic groups are very much by.
In terms of statistics well
again back to this
misunderstanding this deal is
not a personal choice it's not a
private matter actually the
smallest.
People who commit these crimes
are sexually interested in less
than twenty five percent could
be considered as a bill on the
majority of these cases involve
all kinds of other things and in
fact also detected because of
other kinds of investigations
like investigations into all
right for domestic violence
partner who's been manipulated
into committing these acts more
than a third it's probably
getting closer to half now.
Of the people who are convicted
have also either sexually abused
children off of collecting child
**** and frequently that's how
these offenders are hot
online to to solicitation of
minors is something that's
growing where people are going
online getting miners to do
things I start with topless
photos and then I progressed to
ever more egregious acts getting
these kids to have sex for sex
acts with their their their own
pets and then using that as of
the way to so random into doing
even more egregious things.
So you know you might think.
I know that it it appears that
it doesn't happen very often in
New Mexico but frankly that's
because you're not keeping track
of it now and you don't have a
to.
To go after the people that are
perpetrating this act so I can
assure you that it is very much
have in addition to tracking
statistics on a basis as they
occur we keep a running
What we call our watch list of
people that are
on the on the radar to
potentially conflating access of
the state we provide them not
just like as I just mentioned as
increasing the base plan
postings on Facebook and that
sort of thing but also because
people turn their online and
social media and gaming sites
are very popular with UCLA
offenders so it is a very
important
Act that is being committed is
definitely something that needs
to be addressed.
Mexico is one of the last two
hold out for not having a law
that prohibits the behavior
specifically.
And aside from that the six or
eight times repeat what I said
earlier the primary reason for
passing this bill as it was
submitted to.
And for making it a felony level
time and tracking people of sex
offenders as it is that this is
a deviant sexual assault and it
provides your law enforcement
officers with the tools for that
the commission of even more
heinous crimes so I appreciate
the time that I know I can kind
of get our so far so I apologize
for that if you have any
questions of the I'm I'm
available to you guys I can
respond to you today four of the
email if that's easier.
Thank you Mr.
Let's take a the straw poll in
the audience who is here in
support of this made right here
in.
And how many are here in
opposition to this move.
Then we have a bunch of people
who support of the.
New Mexico take your every
single person but if there three
of four people here in the
audience more say something that
already been said that the money
up and and and share your.
This is the.
Limited couple minutes.
We get the good evening I have
Mister chair members of the
committee on Belinda garland I
am the executive director for
the New Mexico livestock board
as we are the agency that is
charged with investigating and
prosecuting livestock cruelty
cases we highly stand in support
of this bill we do see that this
could be a potential escalation
of
Just a short saying my father
used to tell me when I was
growing up that we become adults
to take care of children and
animals on this earth that live
with us this is an opportunity
for the state to do that the
felony crimes that are proposed
in this bill not only protect
the animals but they protect our
children as well thank you thank
you anybody else say something.
Mr chair committee members good
afternoon thank for a long spear
COVID Marcus Montoya a judicial
district attorney really just
reiterating this is a tool in
our kit that we can now.
U. is for these types of
offenses because nothing does
exist so nothing
More than what you've already
heard I just wanted to comment
thank you that thank.
Mr chairman members the
committee my name's manual
Garcia I'm a veterinarian who
represents New Mexico in a
medical association we stand in
support of this bill hello first
of all I think this body this
legislative body for passing and
cruelty because I've been in the
game long enough to look at
patients who have been
patients of animal cruelty and
my response was more get back to
work because nothing was going
happen so that tool is good for
law enforcement it gives me hope
and this is also and I also
encourage this body to have the
moral courage to pass this
legislation because at the end
of the day.
I speak for those that can't
speak for themselves I advocate
advocate for the pets and turns
out we're looks like we're
advocate for children's.
That is proposed thank.
Video this.
Hello I'm Susan Kelly I'm a
resident of Bernalillo county
and I just want to applaud
Senator McKenna for bringing
this bill I was so I'm aware
this issue and what I've heard
today is appalling and I hope we
can deal with it thank you thank
you.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Canaday with
national association of social
workers I think enough has been
said but we stand and support
thank you thank.
Okay we'll take what we take
three of the people of the.
Of the.
Lisa Packard.
She's still there.
Got up which is there the
secretary go ahead.
You're you're on good speaking
the secretary to the secretary.
Okay well we'll have to come
back to you as a doctor Nancy
Aratus.
Yes go ahead please.
Mr chair Senator committee
members my name is Nancy get
enough thank you for the chance
to address you today.
Much like what you've heard
those in our society who choose
to use children those who
sexually abuse animals lack any
semblance of moral compass.
PCL of the offenders behave much
like peta files and rapists.
And I stand with those of us
advocating to fight against
child abuse domestic violence
sexual violence and animal
cruelty and support the
Leising the C. ality.
The act the BCLC has been
document the precursor to other
serious offenses.
In sexual abuse and exploitation
of children as we have heard
from the experts today.
And I ask you to make the C. L..
Mexico.
We I look to you today to
protect the voices and innocent
victim animals and our children
it is in your thank you thank
you madam this redness then
finally Angela still.
Okay Mister.
Hello can you guys hear me we
can hear you very clearly thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair Senators and
committee members thank you so
much for hearing this important
topic today and for into Senator
McKenna thank you very much for
your cosponsor ship of this bill
I think that
Too much time has passed without
criminalizing sexual assault of
animals in our state.
As the director of the boots on
the ground
dog rescue in Bernalillo county
that deals with some of the
worst cruelty cases across the
state I've had personal
experience with victims of
sexual assault against this and
the results of such a heinous
act our.
Heartbreaking and traumatizing
to say the least.
Then to turn around and not have
any recourse for these victims
for any kind of justice or any
way to protect further victims
and future victims is
infuriating.
I do to you and the committee
members to pass this.
Senate Bill to fifteen today to
protect the voiceless animals
and our innocent children in our
state thank you very good thank
you okay members of the
committee.
We have a motion for defense I
wanted to so we'll discuss it
then we should I was going to
propose the said like you
address this
Instead of making it.
The ability of fences.
Here for the third degree all
the way out of.
It it puts it under the animal
cruelty ordinance it adds it to
an existing ordinance and makes
clear that if you would be
considered cruelty to animals to
engage in sexual contact with
the.
I that I know
The expert said no that's not
good enough that could you
address why this would be
rejected it seems to be
something that we we could begin
documenting whether it's going
on or not I mean what we have so
far is one man who posted an ad
that so for the evidence of.
Beyond just
was the do you have anything.
Thank you chairman thank you
members
I'm I'm going to ask that
Jessica maybe even decide where
to want to chime in but
For for me number one we don't
know how bad.
For help extent of the problem
might be in our state because we
have been tracking it
and then I will say you know
this is really it's sexual
assault
and I think we should classified
as that
because it's a human doing it
too.
In another species so with that
I'm gonna pass the of that that
if you should hear a season we
don't charge you with murder.
You know I mean.
There is a difference between
people and and in terms of the
law.
I guess I'm not capturing the
the analogy there someone asked
Jessica to to answer your
question chairman thank.
Thank you senator and and thank
you chairman
perhaps to address the the point
about whether this is really
happening in New Mexico as you
heard from the expert it is hard
to know exactly how often
because all we have are you know
reports that have not been
tracked I do we do have you know
a couple of recorded instances
from you know it and and for
requests from the livestock
board there is a website or was
a website it with is it was shut
down a couple of years ago but
it was beast forum dot com where
I have pages of of posts graphic
posts and and pictures
indicating that apparently this
activity is quite prolific in
New Mexico and in New Mexico in
New Mexico yes this is New
Mexico specific these are a post
in New Mexico
and then to address the
committee substitute
So in our in our animal cruelty
statute we have.
To sort of levels of of cruelty
there's sort of a basic level
cruelty and what's called
extreme cruelty and an
aggravated crime what we
currently have as basic cruelty
is
essentially acts of neglect so
what we have written in here is
cruelty is if you're
negligently mistreating injuring
killing and and what the
committee said if you were
negligently engaging in sexual
contact with an animal that's a
misdemeanor or when you're also
includes filling without with
the and includes tormenting and
so it is not like this so it it
it's all under the operative
word of negligently when you
look at intentionally as the
statute that discusses
intentionally or maliciously
torturing mutilating and during
placing an animal that is a
fourth degree felony so when
when we approached writing this
bill we wanted to be sure that
an intentional act of sexual
contact with an animal at least
house that floor of a fourth
degree felony if we put it in
that section would that be
sufficient present a whole new
statutes.
Mr chair I I would say that it
would be a small step in the
right direction I do not think
it would be sufficient because
there are other aspects to this
that we have written into the
Beastie ality specific bill
which includes
ensuring that a court can order
psychological counseling even
for adults that a court
that needs to order that the
convicted person not have
contact with animals for a
period of time
What else.
and and then that the
That includes that they shall be
registered as sex offenders and
and a court can order them to
pay restitution to for example
if if the animal Vict belonged
to someone and that person
experienced at.
expenditures involved in perhaps
veterinary care for that animal
afterwards that restitution
would be permitted.
The existing statute does
include things like court can
order somebody beta we'll do and
we'll prove the prevention
program or an education program.
To obtain psychological because
that's all in the in the
existing staff to get
psychological testing of course
in order that I'm not sure.
I'm not sure why it's so
important we separate this out
from animal cruelty.
I guess that that is.
This is Amy may I address that
for you
if the if the sponsor want you
to.
Chairman yes I I'm I welcome is
said words to respond okay
sponsors asked you to set.
Okay the key thing the key
differences the and and Jessica
is making the point there's a
very very big difference between
an act of animal cruelty that
involves negligence or
intentional beating but an act
of sexual penetration is so
complete it is an act of sexual
assault and act cruelty or
tormenting a dog bite by
offering for a and taken for a
ride
it's very difficult first of all
to get to
To prove those kinds of
motivations but I can tell you
that in in the majority of
sexual abuse cases don't may or
may not involve direct injury
and may not may not even through
the injury maybe this evening be
observable initially the
injuries are often internal and
it requires a veterinarian with
specific skill in order to even
do things like perform a user
right yet to to capture Siemens
these are not skills that animal
control officers for livestock
members of livestock for
probably typically have to
address now because I don't know
how it works exactly in New
Mexico so you'll have to bear
with me for a second.
I'm assuming that someone on the
livestock were probably has
something to do with our
artificial insemination and that
and that and they may have
access to
to sexual penetration because of
that but this is a private is so
very different from what is
standard animal cruelty
investigation involves that it
does require it's own language
it does require some definitions
a very key point is ****.
Something like.
Eighty to ninety percent of
these cases involve the either
of the photo photography for the
capturing of the video people
who perform sex acts with
animals regardless of whether
it's just doing it with our own
dog for doing what you know I
for a trust past situation where
they go next door and and
capture the the course of the
dollar the whatever it is that
they're doing they capture the
stuff on video and then make
share that online they put it on
Facebook messenger they put it
on
sites like telegram they put it
on the gaming sites read it is a
very popular place used to yes
I.
It thank you and said I think
that is provided for in the
federal rule to I think you
tried to make your point thank
you it is.
The details we don't need to to
go into of.
Everything that you have in your
bill could be done under the
animal fruit he said it's not
negligent we put it in the in
the the.
With their and it would cover
exactly for.
So I am not sure I mean if you
don't want to accept this that's
fine both we will accept it I
would really introduce it I was
trying to do to to help you get
this all the way through if you
don't think it's going to help
you get all the way through we
don't have to accept if we can
move on and I will totally
withdraw that your wish
Very good the chairman I I
believe so and okay yes I just
would like to add something if
it's okay.
What is the.
Mr chairman I I'm afraid it
would only delay for the point
it was further discussion about
parity across our laws in in
terms of the felony penalties.
Okay although extreme.
We'll do is for the group.
Mr Chairman so what I was going
to mention was
that the term **** is at that
mentioned in in one place
currently in our state statute
and that's our child **** laws
on the sexual exploitation of
children and so when we look at
the
penalties that are set out for
that.
possession of obscene material
which in this case is that
material depicting child
engaging and a number of acts
including **** possession as a
fourth degree felony
distribution is a third degree
felony
to because our permit a child to
engage in the act if recorded is
a third degree felony or second
degree if under thirteen years
of age manufacturing the the
**** with a child is a second
degree felony so we wanted to
make sure that in at where there
is potential overlap or the
closeness in the violations that
patients that we weren't
accidentally writing something
in the **** law that would be
substantially lower than than
what's in the child **** law
already have provision against
that for the state of.
In the child or not.
Mr Chairman there there is
overlap if
if the act is to
is involving child **** where
the child is committing **** and
and it is being filled but not
the act itself.
Okay we have a motion from
Senator Sedillo Lopez a second
from Senator Gallegos is there
any further discussion.
It's a new path.
Yes we're we're now we're
discussing yes yes is there any
discussion.
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
McKenna thank you counts
councilman delayed
You know this so I appreciate
what you're trying to do this is
a horrific behavior and and.
And this is
You know as a horrible the it's
arguably one almost frowned upon
I mean frowned upon times a
thousand right so don't bust me
for saying that word but it's
it's like that one of our you
know most on upon.
A wall human endeavors it
doesn't that.
Regulate the behavior up
regulates the behavior in which.
It's almost.
Never reported the are we aware
of any.
Police report in which somebody
reported to the police that we
are aware of that or just the
one example of the of the person
on the internet.
chairman and senator thank you
for the question so I'm going to
refer the your question to
Jessica because a PNM has been
tracking this a lot more than I
have that just briefly thank you
Mr.
Thank you and Mister chair and
senator Maestas so as I
mentioned you know we do have a
handful of reports that have
come in and we have
access to the postings of this
online forum that
demonstrate that there is a lot
of activity
that has happened and likely
continues to happen in New
Mexico
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
generally thank you did prompt
in my hometown is there any
police reports from AP
Bernalillo county or state
police.
You have or that you're aware of
for somebody's reporting this
this activity.
At Mr chairman and then Senator
my Estes there are cases from a
few years back we know that and
I believe it was two thousand
eight and there was a break in
to the Bernalillo county animal
shelter building at the time
where someone had broken into
the building overnight and had
sexually abused for dogs if I'm
remembering correctly
there are other cases that you
know and ended up being at
making the news I'm prosecuted
because there were other crimes
involved there was an individual
who was at cotton committing
**** with her roommates dogs
got caught doing that and then
attempted to poison her
boyfriend and roommate
I guess take to cover her tracks
and so it I think that ended up
being charged as animal cruelty
and and something related to
placing thank you Mr and things
related no no question it
happens no question happens and
and it's very very rarely for
the economy what you're
describing I believe is those
persons you're describing if
caught out of the break in was
was caught but those people were
prosecuted the
So here's here's my take on on
on your bill
In white the other one is much
cleaner much easier if I think
we'll.
With all due respect because
this is a but here's here's my
take one as under current law
you can prosecute if you look at
thirty dash eighteen dash one
which is on the front page of
the script of the a sub to that
we spoke of.
Let me see where is the.
Well I guess is not included in
your bill Mr Chairman gently
because.
Because your your bill it deals
with a little bit of a criminal
code dealing with up with animal
cruelty but if you look at the
bottom of the substitute that
negligently mistreating that the
the word negligently and I
appreciate what you're saying.
negligently only have taxes to
mistreating we are statutes
functions we have negligently
mistreating.
And then injuring.
intentional or unintentional
killing.
For tormenting so.
if animals injured if an annual
animals killed and I believe
tormenting of.
You could suggest that **** is
is a form of torment you want to
bump it up to a felony if it's
that suggest it's Melissa
support maliciously torturing.
For injuring so here's just a
quick story so appears back
folks came with the with the
with the bill Mr chairman to
codify the crime of child of of
of human trafficking we're one
of only two states that didn't
have the magic words human
trafficking in statute of
because we didn't need on our
statutes criminal lawsuits
result in a if they're they're
they're written to capture most
any criminal activity and and
make it easier to prosecute so
you could use kidnapping you
could use child abuse you could
use
You know I guess salt sexual
assault battery whatever you can
use the all the whole gamut of
primes to indict somebody on
maybe a forty year indictment.
Since we created the crime of
human trafficking it's it's like
nine years at the ninety three
or line your indictment and it's
much harder to prove.
so
Which is you got to think when
you do come in a lot federal
statutes to how is it easier for
the prosecutor to to prove.
Secondly and I appreciate that
the fact that you want to be a
felony you're actually making it
Great bodily harm to an animal
you're you're you're making that
equal in in in statute to great
valley home of a human being.
Which which is which you don't
in our criminal court it may fit
because we don't have too many
slots but it just.
we you know human beings are.
Different animals
The you know killing a human
being should have a stiffer
penalty killing on the up but
anyway what what happens is if
this were the problem in my
county is that we only and I
twenty five hundred cases.
I said this the other day I
think in this committee point
that the system is broken with
regard to charging people with
felony counts.
Mr Chairman generally I know I
back in the days to prosecute
the domestic violence cases I
can verify and agree with all
you're saying with the
correlations of the abuse and
things of that nature we still
and I sixty five hundred cases
maybe eight thousand cases one
year we went crazy indicted ten
thousand cases but two thousand
those cases were for bad cases
if if someone were to get
arrested they're going to be
released the next day under that
under the the bill reform that
place a bond
And so if you're a prosecutor do
you prosecute rape murder armed
robbery.
Or for the **** case you know me
so these folks may never even be
prosecuted however if it's a
misdemeanor they're arrested
they're let out there facing a
judge of their facing
consequences three months later.
And those consequences could be
as much as three inner sixty
four days jail straight time so
it's actually quicker justice on
certain cases in the misdemeanor
round from just from a practical
standpoint also the language
about the court may do this the
court may do that that's like a
give and we don't put that in
statute.
Price that it's in our animal
cruelty such a but now I know
why because you know if you
commit this crime we want the
don't judge to do this but once
again that the it's a may the
court may order the case that's
a given restitution jail prison
counseling whatever the court me
do whatever it wants to do
because it has the jurisdiction
over that over that crime and
then also Mr chairman the
The it what's up.
Everyone you know you you just
kind of people are people going
to say yes I mean they're going
to they're going to vote for
this they're gonna want us to go
for this we did we did our sex
offender registration and
notification act in two thousand
seven and there was a there was
a we actually had to built it
was and they contradict each
other and we tried to fix it in
eleven twelve and we finally did
in thirteen that one of those
awesome so six hundred
registration acts in the
country.
And up and here everyone has to
you have to be careful with
those kind of bills because.
Everyone's going to both from CF
to just be incredibly
responsible and with that
situation but to make sure it's
constitutional so it's very
difficult
Endeavor you know.
So we had numerous conversations
with regards to the multiple the
multitude of crimes that could
fit under that act
What's unfortunate if there is
no one.
We could do a ask L. as let's
council five years from now who
got convicted under this if this
were to become law and that's
what I feel.
I think the the societal
pressure.
Keep system.
Limited and primary very
underground but anyway those are
the problems if I don't know if
G. sure is going to have time
hearing your bill because it's
going to be what I said.
Times I with for the people
saying it
So I hope I was but.
Senator.
I have a couple thoughts on that
if
If there's a concern on page
twelve for serious bodily injury
or death to an animal if you
want to quit that too extreme.
creating animal cruelty then you
could just separate that
sentence out and drop that to a
fourth degree felony can you
could keep the act in the
presence of a minor that is a
third degree felony.
That that may address.
This week for the but just you
know that's maybe one one thing
I
I I don't think it was a very
much here I I I certainly think
that.
This is it's a crime of sexual
deviants it belongs in the in it
belongs in this section of law
it's different it's different
and animal cruelty.
you could I mean you could maybe
us off at this and not and I'm
not suggesting that you could
add this in if you want to book
someone on another count of the
direct cruelty to the animal but
I think that this affects you
have so much
That you know page eleven.
this is this is really what I
had to boil it down to why I
would choose this approach it's
it's a betting of betting sexual
contact between a person and an
animal so we're we're protecting
our children there.
if we're just looking animal
cruelty work just going after
the offender we're not
considering how this can affect
children really given evidence
of that and and I would love to
say this and it may be rare but
I'm just wondering how you know
people you know it's like
everybody in New Mexico is
overburdened and understaffed
right well if it's not a crime
you know if you're pressed you
why would you.
Why are you going down the road
and desk anything if you know
it's not a crime you know you're
not gonna prosecute why would
you should expend resources in
sexual crimes are different the
like Bernalillo county has a
what is it called the the ghost
unit or something like that that
the investigators these
investigators investigate sexual
crime online in the I mean it's
crazy I mean I'd for exact was
called thing that's Philip
that the official Fraser that's
a of a slang term.
But if you establish a crime
then all the sudden now you in
power and allow law enforcement
to to use resources for that
because they're not gonna
they're gonna look for if they
know it's a dead end so I think
this could not not only.
You know not only be good for
it's not really all about going
after the actual person students
it's also about protecting.
Kids are money.
This this is these are aces
right here what what number one
aces right so races.
So why not go after this with.
So anyway yeah.
The help of judiciary and what I
can do but.
Whatever I can have is for
thank.
Okay any other discussion.
We'll go ahead and take
all the rules.
Senator guy a go.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas.
Yes.
Can I guess.
Senator Lopez yes explain my
vote Senator Thomas.
Senator Ortiz if enough no no.
as we had several people wanted
to explain their votes Senator
Hickey said.
Senator.
Incredibly complex topic.
Is a call to the world that it's
kind of like alcoholism in a way
I mean it's there but we want to
talk about a deal with that
at but but this is has really
negative consequences although I
think that there are a lot of
issues that need to be worked
out here and and really thought
through and I encourage you to
look at the Senators amendment
as this moves on to Judiciary
and really work on this bill so
that it is and and so that is
sure that it makes common sense
of the other thing that I'm
voting for it is it is it's not
so much the time the sentence
the other whatever that that
that inhibits people from doing
it you know it's specific
probability of getting caught
and I don't know how in the
context of this bill your going
to improve the probability of
this being exposed and and and
getting it entices and so forth
so
I just think you have a lot of
work to do on it and you know
maybe maybe to come back next
year but it's it's in the right
direction thank you thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez to
explain her both.
Thank you I just really want to
thank you for bringing bringing
this bill forward and also my
own opinion is a criminal law
serves a function of describing
what we value and and what we
don't value in society and to be
putting it in realty to animals
in treating it.
Like the animal is nothing
doesn't focus on the behavior of
the person which is why.
I I feel like that's with the
focus needs to be at the
behavior of the person and not
treating it like a deer out of
season.
Thank you for bringing this bill
and I'm happy to vote for.
Thank you so let me explain my
negative.
I've already said that I didn't
think you had a chance of
getting this all the way through
and maybe proven right but if
the community proven wrong but
if I'm proven right the.
I think I just wish you.
Right the other approach here's
what.
You begin getting if you if you
were included in the animal
cruelty we could have moved it
to the extreme animal cruelty
and gotten fourth degree
felonies you would have had some
documentation that this is going
on by doing this I think over
there to do is drive it
underground we will get very
many reports of any we get very
few.
We haven't really dealt with the
issue which I see as of mental
health this is the.
And and.
You know making them register as
sex offenders face I that's just
going to make sure the state
still do anything here that
would stop them.
But it will bring you right to
bring to your to.
I understand why you didn't.
Hello.
Good luck the next day thank you
very much thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto we are going
to provide you come up we're
we're we're we're what are we
doing work check.
But.
the rebooting the sound system
so come on up to get ready to.
The.
Reacted in the.
As.
Yeah.
That would.
The line.
Not yet.
With the.
Yes there it's
a presenter.
That's what it's like I can't
because when you talk that's
when it starts.
in my food.
Sure how.
In my noted it ninety nine
percent for the.
This should work at.
Okay senator will read back up
we're we're okay all right
Senator you can go ahead with
the Senate bill two fifty six
thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr chairman you'll have a
committee sub.
Up in front of you and let me
explain the reason for the
committees of this bill was
originally scheduled to be heard
on Wednesday.
I was notified of some concerns
that have been raised by the
quality New Mexico.
I was sorry they didn't come
speak to me personally on my
office door is open to them
anytime they would like to come
and speak to me.
and it remains open anytime they
would like to come and speak to
me.
However from what I understood
about the the concerns there was
a concern that simply striking
so we the the I'm gonna refer to
it as a Candelaria language
Senator Candelaria about six
years ago during the Martinez
administration.
Cared of Bill to to
make it a disciplinary action
someone's Lysons.
To use conversion therapy on
minors.
And conversion therapy being
therapy designed to.
address someone's presumed
confusion with regard to
sexuality generally speaking to
to return the person to assist
gendered view of life whether
that is how that person
has experience let themselves or
not.
The at the time that bill was
with through the legislature.
I had conversations with senator
Candelaria that I was frustrated
that we were only look up that
we're only
Prohibiting conversion therapy
on minors.
It was my sense of that time.
And it is remain my sense that
that if there is a defunct.
psychological school of thought
that is considered to be
damaging.
That while it may be more
damaging on minors it is
damaging on anybody.
And it should not be allowed at
all.
And so and so it is this is
something that has been on my to
do list.
Of of addressing ever since we
passed that bill and when we
pass a bill I I made statements
that I was willing to stay with
the on a minor because that is
what the Martinez administration
was willing to sign.
But that but that I would come
back with a with a different
bill some day.
that is the reason why I came
with the with the original bill
that I came with.
I'm.
Based on based on what I
understood to be the concerns
raised by a quite New Mexico.
I just of the bill be rolled
over so I could do some research
on the legal status of
conversion therapy bans.
The legal status of conversion
therapy bans and there's there's
a couple different kinds of
bands that that are out there
whether the deal with minors or
or all together.
What is bans on the use of a
state license.
To perform conversion therapy
that is the model that we have
in New Mexico it's a licensure
complaint.
There are other places that have
that have passed bans or
attempted to pass bans on
anyone licensed or unlicensed
performing conversion therapy
within that jurisdiction.
Those are significantly more
susceptible to challenge.
The original bills simply sought
to strike the words on a minor.
After I did some legal research
on the on the status of the
conversion therapy bans with
regard to those that doubled
licensure.
There's a split in the federal
circuit's right now on this
issue.
The ninth circuit that is based
in on the west coast.
In analyzing a they have they
have to basis.
They have that they have dealt
with one of the California case
the other one is a Washington
state case.
The California case actually
they they looked at their B. as
being conduct not speech.
And and sustained the conversion
therapy ban that was passed in
in California and Washington
state case of more recent case.
Was argued in terms of speech.
And within the context of speech
the ninth circuit found that it
was an acceptable restriction on
speech because it was in the
context of state licensure.
As opposed to being in the
context of general speech that
someone would do.
However the eleventh circuit.
Which is based out of Atlanta
includes the parts of the
southern states.
came up with the decision about
five months ago four months ago.
That
that said that their view was
that conversion therapy at that
that therapy talk therapy is
speech.
And that a ban on conversion
therapy is then is there for a
ban on a particular perspective
of speech.
And therefore is not allowed now
I will note that the eleventh
circuit was analyzing.
Eight eight municipal and county
law that is very similar to
ours.
They were analyzing a a ban on
conversion therapy on a minor.
And which did not count as
conversion therapy somebody
dealing with gender transition.
Or or someone tried to because
with who they are.
And we have a similar exceptions
in our law as as were passed in
the city and county and Florida
that were being analyzed by the
left circuit.
And again that was on a minor
ours is on a minor and the
eleventh circuit found that that
was impermissible restriction on
speech.
Now the that left the with.
With the Google decisions to
make in terms this bill one was
to withdraw the bill and which
which which we consider.
But the fact is that wouldn't
change the legal the legal
landscape of things.
I do recognize however that if
we were to proceed with the bill
in its original form.
Although it wouldn't have
changed the legal landscape New
Jersey analysis from the
eleventh circuit or what the US
Supreme Court my to now that
there's a split in the circuits.
It would it would increase the
number of people who my
complaint about.
And but one of the things that
caught me in the eleventh
circuit decision.
Was it the eleventh circuit.
Talked about.
Part of therapy if you talk
about talk therapy that speech.
But there could also be
but you could also do a version
therapy as part of someone's
there.
And aversion therapy is is where
you you have a As a stimulus in
the body.
in order to encourage or
discourage certain behaviors
thank electroshock.
and in fact.
Such treatments have been used
as part of of conversion
therapy.
The eleventh circuit was very
clear that that is not speech
that is conduct.
And conduct can be regulated.
And this is.
In the in the realm of of
conversion therapy particularly
as it relates to adults.
This is the most egregious.
aspect of what could happen in
conversion therapy it's it's not
somebody talking out their
feelings.
We're talking to a counselor
about about how they feel about
things this is this is having a
physical.
Stimulus brought upon them as as
part of as part of the overall
regimen of prison therapy.
So what this.
What this committee substitute
does is it does not.
This leaves the Candelaria
language intact let's see it
leaves the Candelaria language
intact it does not make any
change the Candelaria language
that is existing law New Mexico.
But it adds as an additional
complaint on someone's Lysons.
If they use a version therapy or
conditioning.
In the context of conversion
therapy.
And and so that also but that
also means because that is
conduct that we're talking
about.
That is not something that would
be susceptible.
To to the objections have been
raised.
With regard to conversion
therapy that would that was
based on the eleventh circuit.
It is not what would be in place
in the U. S. Supreme Court.
At the U. S. Supreme Court were
to review the cases of
conversion therapy.
And provide that therapy is
speech if they were to agree
with the eleventh circuit that
would strike down our existing
law on minors.
But if we were to pass this bill
even though that law were to be
struck down we would keep the
prohibition.
Of of using a version that there
be or conditioning as part of a
conversion therapy a process.
I'm so so that is that is the
main substance of this bill the
other thing that we did however.
Because so I'm aware that
there's also a bill that is in
the house right now seeking to
update a lot of aspects of the
Human Rights Act.
And and part of what that part
included in that bill.
Is updated the definitions of
sexual orientation and the
definition of gender identity.
Not that bill's going to pass or
not.
But but but the thing is what we
don't want is we don't want
definitions to get out of sync.
And the existing definitions of
gender identity and sexual
orientation that exist in the
practice acts are already out of
sync with the Human Rights Act.
So what we did with the various
practice acts is we struck the
substantive definition.
A sexual orientation and the
substance definition of gender
identity and we replaced it with
it has the same meaning as set
forth in section twenty eight
dash one dash two which is the
definition section of the one
Rights Act so that whatever
happens of the Human Rights Act
that will be the definition that
we use here.
And it gets updated Human Rights
Act it will get updated for this
purposes.
And it will remain in sync.
So so you will see them.
And and this is actual pieces of
several times after the first
section.
We'll see it we we find that a
person licensed.
Pursuant to provisions of
chapter sixty one shall not use
over aversive therapy or
conditioning and conversion
therapy and aversive therapy
conditioning means conduct in
behavioural therapy.
Causing physical stimuli in the
patient with the aim of reducing
unwanted behavior.
Okay.
And so and then that is that is
repeated throughout the bills
and the various places making no
change to the existing law that
we currently have the Candelaria
language no change whatsoever to
that thank you Mr chairman with
that I'll be happy to stand
professionally need a motion to
discuss this committee so.
Move the do not pass on Senate
bill two fifty six in.
But a due process for discussion
purposes only discussion of the
committee set up for two fifty
six.
So that we can legally discuss
it members of the committee
questions for the sponsor.
What do you want to go to the
well I don't know the I. has the
audience seniors up the weather
just got the full description of
it okay let's go to that will go
to the audience and see if the
the the bill as it's been subbed
out I thought discuss a little
bit first Elizabeth Liz go that
way let's go that way anybody
here in support of this bill.
Anybody here in opposition Linda
yes please.
Come up and use the Mike of
sorry.
Mr chair members the committee
Linda Siegel Representative a
lot of health care groups and we
saw the first bill and and some
were in support of that and with
this change I haven't had an
opportunity to speak with
everyone but generally speaking
this this just adds
Act and an action which has to
happen around conversion therapy
which is
generally supported by health
care providers at this is not a
procedure that they should be
using.
Thank you to anybody else.
and the it's okay no anybody
here in opposition to this bill.
Okay we'll take where we take
three of you marshal you just
start.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I Marshall Martinez in
the executive director of
equality New Mexico I thank you
and M. as a thirty year old
policy advocacy in Liberation
Organization and we lead with
the motto nothing about us
without us is for us all
policies purporting to protect
LGBTQ people should come from us
should center us and should be
led by us from beginning to end
we work hard to bring the
legislative agenda that has real
life impacts on queer and trans
people immediately upon passage
in New Mexico this bill is bad
when it was introduced and the
substitute is actually worse
than it was never a part of our
agenda to begin with.
Mexicans fought hard to protect
our children from the abuse of
conversion therapy and we
protected dozens of queer and
trans young people from severe
emotional trauma in the last six
years this bill and this
committee substitute still stand
to endanger that banned by
opening it up to litigation
weakening its provisions by
enumerating physical abuses
there for opening the door to
emotional and psychological
abuses which are equally as
dramatic if not more so these
are the reasons not coming to us
from the beginning is dangerous
we know the lives experiences
and legal landscape both locally
and nationally for LGBTQ
Communities for these reasons we
oppose this legislation and look
forward to coming back before
this committee with bills that
we know will actually move the
needle closer to liberation for
LGBTQ people let me be
incredibly clear a vote for this
legislation in any form is a
vote against the LGBTQ community
thank you that threat.
Does that threat it was not
intended the servicer sounded
like one yes that's right.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Kayla
herring with Planned Parenthood
votes New Mexico and we stand in
strong opposition to this bill
for generations black indigenous
women and people of color and
queer and trans communities have
led to work on the ground and
community to bring real policy
solutions to this body to
support real change for New
Mexicans that we need across the
state policy without us about us
is not actually for us and we
ask that any legislators
considering running legislation
that has to do with the
communities we represent do so
in partnership with us because
we understand what our
communities face every single
day this legislation is
unnecessary and harmful opening
up the possibility that queer
and trans youth could face the
traumas and abuses of conversion
therapy once again in our state
we ask that you vote no on this.
Next next of.
Chair or Ortiz Pino and members
of the committee I'm reading a
statement from river and Bethany
Mayer Evans who had to return
home to Los crucis this
afternoon.
She is our clergy and
congregational organizer we
stand with that the quality New
Mexico to strongly oppose it SB
two fifty six I'm also here
representing queer people of
faith I am personally a queer
minister and much of my work has
been with the LGBTQ plus
community I've seen the
significant harm that conversion
therapy has caused in the lives
of countless LGBTQ plus people.
I can tell you from a decade of
doing this work that the
religious abuse and spiritual
harm that comes from conversion
therapy has lifelong
repercussions for the queer
folks who go through it it is
imperative that New Mexico
continues to protect queer youth
from the trauma of conversion
therapy and that no bill is
passed to that affects the LGBTQ
plus community without input
from the L. G. B. T. Q.
Committee plus community thank
you.
Anybody else.
Yes.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is jade
Roscoe and I'm with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs we believe
strongly in supporting
protecting and celebrating the
LGBTQ community central to that
is following the leadership of
LGBTQ people and having their
voices be the ones we listen to
on which policies are helpful
and which are not we are
concerned with this bill because
we know good legislature only
comes when we center LGBTQ
communities and take their lead
when proposing policies about
them thank you.
Thank you anybody else.
Okay anybody on we have three or
four people we'll take what we
take to the people online.
Up a lean because the un.
With the dreams in Action New
Mexico.
Good.
Okay Eileen.
This is a long term connection
we're strongly opposing this
bill this was crafted without
the input of any sort of
equality in New Mexico.
The thirty year old what you
need to keep policy in part
because the organization this
bill of the the current
conversion therapy ban but
miners believe Saudis addition
of gender identity and sexual
orientation which are currently
being updated the queue mistras
create.
This will create multiple
versions of incongruent language
for us to fix and a session
where we have significant
priorities to focus on that are
driven by the LGBTQ community
experience just nothing about us
without us for his aborted paper
of this bill is not thank you.
Thank you Arlene when we'll take
a just Clark you've just Clark
on.
Go ahead to just Clark.
Mr chair and committee my name's
just Clark and I'm here in
opposition to this bill as a
queer and trans person I'm
deeply disappointed with this
was created without first
consulting the very communities
would be most impacted this bill
could be harmful to the LGBTQ
currently protected please vote
no as an active protection for
those same drugs thank you.
Members of the committee.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
I we we had we had a chance to
talk a little bit the for this
about
the American psychological
association so wanted to bring
that up in committee to see if
anyone else had thoughts on this
is my understanding is is the
APA does not consider.
Conversion therapy therapy at
all.
Because that implies or
something devalued about
somebody or they're less
valuable or something like that
so when you look at this.
Did you did you consider looking
at or do you think there needs
to be an update with the word.
Therapy or how conversion
therapy as defined in existence
that you.
No we're not what we were that
was that just not of the thing I
I'm just curious yeah Mr
chairman and search committee
there's a there's a term that
but which this is referred to
actually have it in front of you
if you just help out real quick
but it's.
So that kind of yeah it's it's
it's the the okay so thank you
for that Mr chair Senator so
they're preferring the term
sexual orientation change
efforts
I believe it's pronounced so
need a high percent sure it's
the right but anyway just OCD
regulates itself Mr chairman
Senator it is I know I did I did
consider changing it from
therapy to to the to the to the
to the presidential edition
change efforts but the problem
is that that would have required
amending the Candelaria language
and and so that and and like I
said.
I decided that that the safest
course of action.
given so the judge suggestions
that been raised was not to
touch the capillary language at
all and then I didn't want to
have one line be conversion
therapy the other line being
sexual orientation change
efforts okay so that's the
reason why okay Mr chair Senator
I I find it interesting
The top page six that G. in in
your in your what you're
amending.
it says on wanted behavior.
And for for me that's
that's one of the words that I
actually think should be in the
statute.
For a couple reasons
that should be on the exit
existing log out for your your
current
actually the.
On your currents they would yeah
would be on page six I guess of
your use of bills are have got
both.
Versions open
your is the definition of
conversion therapy.
but the word on wanted is not it
is not in it like I said on page
six it's not in the definition
of of conversion therapy like
I'm using the word there because
it's in the bill.
and so I I've always been a
little
You know I've always been
curious about this because you
know I have some statistics here
J. at least according to some I
think is a pew study all this is
almost half of Gen Z. years.
Do not consider themselves to be
a hundred percent heterosexual.
that's just one statistic I've
seen have done extensive
research on.
And from other states and this
is people often often change
their sexual orientation.
and so I'm I'm wondering that.
The the way that this law
actually works it seems kind of
like a one one weight race one
way street for me
which we may or may not have
time to get into right now but I
guess what what I'm saying is if
if someone has let's say there
are they identified as as a
bi sexual sexual orientation but
they they desire some they want
to talk to somebody about
changing their sexual
orientation because they they've
identified as bisexual but they
no longer want to be bisexual
they rather be homosexual or
heterosexual identified in some
other way but they have on
wanted desires are on wanted to
traction.
And so I've always been curious
of this whole thing that the
word I don't know it to me the
word on wanted is not it is
missing from the existing
language if someone wants to
change their sexual orientation
some way and wants to go talk to
a licensed person about it was
the therapist or physician or
whoever it is
you know I I think they should
have the freedom to to talk to
somebody talk to a licensed
person about the.
And I feel like the existing law
does not allow that it it it the
including language it just says
plenty of coverage there remains
any practice to change sexual
orientation.
And I think we all because of
the historical lies the stigma
against
homosexual attraction or
homosexual sexual identity I
think we all could assume that
that's okay it's just therapy to
to change someone from
heterosexual to homosexual
sexual orientation.
But clearly the research shows
that that's not I mean people
are.
Changing this way and that.
at least according to my my
research and so it just seems to
be this whole thing seems to be
kind of one sided
And and like I said I don't
think we need to really get into
the the historic part of that
but I I think because that
particular group of people was
boosting ties for so long and
that's where our minds go to
because of history.
but I I I I just think I I it
was interesting to me that you
you have the word on wanted in
there because like I said I
would like to see that word on
wanted put into
the existing conversion their
definition what I think it makes
sense one for minors.
Minors or adults I mean I think
if someone has on wanted you
know like I said the the the
there they've on wanted by
sexual sexual orientation they
want to change their oranges
some.
If it's unwanted why can't they
go talk about that I just don't
I don't understand
but I I think that's you know.
I I just I just want to bring
that up
Mr yes you know it I would think
it's actually the the the first
part of what you're talking
about because of you if you look
at the consistencies.
You know Kinsey had is.
That is
Seven point scale.
Of of of sexual attraction and
and you know what one side being
completely cisgender the other
side being completely
same gender and your
orientation.
And
and that you know and and kids
is very in fact was that most of
us are expected.
society imposes upon us.
Eight more binary view of the
world.
whether that view of the world
actually exists.
And in nature or not.
Societies imposition of that of
that binary view of the world
and the preference in our
society towards this gendered
relationships.
Has had the tendency in in
previous generations.
A pushing most folks who may be
from a can do wonders of second
see I towards toward or four
towards.
Point view in the world in the
CIS gendered manner.
Unless unless you get towards
the end I think I think we have
with the younger generation is a
is a frankly a eight a better
understanding of of of where.
nature's been all along and and
the and the fact that that that
that nature is not necessarily
binary.
And and so it is
So so I understand the issues
that you're that you're raising
and and I do agree that the that
the Candelaria language of
conversion therapy.
Is a binary definition.
but again my by my commitment in
in in bringing this committee
support was not to touch the
Candelaria language mmhm.
And and so and so the.
The issue of unwanted is is the
reason why aversive therapy or
verse of conditioning is
utilized is to try to get
someone to move from from
whatever is considered to be on
wanted to whatever is considered
to be desirable mmhm.
In the context of that of that
therapeutic relationship.
Good I I just Mr Mr center I I
just think that.
Like I said I I think people's
minds go with with any sort of
conversion therapy they go to
one way right think they go to
this back in the
store eighties in even test
fifties eve I mean there's you
know I've seen that so
I just I just think in in this
day and age from from what I'm
seeing that that you know people
are looking at I I don't know
why we're we're necessarily
saying you can't go talk to
someone about changing your
sexual orientation if you have
on wanted behaviors of of any
kind
you know what whether it's you
can have like our current
admission sexual orientation is
just yet three it's a new
definitions heterosexual
homosexual bisexual choose one
right I mean that's that's so
but if someone wants to you know
they want to go one two three
they want to go from three to
one that one of the from one to
two to one I mean why are we
kind of focusing on just one of
those transitions I I think we
put the you for the work on
wanted if someone has a truly on
what you know no one wants to I
think we what we agree on is we
don't want someone coerced into
getting some kind of medical
treatment of any kind for any
reason there should be no
coercion.
We all agree on that in this
room everybody correct so so so
that's that's what I like to see
is make sure there's no
coercion.
And it sounds to me like once
again historically there has
been coercion.
And that's wrong and we all
agree on the why because every
person is of equal value that's
why.
And so no one should be coerced
into doing any kind of medical
treatment whether it's
forcefully coerced or indirectly
coerced I think that's wrong.
where is also believe that no
one should be forced to
participate in getting medical
treatment that they don't want
to do as well okay.
so the politics of coercion I
think are once again creeping up
in twenty twenty three a
different way.
Mr chair center I I think to to
kind of sum up I I would like to
see a better definition that is
a plus that is updated to.
Once again American
psychological association some
of these groups I know it's not
your goal is kind of more than
you're showing off so I don't
fault you for that but I think
we were looking at this issue
are we gonna are gonna call in
if you're not if we're not why
not if we're not helping we tie
that to licensed people
and and then why are we so
focused on just the historical
like heterosexual to homosexual
conversion therapy when people
may want to choose different to
talk like to talk to people
about different things.
Let's see I think
Final have I think that's all I
have I just want to bring up the
the the the I guess it was very
interesting because I've always
wanted that word on wanted to
put the statute just not this
exact location there's one last
thing that I want to be careful
on this
that once again stereotyping a
version therapy as once again
coercing someone and shocking
them or something like that let
me give you another example of
of
a physical stimulus therapy just
just just just so people don't
stigmatize aversion therapy
right so there is a in my neck
of the woods there is a fairly
new business not approved yet
for for tentative okay for
repeat Year ringing.
And what this was published in
science back in the summer I
think of twenty twenty two and
and the significance of this is
people in Iran has hearing a lot
of delivering right and the and
we can't do anything about it
would not be true it's worth and
these researchers came up with a
very interesting
kind experiment they would they
would give a low level
electrical current through
people's tons while they're
listening to certain sounds K.
to help their tennis so that
that's that's the neighbors and
their so I I just mention it
because you know you have to be
careful what what you ask for
and what you provided based on
your idea of something and the
actual reality of how it's
imposed so once again I think we
could tighten this language up
that we don't coercion we don't
want anything that is not
recommended by some of these
groups but at the same time we
you know if if there's something
else that comes out and someone
wants to change their sexual
orientation from here to here
here here here here and there's
some other type of therapy that
you think oh wow that's actually
something that people want.
Then we could potentially tar
Hance was twenty careful I'll
leave it that but we need once
again to wrap it up I would just
say we nobody wants coercion and
I think we could tighten of the
bill and it's a little different
way but I I see what you're
doing and I'm not necessarily
opposed.
To to the bill that I think we
could totaling gentle thing Mr
in and Mr Miller if if if I just
very quickly if you if you think
about where the existing laws
right now what the effect of
this law would be.
Existing law right now is that
we know conversion therapy on
minors.
Thank immersion therapy is
unregulated with regard to
adults.
If this bill were to pass.
It would still not prohibit even
though I would like to it would
not prohibit commercial their
budget.
But it would ensure that the
conversion therapy in adults is
talk therapy.
Yeah yeah and not what I think
many people might described as
torture.
No as part of this process.
And I agree with you there are I
mean I was careful to put this
diverse of their peer
conditioning in the context in
this bill of conversion there
because I agree with you there
are many legitimate uses of
aversive therapy.
Several people suggested that
during the legislative session I
may benefit from wearing a shock
collar.
It is just a question of who
would have the button.
Our right to be a very etcetera
Gallegos is.
Right but it was so if you're
center yeah I know and I think
right now it's appropriate to
put a ban on on diversion
therapy in
in this section I think it's a
program because that's what the
the the modern you know evidence
inside to showing
but I I just I just wonder like
to bring it up because I think
people have some this is some
kind of some stereotyped ideas
of of what this is and so it it
could be you know things change
in the future I mean it could be
updated but it would take a
legislative fix we have to
always be very careful how we
how we limit what medical
professionals you know can can
offer but I think if it's if
it's twenty twenty three but is
you know what if in the future
It's hard to know so thank and I
think and I would say actually
with more well I think you
mentioned I circuit NIFLA never
burst verses are K. explicitly
says Clarence Thomas said you
cannot separate out professional
speech from free speech so then
that's a pretty and then those
United States record so so you
know centers in Las appellate
courts I mean they're overturn
rates that the cases take are
like the like eighty percent of
the overturn is very high no
doesn't mean you know I don't
what the total is from what they
don't accept but it's a very
high rate not just for actually
I mean nicer cutting is around
average their all round average
but but they're pretty high
overturn rates so so that's
another thing to to and then
anyway I'll into that but I
think that's enough to consider
and I think we're I think we're
we would be in this one about as
far as we can.
Credit yeah.
Yeah you can discuss it with the
other any other discussion
members of the committee Senator
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair
I got a little bit
confused because if the American
psychological association does
not think that this is this is
appropriate.
Why isn't that enough why why
did why.
Because and this is the reason
is is analysis of the conduct
and speech distinction that is
in the case in the basis is
worrisome because what that's
telling me is this is going to
be litigated.
And one of the points that was
made about the litigation is is
that going to threaten the
successful we bet we then we
have now on minors and and that
testimony was very powerful has
was an and I think you remember
we talked about this earlier.
On the floor I said the quality
New Mexico is my go to
organization on issues legal
issues they they've been stuck
they've been studying it of the
land of is it is an organization
I respect greatly they have been
studying this for.
Decades.
And and so I worry about the
testimony that opening up our
successful ban on conversion
therapy for minors.
Up to litigation is quite scary
because that band needs to hold
we should not have are are
minors subjected to any
conversion therapy whether it's
aversive therapy or or
For talk therapy.
And at Mr chair I worry
I worry about talk therapy being
just I mean I've seen a
therapist and you know and talk
therapy I think can be just as
harmful
has the you know that the
conduct and so I mean that's too
bad I haven't read the Supreme
Court cases so that's too bad
that they separated into conduct
and speech is unbelievable that
they did that.
But they did for you know when
we're considering something like
therapy so I I'm really of.
Really concerned because I just.
I think it's true of that.
When we're dealing with where I
know that that I always value
with the people affected by the
legislation state more than any
their voices I tried privilege I
try to center the voices of
people.
We're affecting.
And again of.
And I've said this before I
always look at what is the what
is the harm that we're trying to
address what what is the bill
trying to do.
And.
I understand I I believe I
understand the harm.
but if we're putting forth the
bill that you quality New Mexico
and the advocates have problems
with because they're worried
about about what this could do.
And I haven't you know I have a
read these cases I mean that
that's sort of sad what was that
Mr chair about the the the
conduct of speech distinction
when you're talking about their
P. that just seems so false but
I I'm just really really
concerned and I wish
I also when I spoke to some of
the coal co sponsors about this
because I felt that they'd have
us some guidance and they
expressed some concern to N. and
said that yes they felt that the
quality New Mexico and
organizations like that should
be.
At the table
And so I.
Mr chair I I am I am really.
Worried about this bill.
And I would like to see
I'm I'm and then the only thing
that gives me relief is that.
Apparently the in the American
psychological association this
is an accepted and so that I'm
hoping that it doesn't happen
very much my sense is that
happens more by churches and by
other unlicensed unlicensed
where is somewhere that we
should nip that in the bud but
if the American psychological
association doesn't believe is
appropriate practice that makes
me that gives me that makes me
feel better about voting against
this bill because.
It's the unlicensed people who
are doing this kind of.
Therapy that we need to.
To look at and consider how to
regulate
In order to protect the both the
children and the adults who
might be subjected to the
imposition of this kind of
therapy so
Are you aware of whether this
practice is used in New Mexico
Mr chair the chairman and
Senator Sedillo stressful I am
aware that this practice has
been used in New Mexico's adult
actors has been used on adults
and all children it has been
used by license person in New
Mexico in the past.
I am of the the.
The eleventh circuit's decision.
Well objectionable is very
educational and and what things
that the eleventh circuit's
decision discusses is is that
what the American psychological
association doesn't approve of
conversion therapy.
The record psychological
association to the nineteen
fifties or sixties considered
homosexuality to be deviants.
And so and so you can't just so
the record's ecological
Association itself doesn't
necessarily get things right.
Although not discussed in that
opinion directors like logical
Association.
Signed off on the torture.
of of Muslims American
government.
After nine eleven.
So you know this is so the next
psychological association.
Hopefully the good guy but but
quite candidly they there the
past is not the best.
And and people doing therapy are
not required to follow the
guidelines of the American
psychological association it's
not like the code of ethics the
record medical association.
the the particularly since we
license in addition
psychologists right we have a
variety of other licensed
therapists.
Of different levels
and and so
so that actually there's nothing
about that that is that's
control on anybody practicing in
the field.
The.
The other option that the
eleventh circuit provided was
that we can we can
Address speech if it's
fraudulent speech.
That's the first I was actually
thinking my thought was all
Representative logical
Association as this position
there for conversion therapy
would be fraudulent therefore
you can get it that way but then
there in Alice's of the position
American psychological
association took that away and
it's something that I think the
US Precourt would probably agree
with them in terms of that
aspect of it so so consequently
there is no protection right now
in this state.
For anyone saying a license
person being tortured in the
process of conversion therapy if
you're over the age of eighteen.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I I
guess I'll just have three
others lined up to okay I guess
I'll just end with with the it
was really powerful to hear
those words nothing about us
without us and I understand that
and and madam chair if they
would speak to me I would speak
to them.
one member of this panel at
least called and asked them to
come speak to me and they
refused to so that makes it for
a very difficult situation.
When when this is a commitment
that I've had since the day that
we passed the Kettler language.
Thank thank you Mr chair Senator
Ingle your next.
Service second seconded by
Senator Tallman.
Any discussion of the this is on
the committee said on the
committee sub on the committee
so if you're.
Wait what what we the.
Yeah well we have a motion we
can discuss the motion and the
people who have something to say
can speak about it then we take
a vote.
Thanks for.
You want to be on the list to.
Okay okay.
Yes it did so we we have a data
do passed with no REC from
Senator Ingle.
On the committee so and then
discussion on this next I have
Senator Hickey Tallman in my
Estes.
Take Tallman also listed K. we
have Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Ivey Soto for bringing
this phenomenally complex
legally complex mind bending Lee
legally complex.
And and and I wind up hold that
thought there in the context of
a couple of others.
I have a trans daughter.
It has been a ten year journey.
Earlier we were talking about.
In sexual oriented in their
there is by homosexual
heterosexual bisexual and and
what I have learned in this
process is that all those words
go out the window there is what
the individual experiences and
this idea of unwanted behavior
it's.
I think it's it's.
What but my daughter has taught
me is that.
It's it's a journey in their
transition and and this getting
into the courts is going to be
mind boggling
it in round these issues.
I guess the reason I I I I
appreciate the intellectual saw
I mean it's it's it's.
The way you've framed it and how
it came to be and so forth.
But I do have to go
yeah with the I mean it's not so
much as you know we've we have
to be involved but I think that
the transfer must be involved in
and and I and there certainly
can be difficulties in
communications and and I would
hope that we all learn from this
a communicating more and openly
is is a way to approach these
things rather than this is my
position is absolutely right and
yours can't be so I hope there
is more discussion
I've I will not be able to
support this and the reason I
will not be able to support it.
Is that I'm at.
I'm looking at the age of the
people up here we're all out of
the fifties sixties seventies
culture which was.
Heterosexual bisexual home
senator Morris does he's not.
Seventies baby.
Yeah and and we don't really
even know me we we were so
conditions so culturally
conditions that we can't even
experience in our own minds and
comprehend what our children are
experiencing is is as you said
this is the the the and and and
before that and that.
I I don't I don't I don't want
to put something else
complicating in law that that
people like us are going to be
judicata and we have no idea
what we're talking about in
terms of what they're
experiencing and so I I can't
support from that point of view
your intellectual arguments
about the courts is fascinating
and I've learned a lot from I
thank you for that but I really
I do think that if if we need to
do some sort of protective
language some sort of.
The legislation that it really
does need to be thought through
from those who are going to have
to live with this more than we
are we we're getting old I mean
what kind of may be set in our
ways but I'm looking at my
daughter and I I don't even know
what might be next but I want my
daughter to have that complete
freedom and to have that I
believe that.
People like my daughter need to
be in the crafting of any
legislation and so I I again I
really respect what you're
bringing forward tonight and the
intellect around it and and I
and I'd like to discuss that in
the courts and so forth this
fascinating but I think it's got
to start with them and their
experiences and I just don't
think that we get that very much
in our age group because we're
just so condition thank you Mr
chair thank you senator Senator
Maestas.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you center so those could
this could you present a bill
the
So much.
Great to hear from everybody I'm
just going to a lot because.
The lady in the previous bill
over the year over the
voiceovers suggested of deviance
is criminal activity essentially
deviance is a social construct
Representative
And so as you mentioned.
You know that because in the
sixty seventies it was
considered devidos considered a
crime rose on lawful the.
To do an awful and then not even
ten years going awful to get
married
for our friends the
But but to hate to adults and
have somebody wants to pay
somebody two hundred Bucks to.
To some quack therapy
What is what is the harm in
explain explain why should we
should prohibit that certainly
Mr chairman and services for
follow just say that that the
language here
government at and get this was
our syllabus I was in this bill
is not subject to challenge.
The language of this bill
because it deals expressly with
conduct and nothing else.
It is it is clearly permissible
and not subject to challenge
legally.
So the way this bill at this
point is.
If somebody wants to throw down
to our bones.
And have a conversation.
They can still do that.
What this bill says is you can't
be tortured.
In that process.
Mr Chairman representative of
the does the therapeutic
community deem this already Fund
professional does it deem this
out of the bounds of.
The professionalism of
psychologists and counselors and
stuff Mr chairman and senator by
just there's a diversity of
thought.
And this is this is this is this
is a process that is done today.
In the context of of conversion
therapy.
And.
And
largely within.
Religious organizations.
That doesn't mean unlicensed.
What would be the penalty Mr
chairman Senators up over
someone is on licensed to this
under this bill Mr chairman and
center mass just if somebody is.
Is
Is practicing without a license
that would be a penalty.
If ever the end of the session
if under this bill is someone
who is licensed for use torture.
And during conversion therapy.
Physical torture
then they would they would be
subject to losing their license
thank you Mr chairman center the
So I thought I thought all the
tough bills were behind us and
but this is a we appreciate the
advocates and and the and the
the cohesiveness of the movement
that has one primary
organization.
that's outstanding we spoke
about it on the floor couple
days ago there may be a time for
for grant writing or other
political reasons that there be
multiple.
Credible organizations with the
same purpose the up in a citizen
legislature you know Christmas
January I'm doing up the
department of it was chairman
we're.
ally money.
Call me criticize me for not
bringing them to the table is
like you're here now I mean you
called me here now let's let's
let's that's amended less rock
and roll it's is not out of
disrespect sometimes and in this
particular situation there is no
communication so that's
unfortunate.
The the
It late you know for us of late
those might be included that
that the political mantra of of
adopted and lately is is that
was six hours ago.
Six hours ago we we got out we
got a the we had to come
together as a movie so but my up
my predecessor did the bill in
two thousand seventeen and and
what sent this photo said Mr
chairman is correct that that
this was the intent of the
sponsor it back in.
I don't know if it was I think
it was more of a political
tactical reason rather than a
policy choice that this was not
incorporated two thousand
seventeen bill now that doesn't
leave the eighth of stress and
the issues of ours to the
Supreme Court overturning it my
issue my kids are Mr chairman
Senator as you're assuming.
That the Supreme Court is
intellectually honest.
Actually this gentleman I'm
concerned about our current ban
on minors because I don't make
that assumption I see I see
because we up I live in a world
where.
You know nothing is for granted
and it would only the
intellectual gymnastics of the
current court is very troubling
very troubling and I think the
the as the German mention
chairman the baby the
statistical analysis of of the
of the appellate decisions being
flipped is because they're
taking cases they want to flip.
And I'll to reverse time.
But my
My one of my
I don't know what the word is
not favorite what one of my up
close constituents
Want to support this bill I
don't think I can see I think a
no records appropriate
Just for the simple reason is
maybe three or four years and
and Judiciary if they do give a
hearing can answer that question
for us whether it's possible
whether it's possible and
whether it jeopardizes the two
thousand seventeen bill because
that would I want to do anything
to jeopardize the tales of
renewable I don't think this
would be worth it in and of
itself I agree given the when
factor it's adults I agree with
the conclusion of of of of of
the committee analyst is that
this may jeopardize it with that
that.
Would you consider that a Mr
chairman and and services I'd I
would consider that and out and
I just will also reiterate that
my door remains open to having
conversation with any of the
applicants thank you Mr.
No further discussion secretary
will call the roll you can
check.
No smitteez yes he was very out
of the water bottle market okay
you're going to get in at like
him to be able to vote on this
after all this office three
phrase the motion yes we have a
the we go ahead.
We have a due process no
Representative do not pass on
Senate bill two fifty six
perfect and a.
Committee substitute to fifty
six without recommendation to
Senate Judiciary this where
we'll go next week thank you you
are.
He just wanted to the best of
hi.
The leaving the to indicate.
Well.
Let's go ahead and take the
vote.
Thank Senator guy Ecosse Senator
Hickey now.
Senator Ingle.
Yeah.
Senator my Estes.
to the directors.
Senator McKenna no.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Thomas yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes we
have a so you have a due passi
you know without recommendation
to Judiciary Committee three in
the final vote was for in favor
of that wrecked in three three
it against and to absent excuse
excuse to this right now.
Mr chairman members the
committee I do appreciate very
much session and again I am open
to fifty for the vote to have it
yeah I think you know what I I
think you need to take a more
proactive stance than just
saying your doors open to it if
if they if they will engage you
you try to be proactive that's
different if you wait for them
to take the first step but I
think seeing this this committee
though it may tell them to be
able
talking to the.
Thank you thank you.
So we're going out it was
senator guys this is too bills
are going to be rolled his gun.
we have your ID Senator Ivey
Soto as marriage changes to
ninety five yes this gentleman
did you all have a committee sub
have built.
I do not.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
The committee so for a simple
two ninety five.
So the last time we did merge
licensure changes was about
eleven years ago.
And which is before marriage
equality.
And we haven't we haven't looked
at the laws since then.
we so.
This bill does a number of
things.
The first thing that it does is
that it expands the number of
people who may officiate the
sector to solemnis.
A marriage.
and it expands so that the
people of a slim nice marriage
or civil officer.
Eight of a judicial officer a
military officer.
Of.
A religious officer.
And then also we allow a retired
officer.
To do it if you're retired
military retired elected
official retired judicial
official.
And in addition we allow a
registered marriage officer to
Celebrezze emeritus is these are
people right now go online and
get a fake ordination.
And instead what they could do
now is just go down and follow
form with kind of our office.
And then they are authorized to
bury people.
there any standards for the I
mean okay so there are.
Personal date that the register
within the within the county
where they're doing it.
they also have to.
have to be at least eighteen
years of age up originally
actually had a couple other
provisions of their I got a
little push back on that so in
the interest of collaboration to
come out.
this also allows people who
don't want to do a a ceremony.
To simply get made by contract
at the county clerk's office.
You don't have to have a judge
you don't have a judge you don't
know your because you're doing
it captain Europe ever ships
captain or judge you don't have
witnesses because the reason for
what this is is you're doing a
state action outside of the
state office.
And so what so if you're doing
it in the in the kind of clerk's
office my contract then you
simply get meant if you want to.
the.
The bill also brings in the
language from the recently
passed US federal act.
so so that for example it in two
places.
We have the state gives us full
faith and credit twenty marriage
between two individuals so let
us to another state or country
regardless of sex sexual
orientation gender gender
identity race ethnicity or
national origin of those
individuals.
That's that's for full faith and
credit if it's not someplace
else but in addition if you're
getting a license in New Mexico
we reiterate that language
actually.
To make clear that if you're
getting more slices New Mexico a
mers license shall be issued to
any couple in New Mexico who
otherwise qualifies pursuant to
chapter forty article one
regardless of the sex sexual
orientation gender gender
identity race ethnicity or
national origin of the two
individuals seeking to attend
the March by so we do it not
just as a full faith and credit
would also codify it in terms of
in the state marriages.
This bill also gets rid of child
marriage.
New Mexico is one of the state
that has currently no minimum
age to get married.
If you are pregnant or
somebody's pregnant at a
different judge says you get
married at whatever age you get
rated Mexico.
This moves the age of marriage
two to eighteen.
And it makes any such marriage
outside of that would someone
under the age of eighteen void.
And it also
And and I've I've worked with
Unchained at last which is
national advocacy group
on this issue in terms the
language that's in this bill and
modify the language of the
request in order to be able to
do that.
the.
The.
The bill also then goes through
all of chapter forty which is
domestic relations.
And it finds every place in in
chapter forty where talks about
bride or groom or husband or
wife and it uses gender neutral
language.
and so that it talks about
America cumple or the parties to
a marriage.
Or spouse depending on the
context of the language and so
it makes all of those changes
within chapter forty of our
statutes domestic relations the
one the one place I didn't go
into was the uniform parentage
act.
Because that there I was gonna
have to start talking about the
part of the parent and the non
birthing parents and that seem
to go a little further afield
that what I wanted to the scope
of this bill
if you're talking about what's
in here to but did you talk
about the the technology
communication technology for
armed forces is that the same as
senator
folks bill it is not actually
in the language on the armed
forces was looked at by the by
the parties.
Military families caucus the
language on the armed forces
they.
They they approved of
I don't think they take a
position on the bill as a whole
but the but that so the
difference is that the language
and Center pope's bill.
Provided for proxy marriage
where somebody else's stand in
your place.
The language that is here allow
someone who's on active duty to
get the license although they
can't be present without some of
them to go to a judge the
attached copy the orders and
then when the marriage ceremony
takes place they are they are
present by by technology the
audio or audiovisual ended folks
bill get we got tabled we got to
look at okay.
Okay so that's in the subway we
need a motion about the
committees of.
but I will do that I move the do
not pass on Senate bill two
ninety five.
And a.
do face as they do pass on
Senate bill committee sub is
send a public sent health
imposed vers Committee
substitute percent of bill to
ninety five for discussion
purposes service.
Seconded by Sierra.
Those in favor of this bill.
You want to come up and speak on
this bill.
Members of the committee to yeah
I don't know if I I'm
representing the coalition of
sexual assault programs and I
was just sitting here listening
to all I wasn't here for this
bill I don't know if the
coalition is in favor of this or
not I can tell you I'd love to
see the sub I can tell you that
and change is a national
organization a couple years ago
we asked them to work with local
organizations on the ground.
And
state we were unsuccessful and
convincing them of doing that
when you're talking about
prohibiting somebody under
eighteen for marriage I don't
know if that's what this is
saying it does
there are some cultural
considerations to think about
and I know it seems weird for me
to be here picking this up but I
would want to go back to the
coalition and some communities
on the ground and to figure out
if we still have the concerns
that we had two years ago when
we talked with this national
organization
I also would love for the
senator to speak with the
coalition he said before his
door is always open I recently
heard that that was not the case
with me so hopefully he just
changed his mind about that and
that he and I can speak about
this bill thank you Mr chairman.
I take that you're neutral on
the bill.
Okay.
Anybody else here to speak
either in favor or against this
bill.
Anybody on soon they're all gone
to dinner by no.
Members of the committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
On the on the issue of the state
marriage and marriage age.
on page nine the.
Y. eleven it's is voidable.
That you're looking at the at
the reasonable not the something
that has a committee sub Senate
health and public affairs
committee subject she's the.
Find F. page nine.
Marriage of minors voidable
exes.
The title actually the Mr
Chairman that's a that's a typo
actually the title there should
say void would not voidable
correct space nine one eleven I
think they got that.
Of the eleven patient online
eleven incentive voidable it
should say void any state void
you can probably move it up to
like tens of squeezing after.
Mr chair do you need a motion to
that effect yes and you accept
that as a any opposition to
making that the typographical
change.
Seeing none will go ahead okay
so a copy of the.
No description of the of the vet
that
The reason to cut my ally.
Because there are significant
property issues with declaring
the board the marriage void the
kids were able so I actually
prefer voidable.
ironically enough just because.
if the marriage when you're
talking about minors the
disabilities that and I'm using
disability the old fashioned way
but the of.
You talked about age that's the
way they taught it to us in law
school it's been a long time to
talk about it but the the the
prohibiting factor I think is
with use now the print
prohibiting is age but most
states once they reach the
majority the the age of majority
they can either reaffirm the
marriage is what happens in some
states or scented voidable many
states have like if the marriage
lasts a certain period of time
then then it becomes avoidable
then it's no it's voidable for
period of time and then after
that they'll have to go through
a divorce and there's a real
significant difference in the
property division when you're
talking about a.
Voidable marriage avoid marriage
and a marriage in a marriage
that is dissolved and so
I would prefer if the marriage
was voidable if if what if only
for the property protection of
the individual's though because
the because and then just in
general that's not always true
but in general it's there's a
gender aspect to it and that is
that
Many.
In general then have more
property and so it disadvantages
more young women than it does of
men just to to strictly speaking
I'm not I'm not trying to make a
gendered statement but that's
just the way it is and so why I
guess my question my question Mr
chair is why did you choose to
make it void so Mr and Senator
Lopez
That was that was at the request
of I'm chained.
and I will tell you that the
resolvers enough at.
In fact if you look at in your
book at the original version.
You'll see that we have that it
was.
We had it as as as avoidable.
And and then precisely what we
did was we said that a personal
at the time of the marriage in
the state was a minor who is not
attained the age of nineteen may
file a notice of void marriage
or could have a cause of action
District Court.
And that the District Court.
Actually
Could could then.
It is discretion grant element
into the money emancipate
remarries which is aged nineteen
and and that would also also
this property issues to be dealt
with.
As well and so I there is that
Miss that's that's of the
original bill beginning on page
nine and and so
it'll take a little bit of it'll
take a little bit of Frank
magic.
But I know Frank is capable of
it in that is that if you prefer
the language that was in the
original bill for that section.
I would not object to that
motion at this time and that
would then also allow for the
conversations to take place
within the community partners as
to whether not there's a
preference locally of this being
void or voidable.
Thank you Mr chair I I don't
know who but changes but the
circumstances in New Mexico are
such that there are cultural
issues with regard to minor
marriages and of I just think it
it it I don't like I said I know
who am changes but I think it's
important that we're responsive
to.
The issues on the ground and
At least my take on it is that
New Mexicans tend the data shows
that New Mexicans tend to get
more younger.
Not that it's a great thing but
it's it's it's true and I just
want to disrupt.
The property.
The property law that has
protected.
Young people.
From in this circumstance
Senator Lopez I I I personally
concur with your assessment on
that.
And and so.
Are you know them that's why
state if you the languages is
already in front of you it would
just simply be where where is
that the original bill pay
visibility get impatient.
It just be simply a question of.
Of making a motion that section
five from the original bill
should be used.
Page one page nine.
In a minute.
Indivisibility goals on okay and
this this of.
Mr chair so the.
No that also works at the
amendment we just did which is
what you want to do right that
is correct it would it would
wipe out the amendment would
just it it's that void is
voidable that is correct and
that's and that's why I said
what we'll do yeah because
originally I had it is voidable
and in fact New Mexico law Mr
Chairman said Senator Sedillo
Lopez historically has made
marriages under the prohibited
age to be voidable exactly so it
would remain consistent with
federal with with New Mexico law
if we were to use the language
from the original bill for that
thank you page which raises
another interesting issue and
and again I don't.
What is an change.
Okay that last as a national
advocacy group seeking to rid
the state of child marriage.
And and as with many groups they
are.
There absolutists on the issue
which is why they wanted me to
strike all the other language
about a building voidable.
Senator Frank points out the
thank you very our analyst
points out that on page ten of
the sub.
For that would still be section
five yeah that would still be
section but it's really
something you have void there
right right to the end and then
in the original does that is it
is it safe voidable fit says
what a bull and and then and
then at the end it says the one
change that I made to to the
existing law is existing law is
when you turn eighteen that is
no longer avoidable and I made
it it's avoidable until age
nineteen until your ninetieth
birthday because in fact in it
oftentimes you need that extra
year to kind of figure out where
things are in your life and and
so we want to give them that
opportunity to do that so.
I'm having trouble finding it
was the phone.
We do section five in all of
those other parts correct
correct.
If this section five.
The committee I think that's the
direction Senator Sedillo Lopez
is moving but she's looking for
the language.
To make sure she wants to but
that.
We took care of that in the.
In the.
Individual bill actually was it
was it was much more detailed
and nuanced on that issue
precisely because the cultural
issues that both you and
we're talking about that this
would.
That's kind of what our our for
our family laws and community
property laws come from our
culture your and our culture
historically has had younger
marriages in the average I'm not
saying it's good but that's just
the the history but another
history in our culture.
Is it always got this when I
talk family law was cousins of.
Are not a it's not prohibited in
New Mexico for cousins to marry
and you're taking that out
as well and the reason that
they're not prohibited is
because historically in New
Mexico there is a small towns.
That.
And it's it's cause problems is
because the genetic the just
some genetic issues with a
certain kind of breast cancer
and that you know some some
issues but a lot of family trees
have first cousins in them this
and and they also have double
marriages were brother brother
brother meets a merry sister
sister you know whatever so so
that that happened and that
heritage.
I I don't know how many states
permit because of marriages but.
I just feel like
Again unchanged I just saw the
website of it.
I think it again this is another
bill that I think we should
possibly.
Have more discussions with
people about what we has a state
that the part I love about your
bill absolutely love is getting
out of the
Male female aspect in that that
I love that about the bill
because we have changed
I guess I'm not so sure that
we've.
We've we've changed with regard
to.
The youthful marriages and the
acceptability of youthful
marriages and.
You know in the end and what I'm
worried about is people who
engage in these marriages has a
cultural thing not be.
Hurt because the marriage is
then considered void and and I
of.
And looking at this language I
guess.
So I would like to you know I I
am not prepared to do this bill
and I I remember Senator Woods
when times that don't vote yes
on a bill that you don't fully
fully understand and and I guess
that's what what I feel about
this causing going through it
again I didn't like the that
it's a voidable not void and I
knew that was going confusion we
we took care of that just the
confusing part but then I'm not
I'm not sure that this is
responsive to the cultures in
our state
and what.
What people believe what the
practices are and whether we're
going to be able to protect them
in the event it in the event
which.
This is a likelihood that the
marriage doesn't succeed.
you know I I think that's what
divorce law is about that's a
community property laws about is
about protecting them and when
you make.
When you make this drastic
change it's not so clear.
Whether it's voidable for for
not that those protections will
all be in place
certainly if it's void and that
affects community property.
If it's voidable there's some
protections but not all of the
protections that you would get
and again I I never did find it.
On page nine I and and Mr
sources of us personal current
law in New Mexico is America
under the prohibited ages is
what part of all right so that
is currently in New Mexico.
If you are doing to adopt
section five from there was a
bill then then we would maintain
that is voidable.
And and we maintain the language
that that the judge you could do
a cause of action.
And the judge then can make
these certain decisions
including get out taking care of
the person until they there are
over the age of majority.
The
A lot of the historic nature of
New Mexico.
Happened first of all before
match dot com.
it's true in eighteen sixty five
we passed our first prohibited
marriages Act and in eighteen
sixty five we prohibited the
marriage of first cousins in
eighteen sixty eight we
retreated on that policy.
However because the cultural
practice bill because we had
small towns that nobody moved
away from Mr Chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez and there are that
many options.
We live in a fundamentally
different society today and
there are health problems that
happen if you enter merry too
many times.
And and so there is no reason
today.
For first causes to build a
merry in New Mexico there are
many health reasons why they
should not be permitted to bury
in New Mexico
and the and so it does so the so
the bill.
The bill addresses that
addresses that issue.
it also in the same place
because.
We've we've not allowed uncles
to merry maces or uncles to
bury arounds Committee nephews.
But today.
You gotta make sure that you
also include that uncles I'm
gonna merry enough you and
that's not gonna Mandy's.
And so we take care of that in
this bill.
and and so you know it is
So the so I'll just I'll just
say that the.
The the initial issue that you
raised I'm I'm completely in
agreement with you on that and
like I said we have language
that's already in front of you
that will accomplish that.
On the issue of the of the first
cousins.
That's a decision for this
committee if you want to strike
that or not but I will just say
that I think there are a lot of
health reasons why we should not
do that and you don't have the
same thing of people not going
from fifteen miles of the town
that they grew up in or knowing
anybody else outside of that
fifty mile radius okay are you
going to make a motion or not
to.
But wait to use the results
section five food to use to
delete section five it replaces
section five from the original
but you go back to the voidable
and a court process available.
In the case of a minor.
I think it's better okay okay so
you want to make a motion to
make that was our second.
A second it's a family member
that's affirmative so it's it's
to delete section I
rooms we got it out there that
don't that focus of oil and I
think that we need to review
process yes so the so at as as
is.
I just I was just gonna say that
as is the usual custom the the
this will be prepared as a new a
committee so if you.
So hello discussion so Mister
chair it was a joke that my
husband did not appreciate when
we got married but I used to say
that I married him to expand the
gene pool.
and I think in New Mexico a lot
of people don't know who their
cousins are.
and so the this is first first
again this is the first cousins.
I mean how do you and I are
cousins but I didn't know there
were about a thousand or
something like that.
I've met first cousins I didn't
know.
Yeah.
Really.
But the big family and can also
interesting history with
families and how that how that
all came about are using don't
want to make this move I.
Now move
I moved on to because it was but
we're still in the middle we
never have finished the
amendment I'm sorry I'm sorry.
Yes and on the amendment.
Some of the companies nine
section five starts on this
personal.
That for the
yes.
Do you.
The current in the in the
original bill.
Mr strike.
Which is bill allows.
It is not it.
the age of it's a an
unanticipated person under the
age of eighteen.
Can get married.
But then but then if there is
such a marriage that takes place
then you could have the it's
avoidable marriage and and you
can the cause of action then can
be taken in District Court.
It.
Yes Representative on.
I think which would be added to
the I.
The
line sixteen in the title this
is the right is that what you're
saying.
One sixty to the title.
No actually actually that it
that would be correct if we
drive amendment that would be
correct you don't change.
The following section talk about
board correctly correct that's
void verses voidable.
Biters avoid incest of side
miners avoidable if we've got
this ammendment incest is what.
Okay so that gets me to what I
say we can we that is the
member.
Please.
You got that right okay.
Substitute the so we've we've
made that amendment and now we
go on to further discussion
including the issue of cousins
now finding so the server's
Lebanon's so if you have first
because it's we're currently
married.
This bill does not undo their
marriage.
At all this is prospective only
and I just want to make clear
about that.
Thank you I assume that because
that's the law of and I am of.
But but
With regard to cousins who may
end up within the first degree
who may end up getting married.
Of again.
There's protections built into
voidable versus void of and.
And also the the whole issue of
Of community property
dissolution of marriage or
whatever so my question is why
why do you think they need to be
void has a point to photo
portable certainly Mr chairman
and Senator Lopez historically.
Incestuous marriages have been
declared void in New Mexico
justice historically.
Underage marriages were
avoidable.
But incestuous marriages
historically report.
So it was just keeping the same
structure we've always had.
I Mr chair I agree with that for
the other categories but you're
changing up a cultural you're
changing a standard that.
Certain cultures within our
state every light on.
And making them void so I guess
my suggestion would be if you're
gonna do if you're gonna change.
Because the rest are are mostly
Mostly dealing with jet the
gender issue but this is a
substantive change.
you know and and and I'm totally
on board with changing the the
gender to to be in alignment
with our current law but this is
a change in the current law and
Again.
Voidable provide some
protections to individuals who
did this now I I again
a lot of them tend to be young
you know because that's a that's
a cultural thing in any sort of
taking care of that but then
cousins who are older
and I'm personally aware of
marriages that that were between
first cousins because they
weren't aware of it.
and it concerns me that they are
declared void because again
there's still is a disparity in
who gets hurt by them.
So it's that is concerned.
And it may be I don't know how
you get the kind of input
because you work with this
organization and their goal is
to eliminate child marriages
this isn't it and I don't know
what they thought about the
cousins
My understanding of the because
an issue is it's a problem if it
continues for generations it's
not a problem if it happens
occasionally.
So I I don't know like I said I
I am concerned because it
doesn't you know it I know it
doesn't affect past marriages
but I don't know that the
culture is going to change
sometimes law
gets behind culture and some a
little bit worried about it
You know I understand why why I
think it's important it will
bring isn't in alignment with
most states because there are
few The New Mexico with its
unique history was one of the
few that permitted it.
And like I said I'm aware even
within my family of of that
happening and so it just kind of
shakes me low but.
Mr chair.
And let's see what else I think
I.
I wonder if you guys are we
gonna go through this weird but
weird like this or.
No I I think that that the
others
so late into this.
notes the these are fine.
If we're gonna go through a real
word by word I would just we
just roll it over and then you
have a chance to go through it
in detail meet with the sponsor
find out the answers and then we
can come back on Monday and
actually vote on it because this
is a life.
No we have two more to go.
The that's this is the dilemma
of of bringing big complex built
you know.
Late at night the.
Would you be willing to roll it
over to it and bring it back and
then Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr Chairman hi.
What.
Yeah but I don't that resident I
don't care I mean will rule some
of those because the the this is
too big a deal to to do without
everybody being fully appraised
of the.
In on a Friday night is a fan of
those of the big question marks
I I had I have some
clarification things but then I
I think they were answered.
Right I think that's so you
don't want to roll it over.
Well I guess I wanted to
response to the cousin thing in
that and having it be void or
voidable.
Yeah of the shipment and Senator
Lopez.
I would it would it would be a.
I mean to the extent that we're
talking about incestuous
marriages.
I'd I don't think that that is
appropriate on on any of those
but I do think certainly I'm
happy to work with you hopefully
this bill gets out.
if not over the weekend before
this because back in terms of
making sure subsection do.
where we talk about the cause of
action is to to buy a party to
the marriage.
that the that the court shall
consider art community property
issues in the dissolution of
what marriage.
I think that's important yeah
and we can and frankly they
could be just.
They could be simple is that the
courts are considered community
property issues.
And the dissolution of avoid
marriage to this is Mr chair I'm
so tired that I'm having trouble
processing what you know all of
the.
All the patience of that worked
sh no don't do that.
Mr chair
just because there's a void
there is voidable and then
there's the dissolution and you
did something really interesting
with with this section creating
a cause of action we are you
know within a specific one which
is very interesting I just want
to process all of that
In light of the the history has
been a long time.
So.
I mean if you want to roll it
that'd be fine or let's do that
this role to to give you a
chance to read it through
thoroughly disgusted with
Senator Ivey Soto and we'll try
to figure out either on Monday
or if you still have some issues
on which we will get to it.
What if
added to Monday's and then
Senator Maestas should come Mr
chairman thank you service order
though the up on page ten line
nineteen.
Yes children are precluded but I
guess they're not with the
section five so I would say you
consider the language parents
with their.
Children or parents with their
adult children.
And then sent it so late in the
hour all come in on the great
grandparents.
This would prove this would
theoretically allow great great
grandparents so there's there's
still a shopper solution
additional shot and then with
regards to the cousins I think
first cousin is
It's totally reasonable under
the law.
I think it's you know.
Fourth cousins the grandma's
could give you the green light
were first cousins now thank
you.
Okay anything else anybody have
any other comments before we
move on to the next Senator of
the in the.
Thank you chairman and senator
so yet Page ten about the
cousins.
Since we're going to roll into
Monday
Consanguinity so.
I just wonder what folks read
that.
Does that mean first cousin once
removed.
Twice removed I mean how how far
down it's the first degree of
consanguinity the first okay.
So first cousin once removed
it's not not able
instrumentality months removed
right if they want to remove the
Camaro.
Really.
So for if.
Well All if they're straight up
first cousin to date you can get
married under this bill you
would not be able to get
married.
I'm gonna have to think about
that on for Monday thank you
yep.
Any other discussion okay
Senator message you the fact
that thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you very much for your time and
attention on these bills.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto will
go now to Senate bill
With Senate bill two sixty four
aggregation of investment for
penalties decide to go fast.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members of the Senate bill two
hundred sixty four dealing with
the embezzlement statute thirty
to sixteen dash eight this.
This suggests that we combine
within it within a twelve month
period the crime of embezzlement
so if somebody you know takes
you know Eilers from the till.
Ten times the once a week it
would be one crime equaling
thousand dollars instead of ten.
Petty misdemeanors equaling one
hundred dollars as as
articulated in the.
in the public defender analysis
it's consistent with the single
larceny doctrine which is our
larceny statute and that is a
mistake typically committed as a
pattern of conduct the courts
also agree that this could
reduce labor.
Reduce labor need and in the
process system and ensure swift
and certain justice also it
essentially caps a sentence at
nine years because of somebody
stealing
they're they're not stating
their best thing I misspoke of
someone's.
You know takes twenty five
thousand from the tail of five
times theoretically under
today's law they could serve
forty five years in which they
just might so this essentially
would cap it nine years which is
appropriate for a white collar
crime and with that I would
stand for questions.
Is there anyone in the audience
is here in favor of this bill.
Opposed to this bill members of
the committee.
Overdue tax.
Is there a second we have a
motion and a second.
In the discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
This is why you stay here till
seven on a Friday night.
Senator guy Ecosse Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle Senator myiasis
yes Senator McKenna.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tallman yes and back to
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator to the piano yes okay we
have a due pass with less bill
of the night is money so I
turned the gavel you have to do
passed by a vote of the I six
six is thank you Mr chairman
honorable members and and I
misspoke I I use the word still
it's at investment as you
already have possession of of
the items and you just
cumbersome into your your your
pocket thank you.
Yeah we better pass it up to.
So much for your work through
some copies of the pandemic ten.
Yes.
Thank you.
He said.
Is it is a conflict of the
settlement Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
a bill that the Senator in
poverty brought to my attention
we we thought originally that
the department would be fully
supportive they apparently of a
determined that they think they
will have fiscal problem so
they're neutral on the bill it's
my understanding.
because it doesn't guarantee
they'll get the full amount of
money they think that they need
this is a bill that deals with
the ten of program ten if used
to be known as the predecessor
programmers if I do see the the
old welfare program when Clinton
reform to welfare or some of us
think of it as a deformed to the
welfare program he replaced it
with ten the big change for New
Mexico was that it became a
block grant the the instead of
it being an entitlement to a if
DC was it became a block grant
in the state was given a lot of
discussion about how to spend
that block grant for the last.
Ten years at least the number of
families receiving assistance
from this program has been
declining.
And and and it's not because
there's not need I don't think I
the you know and of the Attorney
certainly don't it's because the
program has become so.
Stingy in the budget and so
punitive in the way that work
requirements are being carried
out and.
So dangerous because it says if
you you know you only have five
years in the program and if you
blow them when you have two
kids.
Later on we have two more you're
not eligible for you get zero so
that there's a lot of a lot of
problems with the tenant program
but the big problem is we just
have not really kept it up to
date with the needs in the state
about about six years ago we
started we weren't spending all
the blocker the blocker is what
about a hundred thirty five it's
not a hundred thirty five
million a year we weren't
spending enough of it on the
benefits to people.
So we started taking the rather
than returning to the fed's.
We we started paying for child
care with it we give it to see
what I do here to now early
childhood.
Do you see you do whatever it's
called early childhood
development program early
childhood department and and
and.
And they this of any department
in state government that's the
one that has so much money right
now for childcare.
There really is no read no need
to divert about forty percent of
it sixty two about sixty two
percent of the tent of block
grant is being diverted to
childcare and CYFD and and and
and to see what I do as well so
it's it's like we're not using
the block grant we could be
having a a more robust ten if
program the budget could be
better the work requirements
could be really made much
clearer and more supportive of
the family's less punitive we
could be helping families
transition from welfare to work
that's what this bill is set up
to do.
And then we we we got the FIR
and there are a number of
changes that we need to make so
we have a committee set up so I
would move do not pass on Senate
bill two sixty seven.
And a.
Pardon me.
And to do passed on the Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute percent a
bill to sixty seven procession
purposes.
Okay and I would like to to turn
it over with there's one other
amendment doing that we may need
to make because.
The
The department's the it wasn't
the education department the
broader hi HSD HSD identified
one other area where we we the
change we're proposing conflict
with.
Another state law and and L. a
let my expert witness to
Gonzalez from the Santo online
poverty thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
For hearing SB two sixty seven
thank you to our sponsors for
bringing this legislation
apparently years and community
organizations that we've been
working with over the last two
years developed the priorities
that you see in this bill and
and some were here earlier and
had to go back home to
Albuquerque to be with their
with their kids I want to thank
the parents who we work with in
particular on the organization
and in economic and crossroads
for women who do so much to help
our parents
Just have the kind of life they
want with their children so
thank you first I want to share
the story of one of our parent
leaders who couldn't stay out
longer our news Micaela and she
applied for tennis when she was
in her third trimester of
pregnancy she knew she was going
to need some help with the baby
was born she missed an
appointment while she was still
in the hospital recovering from
childbirth and the basing Center
she received a reduction in her
cash benefits while in the
hospital
she eventually was terminated
from the grant and lost the that
the cash benefit while she had
this new one she attempted to
regain compliance multiple times
for case file is about twelve
inches thick with that shows the
various sanctioning that
happened in her in her benefit
recently she regained compliance
and then was sanctioned again
for not turning in the proper
paperwork for child support the
paperwork required her to get
pages notarized and it's very
complex.
she went on to be sanctioned two
more times before the department
said she finally had the right
paperwork and her story is not
unique about thirty percent of
the families who rely on kind of
have their budget reduced or
terminated due to these types of
programs violations
nearly one third of New Mexicos
infants and toddlers live in
poverty but children intent of
households live in extreme
poverty now despite the high
extreme poverty child rates
there are punitive tennis
program requirements that lock
families out of budget for six
months at a time I can kind of
is important to these families
that are very low income because
they're used to help with
housing costs and food once not
dollars run out in the middle of
the month they can also be used
to pay for utilities and other
essentials like diapers
transforming the tenant program
into a model that supports
infants and their mothers
actually results in greater
lifetime earnings for those
infants they also have higher
educational attainment and
greater overall health and
that's because the research
shows that even a three thousand
dollar annual boost to family
income during these early
childhood years of zero to five
is associated with a seventeen
percent increase in earnings
when those children grow up as
well as an additional hours of
work.
What we're suggesting here and
you should have the committee
secretary may have passed out
this Bakshi here that that
briefly describes what the bill
is is trying to do
is what ten other states have
already done which is to
redesign their kind of programs
and to move away from a punitive
punishment model to a family
support model that works with
families to figure out what's
going on so they can continue to
receive these important cash
benefits which are time limited
anyways the average family who
received kind of in New Mexico
is one parent and two children
and forty nine percent of those
kids are under five years old
what that family receives
average size families just four
hundred forty seven dollars a
month that's fifty four hundred
dollars a year in order to be
eligible for can if you have to
have less than a hundred percent
of the federal poverty
guidelines but you're living
when you receive those benefits
at just twenty three percent of
the federal poverty guidelines
those numbers have not been
increased in in twenty five
years.
Now under the prior
administration under governors
former governors and working as
I'm she instituted some new
rules into the program that's
all dramatic decrease in the
program and so now only forty
percent of families that are
eligible for kind of for
actually rules and that's
because there are these
unnecessarily punitive program
rules that lock families out of
the program so this bill will do
five things the substitute will
do five things to modernize the
kind of program and in
discussions with HSD we
understand that the total fiscal
impact for the substitute is
three point eight million.
The first thing this bill would
do is to stop punishing the
children when there's a program
violation under federal law you
can create a pro rata share of
the grant so that some portion
of the grant is preserved for
the children even if the parent
commit some kind of program rule
violations like failing to turn
in documentation of work hours
so the bill would preserve fifty
percent of that for let's say
for the average family fifty
percent of four hundred and
forty seven for the children to
get that for twelve continuous
months.
The parent can regain compliance
at any time if they of fix
whatever program rural they've
violated this modest retention
of resources for the children
will have a lifetime impact for
them and it will only cost one
point six million dollars.
The next thing this bill does is
to ensure that families are
exempt from work requirements
when they have good reasons the
state law already requires the
state to accept New Mexicans who
have barriers to employment in
and and and only on permits the
state to require specific
activities like applying for
federal disability benefits like
SSI in two thousand eleven under
former Martinez former governor
Martinez administration HSD
stopped allowing exemptions to
the work requirements even if
you had a significant issue like
being experiencing disabilities
or welcoming a newborn baby or
taking care of a disabled family
member they would not reduce the
hours you had to complete two
zero.
which meant that these families
at the time that they needed the
cash the most lost their income
and this causes further
destabilization research from
several different organizations
and and university shows that
families who leave town if due
to sanctions they're less well
than families that leave for
other reasons because of the
destabilization effect of losing
that income when they needed it
the most.
The next thing this bill does is
to stop the practice of
retaining any child support
dollars that are collected on
behalf of families that
participate in kind of and then
to exclude the child support
dollars from the cap monthly
cash benefit calculation right
now New Mexico keeps all but one
hundred to two hundred dollars a
child support dollars paid to
families who participate in
tennis.
that's up and and this bill will
change that so that all of the
child support is passed through
to these families this will
increase family support by as
much as thirty three percent
this change is been done in
other states and it's been shown
to increase compliance with
child support payment
requirements and the fiscal
impact here is two point two
million dollars but the state
has applied for a federal waiver
which if it's granted would not
require those allocation of
funds.
The next thing there's two more
things the next thing this bill
does is to add program
eligibility to the education
works program right now the
education works program provides
twenty four months of this kind
of cash benefit assistance to
very low income New Mexicans if
they pursue a four year degree.
Early this program does not
allow participants who want to
pursue a GED or occupational
training or certificate program
to benefit from that program
this bill would expand those
eligibility criteria so that
they could go get their GED and
and participate in education
works there's no budget impact
here because the capacity for
this program exists to absorb
these extra programs.
The extra eligibility criteria
the final thing this bill does
is to provide ongoing
flexibility for families to meet
program requirements right now
families get a once a year
opportunity to fix whatever
program will they may have
violated this change would allow
for continuous ongoing thirty
day periods to correct whatever
violation they may be in
violation of.
finally we want to thank the
Human Services department for
working with us on many of these
issues many of these policies
are things the agency has
already put in place by
regulation are is planning to
the department has also helped
us understand the budget impact
in our understanding from these
conversations is that the impact
of the substitute costs three
point eight million dollars the
which is well within the budget
that is coming out of
appropriations that will contain
an additional ten million
dollars for kind of cash
assistance and also the budget
for fiscal year twenty twenty
four carries over twenty four
million dollars and unspent
funds from last year we urge the
committee to pass this
legislation is that will lower
the administrative costs in the
long run and improve long term
outcomes for New Mexico's lowest
income children thank you thank
you to one less comments the co
sponsoring this is Senator Lopez
who had to go home early because
virtual pin but
she was part of the group of
legislators who participated in
the original the of the
commission or whatever work
group that that formulated New
Mexico's version of of tennis
back in the nineties and the
she's one of pointed out to us
that the budget has not
increased since the.
It's still the same in the cost
of living of course is gonna
grown astronomically since then
but we still give families the
same meager check each month
that we gave them in the
nineteen nineties.
For.
Lost a lot of its value.
Thank you for The presentation.
Conclude your yes.
Support.
No there's the one other
amendment we need to make an
it's on page twenty seven.
We have a word.
Right now it says on the line to
that the failure of a dependent
child to attend school shall
shall not make the adult member
of the benefit group subject to
sanction I'm it it needs to be
shall know may.
I
to the H. one seven line to.
We thought it was.
It's on the bottom of twenty six
so twenty seven to be nine
conflicts with the provision of
the bill that prohibits
sanctions for school attendance
that section states the benefits
may be reduced for school
attendance so there needs to be
an amendment saying that.
The.
It's it's.
Sorry I mean she yes you have
actually service thank you thank
you of sovereign Hager from
Mexico Center online poverty the
US there's another section in
the New Mexico works act which
is the tennis statute that's
twenty seven dash W. dash nine
and it says that it explains how
the state agency can sanction
families when the kids don't go
on that's already provided for
in in our other laws and what
the bill does is explained that
you cannot sanction for that
reason and so what's pointed out
in the FIR by HSD is that twenty
seven dash W. dash nine which is
not contained in the bill fees
be structured to be consistent
with what's in the bill here in
section five so we have to we
have to put in a statement into
it we have before we to be
inserted right at right on page
twenty I guess.
Twenty seven to B. seven.
And so on.
Twenty.
ends on twenty three.
So we would need to insert all
right on page twenty three.
In line for.
Irvine I insert.
I read when we do the
a reference to twenty seven.
To be.
Nine isn't to be nine but I I
think the amendment Senator
would be to just strike twenty
seven dash W. dash nine that so
with that we have to say that at
that point where do we stand at
the end.
The probably before that because
these follow sequentially the
year so what are the legislation
so we would we would insert on
page twenty three I think line
I.
that would be a of what we call
it repeal or striker what we
call it the late.
The deletion.
Four nine that's right that's
exactly what yeah right before
fourteen it would be inserted
before fourteen.
And we say would would be we
strike it.
Yes
It's it's a provision that is
it's not a we we it does not
cited in this bill it's the
other part of the the the the of
the ten a fact that we did not
include because we were changing
of the department said you you
gotta change it because it
conflicts with what you're
saying of the twenty six.
Perfect for section of.
Twenty seven to be nine.
That would be a.
Is that the what.
Care that be a separate.
All.
Yes.
The.
The section in the section of
the tent of love that's not
included in this bill is section
twenty seven W. nine is as
mandatory school attendance it's
as if the kid doesn't go to
school you can thanks in the
family.
On twenty six on page twenty six
we say you can't sanction so you
can we got to delete that in
order for this to work.
Right yeah I'm just suggesting.
Section that we are fighting and
another law yep that yes in the
new the new number you're right
a new number the section I would
right after section five.
And then re number of the
succeeding sections.
Is that the new section five
says strike.
Section twenty seven twenty
eight nine mandatory school
attendance.
I I don't know.
Okay so you have a new section
five with a repeal was it
revealed seven very that.
That.
And you would have sessions
I.
No shoes re number.
Thank you.
Yeah everything else is good.
Twenty three.
Yes
Yes.
Yep whatever that formula is
whatever it is.
And remember.
All the all right now.
As of.
Just.
Is that right.
Okay that makes it easier.
Of of.
So any repeal would go at the
end of words numbered in the
perfect.
Okay hello it's new section
seven.
Yeah because section seven is
the effective date.
Thank you senator I.
So I know that.
Call me on the.
Madam chair and then move that
we have to pass on the.
Do that yes.
The leader of.
I.
Of the you know you move it do
not do not fast.
I move it to not passes.
I visited.
Thank you secretary thank.
Yeah it is that.
Senator guide.
Yes Senator Ingle biases yes.
Yes.
Senator street and Senator
Lopez yes.
Okay.
Yes Senator Ortiz yes.
When whenever
whenever lawyers stop cease and
desist.
Then with that we conclude our.
This evening's activities thank
you Mr chairman thank you thank
you the range of thank you.
