The need for more law
enforcement officers in New
Mexico streets only talked about
New Mexicans needing to feel
safe while they were driving
home while they were shopping
school and it resonated with me
because people Mesilla Valley
we're seeing an increase in
crime and soon after her speech
the mayor of Espanola spoke
about the need for more police
officers not only in the city of
Espanola but the county of Rio
Arriba because I believe so much
in those words of keeping New
Mexican safe I rallied around
this bill that has the
governor's full support know if
you remember Mr chairman last
sessions house bill two provided
a non recurring appropriation to
DGA of fifty million dollars to
distribute to local law
enforcement agencies for officer
recruitment and retention now
house bill sixty eight provided
the guidelines for
administration of the program
that then became an MSA nine
dash six dash five point three
thank section but this bill
proposes to replace now the
purpose of this bill Mr Chairman
is to broaden the guardrails for
the program to include
distributions to both state and
local public safety entities for
the purpose of recruiting for
employment officers as well as
the billion person whose
positions directly support
officers now you should have
seen a committee substitute that
I believe you have in front of
you the.
Not that.
We will soon though so as with
that is passing up the committee
substitute what it does is it
seeks to completely replace the
language that was enacted and
NMSA nine dash six dash five
point three with Bob Barr
broadening guardrails the
substitute bill does not affect
the current allocation and so
the executive budget
recommendations go wrong wrong
one yeah we have a committee so.
They're just making sure
everybody the way comes only
days.
Thank now the executive budget
recommendations included is an
additional hundred million
dollars and we're seeing a vital
in order to keep our our New
Mexico streets and citizen state
and with that Mr Chairman.
I'm gonna handed over to
cabinet secretary Bowie who is
my expert witness today.
Please thank you Secretary VOA
good to see you fusel Mr chair
thing what this is all about
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee first of all I
thank the sponsors and our meal
and Representative Ferrer for
bringing this bill fourth for
some time now it's of civics and
civically over the last several
years is everyone's aware we've
been struggling really in the
law enforcement space in order
to recruit and retain our police
officers and everybody
understands and knows the
shortage of law enforcement
officers of course has left New
Mexicans vulnerable in the space
of crime I think everybody would
agree that more police officers
with hopefully a hopefully help
in that space and reducing the
crime this for that reason as
you might recall the last
legislative session the
executive and this legislative
body a champion the initiative
to work towards placing a
thousand police officers on the
streets of New Mexico to combat
crime and so as was mentioned by
Senator Hermio the fifty million
dollar appropriation during last
legislative session for a need
to be to.
Was to address that shortfall Mr
chair for this for a moment I
would like to just thank
everybody not just this
committee with the legislative
body as a whole for that support
that we've seen during the last
legislative session I can tell
you that we've been able to
recruit more police officers and
retain more police officers as a
result of this funding speaking
with cheese and shares there are
multiple conferences and
meetings that we have we believe
and we know that the fund this
had a positive impact on
agencies across the state of New
Mexico and I can tell you
speaking on their behalf of very
many are grateful for the
opportunity to to bring more
people on board as you know not
every organization not every law
enforcement agency in the state
has the same funding streams
opportunities and this allows
them to be competitive and to
make sure they can also recruit
the law enforcement offices
needed whatever community that
they serve so I believe we're
moving in the right direction
and with that I would say
briefly the amendment here today
would focus on is expanding this
program a little bit so that we
can also recruit people into the
space that can help law
enforcement and as an example of
the New Mexico state police last
year what we did is we took
task and responsibilities that
we're we settled our uniformed
officers with and we look at
some of those and we decided
that non uniformed personnel
noncommissioned personnel or
sometimes refer to a civilian
staff could handle some of those
things and so with the you're a
crime scene technician someone
who's taken evidence and
traveling across the state to
deliver evidence on some of
those things support staff all
of those things that we expect
from our police officers we now
can look at non commissioned
staff to take care and so the
bill in the amendments here that
the sponsor has brought forth
allows for.
Of that as well as you can
understand as we bring in more
police officers across the New
Mexico that requires support
person to make sure there are
affected we're I can tell you
all the time and in the
uniformed often gets the credit
there's a lot a lot of people
working behind the scenes making
sure that the police officers
have what they need in order to
administrative staff that's
dispatchers crime scene
technicians as I mentioned and
so forth and so this bill with
support hiring that additional
staff so that we can reduce
crime Mr chair with that hoe
stand for questions I would
introduce our Fuhrman of Diego
minutes with the FAA he can
answer any of the the the final
cover anything that ever you
just available for questions Mr
chair just available for
questions.
The audience is there anyone in
the audience in support of this
bill.
Okay you want to say anything
about come up use Mike that if
you want to say anything about a
complaint up and get ready to
see you just you just showing
support for.
Mr chairman of the committee
Troy we third W. for the New
Mexico state police
We just want to one echo
everything that the secretary
but we have said we want to let
the committee and sponsors know
that we stand in support of this
bill it will not only help to
maintain current law enforcement
capacity to help build a future
capacity improve public safety
in the in the state and this
this particular version or this
new bill also but if you able to
expand the funding to state
agencies so we're very
appreciative of that and of the
US sponsors to bring forth thank
you but what other state
agencies would it didn't go to.
so any of well so I believe this
will be state police and then
corrections as far as the
S. T. I. U. like the individual
to deal with the Skylanders
probation and parole violation
stuff like that and enforcement
arm of that I believe and then
there's also several support
rules laid out in the bill as a
secretary was mentioning okay
this is your last year the state
agencies were not support in
this fund so state police a
universities a game and fish so
some of those agencies that we
did not receive funding state
police.
Those just for local correct I
didn't realize that so you so
this would open up to you as
well yes Mr chairman of the
committee.
Okay is there anybody here in
opposition to this measure.
Anybody on to okay members of
the committee questioned.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I think this
is a really great ideas souls of
the to start with everything is
the real get great ideas I was
just I I only saw this as of now
so I'm just trying to figure out
if it addresses this and I think
it does but I want to clarify
that
It's it's the.
DPS which is your shots of the
bill does not indicate felt
eligibility criteria for funding
which may cause confusion is
that remedy by page two line
nineteen or you of like twenty
twenty one the department shall
establish criteria.
Is is that the.
Senator Mr Mr chair Mr chair
Senator yes okay.
I.
You know what the back reminds
me we never did you are motion
on substantive bills somebody
want to do that motion.
Senator McKenna so a chair I
move a do not pass on Senate
bill two eighty eight and a do
pass on committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty eight for
discussion purposes only the.
But Senator Sedillo any any any
if discussion go ahead.
Thank you
Thank you Mr chair so
To prove it so the criteria so
just going along with the idea
of establishing criteria which
addresses this issue then it
says
so what I look for when we're
support we stated and agencies
going to is status criteria I
look to see what what guardrails
what it what it.
What are the parameters of what
we what we want them to status
rules about and it says to
prevent crime and improve public
safety and my question is yes of
course we all want that but is
that specific enough to give the
DFA guidance for for the
criteria like are there I love
that you're opening it up
Two dispatchers administered
person I I think all alike is a
love that and I support that
idea my question is more of a
technical one of whether DFA of.
Could use more guidance in
establishing the criteria and
then we're voting on a bill that
we don't know what the criteria
the card wells I'm not saying we
substitute or we've set the
criteria I'm saying what are the
parameters Mr chair members of
the committee I'm gonna defer to
at Diego he menace of the DFA to
help with this question thank
thank you for your Senator.
Mr chair and the Senator it with
your finger into his making
noise you got a hold that that
doesn't get to hold.
And the woman talk yeah keep.
Okay thank you senator Mr chair
and senator you're looking up
the yet to continually hold it
is holding it down it is okay
well.
Lean into this
Okay I just want to zoom people
to be able to get a.
thank you senator had Mister
chairman Senator Sedillo Lopez
the.
Language of this bill was
drafted to be brought on purpose
as you noticed in the bill it
covers a lot of different types
of positions everything from
dispatchers to a forensic
scientists and laboratory
personnel.
And so I think that the.
The reason that we had for not
getting more specific here is
because.
Yes that is to cover such a
broad swath that we don't want
to narrow it too much and and
cut out some of those some of
the intended recipients and and
in addition I mean in addition
to all these various positions
the intent is to distribute to
the county sheriff's
universities
state agencies and so we we just
made it deliberately brought
with the intent for for DFA to
establish the criteria and have
some flexibility and and
figuring it out
how how and where to distribute
the funds.
Senator.
That sort.
I support the bill and and I'm
going to I'm gonna vote for it I
just feel like
May use the funds.
I just feel that that's a very
very broad grant of authority to
the DFA
To just establish criteria.
To prevent crime and improve
public safety.
Almost anything that you can
think of like just
hypothetically and as chambers
public plug for my tax bill.
Reducing alcoholism would would
do that and then I don't think
it's a civilian evidence
custodians public service states
so I'm just saying well what if
this may be a good idea what
what if this was a public use
use public service aids two of
reduce alcoholism and do
prevention work great idea but
where's the limitation.
Mr Mr chair of the Mr chair
Senator Lopez I guess the way
that I redid its advances
positions that directly support
commission the law enforcement
officers and the crime reduction
efforts and so for me direct
support of the people that work
in the agency and I identify
that as direct support and we
have a lot of law enforcement
partners and I'll just give a
fuse simple maybe court will be
a law enforcement partner that's
an indirect partner JP of
detention centers those are all
partners but they're in direct
and so when we look at the
positions that are included
specifically mentions
dispatchers police
administrative person suing
crime scene technicians these
are all internal positions
evidence concert in forensics
lab of a public service age
which are again the drive of
vehicles issued by the agency
cold case investigators hired by
the organization investigative
analyst an unmanned aerial
vehicle operated vehicle
operators which are drone
operators and so to me as I look
at it it's those that provide
the direct support within the
organization not you know
external partners so the
positions but.
Not that you're gonna do that
that they're gonna do this but
a public service aid is a very I
think it's very flexible
position no the Mr chair Senator
is not actual public service
eight is that you typically a
younger person that we hire
starting at about the age of
eighteen provide them a marked
unmarked car they don't get the
red lights on their vehicle but
they basically take lower level
calls for service so they may
take of crashes without injuries
not type thing with their
directly employed by the law
enforcement organization so
public service aides are they
were they were uniformed they
don't have a gun and a badge and
a gun to academy they go through
a public service eight academy
on how to process low level law
enforcement related type stuff
and they are imported directly
and working in conjunction with
the law enforcement thank you Mr
chair so so what do you
mentioned that is so is a cry if
the money could be first come
first serve if they meet the
criteria or will there be an
evaluation of which applications
are a stronger.
Mr chair Senator I believe the
intent is to create some kind of
application process and the DFA
would would lay out well
establishing the criterias.
And and will be competitive Mr
chair or will it just be first
come first serve.
Well it how much money is in the
front of the look if I can just
inject how much money is in the
fund the mid you how much did
you spend this last year and
would use it for the Mr chair
with the local agency that was
fifty million this request is
for an additional a hundred
billion.
We're asking for for the fund
this that's not in here is that
a separate bill it's in here.
At Mr chair there is that that
the hundred million was in the
executive recommendation for the
budget the budget currently has
about thirty two and a half
million sort of for a
generalized version of this but
specifically for
law enforcement and so that.
Money what's the appropriation
and house bill two is currently
tied to
That's contingent on on the
passage of house bill three
fifty seven which creates this
fund and.
thank this specific to to law
enforcement.
So three fifty seven but we had
it this year so Mister best last
year.
Mr chair that's the fifty
million that was in their life I
was a fifty million they only
spent about eighteen million of
it sounds like they're still
thirty two left Mr chair I
believe.
But I'm not sure the exact
number but the the full amount
of the fifty million has been
allocated not all of it has been
spent yet so if they've
identified yes Sir.
And and what is the use of force
or what have been allocated for.
Mr members of the committee has
been allocated for new hires for
specifically we had a lot of
discussions regarding this and
what it should be used for and
the result intent always was was
the boots on the ground and so
we've made sure that the agency
could use it as a as a higher
and so is allocated for an
agency to be able to hire a
person and if they can
demonstrate the higher than they
would be basically awarded the
the funding will there be
continuing funding or if it's
one time only and it's great to
hire somebody but if you only
have one year funding great
question Mr chairman of the
committee of the intent
initially when it was rolled out
last year was the pay the first
year a hundred percent the
second year at fifty percent
having the agency match their
fifty percent the thirty year
twenty five percent and then the
you know getting to where they
can get to their cyclocross
local government just to pick it
up at that so yes.
Okay Senator I'm sorry I I just
wanted to take to clarify that
there are using this money right
now thank you Mr chair that was
actually a little bit of where I
was going I am like I said I
support the bill I do think
we're you go from here to
finance Mr chair correct.
I think it's very likely to go
up for the for these people the
positions and so that gives me
some comfort in the lack of.
A guard really get the guard
rails are the positions that are
necessary throughout the state
so that that helps me thank you
Mr chair Senator Maestas your
next then Senator guys thank you
Mr chairman center how to meal
Mr Secretary
the colleges for missing the
presentation so just that I want
to be redundant but.
But essentially this this law
was passed last year.
it's only been in the books for
you know eight months and it
talks about retention
recruitment stipends
And then there's requirements to
get this type and you know you
you remain employed with
agencies for three you know.
provided the recipient remains
employed with the agency
things like that and so now you
want to take out that language
and and essentially say
you know funds appropriated to
DFA.
For law enforcement statewide
law enforcement support.
And then you list this criteria.
And then you don't.
To prevent crime and improve
public safety which is very very
broad and then you talk about
and then you make more folks
eligible so is the is the main
point is to make folks eligible
to make the fund more more
liquid so to speak
But my question is Mr Mr chair
Senator had me on the secretary
the
It is it only for person or can
you buy other stuff.
In that can the law enforcement
agency of purchase purchase
things with it.
Mr chair Senator masses it's my
understanding is for person and
that's what we've done this last
time around and I get that the
language as you're pointing out
is being removed and it's open
opening up a little bit I think
the challenge over can I The New
Mexico as a whole is that as we
move towards this goal to put a
thousand police officers on the
street and mention this little
bit touched on in the building
the presentation is that
the goals get thousand police
officers out there that that
number is hard to find this hard
to find those people that will
do this job currently and so we
recognize that all the there's
difficulty recruiting in that
space there are still other
people who are willing to
contribute to the overall effort
of reducing crime and and these
other positions which can be
taken care of by non sworn
relieves that burden from the
uniformed able take care of
other things and so we
identified that we do this with
the New Mexico state police last
year the number from bill we
asked for appropriation we
received and we took a lot of
these possibilities police
officers and settled with and we
say we hired civilian crimes
investigator people that could
take evidence is used to be
uniformed drivers all across the
state that we have people that
we hired for to do these things
so there's a we recognize
there's a lot of things within
law enforcement thank you take
care bye other people that want
to contribute to the costs and
in discussions of course as I
mentioned you know those are
hard to come by as well we need
to support those and make sure
we.
The girl told police house would
go so to speak right and so we
will make sure that all these
the positions are supported and
that's the reason for a
providing a little bit to make
sure that the efforts towards
reducing crime that we're
looking at all components within
the law enforcement agency in
our able support that we are
hiring more police officers to
take more administrative staff
to keep those people moving
forward there's a tremendous
amount of staff that works and
behind the scenes uniforms owes
the public facing peace but
there's a lot of team work that
goes on to an organization Mr
chair thank you Mr Mr secretary
thank you so much for that and
Senator Hotmail the.
I think on page two line twenty
three says up distribution of
funds.
Rather a line twenty three
twenty four of.
I don't think you need the words
to prevent crime and improve
public safety.
And then it's and the online
twenty four Law Enforcement
Academy may use the funds.
Of.
I would maybe.
Put in a we you know may use the
NMAA solely use the funds for
personnel come another words I
would it the way this reads you
could buy cars you could buy.
Of.
You know uniforms you go buy all
kinds other stuff I think it
should be clear questions on
that that is strictly for
personal not that I'm against
cars and all that stuff but
there's other funds for that law
enforcement protection fund
cities and counties have taxing
authority I think that this
should be narrowly tailored for.
Per person and that recruitment
because that the secretaries
right Mr chairman the it's all
they're all part of one team
whether they're uniformed
officer or not there's you know
and as a society as a government
we put so much duties on on
officers it's it's unbelievable
social workers you know
counselors bouncers everything
else so anything we can do to
alleviate that responsibility
and and specialize it elsewhere
is fantastic in the key Mr chair
Senator up secretaries is who
becomes a cop you know that's
the key to true police reform is
is not just targeting a specific
up psychological profile but
that's all folks
want to become officers long as
they don't jeopardize their
fellow officers safety.
You know we we need all all
types of books become co chair
New Mexico police officers thank
you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator
Gallegos you're next.
Mr thank you Sir Representative
thank you for bringing this
forward Ives
Quite pleasantly pleased to find
a new word guardrail
historically we've mistreated
our law enforcement for years
and the guard rail I look at is
is help them solidify what they
do can to protect them so I I
like that I did have a couple of
questions Mr chair Senator
Representative so in a large
rewrite so the way I looked at
this in the first on page two
the first segment that's re
written is talking about the
criterias distribution of funds
I understand that it goes into
page three tell you different
parts of law enforcement that
you can use this in but Mister
chairman Senator and Mr
secretary do we have any more
funny funds in this for training
I see a lot of large group of
people coming on board my fear
is we'll get them here and not
have the funding to train them
properly Mr chair Senator
Representative.
Mr chair Senator Gallegos of
budget move the Mike right in
for use of pick up I'm not sure
it's picking up it certainly was
covered in the original version
of this bill that that training
what was part of that
we naturally we handle that to
the New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy to to answer your
question a bit more directly Mr
chair Senator goes is that we
have seen an uptick in the
amount of people that were
training currently we hope that
this is a positive proof of the
success of this all of charted
tribute directly to this
currently but we have seen the
law enforcement academy homes
that maximum capacity for we're
able to see to we started sixty
five officers are capacity is
about seventy we've never seen
class at large and we are seeing
some some movement in the
this Mr chair thanks for that Mr
centered Representative in Mr
secretary and and I I appreciate
that I hope that some point time
we'll do some training for human
trafficking we had a bill on
that mall on the floor and
I know that it can human
trafficking come across the
border but my question then Mr
chair and senator and a
representative is on the FIR
shows no fiscal impact and
that's because of last year's
bill the fifty million dollars
so there's no absolutely no
appropriation in this one that's
an add on is that what I'm
understand Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair and senator David yes
the the appropriation.
Was not included in this bill
but and the executive
recommendation the the
governor's budget recommendation
include a hundred a hundred
million dollars for this purpose
and house bill two and its
current shape it's got thirty
two and a half million forward
that would support part of this.
Yes specifically the law
enforcement part and Mr Chairman
center and Representative I
understood that earlier but I'm
trying to figure on that thirty
two point five of is it directed
specifically for hiring Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair it's contingent on the
on another bill
I believe that is specifically
for hiring us that house bill
three five seven.
Yes Sir House Bill three fifty
seven.
Thanks made my next question Mr
Senator Representative it talks
about a conflict with three
fifty seven do we know what the
conflict is.
I Mr chair.
Senator House Bill three fifty
seven repeals the section of law
that that we're proposing to to
replace.
The.
What this bill does is replace
the current.
Law with broader guidelines
House Bill three C. fifty seven
scrapped entirely and creates a
new fund and process.
Mr chair and center of setting
up money's water for me but I
appreciate it because that's
what I was going because it
showed that conflict in so I
appreciate that I really like
Mister chairman Senator
Representative offering for us
to help law enforcement because
I think for years we take me
from being the heroes.
To the Sears so I I liked that
you guys back up on a pedestal
because I appreciate what you do
with that you.
The body else but so will the
committee.
The best the motion for do pass
seconded by Senator Hickey.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Ingle.
Yes yes.
Senator mess.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente
center to the piano yes
congratulations senator and
representative Representative we
didn't even give you a chance to
say word what would you like to
say anything about this bill
after we vote.
We hear you did vote so go
ahead.
Yes I just thank you.
Or every.
The Los four.
And so I think this is a step
right direction and I.
Appropriation for.
You get more money into this
into for this program and two
appropriation.
Thank okay good thank you Mr.
the yes the motion was under
this up and we didn't make any
other amendments to it so we're
okay.
For good Senator Lopez for
seniors.
Smoke free receive those.
Senator Hickey H. two of your
good.
Mr Chairman we're both co
sponsors so.
I did want to you can just sit
here all right.
At support I guess so we we
voted to table this bill but
then we we were pressured by
a of civic organizations and the
activists to reconsider it
advise Sanchez three considered
so.
So here you are given but will
let me be clear we are not going
to take full blown debate on
this we're not going to have
another debate on the bill we've
already heard we're simply going
to give you a chance to explain
why we were wrong to table it
and then we will vote again.
Thank you Mr chairman
It's a honored to be in front of
you to explain why you were
you're not that you were wrong
you just weren't fully informed
so let me clarify that you're
this is the chair person you are
never wrong here's the problem
very briefly just to summarize
that secondhand smoke kills
fifty thousand people a year and
we need to do everything that we
can also when you look at and I
have all this information and
I'll give it to if you want to
see it basically when you look
at the native American casinos
in eighteen when they were
smoking and today in twenty two
they're doing just as well and
also the studies and
Pennsylvania New Jersey show
that
actually the the smoke free
casinos are doing much better
than the New Jersey once course
New Jersey had trump associated
with it so that he may speak for
itself anyway
anyway it's just what this does
is eliminate
the race tracks from the
exempted place where smoking can
occur and I would ask that the
committee think about the health
of all the people who are going
to get expose their and the
potential cancers and and heart
disease and strokes that
secondhand smoke produces and
would ask that they be
eliminated from the exemption
that says this bill to pass
thank you Mr chair thank you did
you want to add anything Senator
Lopez and Mr Chairman north find
I just they did a if I may.
Okay we are going to take
anymore for testimony on this
either from in person or on the
zoom and will we're looking for
a a motion.
Fort to questions in the
committee that one but.
I voted for it so I can't be
from no you can make the most
we've pulled up to table is back
on the table yeah.
Okay so we did this two meetings
ago of less right yes we pulled
it up and said we'll hear it on
money that we put it over here
talk today.
Sure quick question thank you
have a question go ahead that
one.
This question I will accept a
short answer why are we not just
striking all of the.
Just all boxing knows all came
facilities all right I mean.
What why is it just the right
receives
thank you Senator Schmedes and
Mr chair because the native
American casinos do not allow
smoking at this time and the
receive nose up.
I'm not sure that that's
accurate and effective
I'm sorry I made of a little air
there
the vast majority I guess maybe
I could say of the native
American casinos do not allow
smoking.
I think that.
But I was what state Mr chair
Senator yeah we we can't tell
them what to do yes that's the
issue we can't tell the drive so
it doesn't I I'd say striking
you doesn't tell them what to do
there of sovereign we can't tell
Santa what to do right so I just
a question well because we it's
a state it's a state license
came facility so.
F. or or casino building I don't
know I was there I don't think
they're considered to be state
licensed gaming facilities are
there they're not state law I I
okay I'm not a lawyer yeah right
I don't believe there state
license their sovereign nations
that do there on licensing we
have a compact that allows them
yeah okay maybe I can rephrase
Mr chair so and this is the only
point I have it revert let's
let's not I'm not talking about
tribal sovereigns at all I'm
just saying E. it says it seems
that.
We are what we're gonna do the
the racinos but we're not gonna
do that a state license gaming
facility casino are being bingo
parlors so those people can
still smoke right so are are are
there still facilities.
That are going to be allowed to
have the indoor smoking that are
separate from the tribal
sovereignty Senator thank you
senators committee and Mr
Chairman
When I last looked most bingo
were in Catholic churches and I
don't think that they probably
allow smoking but there probably
is some of the legislative
building there are like the F.
W.'s and American Legion posts
that have state licenses taps
the slot machines and gaming and
so on and and and and.
I.
And and and they.
You have a bingo your son runs a
bingo place to visit all have a
lot of folks talk to.
And there.
So those those those because I
just that question and with it
was it was those kind of
facilities if the remit and this
only covers a receipt as as I
understand it is that right that
is correct and there are how
many of those I I.
Okay.
Thank.
Any other discussion what's the
will of the committee.
We have a motion for do question
Senator McKenna seconded by
Senator Tallman any other
discussion.
To table a motion there's a
substitute tabling motion is not
debatable.
And the secretary will call the
roll the.
Senator raros.
Senator Hickey no Senator Ingle
yes Senator Maestas yes.
Moved to explain.
Senator McKenna no Senators
maybe is no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
I am those four yes.
That the way you can you can do
to yes I know it's on
To a tabling again on the tenth
okay.
So if so we we're back with that
attainment motions Mr chair
we're back to the motion.
Effort to pass yeah okay very
good so we have we you want to
explain your vote okay Senator
we go we go back in as motion
seconded by Senator Tallman and
the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Harris.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Will move to explain.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee yes X. one Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
to the piano no.
For I yes I poured passes.
S. as senator my sister thank
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Senator Lopez no I'm I think
this ultimately needs to happen
but.
There's a lot of moving parts
with the rest of the compact the
Recinos horse racing and I think
we should solve all those
problems together and then
secondly I thought that was sent
to was brought back up the table
would be different so I don't I
don't think that's a good
president just bring the bill
again and then thirdly.
He needs to go I mean if we're
gonna.
Is the only part of the of the
current law that doesn't jive
with being outdoors being a
private club those VFW bingo
that we talked about like they
qualify under G. private club
so.
I don't I don't see the
distinction between.
Ingle parlor and and a casino
thank you Mr okay we have a new
path thank you so and to explain
your vote Senator and and I just
want to ask I I really agree
with Senator by Liz and I I if
this was on the floor as is I
I may be forced to vote against
it and I didn't want to bring up
this is the second time it's up
and want to take up too much
time but maybe it it's some
other issue and I can get with
you offline of striking all the
and I I would say why not just
yeah I want to start the whole
the whole thing would just seem
more equitable to me so and I
hope we can maybe work on that
as the bill goes for but I I do
want to stay alive that's why
voted yes to continue look at
the issue thank you thanks for
and look Senator Lopez sure stay
there and present the next bill
thirty.
Sure yep we're up to the.
Then Senator Sedillo Lopez you
wanna joiner get to leave.
Would you like to.
The joint and all state of.
Readers the city of those
because I might call to leave
Senator McKenna is going to join
up okay because I I have a
jubilant Judiciary Committee
cone but I might to work okay
for the vote.
Senate bill thirteen.
Reproductive health provider
protections.
I guess here and members of the
committee and.
We will use the microphone right
this had Vigil because it's
easier for the webcast together
I think it helps you you're
right.
Watching your committee Mister
chair I figure that one out got
to use this one.
I'm Mr chair members of the
committee we are here in front
of you with Senate bill
thirteen.
Mr chair.
The the issue of course it is
here is
Talking about the autonomy that
we have as persons here in the
state of New Mexico for our
rights to access reproductive
health care.
And the bill that you have in
front of you Mr chairman members
of the committee somewhat
mirrors the governor's first of
executive order that she had
issued last year I think it was
in April and then it has a plus
as I would say because it also
does offer for us to for
consideration gender affirming
care.
Mr chair of I I know it's we'll
get into more the discussion
this afternoon but what I'd like
to do is to offer an opportunity
for
Just maybe co sponsor who
sitting here with me if you'd
like to add a few words and then
also for our expert witnesses to
introduce themselves and then
with that we will.
however you wish to proceed
after that but then we will rest
okay USA so the Senator.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee thank you
Senator Lopez yeah it was very
easy for me to be a plus sponsor
for this legislation chairman
and members
many of us have heard.
The really Harling tales of what
fellow Americans have had to do
to get reproductive health care
across the nation since the the
Reese the fairly recent decision
from the Supreme Court and if
anything I want to respect
everyone's a Tanami here in our
state and those fellow Americans
that come to our state to get
the reproductive health care
they need and for those
providers.
who will give them that health
care so I stand by for any other
questions thank you chairman and
members of the committee.
Good let's go to the expert
witnesses and if you could
introduce yourselves.
Mr chair members of the
committee you have to Mr chair
is it but hold the button you
have to keep it down I think I'm
not sure that one works.
The area at the top of.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Rebecca
goes and I am an attorney and
the current board chair of
Planned Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains action fund thank you
for having me and I look for to
answer your questions okay.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Randy again
I'm an attorney and a new a
western woman who's spent her
life in New Mexico and chooses
to be here because of the
freedoms we have here so.
Good to see red nose Mr chair
will stand for questions okay
let's go to the audience first
let's just get a show of hands
how many people here are in
support of Senate bill thirteen.
Okay.
And then let's see who's in
opposition if you show your
hands anybody here in
opposition.
Okay.
We'll be doing evil and equal
does it division of the
supporters and the ponens we
won't hear testimony from
anybody so we will hear three
people three or four people your
pick who you want to have to
testify on this.
Cap would be one of them Cat
Sanchez.
The
Chair members of the committee
I'm Cat Sanchez I am the co
director Policy abled commuters
we are a reproductive justice
organization that is led by and
for black indigenous women and
people of color.
As we see states becoming
hostile to reproductive health
care and gender affirming care
we are seeing the need to
protect providers and patients
accessing healthcare across New
Mexico what we don't want to see
in our state and what has
happened in states limiting a
person's bodily autonomy is
providers paranoid when they do
their jobs and patients paranoid
of going to a simple health care
visit we fully support as B.
thirty.
Thank you cat anybody else want
to speak.
Mr chair we do have a provider
who's on soon it also we are we
have we have it is she gauge
intranet doctor Henry no I don't
have Dr okay but is there a
doctor Henry of.
Well do.
Make impending Megan Hendrix yes
let's hear.
Doctor Henry.
Yes can you hear me yes.
Right thank you Mr chair and
Senators my name is Dr Megan
Henry and I am of the New Mexico
section secretary of a cog the
American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists
I was born and raised in
Albuquerque attended the
university of New Mexico school
of medicine and state your name
from my OBGYN residency I have
been practicing in rural
northwest New Mexico for the
last six and a half years it is
my privilege to care not only
for New Mexicans but also for
patients who come from Colorado
Utah Arizona and for there to be
honest living and practicing in
rural New Mexico can be hard
needing to drive an hour and a
half round trip to go out for
dinner for my daughter to attend
dance classes has taken some
getting used to even so many of
my patients routinely travel
four hour round trip to come to
see me the fact that I can find
these patients with care that
makes a positive impact in their
lives and the lives of their
families makes the hardship of
living in a rural community
totally worth it.
Sadly there are many in this
country and even the state who
are working to make it even
harder for patients to access
health care health care that we
know to be lifesaving many of my
fellow the lands across the
country have found themselves
torn between providing the
highly skilled care that they
are trained for or risking their
medical licenses hefty fines or
even jail time.
Many of my patients come to see
me when they're at their most
vulnerable scared in pain
possibly on the brink of their
life changing in ways that they
can't yet imagine when I have a
patient in front of me who is
pregnant and hemorrhaging or has
had their water break
prematurely I always want the
first thing that I think to be
how can I best take care of you
and not have to worry what state
they're from or what
circumstances could have
precipitated their presentation.
I ask that you vote in favor of
Senate bill thirteen to protect
me and my colleagues so that we
can continue to put our patients
needs first knowing that I can
continue to provide high quality
appropriate care to anyone who
walks into my clinic or
emergency room the they from the
state or from one of our
neighboring states is vital for
me to continue to live here and
care for those.
Quality physicians and
healthcare providers are
precious resource that is
already hard to come by in New
Mexico especially in rural parts
of our state please show that
you value us and the care that
we provide by voting to pass.
Thank you doctor Henry and
somebody else here that wants to
speak up in support.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Laura like
Kellogg I am the acting Medicaid
director for the state of New
Mexico.
And in recognition of the
provider resource issues that
the state is currently
experiencing we do believe that
this bill would allow us to
further close that gap
particularly for our rural
counties which are currently
experiencing OB desert's thank
you thank you.
Okay let's go we do have some
opponents online let's go to
them will take for them
Judy Ross.
Thank you if you could to make
it the you know succinct that
would be ideal.
Last night regarding is the
seven we were sure that
standards of care one point.
Know that women in New Mexico
would be sent however in the
fiscal impact report regarding
this is the thirteen the
question was raised whether
there was not an important
crossing the standard of care
investigations violate medical
practice that and so I'm trying
to understand whether these
Senator planners were no longer
able to be investigated
No I believe that regardless of
the type of procedure reforms
that the in in in in the should
be able to investigate the
medical act was not grossly
negligent treatment in a sense
the second part of this.
Yes.
Sixty percent of the abortions
are done via the abortion pill
and governor Grisham has on
record that pharmacists should
be able to prescribe abortion
pills this certainly has no
standard of care within us a
pregnancy one volunteer we
typically would educate women
for approximately an hour about
what to expect from the abortion
pill on extremely concerned that
this bill circumstance or could
circumvent the standard of care.
Okay thank you mistrustful.
Miss Martinez.
If you get off.
Okay then we'll go to somebody
named Rosalee.
Rosalie can you can you go ahead
and speak.
Okay good you're you're you're.
Online with us.
She's not muted you're not muted
Rosalie go ahead and speak if
you want to.
Yes.
Did you want to speak.
Okay we'll go to then
Judy Hendricks.
Hello can you hear me yes yeah I
just I.
Hi I this is Joni Hendrix I am
the executive director with New
Mexico Family action movie and I
am also a black is mental.
All.
How does this bill at regarding
concern the standards of care as
well at the services that are
outlined in this bill at the
civically gender affirming care
I actually have a long term
process as part of standard of
care for example for a to help
get the.
Okay process that includes
parent involvement family
counseling assessments and
education up whites different
procedures or apartment blockers
will do so.
You're you're breaking up you're
you're going in and out.
If her internet broke up.
He is no longer at okay well
sorry.
Did you want to respond to any
of the comments made or should
we go to the committee.
Members of the committee here
your discussion or questions
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr chair I am also very proud to
be from sponsor of this
of.
this important legislation and I
think it's very carefully
drafted of.
To provide the standard of care
for.
Yes this is a lot of I.
With the pundits general
liability would be subject to
liability under the laws of the
state that includes port laws so
if there were any kind of
malpractice with regard to the
provision of services it would
include
Representative.
And I think it's very carefully
drafted to protect people were
coming to the state and we have
to have the state of Texas.
Of which would have to come from
the state and so many women all
our state and we need to I
believe we need to protect I'm
also very pleased that this bill
Johnson the.
Executive.
Thank you four ways and provides
for gender from health care and
protect those kinds of
treatments because we can see
the same kind of.
Anti trans legislation and
policies in other states and so
definitely to protect.
For their healthcare needs and
so I'm very proud to.
This legislative legislation.
Thank you.
Any of the Senator Schmedes.
Mr chair Senator.
Question those so this is so far
away
I
I agree with what Senator said
about the that New Mexico in
itself could establish a
standard of care think that's
possible with this bill.
That's not how we develop
standards of care medicine
unfortunately because is such a
heightened idea logic political
issue we're not having kind of
like you know pro life states in
proportion states and all these
things gender affirming states
they're taking on models of
health care piecemeal instead of
having a consensus standard of
care.
That's one of my main concerns
with this bill is are we sold
divided that we're gonna lose
track and take our eyes off of
the patient in developing a
standard of care and we're gonna
refuse to work with each other.
And both sides are gonna have
lower standards of care because
we have to have diversity of
perspective.
In fact that's required from all
areas of medicine the NCCN
guidelines how we develop cancer
treatments you have a broad
broad broad perspective.
And that's the only way to
develop standards of care in the
United States and so when we're
segregating ourselves into red
states and blue states we are
literally destroying Medicine we
are destroying evidence based
health care we really are
because now our political and
social pressures are more
important than our moral
judgments upon in our moral
judgments upon evidence based
health care so that's the lands
that I'd like to to to have a
discussion with you today
is mentioned I'm gonna jump
around a little bit forgive me
for that but I have some more
pointed questions I think we can
work through quickly section
three.
Subsection a does this pertain
to it per request.
But.
Three a section three subsection
I.
Mr chair for the status will
answer yes this guy goes Mr
chair Senator Schmedes
April already protects from
releasing the kind of
information
under F. ruts the you are you
can't release that type of
information so this wouldn't
apply.
Mr Mr centers and and experts
I'm not talking about protected
hit the I'm not time out
personal data under some
information on I mean you can if
for us a government entity and
what what they do I mean you can
if for emails that don't have
that they'll redact information
I mean I you know you can infer
Department health so.
I'm not talking about my
question doesn't pertain to
protected health information
from individual.
I'm some other allowable.
If for information I apologize I
guess I don't understand your
question can you reframe chair
Mister Mr chair Senator so it it
says that they shall not release
information for engaging in a
protect health care activity so
I wanna know that when it says
they shall not release
information are we gonna have a
conflict with our expanding it
for a long.
And Mister chair Senators why
why not.
April already protects this type
of information for pre released
all this does is the state that
this information can also not
be.
Okay Mr center I'll move on from
the I I disagree I I I think
that if for would would protect
against protected health
information and individual the
identifiers and things that are
protected from have a so I I
think we all disagree but I for
interested time I want to move
four Mr chair and centers are
all familiar with the federation
of state medical boards.
We can talk about that as are
familiar to their Mr chair this
using Mr chair.
No no okay so Mr chair Senator
the the federation state medical
boards is is kind of this group
of medical boards you know that
that oversees the individual
state medical boards and their
mission in fact.
Is to protect patients from from
bad actors in New Mexico is
unfortunately particularly
susceptible to this because
we're so underserved
we will regularly people
regularly get people that call
from out of state and say Hey
I'm looking for this job I would
like to get a license in New
Mexico I'd like to work for such
and such practice.
And a lot of these folks have
been largely rejected from other
states they have a history of
Medicare fraud
sexual harassment
you know things like that.
And and I've seen personally I
I've seen facilities that accept
people that have kind of.
Shady credentials shall we say.
and and I've seen bad things
happen I've seen bad things
happen surgery and so my concern
is that we're looking at your
your bill says.
Except I mean we we can get a
court involved rights we're
making it more difficult for the
federation of state medical
boards work for some other
Medical Board.
Just because they're engaging I
protect health care activity so
a physician that's engaging in
you know providing care for the
person that's gender non
conforming or any sort of care
that's on this list all of a
sudden we made it more difficult
for Medical Board that's just
doing their due diligence and
from it from you know trying to
do their the fulfill their
mission statement now they have
this this court order in the way
just because the you know some
sort of there some sort of
professional disciplinary
problem and I would ask why are
we protecting those physicians
or health care workers only
we're as if there's a
disciplinary action to get this
extra step to protect them that
the accord  and and and not not
a doctor that performs Colin
Oscar peas or sinus surgery.
So that's another problem that I
have with the bill I think
really needs serious
consideration if we're going to
help are are you know oversight
overseeing agencies we can't get
in the way of that and that's
actually gonna get in the way of
developing standards of care I
think in the future.
okay scale on one let's get
response from this budget Mr Mr
chair of Michigan could answer.
Mr chair Senator medicine thank
you very much for pointing out
that we have lots of really bad
doctors here I'm going to
exercise this part of your
testimony as a witness in one of
my practice cases
try to get hired well that's
right that well many of them do
get hired and commit malpractice
with those kinds of things so so
first of all this build accepts
and allows legitimate
investigations into poor
standards of care for that poor
outcomes if there is a abortion
provider who is negligent or
reckless and kept and and kill
someone that doesn't prevent any
licensing board to investigate
that when it comes to violating
the standard of care and so I
think your concern I mean I
appreciate the testimony on the
record of that and this this
takes care of that allows there
to be that kind of investigation
where there is is malpractice or
something that violates the
standard of care so so that just
to follow up on that that
prohibition in here is when the
allegation is just that they did
an abortion correct that is
absolutely correct Mr chair
that's correct Mr center I I I
I've got some on that point
actually let me just since we're
on that point I will skip.
And I want to make sure I mean
if that's the case you know we
we have to learn how to live
together in this country we have
to be neighbors with Oklahoma
and Texas otherwise we are
otherwise I mean this bill kind
of scares me in a way that we're
headed toward that national
divorce that people are talking
about we just cannot work with
the people that sort of attitude
and so I I'm concerned about
that I really really am and once
again I think but on page six it
is.
On that point Mr chair it says
some on page six line nineteen.
We're talking about abusive
litigation now.
But the definition of abusive
litigation it says to prevent
Center penalize an individual or
entity for engaging in this
activity I think you need the
word solely for engaging so it
it means solely because you
performed an abortion it that
that's not what the law reads
the read that the law reads for
engaging it so your cut anyone
who is engaging it whether it's
malpractice or not if they're
engaging in it they're covered
by subsection a on page six so
if we're going to have the you
know that intent.
It needs to say Seoul Lee for
engaging in a protected health
care activity if that's if
that's the intent of the bill.
so I I disagree I disagree that
statement I I think there's a
couple parts in the bill that
you need to save souls Lee
because it's also on page
eleven.
Eleven lines twenty two twenty
three says shall not arrest or
deliver a person if the charges
based on engaging in a protected
health care activity it should
say is based Seoul Lee Alcon
engage in that activity but let
me just ask you a question on
that I mean are you suggesting
that the Texas medical board
should be investigating in New
Mexico drive for practicing in
New Mexico just because you
allegation is that it's doing
something that's malpractice
should be the New Mexico Medical
Board as well and then we don't
need to make that change you're
talking about well Mr center I I
think you're your concern is is
that they're going to be sued or
something just because like
important questions so
malpractice can be involved in
an abortion but but when when
people have licenses in both
states the investigation all
needs to be cross state because
it and the the patient could
have received care in Hobbs and
Odessa for example so this is
really driving a wedge between
Medical Board so do we we just
ask you you have on that point
like.
Then then all they have to the
state and let's not let
something else and and then
about five is protection so I
have.
It it just seems to me that that
our own state sovereignty would
say if there's something done in
New Mexico.
That a Texas official thinks is
somehow a violation or medical
malpractice they should be going
through the New Mexico Medical
Board to to take action not the
Texas medical board Mr let me
give you an example so let's say
someone has practiced in New
Mexico they're trying to get a
Louisiana license.
In that process they're gonna
ask questions about have you
ever been subject to discipline
and all that other stuff other
thing and so if there the the
way the way the bill is written
it if they were practicing in
this area this bill is going to
create barriers to communication
with I think man with red states
I mean I think that's your
intent is you don't want someone
to just get sued just because
they perform abortion abortions
legal in New Mexico and it's
illegal in another state right
so that's that's the issue is if
they're seeking to establish a
license or work in a a state
that has different laws.
And there is a true disciplinary
concern for malpractice they
they're going to need to ask
questions about those things you
have to check the boxes off you
have to say have you ever been
subject to but that's different
from doing investigations well
it says professional
For professional despite actions
so I just feel that who but it
but the point is who would who's
in power to do professional
disciplinary actions on a doctor
who's.
Doing those procedures in New
Mexico the New Mexico Medical
Board right yeah so I mean if
they're not I mean we're we're
not precluding them from taking
action.
The if they take action and then
the doctor goes to Louisiana in
was to get a license there he's
got to reveal that the New
Mexico Medical Board took a but
not that the Texas medical
board.
Reached into New Mexico to exert
its authority apparently the the
heart the hardest problems Texas
has a law that says you can't go
out of state and get this done
well that's the heart of it and
we're saying no if you come to
New Mexico the New Mexico
Medical Board at least that's
where read what you're saying
would be the ones to government
Mr chair and I'll try to move
through this it is relevant if
someone in another state has had
a a bad history this given a
real example of that.
It is relevant that disciplinary
action has been.
Been taken I can't I can't
disagree with in both in both
directions.
So.
But I mean it should be the New
Mexico Medical Board makes that
funding not the Texas medical
board once again unless they're
seeking a license in another
state and they want to look back
at what.
Or if it's a physician that is
concurrently practicing across
state lines so that's that's the
issue anyway Mr I I can we want
for that I I just want to make
the point that I I think that as
the bill is written it doesn't
say I I think your intent is
just because someone was solely
participating in abortion they
should not be having
disciplinary action and and I I
think the way it's written is
you're you're covered widely if
you're involved in any of these
protected activities or not but
I want to move on.
because it we may just have an
impasse there
I have now to a couple things
that I I did like sorry I told
you would jump around Page four
subsection D. section three
subsection do.
It says that this shall not
apply to an investigation or
proceeding subject to potential
liability and then you come
across in the in the next
section it says that if if these
if these kind of information
requests are brought by an
injured plaintiff you still
would allow that injured injured
plaintiff to of to go go forth
of if someone was injured in the
context of these setting so I
think that that that's good that
you included that however I have
a question in
Page four line fourteen.
It says so it's we're protecting
these people if they are are
saying that they're liable but
it says so long as the
investigation does not violate
the public policy of this state.
so Mister chair Senators experts
who gets to decide.
And and and state and educate
what is the public policy of
this state if there's a
disagreement between the
plaintiff and.
However.
Excuse me miss and if mistaken
could answer Representative
again Mister chairman Senator
Schmidt is it would be the
courts of New Mexico.
So Mr etcetera so another
concern there is that we're.
Hi I thought we are potentially.
For someone who's alleging.
Malpractice or harm it just it
seems like.
If that harm is within this area
of health care it just seems to
me that we are we are creating
potential extra barriers because
the the defense will now say
well.
What you're alleging it didn't
really violate public policy
it's like this extra layer for
lawyers to argue over so I'll
I'll just leave it at that
because I once again I don't
think we're gonna have an
agreement there I mean the
starting point would be this
bill if we pass this bill this
becomes as I understand it what
we do here becomes the policy
then it gets tested in the
courts but.
If we don't pass this bill then
we have some other policy but if
we pass this bill that would be
the policy.
Mr center I mean I think my
preference would just be let let
state medical boards
due to do the wrong thing but
let me what I have one last line
question
And that is with the term gender
from health care.
so are this is a this is a
health care.
Model.
and I'd I'd like to try to start
on a.
Common footing here
The NHS.
From the U. K..
said this I I found it quite
quite good.
This is children and young
people with gender incongruence
artist Fauria must receive the
same standards of clinical care
assessment and treatment as
every other child in person
accessing accessing health
services would you agree that.
I'm sorry Mr press Mr chair
could you please repeat that I
couldn't quite hear oh sure the
the the NHS can national service
in the U. K. had has said this I
just wanna make sure we're on
the same.
same footing here they say
children and young people with
gender incongruence orders
Fauria must receive the same
standards of clinical care
assessment and treatment as
every other child or young
person accessing health
services.
Can we agree we will support
that statement
Mr chair Senator anyone who
needs to health care that would
of course
assist in their abilities right
to make sure that you're healthy
of yes.
Good.
Mr center I ask this question
because I I with another bill
has nothing to do with your bill
I thought would be on the same
page I asked and we were and we
it was hard to improve upon so
I'm glad we agree with that I I
thought you would but I have to
ask.
one more statement this comes
from the National Board health
in Sweden they say it is
important that children and
young people who suffer from
gender dysphoria are taken
seriously treated well and
offered adequate care I'm gonna
assume you you agree with that
too if you agree with president.
So I I think that
this is the starting point this
is what I would like to see
codified in law because I think
that's what we we agree on okay
come across the aisle across
party lines.
what I disagree with.
Is I disagree with codifying a
specific health care model
that's called gender affirming
care.
and that's what I want to ask
you about so.
I think we have to be very
careful when we codify certain
health care models.
In state statute.
Very very careful this model has
been used.
In other countries in other
jurisdictions.
It has been using Washington
university we now have the
first.
Whistleblower.
At one of these clinics that's
been utilizing the gender
firming Care health model.
but and and I realize that we
you know I I'm not gonna bring
I'm I've got papers in here I'm
not going to make this
scientific I understand that we
disagree ideologically and so I
want you to not take my word for
it I want to explore.
Other countries and other
jurisdictions experiences with
this and we need to heed their
warnings before we put.
A certain model in state statute
so just a couple of of comments
on this
This is from the National
Academy of medicine in France.
This just came out February
twenty fifth I'm sorry for
everyone for the love last year
this just came out.
very very recently
They said that.
Great caution must be taken in
children and adolescents
regarding gender affirming care
this in this respect it's empty
it's important to recall the
recent decision.
In Stockholm to ban the use of
hormone blockers.
I believe in.
Thank.
They said in a Jennifer model
once again this is not my words
this is the National Academy of
medicine in France this is this
is this is not something like a
logic party this is their their
official stance
they said that.
The promotion of clinical and
biological as well as school
read ethical research in this
model is still too rare.
In France to make a definitive
decision on this.
They said the risk of
overdiagnosis is real as shown
by the increasing number of
transgender young adults wishing
to do transition.
The NHS so this when they
reviewed the the NHS now.
They reviewed their experience
of nine thousand patients at
their transgender clinic in the
U. K..
By the way they shut that clinic
down and and have totally
changed how they're doing
they're still providing care for
these people and that was their
number one primary care so
they're like we're not gonna
shut off access but they said
this they set a fundamentally
different service model is
needed which is more in line
with other pediatric provision
fundamental different model than
the gender affirming care model
okay.
this is the stage their views
not able to find.
Advice on these hormone
treatments due to gaps in the
evidence base this is an
official letter that was written
from the British guy.
So I I I think
You know at.
I I can I can go I can go on and
on on Sweden has very similar
things to say.
They're very level headed there
to the left of of us as a whole
in in America so this is not a
these are not high conservative
countries have some sort of
ideological disrespect for
people with gender can grants or
that are gender nonconforming
okay this is because they're
saying the statements because of
their experience with the gender
affirming model.
So I would I would love it if
you would consider.
changing who you're protecting.
Or or changing the model that
you're protect I think you're
what you're doing in the bill is
you're protecting a model of
health care that has been shown
to have devastating effects and
we're other countries are now
moving away from that model I
think what you want to do is you
want to protect people okay and
and and really a lot of these
protect pertain to minors okay.
a lot of these concerns and so I
think you want to protect
people.
If you want to protect these
people from getting fair I think
it should say all the services
psychological behavioral
surgical.
Provided to a person.
With gender nonconformity or
gender dysphoria I think that's
what the bill should say should
say to support this this model
of health care.
Models of health care change
over time and we're seeing that
from your big time and we see
here very very soon with.
With all the transitions that
are coming out now there's not
from the documentary etcetera
etcetera this is a very big big
big deal we can disagree on the
subject we can still seek to
protect people from harm and so
I'll just I'll I'll throw it out
there with the with come a final
question Mr chair Senator.
Would you even consider an
amendment to your bill on page
two in your definition section.
to kind of change Jennifer
health care and to just just say
that instead of that instead of
protecting model we're gonna
say.
psychological behavioral
surgical pharmaceutical and
medical care services and
supplies provided to.
People with gender nonconformity
for gender dysphoria and strike.
The support an individual's
gender identity is that even
something you would even be up
to consider.
sorry.
Mr chair Senator I I appreciate
your the suggestions that you're
bringing forward but at this
time I would prefer that we stay
with the language is here in the
bill thank you Mr etcetera
I will I'll wrap it up with that
I thank you for your time and it
was a lot this bill means a lot
used as a health professional
means a lot to me.
it means a lot to me
And I would just urge you.
To be very very careful and to
heed the advice of the NHS.
of.
I forgot of the.
French National Academy of
medicine of the national board
of health in Sweden and other
jurisdictions that have more
experience I I really would
before we codify a health care
model into state statute.
Please consider protecting the
people and the services that
they are getting because of
their.
Their gender nonconformity or
anything else consider
protecting the people not the
model that's that's my last plea
to and that's why I'm not gonna
support the bill because we
should not be codifying certain
models of health care that
clearly and I can tell I mean
I've got all the stuff I could
go over I don't want to turn
into a science journal thing
today because we're not
scientific body right we're not
prepared to have debates like
that.
But I would just urge my my
colleagues on the committee do
not codify a model protect
people and do not qualify health
care model that that's shown to
have some major problems the
that are popping up even even as
we speak thank you Mr.
Thank you senator.
Many of the discussion.
Senator Geyer's Mr chair
in senators I first I want to go
back Mr chair we had a lot of
people on the planet that we're
not gonna take any more P. I'm
just give me an indication okay
your web systems not work if
they can't get in and they can't
comment are you considering this
open to the public Mr I
understand you're not going to
go back understand this bill is
going to pass I'm just saying
the public would like to have
that Madam we actually we had
about a ten of the people who'd
signed up but I said we would
cut it off and for each file
they're sending notes that they
were not able to get all well I
just need for others to to got
on and.
Hello that we did have some so
I'm I'm not sure what they they
consider the system just saying
your system's not worse working
Mr Mr chair Senators up I just
had a couple of questions so I'm
trying to understand and I'm not
a doctor's my colleague here is
up.
Earlier in the discussion guys
talked about
A negligent provider.
Are there protections in the
bill on how.
A person that feels that they're
being treated negligent have a.
An option to go to the provider
to get some kind of
reimbursement is there anything
in the bill that gives just to
public protections Mr chair
Senator.
Mr chair again could answer
please.
Mr chair Senator diagnosis at
the very good question and in
fact that's what that whole
section is about talking about
tort law that any kind of plan
that you would have to tort law
you would go to a lawyer make a
claim against the doctors
that in court first against
their insurance company their
malpractice insurance company
and that that if they didn't pay
you would have the ability to
file a lawsuit against them and
to use all the resources of the
court system including summons
and subpoenas to get the
information to prove that that
figure was down which is that's
where somebody's harms during
during an abortion for example
or somebody is harm to the baby
dies there's I mean I'm just
giving the baby the the the
patient dies during during a
procedure that they would be
able to go ahead and file file
the lawsuit against that person.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and gentle lady so and I'm just
wondering because I understand
K. Jackson Act acts and.
Acton's of head pathway during
boys clinics of care for.
Mr chairman and Senators was
that
Result in courts you know sure
generally I don't know one way
or the other Senator graders
don't know.
Mr chairman in centers I I
understand there's that young
lady died and she's American a
native American and so I just
had
of care and compassion to but
for meshed Mr Chairman
Senator just one last question
is up in discussions of his bed
said that were taken away
women's health.
Mr chair Senator can you explain
to me what part of women's
health we're taking away here in
New Mexico I understand Mr chair
Senator that the governor's made
an executive order that of
abortion is legal within the
state boundaries I'm just
wondering where why we need your
bill with her injectable Mr.
thank you Mr chair Senator
graders of the bill that's in
front of us
is protecting a person's
ability.
Are to access reproductive
health care which could be a
course abortion care a gender
affirming care we want to make
sure that the access is open
eight we are open here in the
state of New Mexico but if we
have someone coming from one of
our neighboring states that
needs to access to care we are
here and are providing this to
say that we are are protecting
our providers.
For providing the necessary care
that's being asked for.
Mr chair Senator I and I
appreciate that and I understand
it it goes back to Texas shut
down their clinics but they
they're still hello Mr chair
Senator to donate continuing
Care for for women there so
you're being with this bill
specifically just to those two
items that correct Mr center I'm
Mr president Mr president sorry
just elevated.
Mr chair Senator in a
reproductive health care covers
many facets but again we're just
trying to make sure that those
persons who are coming into our
state and our providers are
providing care that they are
protected Mr chair also as we
know it's not just Texas is
there is own a I mean the list
is long of states that we are
kind of an island between us in
Colorado in this part of our
country that we want to just
make sure that persons have
access to the reproductive
health care that they need.
Mr chair Senator so go back to
my question you'd give me the
two topics abortion and gender
for me are those the only two
top sure bill.
Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair Senator if there's as I
have mentioned before there's
other areas of reproductive
health care Mr Sir you gave me
those two topics well Mister
chair I dead but reproductive
health care covers of big wide
range it could also be you know
preventing a pregnancy the other
there's a whole range that we
have and again Mr chair Senator
you know other states have some
pretty
A strict laws that they have
passed and again if a woman
needs to come into our state a
person to access these types of
care or services we want to make
sure that our providers are
protected so that they are not
criminalized by Texas or some
other state where they already
have that other statute.
Mr chair Senator I I appreciate
the.
Secretary discussion but with
that all yield I appreciate.
Thank you senator any other
discussion if.
Really the following.
Mr president of.
Same Mr president I'm sorry
reality for
you know Mr chair you're
correct.
Is that delivered.
you that we will be by the.
Sir if I have Mr chair I mean
that it's a consideration I you
did say no to it could be
something as this bill if it
moves out of this committee as
we go into Judiciary we could
have more of a discussion on it
certainly.
Well I guess it does in the way
of the you've got a of wanted to
talk to.
The gender affirming health
care.
Psychological.
Provide support to vendor are.
The biggest in the.
We will certainly does.
Mr Mr tears we provide to
judiciary will be quite a few
other I'm sure conversations
that will have their to.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for bringing this bill
forward I won't.
Go over what staff we discussed
on Friday evening but
I I I want to say that I think
that's a pretty good definition
of gender affirming care having
had direct of family experience
with that and again I would say
as I said that evening.
Of the and and this is with the
greatest respect for the
greatest and we're not the
greatest generation where the
baby boomers with with great
respect for the baby boomers but
we're we're kind of beyond where
the world is today and we really
need to respect their viewpoints
about this as as the gender and
and how it is identified in
experience and I really want to
emphasize that were experienced
by the individual evolves and
having the freedom to be able to
live that experience is very
critical so I think this is a
very important bill but I want
to reaffirm that I think given
where we are now
it's it's it's a more
contemporary and solid
definition so I just want
different.
Senator twelve.
Thank you Mr chair.
Seconded by Senator by the.
Any other discussion.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator guy Harris Maez Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
The
center Maestas.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Clemente.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
So you have to pass the I three
five to three vote of the Senate
bill thirteen thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank.
Thank you for.
Senator.
Yes.
Not that.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
Okay.
Yeah we need to get on with the.
This is.
Okay we're gonna have Senator
Ingle right here.
you can see yes I right it's
necessary that we've had
confirmation Billy Senator
Gallegos is zoom is working I
think the internet maybe because
of the wind okay probably part
of our.
Following an act with.
This is from the door to yeah
Crysis from the department of
health the funds in the sense
that all of this I.
They're both good to see a nice
the bipartisan bill come before
this committee yes.
So
The reason is Mr chair members
of the committee is that this
bill will assist our rural
hospitals and health care
facilities the Mr chair members
of the committee the
Centers for Medicaid and
Medicare have a new I think it's
new as of a year ago designation
maybe two years ago a new
designation for rural.
Rural emergency hospital
licensure and they now have a
new fixed rates for these rural
hospitals and Mr chairman as we
know a lot of our rural
hospitals are endangered
both financially and in terms of
getting specialists doctors the
medical equipment having enough
funding
so this did go through Senate
Indian rural cultural affairs in
in that committee we had
Christina Campos as an
administrator.
Of the Guadalupe County Hospital
but she is out of state so she
can be here with us today so in
order to protect these hospitals
we would like to put in our
statutes the CMS
Standard.
Of rating so that are hospitals
can apply to do you H. to get
this designation and then get
that funding and with me today I
have my co sponsor senator
Stuart Ingle who of course is
very concerned about the rural
hospitals and also I have with
me Chris Burmeister and he's
from the department of health he
is the director of the division
of health improvement and he can
be our technical expert.
So Senator Ingle do want to say
something.
Yes thank you Senator it's a
this particular bill apply
certainly to
several hospitals in my Senate
district and New one in
particular that I am for most
familiar with is the one import
talus that
Basically we had a hospital
there since nineteen fifty and
then and then the in the
eighties it became the property
of of a larger hospital that
close to the people in that
community were so frightened of
what would happen to that
community without a hospital
they passed a pretty sizeable
tax increase on themselves like
eighty seven percent for two
stab wishin new hospital and its
service mall rural hospital that
does basic care and then if we
have to have further care than
it certainly can refer to other
hospitals.
So we have a university there
eastern New Mexico university
and that also is very very
important for that community to
have that if you don't have
doctors in the community your
rules what's gonna fall it
should but this community if
what I admired about it so much
you know we're always viewed is
very tight wad people over there
and we'll pass anything and
that's not correct because when
there is a need those people
came forth and pass this and
established a hospital it's
doing well it is truly doing
well we have a full complement
of doctors we pay very well to
practice and for college New
Mexico my daughter's a doctor in
Fresno and if you could make
twice as much in protagonista
she's making impressed now and
she's a hell of a good doctor I
keep trying to get here but this
bill particularly was lose is
made for hospitals just like
that to give them a chance to
succeed and continue to provide
health care for the people in
the areas and that's what this
particular bill is going to help
with and I certainly am the
proud to be a partial Sanchez in
this bill thank you right thank
you senator Mr revise your did
you want to say anything about
this.
It
yes Mr chair I just want to add
in unfortunately miss compasses
and I think one of the things
with this model that really
helps our rural providers to be
able to stay intact and still be
able to provide health care
within their community
the rules for proper the CMS
statute or requirements were
passed in two thousand twenty
what we're looking for is that
statute change and then the
department of health to
promulgate rules to allow these
to operate there's criteria for
for what facilities fit and it
really does fit the role
struggling providers to be able
to keep health care within their
community
says Chris just if you could
answer one quick question the
senator mentioned that this
would make these hospitals
eligible for what did you call
it a standard rate for a right
total Rader yeah right but so it
yes Mr chair it would be a it
would be a different kind of
billing way so miss compost is
already been approved through
CMS so when she gets this
designation it's a all inclusive
basically kind of right to have
her allow her to be able to
operate and you don't know what
the rate is is it is it still
based on a patient day or is it
kind of more of a global right
that's it correct for sure her
basic costs are covered.
Get okay correct Sir.
All right let's go to the
audience anybody here want to
speak in support of this bill
that.
Thank you Mr chairman members
can we explain this was going to
come up in music because of the
zoom where they will pick you
up.
So the hospital solicitation is
strongly in support of this we
have several hospitals that
would qualify for this but it is
discretionary and us who's been
mentioned Christina Campos runs
a hospital and will be County
and her census is just a little
over one and so it's not really
viable for her to stay
classified issues as a as a
small rural hospitals so this
would be a very good thing for
her and stabilizer revenue and
we have several hospitals I
think that would consider this
but as I said it's discretionary
so they don't have to do it but
we do need to have this of the
statutes so that they're not
options available thank right.
And the Medicaid director wants
to speak.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee again are you
holding that I'm trying.
My name is Laura like Kellogg
acting Medicaid director and we
do stand in support of this bill
we feel that codifying it this
classification in our state
regulations will assist with
some of our rural providers in
order to keep them afloat and
Could you answer quick question
are you the new Medicaid
director you an interim or are
you and acting but is your hi
I'm an acting director so you've
been in the division for what I
have I've been since twenty
nineteen I've been a deputy
director since the fifth.
Great at the that was her the
same person the.
The lighting different is.
Good thank you anybody else want
to speak in support of this bill
anybody in opposition to this
bill.
Nobody has a okay members of the
committee.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr thank you Centers
for bringing this forward so.
In order to get the world so you
pass the license spend some
money get to meet the criteria.
So Mr chair Senator I'm gonna
let Mr Burmeister answered but
what they are doing is they're
giving up their hospital
designation.
So I'm gonna let Christine.
So not all of the hospitals in
the rural part of the state are
going to rush to do this if you
could explain that that's really
important.
Thank you for the question
center
yes it's a voluntary so
basically what CMS is done is
they've allowed states to decide
this designation
if we adopted it goes to statute
then we'll promulgate rules it
doesn't cost to to apply there
are there any cost with this
it's kind of the opposite of
that this is giving them the
ability to be able to be self
sustaining and be able to still
operate within their community
it'll still have services the
model is a little bit different
than a hospital it's based on
this idea that people come in
they get stabilized to get moved
to a larger hospital system if
miss Campos was here she's
already contracted agreed with
some of those receiving
facilities to allow this kind of
a practice that to occur so it's
it's just a care system is
another type of designation like
a hospital or critical access
hospital it would be voluntary
and it's it's specifically based
for rural hospitals there's
about four hundred that they
estimate the country that
qualify for this the potentially
would be taking advantage of
this in the country miss
compasses facility would be the
first one approved in New
Mexico.
Would have to give up some of
its services that there.
Not providing because there.
Have a lower.
Standard of of licensure so Mr
chair and senator they of miss
Campos already has give or take
one patient today.
So it's very hard to keep of a
bevy
Off when they're not assured of
seeing patients or reimbursement
for those patients so in this
designation they will receive a
fee for the service that they're
providing plus an extra five
percent but they are giving up
the opportunity to do the
overnight budget and in fact
with
a hospital with one bed or one
patient it's very hard is eight
mention to even have all the
services available.
So in order to receive this
federal money with this is they
have to take action.
Mr chair Senator we do need to
put in the statute and then the
department of health would
promulgate rules for the
process.
One last question Mr chair
Senator.
Yeah I read recently that and I
figured.
The number of those in the
thousands of.
The of thousands of rural
hospitals have closed the last
decade.
Huge number so the proximity
hospitals you think will take
advantage of this in in New
Mexico.
Mr chair Senator I'm going to
defer to Mister but Burmeister.
Mr chair Senator so far we have
one that is part of plied and
been approved through CMS so
there's criteria for it so not
all hospitals obviously would
fit criteria for.
This is really a role
designation we we don't know we
know one there is a potential
second one that would
potentially fit criteria but
really the the kind of purpose
of this is is a struggling
hospital to be able to save care
within this rural community.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
angle.
because it is leadership his.
His hospital trials authority to
take advantages there are
remote.
Probably won't.
That that's all I have thank you
Mr Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Stefanics in center
and go for bringing this forward
this is not only an important
bill because it meets the
current situation it's an
important bill it's dealing with
the reality in the old days
there were lots of doctors of
surgery they can go on it some
of these hospitals.
But that's just not happening
anymore nor is it probably is is
it if it's safer going into
hospitals are doing much more
value I mean that volume is is
almost isn't an equal sign to to
safety and quality and outcome
of what this is is a design that
I think is going to have other
hospitals be able to maintain
services and even now hospitals
but entities to maintain the
emergency services that need to
be provided
you know with the with the
physician shortage that we have
we're just not going to pay for
the staff hospitals in the away
but the way emergency room
doctors have evolved through
companies and so forth to me
they are available I mean that
you you can staff up for them
through the company's of now
organized for better for worse
as some private summer of more
commercialized but you will be
able to get services provided
when they're needed and
stabilization and you know just
given the the difficulty with
human resources and health care
as well as financial this is a
great bill to move forward and I
think it will be a model for
others in the state and I'm just
really happy to hear that were
that were moving along on this
and
It is just the other thing I
would encourage you is to again
measure how this is working.
Patient satisfaction
Medical measurements that we
don't need to go into here today
because I think demonstrating
how well this concept works
which is which does in other
areas will be very helpful not
only to encourage more of these
but also to get more federal
funding five percent is not
enough.
I'm sorry he is just thank you
Feds nice idea but the reality
is is not enough and we can and
we've got to go to them with
data on the impact that we're
making on people's lives so I'm
encouraging you to as you move
forward with this the department
of health start coming up with
some medical measurements as
well satisfaction measurements
and the ability to staff
something like this so that we
can then go to the federal
government and state you know to
really keep something like this
going can provide the services
that you taken extra twenty
twenty five percent of the
billing that goes out for in the
south thank you Mr chairman for
allowing me to make those
hopefully helpful observations.
Senator we can.
Thank you chairman thank you
senators Ingle as to panics for
this bill this is response
really exciting
As I read through this I I did
see that you the hospitals with
that this designation cannot
have a patient for over twenty
four hours and so I'm wondering.
Four times when patients have to
be transferred because they're
not stable enough to go home.
have those hospitals that are
what level one and level two are
they aware of this legislation
and are they going to be able to
absorb that patient flow.
Well Mr chair and senator thanks
for the question as we mentioned
miss Campos might have one
patient give or take a day and
she has already established
relationships with both Chris to
sing Vincent's and UNM hospital
so that based upon the needs and
severity of the patient should
be able to transfer that
individual before the twenty
four hour period.
Okay great thank you chairman
thank you says I I may have
missed that hi takes a while to
get into the weeds of the bill
so thank you it's that's the
first thing that alarmed me
thank you thank you senator but
some of the committee.
Senator Hickey.
Seconded by Senator basically
any other discussion or debate.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
yes Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Tallman yes Senator to the piano
yes congratulations Senator you
have a.
Thanks is there a vote to pass
thank you and so Mister chair
was waiting for my name to be
called and what.
We miss you too.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senator Lopez
let's go to you juvenile
corrections grant funding.
This is Senate bill three fifty.
The three sixty.
We have a.
Can cover.
With the of the of the of our I.
We have a committee so.
Yes Mr chair there should be an
actually picked up the wrong
file so if I can get a copy of
the committee said to ensure
just making some copies thank
you Mr chair so to get it get us
rolling I'll move a do not pass
on three sixteen they do pass
for purposes of discussion of
Senate health and public affairs
committee
substitute for state Senate bill
three sixty.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee the
substitute when you get the
wording is really just a small
change so it doesn't really
affect the discussion if we
could proceed with that.
Mr chair members of the
committee we are here in front
of you to discuss a little bit
about what
The juvenile community
corrections grant Fund does in
our community and the proposed
changes that we're making about
Mr chair I have some much better
advocates in our community who
can explain this I think a
little better than I can I have
judge Schneider who is here with
us this afternoon also will be
no Garcia who some of president
there in the south valley of
Albuquerque if I could recognize
of you know with his all of his
Garvin is the.
Good to see of the if I could Mr
chair start with judge later
please judge Senator welcome.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee and introduced
either on the chief judge of the
twelfth judicial district which
is like an entire counties and I
preside over juvenile justice
cases as well as a child
protective services this in a
guy basis I also serve as vice
chair for the juvenile justice
advisory commission and I chair
the legislative and planning
committee for J. Jack and before
I get a little bit of
information about the about the
bill before you I do want the
committee to know that the bill
is supported by the juvenile
justice advisory commission
Mr chair members of the
committee Senate bill three
sixteen changes the service
population for a juvenile
community corrections grant
programs and that changes the
population of of those served by
the programs and services
underneath the grant it further
requires grantees to reflect
that is our diverse population
said that communities receiving
the services by adding some
equity and inclusion language in
the bill and the act the bill
expands the voice of the
juvenile justice advisory
committee in an advisory role to
CYFD in the application process
for
awards for the grants and.
That's a synopsis of what the
bill does and Sir I would Mr
chair I would stand for
questions by you in the
committee as as with my Mexico
expert Mr Garcia.
Mr Garcia did you want to add
anything to the.
The opening statements from
judge Snyder.
hello Mister chair Senators no I
think it's pretty it's pretty
simple fourth right
having input
on the grant and you know
providing expanding the the the
population served.
Right so much money that's the
that's the key component.
And senator did you want to go
over the how the substitute
changes the position else's I
ice up raises a question about
your new section H..
You know this is said there
should be a section eight you
know you put with it so what
else have you to.
Thank.
Mr chair if I could just more
Miss Mister chair members of the
committee.
The original act.
Allocates these programs and
services for one of what
educated delinquencies and.
We want to we seek to open up
the funding as I said for pre
adjudicated use not just young
people who'd been adjudicated a
delinquent offense.
In doing so and and and working
with the children youth and
families department
on on the order changes it was
called to my attention that.
The only definition in the
children's code is child and a
child under the children's code
is anyone under eighteen someone
who has been adjudicated a
delinquent can also be a young
person who was educated while
they were juvenile.
It received a commitment and
comes out of that commitment
over the age of eight at
eighteen or over and so we
intentionally.
Carved out or or insured in the
in the
in the bill that that population
would still be eligible for
services
under this act and in doing so
we created we we recall the
service population juveniles and
then added the paragraph H.
which defines juveniles as.
Re educated young people who are
charged with a delinquent
offense and post educated young
people who the procedure to get
young people so that would
include young people who are
eighteen and and we would be
insuring that we capture that
population so is it fair to say
your with this ammendment what
looked originally like a great
much widening of the the pool of
eligible for participation
you you're more dedicated to
young people who have been
charged with an offense.
Mr chair members of the
committee we've added that
population the young people who
come into the justice system and
let the let me at this point of
reference.
These referrals under this.
grant funding our referrals
through juvenile probation yeah
which is another thing you
vetted and the substitute
exactly and we and and we did
that too.
Really distinguish this from
another
part of grant funding under the
juvenile continuum Act this
stream of funding comes through
referrals from juvenile
probation.
Those could be referrals
informal referrals they could be
also cases where petition is
filed and they come before a
children's court judge but it
does include that population of
pre adjudicated youth which
serves the original purpose in
the act of.
Providing services for the
diversion which is language that
is in that statute as it reads
today for the desert diversion
of these young people and we
want to include those services
for diversion for young people
are.
Come through juvenile probation
but not yet have been educated.
But.
Okay let's discuss the anything
anything else about this up here
looks like you've toned down a
little bit to the role of the
advisory committee in making
decisions.
I talk about that yes Sir I'm Mr
chair members of the committee
the role of the juvenile justice
advisory committee is just that
by statute Advisory we're not an
equal voice with with the
children youth and families
department they have the
ultimate voice and and who gets
the who the recipients are this
grant funding.
So in the original iteration of
the of the bill there was
language in there that could
have been read to suggest that
we were equals with CYFD we have
an advisory role J. Jack does so
we wanted to make sure that that
was clear I I will if I may
Mister chair members of the
committee added that the reason
for that is.
J. Jackie.
Across our state we have tools
Justice continuum's and J.
Jackie here is from those
community members from those
community can contentimage I
believe at this point there are
twenty of them across the state
of New Mexico their juvenile
justice partners who have a
board and and the communities
and they know better what's
going on in their communities
they know better what's needed
and we hear from them the report
today Jack we have a meeting
every other month they report to
us my subcommittee as well as
Alpino subcommittee
the system improvement
subcommittee we do outreach with
with these continuing and we so
we hear from them in a robust
way in a meaningful way and we
are the voice for them and so if
we we believe it's important
again and ever and and an
advisory capacity to have a
voice.
In this grant funding process.
Thank you okay let's let's let's
go to the audience and anything
else about about this of.
Mr Singh okay let's go to the
audience who's here to speak in
anybody here let's just to of
straw poll first slide show of
hands who is here in support of
this measure.
K..
Anybody opposed to this measure.
Okay we will hear from to in
favor and to propose so I just
come on up Mr Shatner.
State why you supported.
Mr chairman senators members of
this committee I am supported
this legislation.
Because it what it will do is it
will encourage jurisdictions to
resolve things informally so as
not to have an increase in the
number of users who have to be
adjudicated in educated youth
that lived with them for a
longer period of time so this
will allow them to get services
without having to to receive
that formal probation they can
get informal probation like a
consent decree or a time waiver
which is often stickers so a lot
of times jurisdictions will say
that that do what we have to
have an education in order to
access this funding to provide
the services for these young
people into this will open that
up and then wind and and of and
I've testified in this committee
before Mr chairman I worked in
the District Court in Burleigh
county for eighteen years and we
have a lot of dividers are
programs and Bernalillo county
including one run by Mr Garcia
but the other jurisdiction in
the state do not have access to
the same amount services is the
use of Albuquerque have and so
this will help them a great deal
and and and and the portion of
the bill that I support in terms
of the CYFD receiving input from
J. Jack is that recently in in
not the current administration I
support to secretary of state I
do she's made tremendous changes
but in recent past in in going
backwards it's been the lack of
communication and a lack of
sunshine of from the former
secretary and just insuring
information with the with their
J. Jack committees which
appointed by the governor and
the communities in general so
this is greater sunshine and
better access to services for
young people thank you Mr
chairman thank you to
did you just say something else
of you know about this.
Thank you Mr chair Senators
just pretty pretty much what
Mr Shatner shared
for a long time
of the.
The modest operated as the
approach for solutions answers
services but primarily been done
by system agencies without
direct input from those directly
impacted.
Those with lived experience
the more nontraditional of
people of our communities.
What this does is it enables us
to
what representatives on the J.
yes for not to replace on the
authority of CYFD officials.
To expand the inclusion at an
equity and information directly
from the population being
impacted directly from the
population that we're talking
about and that were all assigned
an appointed to serve on there
is a reaction from not all but
some members of the CYFD
juvenile justice agency or
department.
Somewhat of a maybe this is
archer versus yours but the
truth is
we should do this together and
that's what this is thank you
for thank you Mr Garcia
is there anyone here from the
department it was to testify
yes.
Terry.
Mr.
Yes.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee Mexico tomorrow
children youth and families
department and we do support
this legislation we help draft
it and and we've been working
closely with the sponsor so we
we appreciate the time and the
substitute is fine with you off
of that that's that's part of
the changes thanks committee
okay now let's go to those who
oppose this Mr cost us did you
want to testify.
And Mr cleave all you want to
yes by to come up and get ready
to speak.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Nico
Stallis really happy to hear
about some of the changes that
were included in this new
version of the bill because it
the average overstate cost me a
few concerns I I was really
struck by the fact that
delinquent or judicata
delinquent was struck from the
beginning of the bill and then
it was added back into the bill
at the end not sure why we would
need to strike it just added
back into the bill but I heard
the explanation from judge
Snyder that we are now created a
definition of juvenile so that
we can include a non adjudicated
youth my only concern with that
is there already exists a fund
in the state of New Mexico the
judge Snyder had reference the
juvenile justice continuing fund
that's already in place
specifically to meet the needs
of non adjudicated you so I
really don't want to duplicate
with the juvenile community
corrections grant something
that's already in statute under
the juvenile continuing fund
because basically they're doing
the same thing up my only other
concern and and it might be
unintended but I'm just a little
bit concerned that the language
of a requirement the referrals
to the community corrections
programs and services shall be
made by juvenile probation and
parole services one we we don't
do parole in New Mexico anymore
so I don't know if that was just
an oversight including parole in
that definition but I also don't
want that interpreted that those
recommendations or referrals can
only come from juvenile
probation and parole and the
reason that I'm saying that in
the facilities that are overseen
by Chile youth and families
department we have a much older
population I think the average
age is still over the age of
seventeen so many of the users
that are in those facilities are
often referred to community
corrections so I wouldn't want
including language in the bill
that release you mean right so
I'd hate to include language in
the bill that would prohibit the
facility staff that has been
working with these individuals
for one year two years however
many years they've been in the
office.
Ladies and not allow them to
also make a referral to juvenile
community corrections because of
this language it seems like it
could be interpreted for it to
happen that way super excited to
see the equity language in there
I think J. Jack and the
department's done an amazing job
of the last couple years then
there's a race equity statement
that I think is read at every
meeting of the JJ act aboard you
know just to re emphasize the
work that's been done so those
are just a comment in the
concerns that I had thank you Mr
you'd seen the substitute you
you know what was in it I wasn't
sure if that was Mr Chairman
wasn't sure if that was the
version that was being present I
had seen some of that language
and I guess that is happy to see
some of the changes that were
made thank you thank you.
Strictly love.
Thank you Mr chairman senators
Bob cleave of acting chair of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission and longtime chair of
the juvenile committee the
sentencing commission.
over the years we've had a
number of programs come in to
discuss how they're doing at the
juvenile committee from both
juvenile community corrections
which is a separate statute in
with David referring to its J.
Jack up to different pots of
money one thing it's it's in
common is most these programs
are struggling referrals.
they're having a hard time
getting referrals from juvenile
probation because juvenile
probation is not getting the
referrals that they did it one
time from law enforcement I mean
it's drastically gone down year
after year after year so trying
to sustain programs in Juneau
community corrections in the
juvenile justice advisory
committee it's not working
through appropriations so I
agree with the the sponsor and
the the
The reasoning to expand the
judicata delinquent keeping that
and adding things like non risk
or high risk type of offenders
so you can loosen the criteria
our kids are slipping through
the cracks in New Mexico our
families are slipping through
the cracks and not getting the
services that they did it one
time the one thing we could
agree on and I talked to judge
Snyder we can go Saturday is
that point let's expand this
measure to to allow more
referrals coming in and having
commend from juvenile probation
I'm not sure that's the answer
maybe from hospitals maybe from
other other areas such as
schools so that that was a point
that we at look at making what
we wanted to do is just look at
opening up.
The the pool the target
population on this bill all the
other things in there we do not
think this is necessary.
having J. Jack getting involved
in juvenile community
corrections advisory capacity or
whatever it just doesn't make
any sense they're having a hard
time taking care of their own
business with their programs not
being able to sustain reverting
a lot of money so on that note
thank you thank you Mr cleaver
then we have two people on the
zoom away to speak in support of
the first is.
Corey Adams.
Thank you Mr chairman yes.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members as I just wanted to
items Corey Adams I'm the deputy
director for juvenile justice
field services for CYFD I want
to speak in support of thirty
sixteen
We are supporting this year's
been touched on already but you
know what the tremendous you
know decline in referrals to
juvenile probation over last
really I seven years we've seen
the population of GCC programs
declined as well so there's a
lot of interest in expanding
these programs they have the
ability to work with non
adjudicated youth we have
communities in the state were J.
C. C. is in operation but they
don't have the continue
on programs to continue
supported programs in operation
so expanding that pool of
clientele would expand the
services in those
in those communities so
just speaking in support thanks
everybody for top good thank you
Mr Adams said finally Erica
Sanchez.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
Erica Sanchez with and I'm can
an organization that partners
with young people impacted by
systems to improve their
transition to adulthood we
support Senate bill three
sixteen because it's important
that the funding be used as
intended and that more users
have access to these to services
and supports without being pool
deeper into the system so we're
glad that it's not requiring
education anymore we also think
it's important that more
community based service
providers are engaged in the
provision of the services to
young people thank you thank you
Erica.
so now will did you what I I was
going to ask you what about the
suggestion that
That was made that you accept
referrals from
facilities.
Hospitals are DC's and the and I
guess the detention facility.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Be a little bit confusing
because there are two streams to
grant streams of funding for
kids in the justice system
there's this this stream of
funding the juvenile community
corrections funding and then
there's another stream of of of
money through the juvenile
continue on act fund.
The need this funding as it
exists today again is just for
adjudicated young people so when
we worked with with whereas the
continuum Act fund is for.
Money that can be used for
services and programs by
referral from anybody could come
from hospitals could come from
mom and dad come from the school
or could be a judge but it could
be anybody in this other part of
money in this part of money and
with the same agencies the I
would would to the institute
excess money from both parts to
provide those services but
actually potentially it yet
referred project the other uses
but if they came from the the
hospital whatever RTC they would
use this other doctor.
This money is a little bit
different because if this money
is.
Is used by by the department by
CYFD to make grants to counties
municipalities or private
Organon profit organizations
individually or jointly and the
funding in the juvenile
community corrections or the
community juvenile continuum Act
I'm sorry the funding to that
act can go to different two
different sources so it's it's
and I don't have that bill in
front of me I'm sorry Sir I
think we might be twenty on that
one on Monday.
But the money goes to different
organizations and different
entities and so this money has
traditionally been used
well let me it's reproached
Education and and so it's in
addition to appropriations or
for services when young people
come out of a commitment.
What we seek to open it up to
our heightened levels of pre
trial supervision and diversion
programs so that perhaps a child
who is in the system doesn't
have to be adjudicated that
there's perhaps a time waiver or
or there's another way to handle
it without a formal adjudication
but with and working on the
committee set up with the
children youth and families
department if it makes sense
that this part of money that
this that that young people who
touch juvenile probation
in the traditional way that this
money has been used for kids in
the system.
That that these referrals come
through general appropriations
it makes sense that the other
part of money which is a larger
deposit money without a larger
reversion that that money
it is just open up in a
different way I want to get into
that other billing confuse
everything but there's a reason
for this there's a reason that
this comes through the
department these are kids who
are in the system the other part
of money is for kids who are in
the system as well as kids who
are at risk of coming into the
system so that population is
absolutely that the recipient
recipient of grant funding.
This is just a different stream
of funding it said I think there
may be a little bit of
confusion.
One of the question what about
eliminating parole.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it should have been
omitted yeah and in the other
bill it was omitted because
there's no longer on parole and
and so it should have been
admitted in this it was an
oversight I'd like to propose an
amendment on page three.
Line for.
Delete fend.
It online I for real food read
and she'll be made by juvenile
probation services.
Yeah just delete and parole take
out and parole.
Four is there a second to the
committee to that amendment
second seconded by Senator
Tallman any any discussion it is
just in for reclusion.
Seeing no objection.
Will consider the bills have
been invented and this then
becomes a point to.
because it's a committee set up
and and the always getting
curricula we amended committees
of.
It becomes a point to.
Okay let's go to the committee
and we start with Senator
Gallegos.
Mr chair thank you for asking on
the funding stream but I do have
one other question so taking at
Changing judicata two juveniles
says it'll be in a significant
increase to the Department.
Mr chair Senator would you mind
if the department explains how
that would be handled and if it
isn't a bad thing for.
I think the sub to Care that but
go ahead put it okay Miss Mister
chairman Senator Gallegos.
I'm I'm just sort of
understanding would be
significant a significant change
to the department is that the
question that was my question
but if the sub took care of it
than the that okay hi in our
there again I sent my analyst to
note to see if she ever saw the
so couple other she hadn't seen
but so I I I only have the
analyst analysis on the original
and that was one of her concerns
of testing care the work Cody
just give me a thumbs up so
that's All I Want thank you Mr
thank you senator Senator
Maestas.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Lopez your
honor and Mr Garcia one just
take a moment to echo their
sentiments Mr Chairman thank you
Mr Garcia for just your
leadership and commitment to use
in New Mexico and and your trim
tremendous contributions to our
community thank you so much want
to say that publicly but with
regard to the language of.
The two things one is like I can
ask the.
Mr look on the top of page two
three.
We're looking at the committee
so that point two two five three
oh five one correct I thank you
for and then
So what is the policy we're
trying to achieve because the
language is a little.
A little weird it says
And requirement that referrals
to the committee corrections
program and services shall be
made by the juvenile probation
pro service are we suggesting
that they shall only be made or
we saying juvenile probation and
parole you need to start making
more referrals.
Mr chair Senator.
Miss Mister chair and senator
Maestas on the purpose of that
as I said is to.
And and I made to defer to to
Morrow on this as well ceases to
speak on behalf of that that the
department but in my
work with the department on the
Canadian side it made sense in
our in our conversation again
because there are these two
separate streams of funding
where one also includes at risk
youth so those are kids that
aren't even touched hopefully
with with juvenile probation
those referrals can come from
anywhere in the community and so
there's already that stream of
funding this is funding that
again as is for diversion the
original language but is
traditionally been adjudicated
youth so those those referrals
already came through juvenile
probation and but in opening
this up.
The intent is and the belief is
that we can maximize use of that
funding that get that runs Act
grant funding with that defined
population kids who are referred
to appropriations so can be
informal it can be formal where
they file a petition but it
significantly expands the
population that this money can
serve but it's a distinct and
separate population what did not
completely separate but it's a
separate population than the
other grant Fund because that
serves at risk where community
referrals can be made and I and
I if I may act one other thing
I'll add is the stream of
funding in the continuum Act is
a larger pot of money and so
it's it's it's you know
Out of a larger group of young
people can be can benefit from
that where is this is a smaller
allocation.
So it makes sense to have that
those parameters on how the
money can be spent okay thank
you Mr thank you judge of the
We may want to consider down the
road online for is in Syria
saying program you know.
That that right the requirement
that referral shall be made by
juvenile probation parole maybe
suggest that.
Requirement that referrals be
received by juvenile probation
and parole maybe maybe just
thought hello at at at the
bottom the judge heard my fees
back to the Mr chairman.
And with but we we just amended
that to take up rule they don't
have really okay thank you thank
you and then up you know because
as a young proscar you you you
have to convict somebody to make
them go to counting make them do
something right you're not that
you had to give the court
jurisdiction to make them do
something.
And and the judge told me that.
So the defect of.
You know of course we don't
Comeaux says it doesn't doesn't
solve problems is it is it
creates more problems.
I was so devastated by that
coming but because a conviction
you know is is has a lot of
negative consequences with the
rest of us so anyway on on on
paragraph H. at the bottom we
want to include we don't and
this is fantastic public policy
is not just of offenders who
have been convicted or error in
the juvenile system been found
to have committed an offence.
And so on line twenty it's as a
juvenile means a child charged
with an offense that that's kind
of fuzzy in the in the juvenile
system that charged with an
offense do we want to say
something like referred to
appropriations or formally
charged in in children's court.
Mr chair.
Senator SS.
And I'm going to again
also defer to Mr more on this it
but I believe you're correct
because these would also be.
In formal referrals where they
meeting the petition alleging a
delinquent act might not have
already been filed.
Representative thank you Mr I
think because I think charge
would be like a formal because
essentially that you know the
way it works all kinds
allegations arrive on the
probationers desk and have a
choice to do nothing.
Do do is like a soft probation
or or formally charged them in
children's court this would only
capture those formally charged
in the children's court so we
may want to say maybe that that
put your thinking cap on will
this work if we say.
means a child referred with an
offense.
Mr chair and and Senator my
sister.
I'm wondering I'm gonna turn
around and look at Mr more on
this am I wonder if you just
referred to juvenile probation
because.
Informal referrals can come in
and a lot of different ways.
But if I may Mister chair refer
to to Mr more on on that.
We.
Mr Adams the the Mr Chairman
Middle Adams is on the zoom we
the Soviets let's object expert
but let's see it's gonna go to
Kodi Adams first and then Dave
Schmidt it's close was the
language preferred for what but
Corey Corey Adams did go ahead
court can you add to the
question.
Thank you Mr chair can everybody
hear me.
Yes.
Okay
So.
Based on what we would consider
anybody charge to be anybody
like a referral to probation but
I I you know I would support the
language change to referral to
juvenile probation but I think
if we say charge again when we
were speaking on terms of
referrals to appropriations when
we get that referral we consider
that used to be in charge by by
law enforcement typically so.
So you so let me just be clear
court you you think we ought to
change charge to referred to
appropriations to juvenile
probation with effects and can.
I think I think changing I would
be in support of changing to a
referral to juvenile probation
if we did that we could also
that cover on family in need of
services referrals which might
go beyond the like what I think
it is important to it's also
acknowledged we talk informal
cases are for the department and
services the probation refers to
are in essence voluntary by the
families of the so they would in
essence be in agreement to do
the program we could not refers
them to a program without them
being in agreement to intended
to participate.
Okay very good so good catch
thank you want to make that
amendment make make a motion.
The twenty.
I move to strike the word chart.
For two.
Is that is that a friendly
amendment Senator.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chair yes is it
okay leave the food charge get
published charged.
And it's considered a friendly
I'll second the the amendment.
Okay.
Darn it we don't have a quorum.
L. okay okay the.
Three long.
Yes.
Thank you Mr we.
We'll just we'll just pull that
when we get another member back
in we'll we'll vote.
This were.
Here here Senator said let's
let's finish that up we have a
an amendment Senator Sedillo
Lopez on page three.
Line twenty it's good as a
friendly amendment.
That we striking charged and
referred to juvenile probation.
okay any any opposition seeing
none will consider the bills
have been amended again Senator
you still of the the the the
floor Senator Maestas.
Senator Lopez the.
Percent.
And mystery of.
Thank.
I'm gonna take the committee
chairman's prerogative and call
and Dave Schmidt.
This to to speak of I was
expecting that he would have
been on earlier but he didn't
get all for just a and again for
those of you who remember him.
Long time advocate for four of
the children and it is indeed
for this committee so Dave you
have something to say on the
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman I've been
on for the last.
Since the start of the committee
here so I've heard the entire
discussion good.
On this I assume that you can
cure.
Your meal speaking now.
If if you could hold the my
closer to your mouth that would
help.
We're turned up the sound if you
have that capacity.
Okay have you all the way up can
you hear me better a little bit
yeah keep it close to your mouth
and and and will be able to
hear.
Well I'm on on my computer.
What size I can turn the
computer okay we hire you did go
ahead.
Okay hi I have been prepared
mostly to speak to some of the
issues that have been raised on
page three the.
What was the amount that
regarding juveniles and Senator.
We're still in line to what I
was going to propose and that is
an expansion of the.
Of the amendment on page two
line eight.
And where you keep a duplicate
of the line points and expand
the pool of recipients of the
school of those that can be
served by now unity correction
to include and you've already
covered that with Cody's
suggestions referred to.
Part of the problem with refer
to is that on page three in
section eight.
This is a definition of of
juvenile and not of of a lesser
at risk file in the the purpose
of voting member was to expand
the pool of kids that can go in
and be served by I community
corrections.
Why would yes that you're
expansion of the.
The kids second reserve I do
now.
Community corrections be
contained in on page.
Two hundred north following a
duplicated elections and those
referred to who now fort.
To take kids away from any
owners that the trial has to be
charge.
Moore has to commit a billing
for act if they are in one of
the thirteenth services being
provided under community
correct.
Four or otherwise.
Ideal lady.
This would be addressed in
combining those two Fund.
The community corrections and
the continual.
So that the money's can be
expanded for both purpose.
Yep so so.
What we've been told is that
the.
Continuum Fund is much larger.
Because it is for a larger
population.
And this is a a narrower
population and a smaller pot the
would there be some advantage
somehow to combining those two.
Yes the the this is a large
number one the community
corrections Act I believe is
the.
As part of the minute thank
because of the lack of referral.
Now combining these to make it a
non reverting fund the the fund
is now up to six posted six
million dollars we don't want
any of this to be lost because
they are referring to the CV
then up for.
My suggestion would be that you
just go with the referral line
please and do away with with the
other one thing twenty eight and
makes it more of a formal
situation work I'll ask to be in
in order to Sir.
Also the.
Also the juvenile justice
committee and I was chair of
that committee for some years.
I think does not need this kind
of language in this bill in
order to the children youth and
families can expand those
committees anytime they want my
administrative action I wouldn't
walk at the end by legislation.
Okay.
Thanks Dave.
Any other written your question
do you happen to try and I okay
hang on there that.
So did you want to respond judge
I Mr chair if we could please
Mr chair members of the
committee first and foremost I
but I have so much respect for
Dave Schmidt all the work
Senator one justice just an
immense amount of respect I to
me though it's it's important to
distinguish between these two
these two pots of money because
that and I pulled up the SB
three nine nine which hopefully
later next week but that on the
continued that continue on
frontier and I would like to
peel and indoles reader read
read how these awards are given
these awards.
R. two juvenile justice
continuum's for the provision of
services this is how it reads in
the statue right now services
and temporary non secure
alternatives to detention for
juveniles arrested or for
digital appropriations for at
risk of such referral and that
the important distinction here
is that this money is an award
of requests to juvenile justice
continue ones I chair the Otero
county jewel just discontinue
for almost ten years now prior
to that for almost ten years I
served on the Lincoln County
okay Joel justice continuum
those are community stakeholders
like I'll be no this money goes
to the people in the communities
who know the special unique
needs of the kids in their
communities the other part of
money goes to counties
municipalities private
organizations
that nonprofit private
organizations that's different
this the money in the bill
before you all today in the in
the
corrections Fund yeah community
corrections fund goes to
introduce like big brothers big
sisters for instance up to one
that comes to mind and in my
community that the counseling
center they run our our
community corrections program
which provides a heightened
level of supervision on
probation this is very
distinguishable from the money
in the continuing fund that goes
to our compete continuance to
have a community stakeholder
voice and and that's important
to to keep those pots of money
separate so that the communities
have again just a voice in the
needs of their community and and
they apply for that funding
through J. Jack directly.
The community corrections money
is applied directly through
CYFD.
So it's it's it's it's a
different structure and it's
intended for different purposes
and I believe it's really
important that both incredibly
important to get services to our
young people but I believe that
it's important to to to notice
distinction should be mindful of
that and and understand why we
have those distinctions they're
meant for different things thank
you it's but they're but they're
different they're very
different.
Thank you Mr chair.
Okay.
But the will of the committee.
Nope you because it's a
committee sept.
Hi
move they do not have says that
it's built in the fifties I do
have a.
As amended to S. S. twice as
twice amended that point to
version secretary.
Okay so we have a motion at a
point to.
Of the point two version of the
bill is there any discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Davis yes ma'am Senator
Hickey yeah Senator Ingle yes
yes yes Senator McKenna yes
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman.
Center to the piano yes so you
have to pass her on the seven
zero vote with the two excuse
thank you all thanks this issue
thank you and thank you for your
though we will go to
Senator pope for homeowners
association board elections.
My bill in the Interstate Cup
actor you hear for the
interstate compacts.
I I regret to tell you I usually
hold my bills for last.
That way the committee is
depleted they don't have any
they have no questions left and
we could just zoom in.
You get the votes on that Mr yes
this.
At the end of the half hour I
think the six hundred and fifty
we get to.
Okay Senator pope.
Mr chair I believe online I have
Elizabeth Hailey from the west
side coalition in neighborhoods
and she will be helping me be my
expert on zoom.
If she's available three two oh
Alie Elizabeth Taylor.
She online.
The okay.
The good Intel's about the bill
center Mr chair this is Senate
bill three to one homeowner
association board elections what
this bill does is IT pros
proposes to amend.
Forty six forty seven sixteen
forty seven dash sixteen dash
zero eight.
Which provides some find that
master planned communities are
treated the same as other
planned communities with regard
to the rights of homeowners to
control the board of H. away one
seventy five percent of the lots
are sold.
The issue that we're trying to
address with this legislation is
that there's no legitimate
reason to treat homeowners in a
master planned community
different differently from
homeowners in a planned
community.
Under current law the developer.
Has one hundred percent control
over every aspect of the
operations and maintenance of
the community until the last lot
is sold and that's in a master
planned community.
At the beginning of the
development the developer has a
legitimate interest in control
the operations of the H. away
what is more more lots are sold
the interests and risks of
liabilities of the homeowners
become stronger by the time
seven five percent of the lots
are sold these interest away the
interests of the developer.
The developers control.
And do in some cases lead to
problems along with many others
because the homeowners are the
distinct disadvantage and their
property and legal rights can
become impaired.
In summary Mr chair.
A developer sometimes often and
add a state entity is able to
use the homeowners money.
To benefit the developer rather
than the homeowners developer
can pursue only its own
interests.
I'm sorry most place.
There's simply no reason why
this should be the case and
certainly no reason why New
Mexico citizens should be
disadvantages because they live
in a master planned community
once again Mr chair on this we
are just asking for the same
rules right now.
At city four percent a lot sold
in a planned community
There is more the representation
the rights of the homeowners
this is not the case and a
master planned community and
that's what really what this
bill addresses I would like to
give a few minutes to Elizabeth
Hailey ONZM this Haley.
Yes thank you can you hear me
yes we can.
Okay I'm my name is Elizabeth
Hailey I am the president excuse
me.
Mr chair and at and members of
the committee I am Elizabeth
Hayley I'm the president of the
West Side coalition of
neighborhood disconcerting
issuance more commonly called
was gonna our members represent
communities from just south of
central to the Santa line and
west of the Rio Grande
Bernalillo county it's really a
large portion of the residential
properties in Bernalillo county.
Our coalition representative
Many residents including
homeowner associations and
members of planned communities
and actually the impetus for
this legislation came from our
coalition members who have
reported
a variety of problems with being
assessed fees and not being able
to plan for any kind of a
denture ality because they are
so locked out of the process my
comments support Senate bill
three twenty one and more and I
just want to let you know what's
going to has monitored involved
the legislation's progress for
two years.
I think it's important to say
especially in times of inflation
homeowners depend on capital
investment in real property the
state even with rising costs and
economic uncertainty and they
really need to be able to
control both their properties
and to know their future
financial commitments and
obligations.
And I think that is the most
important the most important
thing with in this legislation
is that they deserve parity they
deserve to be able to plan they
they need to know that when they
leave these associations the
kinds of fees and
responsibilities that they will
have because.
Appaloosa works it works best
when they're rules that are both
the renewable and equitable
thank you very good thank you
Mr.
Let's go to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this bill.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill.
In the video zoom but this bill
members of the committee.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr Chairman center just out of
ignorance so I do developments
we don't build the homes we
build the projects so what
you're saying as as a lot your
soul then it ships so that way
the homeowners get more controls
out what this bill does Mister
Mr chair Senator yes and and
what's happening now is the way
the the statues are now if
you're in a planned community at
city five percent that H. away
shifts over to the rights of the
homeowners currently in a master
planned community that doesn't
happen and it continues to where
the developer has the control
and they're making decisions
especially close at the end that
are going to be really going to
affect those homeowners and what
we're asking for here is in a
planned community at seven five
percent that change happens and
we just want that to happen at
city five percent for the master
planned as well to have parity.
Mr Chairman center just because
we've got a eight hundred homes.
Of plant facility but but it's
not H. away I think the
difference is in large city like
Albuquerque you've got to have
things in place and almost tell
you save your money come to Lee
County because of we don't have
to deal with this but I just
want to clarify that because
I've never are you actually
creating colonia us there and we
can.
Depends on if you give such
money for Mr chair.
But yes so I've just not seen
this I've known even here Santa
Fe Mr chair the people I stay
with their part of H. away and I
just did not know how that works
so basically it's transferring
of power by lots served as chair
Mr chair Senator corrected the
dealing with an H. away and the
members of the control of of the
board that's where it comes into
play Mr etcetera not knowing
enough that sounds fair to me
thank you could you explain the
master how does a master planned
community community differ from
a planned community yes Mr chair
if I could have Elizabeth
comment on that because I
sometimes I mean to confuse with
that from my understanding is
you would have a development for
example on the west side of
Albuquerque right you have a
development this is something
all of into a master plan
because you have all those
different developments within
been Tana ranch right there's
not there's been Tana ranch but
there's different developments
with inventory would be like a
master plan and let's have it if
you could comment on that.
You have to in need of this
sailing.
At the master planned community
allows development and faces
whereas the whole plan is is
usually approved at one time
through the setting
jurisdiction.
Okay.
Very good.
So your your bill would only
apply to a master planned
community would.
The full thing is built out in
seventy five percent of those
lots are are occupied then this
would kick in not for each
little phase of it.
Mr chair correct okay.
Members of the committee
flexibility committee.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator pope
Yup.
The declarant the declarant in
the control of the board.
Next just kind of refresh my
memory so that the developer
develop say thirty thirty lots
built thirty homes he's they're
selling the homes.
And a homeowner's association is
attached.
Kind of to those home buyers in
their the kind of buy a home in
anticipation of being part of
this homeowners association is
that the declarant the
homeowners association.
For the developer.
Mr chair
Miss Haley I wonder if you could
help me with that one.
It is it is usually the
developer.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Lee
So we not only want to include
master planned communities.
But how does paragraph F. on
page three how does that.
Change what's currently in law
for for non master planned
communities.
Like it seems like it's
repetitive but it's not like it
it seems like it's similar to
other programs but it's not the
kind of tell me.
Mr chair Senator Estes from my
understanding what we're trying
to do is just really have have
parity
I will have miss Haley if you
want to comment on section of.
I think that some of the
sections
control certain contingencies.
The present at paragraph F. on
or after January first twenty
twenty four no later than sixty
days after conveyance of seventy
five percent of the lots that
are part of the development in
any additional lots that may be
added to the development to lot
owners other than the declarant
no less than seventy five five
percent of the members of the
board shall be elected by lot
owners other than the the
declarant.
Mister chairman Senator Mr Allen
I can I'm reading it I
appreciate you reading it
but here's what here's I finally
figured it out so.
Once twenty five percent of the
lots are sold.
The neighbors the neighborhood
gets twenty five percent of the
members.
In paragraph the on line seven
eight once fifty percent of the
lots are sold they get no less
than thirty three percent of the
members.
And then we're adding a
paragraph that one seventy four
percent of the lots are sold.
Then it jumps from thirty three
percent of the members to
seventy five percent of the
members essentially giving the
neighbors up.
Essentially a majority of the
board at that point that's
that's the goal.
A yes Mr chair yes okay and then
lastly Mr chairman of the table
with the the appreciate what you
do for the west side that this
did was gonna actually vote on
this bill
because I get an email from was
gonna are you just saying your
president was going up for rate
for identification purposes.
My president was gonna for
identification purposes when the
bill was first introduced last
last year Wisco no voted on it
as as late as our last
Last meeting we actually discuss
the bill.
And that and talked about a
specific problems that members
of planned communities were
having and addressing whether
the bill would cover them and
their feeling was that it
probably would we sent and and
disseminated the bill to the
members of the executive
committee who have reviewed it
and empowered me to come and
speak on its behalf today is
that clear enough.
Thank you Mr Mister chairman
Senator Haley I don't know why
or Mr members he Senator pope I
don't know why wouldn't be
unclear but I appreciate you
saying asking me if it's clear
enough that everyone what you
said.
I think you just frankly.
If you if you voted on last
year's bill you need to vote
again on this year's bill
because it's the the
organization is on going there
there's new there's no executive
members directly there could be
a new president and I think you
lose credibility when you don't
do stuff like that miss Haley is
that clear enough thank you Mr
chairman moral or excuse me
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair.
What.
Mr Mr chair Senator why we're
planned communities exempted in
the first place of strategist in
the policy.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
do you mean why were the master
just the master commit I'm sorry
master communities exempted and
first Mr chair Senator I do not
know the answer to that I don't
know if this Haley would you
have some background on that.
I think that
I think that many states would
follow the same sort of rules as
expressed in this legislation
but unfortunately New Mexico
didn't and it ended it really in
balance wait the the the
interest of the developer over
those of the individual property
owners even when they
constituted a major.
And I can just I can't answer
answer why.
Thank you Mr chair it seems like
a good idea to give the people
who actually own the lots and as
I understand it it's the lots
that are purchased not the house
being built.
Is that correct Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator Lopez to table
if you can answer the.
Well
HOAs very depending on the
agreements between between men
members and the H. away but in
most planned communities they
are they are they are buying the
house with a with a tenured
interest in a lot so so yes it
is suggested that these
conditions have been have been
overlaid in the legislation so
that they sometimes even when
there is an H. O. A. that board
that's running in tandem with
the Board it's being run and
occupied by the declarant they
net don't necessarily have to
exchange information with that
and in some cases they have a
they have a language in those
agreements that that they don't
they don't have to disclose
their decisions or the declarant
even when a minority of lots are
left still has to have their
approval for for certain items
and.
There is nothing in the existing
law that motivates the declarant
to have to work on behalf of the
actual property owners and
that's problematic especially
when you come to a phase where
there are many more individual
property owners and then with
with more land investment in the
development than the actual
declarant.
Thank you Mr chair them that
makes a lot of sense but are you
familiar with the valley
improvement association in
Valencia County.
I can't say that I am.
Well the story there's it's a
long story but the bottom line
is it never got developed most
of the most of the association
never got developed and all the
a lot of people from New York
California New Jersey bought
lots and they they I mean I
think that there are other laws
against this but it really
It really made it of a complex
thing to.
Develop I mean they were put I I
can't say that that was all the
problem their problems with
water there all kinds of other
problems but
It houses were never built.
And so all these people have
lots in an undeveloped in
undeveloped opal area and so
that's
That's why I asked the question
I just worry
I support the bill because I
think it's a good idea to
transfer power to the owners.
But
Because I think maybe they would
have more of an interest in
developing and completing it
then maybe a developer just sold
the lots and got the money and
didn't have to worry about what
happens next but
that is just a cautionary
cautionary tale
Mr chair but I I do think it's a
good idea for the the people
actually purchased the property
to have more of an interest
thank you Mr chairman.
Reserve the committee what's the
will of the committee Senator
Tallman going to make a motion
mmhm thank you Mr chair at the.
Center for.
So how briefly houses differ
from existing.
Well it.
Mr chair Senator so existing law
and is what we're trying to
change right now with a a
planned community SNE five
percent a lot sold the H. away
board goes to the homeowners
that's not happening right now
master planned and so we're
trying to do with the master
planned community is do the same
thing towards a.
When the transfers from my
understanding Mr chairman miss
Haley can jump in the existing
lawn a master planned it doesn't
turn over to the homeowners and
to all the lots were sold.
On the H. away.
Mr chair Senator Tallman
About that time I yeah I I just
yeah I don't.
I guess I'm being careful I
don't know if I want to name
developers myself as a Senator
but
this is Haley I don't know if
you want to comment on that on
some examples.
All right I think that
I think that I'm.
That that in the information
that we received in our member
from our members.
They have found that a variety
of fees and assessments have
been assigned.
That by the developer where.
Where they had really no control
they were assigned
responsibility for for taking
care of them of maintenance in
front of their houses in one
case they were there were
assessments made for for closing
costs when they when they
transfer are so there
Their facilities that they were
unaware at and we're just sort
of imposed on them they're all
kinds of things including Jess
money base basic maintenance
where the where the development
company and it's in its
nominated management firm would
spend a lot of time on the areas
where there were and where they
were properties to be sold in
very little time on on
maintaining the comments in the
areas that had already been sold
and there was nothing to prevent
them to do from actually doing
that
I I would rather not this call
out specific developers because
I don't know of the dead solid
certainty I can only report what
our members have have talked
about in the meeting.
And what I would say is Mr chair
Senator Tallman I also went to a
couple developments on the west
side of with constituents who
had concerns on developments
that were completing their their
their construction lots and
promises were made and then
because they had no membership
on the H. away to make these
decisions they were kind of shut
out in those decisions we're
going to affect them once all
those lots were sold in the
development thank you Mr
chairman and that.
The experience with this and we
don't have any problems with it
all of the lots were sold but on
support the bill.
Members.
A motion to.
I move it to pass.
We have a motion and a second
any discussion secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Harris.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center my SS yes
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes center
to the penal yes congratulations
Senator Mr chair sorry when a
little long usually my bills are
five minutes but I try to.
You can't control the questions
from the committee it's fine
Senator Padilla two bills for
this and you've assured me they
both are very spree for them I
would just hear both the same
time right.
For the three twenty seven three
twenty eight thank you very much
Mr president and with that Mr
president of the committee and
Three twenty seven little easy
personal construct the so three
twenty seven can we start there
Mr yes please okay so thank you
very much I've actually been
before your committee twice this
is my third time actually I
believe
as I serve on the Mexico finance
authority as a voting oversight
committee voting member we do
take is you know pieces
legislation to help the
organization but essentially
what three twenty seven does is
it extends for another four
years the ability of the NMFA to
make decisions based on loans
rather than having to come to
the state legislature to do that
we maintain our oversight
authority and are watchful eyes
the legislature to make sure
that there's no funky business
going on there the work that
they do as we all know is just
powerful they've they've gone
from three loans the original
five years to over forty loans
now your closed over forty loans
now based on you know the
success of this program this
really is just going to help to
continue to promote economic
development job creation and
some of them are communities
that really need the these loan
funds at this loan fund
available to them if you will
and the oversight remains and
I'm gonna ask the super
spectacular wonderful Marquita
Russel who is on the spot with
everything to say a few words
this Russell welcome thank you
madam Mr Chairman this can this
fund is existed it's a very
small fund the Economic
Development revolving fund is
had about ten million dollars in
it since its inception in two
thousand and five as Senator
Padilla mentioned for about a
six year period the law required
that we take before you all
applications before we could
make a loan that is not a very
business friendly way to do
things and as a result we ended
up with a higher risk program
the more comfortable operating
in two thousand eleven some
state funding was coming some
federal funding was coming in
and the legislature authorized
us on a short term basis to make
these loans without prior
approval by law that.
Coming back again and so it we
anticipate we may need to
partner with the economic
development department to help
provide an Avenue for deploying
some of that capital this law is
necessary for us to do that and
we ask for your support kind of
like extending the sunset for
four more years as a that's
right Mr chairman and and again
I was kind of jokingly saying
but I'm very serious when I say
the legislature maintains its
oversight authority on this on
the work that they're doing that
anybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
Anybody in opposition to this
bill nobody's on the zoom
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr we have a.
Seconded by Senator Hickey.
Discussion Senator gave us.
Mr Chairman Senator and
mistrustful just a real quick
question can you give me some
examples on on going funding
that's going for economic
development
I didn't know if there statewide
projects or certain areas only
that's a project Mr chairman we
have operated this program for
while the forty projects are
statewide they're definitely
more in rural areas and there
are in urban areas
over the pandemic we operated
emergency fund so many more of
medical providers healthcare
providers nonprofits were served
in that time period in other
instances it's been development
of hotels so it really runs the
gamut in terms of location and
types of projects and one thing
I can add to that the Mr
chairman and senator is when you
think about what NMFA did it
with the projects in the plaza
in Las Vegas I I'm I'm fairly
certain that's why the long
years of school of the Longmire
series actually selected Las
Vegas to be it's it's a although
they the the W. S. Montana which
I'm really pissed off about.
But the but they do that's all
that's another bill for the
denture but but but bottom line
is that the work that the NMFA
did in that area I operating
this funded this way has
promoted types of projects like
that and I assume that all your
projects are available online at
your website Mr Chairman I
believe that you can find that
information we certainly have
made we make by diverting due to
different periods during the
interim reports to our oversight
committee where we have reported
in full in the portfolio other
leveraged funds that we've
brought in and the status of the
underlying projects so they're
definitely available to the
public I think they're probably
one of more fuller of
representation of the
information
on the legislative website work
on that good question.
Anything else senator Gallegos
Mr Chairman center now thank you
Mr president thank the Kateri
will call the roll.
Senator gave us yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes your
honor roll Senator by the.
Thank you.
And yes seven zero vote and now
we're going to take up your
fostering connections
eligibility three twenty eight
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee is is you know
that other certain types
legislation that we all carry
that are very very close to us
and that we're very passionate
about you might you nice Mr
Chairman serve in the mortgage
finance authority oversight
committee and several years ago
you and I were at a conference
the Housing Authority comfort
housing summit excuse me and the
speaker spoke about the what
became that year's legislation
that I brought the fostering
connections act which took
fostering supports to the age of
twenty one for eligible adults
they're aging out of foster care
things like housing
transportation credit saying the
credit system help with the
judicial issue correctable
Issues one of our that the
individual might wind up in the
judicial system
transportation education
etcetera those supports are so
critical for some some young
folks I was one of these kids
I've disclosed to the
legislature of the a couple of
times at the age of eighteen we
all thought we knew everything
right was it turns out we don't
know anything and can you
imagine going into the world
eighteen and having zero
supports the lad on when you
have when you when you have an
issue coming out of foster care
so so bottom line is this is
something that I probably got it
done in one year we knew that we
were gonna have to come back to
make some corrections it's that
we have a walk or that we're
gonna correct today if you allow
us to do this today
and so essentially with the the
legislation does is it it it
extends the eligible youth that
that would be eligible for this
the way that we designed the
legislation originally we we
left out me just make sure I
have this right under the
current legislation that we
passed and was signed into law
those who turned eighteen while
in CYFD custody without being
adjudicated are not eligible for
the extended foster care program
and also those that turned
eighteen when we cut state
custody under a voluntary
placement agreement are also not
eligible so essentially what we
did when we when we created this
thing but wonderful thing the
state decided to do were the
seventeen state to do this we
actually have excluded
approximately ten.
Eligible adults every year and
that's what this legislation
really correction I'm just my co
sponsor my expert witness here
to say a few words and
introduced herself.
Greetings for the Mike right up
to your mouth right through your
mask yep.
Can is that right the pushing
the button to thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Sarah Fong I am a deputy
director with at CYFD protective
services division and I oversee
the fostering connections
program and everything Senator
Padilla just mention to all is
correct there was just a slight
oversight and who we are
allowing into the program and
about ten young people have
fallen through that gap and have
not been eligible for extended
foster care which includes
everything from having a an
attorney to be an advocate for
them oversight of the court
system and a requirement on the
part of CYFD to provide active
efforts to effectuate the
transition plan and help ensure
that these young people achieve
their goals and their
aspirations so what this really
does for the state of New Mexico
Mr chairman members of the
committee is you have about two
hundred fifty to three hundred
so that children a year old
excuse me help the L. the the
become eligible adults for this
purpose we defined back on the
legislation was passed if you
take a look at the New Mexico
and other states that do not
provide the supports seventy to
eighty percent of these a young
adults wind up with their own
children in foster care at some
point in their life when where
this is been implemented in the
seventeen state I love this
programs you can spike tell this
our it literally flips the
script on that and it reduces it
to you know really twenty or so
percent so that's a really
remarkable thing over time we'll
see a reduction in student in in
young people that will go into
the foster system as a result of
the work we're trying to do that
right now you have an amendment
we do have an amendment to the
and I'm gonna ask Miss my expert
to explain a little bit here but
essentially when we filed the
bill we we we we probably lost
track of one I think sentence
and it just kinda cascaded
across the bill so if you
wouldn't mind walking through.
Sure Mr chair members of the
committee
I apologize deeply and humbly
for my human mistake when that
director call need to finalize
what we're submitting I didn't
have it in front of me so we
were literally and figuratively
on the wrong on the different
pages and so are proposed
amendment actually isn't that
correct all of the language in
the E. the bill that was
introduced so that it does close
the gap allowing those two
populations to into the program.
Hold on a second he's going to
call the committee you got it is
that makes sense you got it for.
Senator guy.
Did you want to move the
amendment.
But let's let's let's get a move
they made up on the table so we
can deal with it.
Thank you okay.
Okay so we have a motion to deal
with the amendment is.
Senator mess this and did you
have your.
Okay when you get a look at
anything on the amendment up I
don't understand the last one
page everything else make sense
of page two eight sixteen.
The state.
After order.
But order already has a bracket
around.
You say insert a closing bracket
remove the closing bracket in
the line through for.
And then strike the underscored
language I I don't know what
you're getting with all of that
body how should it read what
should it reach right the the
that last the the fifteen
sixties subject to out of home
placement.
Thank you for going to get
through them.
Thank you Mr chair it should
read less subject to out of home
out of home placement and and
then it goes into the B..
That we don't need to make that
change it's already there.
You already got it got order or
is already taken out an item is
inserted so you're fine.
With that.
That right my misreading it.
But and let's see Mr chair.
Correct.
Your verification is not what's
intended the amendment is
correct.
Then you know it's a or would
you want not just
the phone.
Remove the closing bracket and
the line through for it okay so
you want to be or want to
restore forms okay.
It's basically that's a.
Mr chair and thank you which is
what limiting order.
Yes.
We're they will restore order
okay.
Every year out of orders and day
of the week.
Okay everybody understand the
amendment is there any
opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
bills have been amended and
we'll go process question Mr
chairman what's your process
question how does your come I've
never served on this committee
but I seem to be here quite a
bit but Mr chair do you do you
take amendments as they're
accepted and develop substitutes
on the way out result we have
brought that here not for this
one this is too simple right is
simple okay I just wanna make
sure system one of because you
know I don't want to get into
some big old Kerang when we go
to if it were it over several
pages and you drop paragraphs
and all that that this is pretty
simple thank you okay let's go
to the audience is there a
single person in the audience
was to speak on this bill and
well let's do a few of hens
who's in favor of this bill.
there's a lot of people do do
any of you want to speak on the
bill.
Does anybody oppose the bill in
the in.
Is there anybody on the zoom I
have it here okay Allison and to
cut you supported you want to
speak.
Yes I thank you
Mr chairman and steam members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak
I am Allison and cooking and
just nine legal director of
advocacy Inc a nonprofit
organization that's the largest
provider of legal services for
children in the foster care
system in New Mexico and on
behalf of our whole organization
and the nineteen attorneys who
contract with our agency and
urging you to please vote for SB
three twenty eight as amended
when I started this work most of
my clients who age out of foster
care honestly fell on their
faces I can't tell you how many
times I saw them panhandling or
being arrested within weeks of
emancipation we had failed them
since this program began in
twenty twenty my colleagues and
I saw a huge shift now they have
the chance to learn to be
independent with the safety net
in place with the help of this
program my clients are finishing
high school going to college and
daring to pursue their dreams
instead of just hoping to
survive I can on I can state
unequivocally that this is the
best program CYFD has
implemented and I am so proud to
collaborate with this program to
help our most vulnerable kids
the only shortcoming that it has
at this time is it is not
available to all young people
who have aged out of the system
or lost their support upon their
eighteenth birthday this bill
will address the NMAA loophole
that denies access to this
amazing program which requires a
court finding that the that the
young person it's been abused or
neglected there are many reasons
that this may not occur due to
court system delays they may age
out for for the trial was
completed or as in two cases I
have right now the parents are
both dead and having to request
a finding that a child was
neglected by their parents in
order to secure those resources
is heart breaking to a young
person who is already grieving
this bill will keep that from
happening I just hope someday we
can expand this even more but
passing this bill is the first
step thank you all very much for
the opportunity to speak thank
you Allison and then finally we
have Erica Sanchez from and then
can.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm just I'm just
with a hand in organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care to
improve their transition to
adulthood we work closely with
Senator Padilla and then
national passage of this
legislation and it was as was
mentioned this risen an
intended leaving out of this
this small group of young people
so we appreciate the Sanchez
this bill and hope that you will
pass it so these young people
whose cases have been
adjudicated can access this
program thank you good thank you
Eric of okay let's go to the
committee senator Maestas your
first up thank you Mr chairman
thank you center for their real
quick on
Your amendment
During the amendment but but I
support it but I just curious
online eight the item for on the
amendment it says any other
states foster care system and
you remove that was the reason
for removing that.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Maestas it's not necessary the
the ICPC the rules that apply.
Mr Chairman delay I see
my apologies interstate compact
on placement of children that
allows for states that have
programs to serve children
across state lines should any
children moved to New Mexico
that the I. C. C. P. is going to
come up the last bill of the
night to me.
Thank you Mr so essentially it's
a given.
That was the purpose language
and these those those those of
those foster kids are covered.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
Maestas but some Senator games
one final question is your
answer so in.
In the bill this is all language
but talks about the bill
benefiting fostering connections
program would those in custody
of the state of the tribe
through judicata in in that
language there or in actually
page three line eleven talks
about mental medical or
behavioral conditions are those
services and on or continue to
the new constituencies Mr
Chairman so yes they are.
I appreciate that I didn't I
just noticed that after he's
looking through the amendment
and I thought that was really
good piece that adds value to me
so Mr ideal thank you right I
had one quick question for you
does the department have the
budget to handle the expended
clientele Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman us so essentially this
allows the department to apply
for even more money to be
brought down from just checking
forty four forty four east so
you're funding it with four
eight excellent great okay no
more effectively to us to make a
motion a defense motion.
Wonderful Senator Hickey
seconded secretary will call the
roll as meant.
As a.
As amended yes that's what he
meant Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes Senators media's
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Sierra yes Senator to the penal
yes and your eloquence once
again has served you well
Senator you have a do pass.
Four seven zero vote thank you
Mr chair prejudiced I know
you're probably tired but can I
just recognize we brought every
expert that could possibly need
for the white and I have been
sitting here because I do want
to
be
here and I just want to thank
them for all the work that they
do because I love every single
one of these people and the hard
work that they do thank you for.
Thank you senator Senator
Rodriguez you have two bills
before us thank you.
Then you have to hard working
experts coming with you to thank
you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee
I have is the.
Anand is here he's the the CEO
or the director of the mortgage
finance authority in Albuquerque
and I actually have a very
simple bill before you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we pass this bill last
year a bill that correlates to
this in the about ninety nine
point nine percent but we just
want it the bill doesn't kick in
until twenty twenty four so we
were just going to move the date
for affordable housing to the
funds into the affordable
housing trust fund instead of
kicking in the funds are going
to put in there in twenty four
we we would like for them to get
can this year and there's and
that would move approximately
thirty seven to forty million
dollars immediately into
affordable housing money that
would be leveraged twenty nine
to one so we can bring get
leverage because of everything
you present this bill center
used to wonder sixteen do would
put it to rest twenty ninety
nine and I go to is the and what
is a cell thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members appreciate your support
the the Senator decide to cover
all the points I believe it's
been a very successful program
has provided over forty eight
that thousand households were
units since its existence and
not many examples that I can
give you across the state for
that's been very useful to stand
for questions Mr Chairman right
thank you the let's go to the
audience is there anyone here
besides John Anderson supports
this bill.
Okay yes Mr Robert also supports
a very good I'm glad anybody
opposed to this bill.
Anybody on zoom.
Who is it.
Diane **** would you like to
speak in support of this bill.
I'm sorry about that good
evening Mister chair members of
the committee I just want to in
order to just.
Past the you know I know time is
constrained I just want to make
it clear that the veterans
military family caucus strongly
supports the passage of this
bill and thank you so much
thanks great thank you David
members of the committee.
We have a motion for a do pass
seconded by Senator Hickey.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator virus yes ma'am Senator
Hickey yeah Senator Ingle center
my SS.
Senator McKenna yes centers
maintenance center city of
office yes Senator Tallman
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
congratulations Senator your
first bill passes on a seven
zero vote thank you very much
miss Susie thanks for the
committee that will go to school
based health center thank you Mr
chairman and this one here is
yeah I have a are you are you a
lamb with me she is a policy
director for the department of
health and we have Nancy
Rodriguez who is very confused
not my call at all I wish I was
worker look like or to but
anyway she's the director of the
school based health centers and
then of course we have Kristin
and I have to pronounce your
name Kristin over or rest of it
yes and you are the clinical
operations manager for the
department of health in just in
a not show Mr chairman members
of the committee what we're
trying to do is put.
The school based health centers
into statute finally caught a
fine and to where we know they
exist they can be obliterated
any time without having any
protection in the statute we're
not changing anything good that
they do we're merely saying they
they really need to be in
statute and so we know that they
provide lots of services I could
go on and on throughout New
Mexico to our students and so
that's really been a not sure
what we're trying to do Mr
Graham thank you senator do you
want to say anything yeah I just
just a minute I use the Mike
okay.
Thank you for sharing question
yeah thank you Mr chair can you
hear me I don't think it's
working just to just to keep it
down.
Mr chair can you hear me OK so
Mister chair members of the
committee I think that it's
important just to start with
Clovis release just stating
clearly what the policy purpose
of this bill is this bill is
acknowledging school based
health centers as a critical
access point for primary care
and behavioral health for
children across the state and
many different communities the
delay to supported school based
health centers and all of their
variety for around twenty five
years and although students
really rely heavily on school
based health centers as Senator
Rodriguez just stated they are
not codified in law
this bill is really about
securing them in statute for
their sustainability into the
future it's also about
recognising the diversity of our
New Mexico communities and
offering to them not mandating
to them the opportunity to build
school based health centers in
their their communities
according to their local needs
this bill is very simply
establishing and protecting them
in law the D. O. H. will
continue to assist any local
communities that require or ask
for any kind of technical
assistance epidemiological data
so that they can make informed
decisions about the services
that they might want to find in
their school based health
centers so that they can make
informed decisions and that's
the extent of the bill we would
love your support and stand for
any questions that you might
have okay did you want to say
anything that's this Senator day
as a sub.
We'll just point to thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee I'll just point you to
some handouts that we provided
it but particularly given the
lateness of the hour we don't
have a lot of folks here in
person but we did do a sign on
letter for this bill that has
forty over forty five sign on so
want to point you to that and
also point you to the fact that
this model is a national
movement so we have a map that
shows which states across the
country have the sort of
codification and this sort of
investment and I'm here to help
answer any questions you may
have thank you Kristin did you
want to add anything.
Yes done doing here You minuses.
Push the button thank you know I
can just be here to answer
questions right let's go to the
audience is there anyone here
who was to speak in support of
this bill.
Okay the will take you picked
you pick three area or.
I can't think of a model.
Okay.
Start with.
The store was doing then we'll
go to a list and then we'll go
to.
The man in the back we need one
male voice is.
Good.
Please come use the microphone
the.
Tentatively verified thanks for
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think you Mr
chairman members of committee
Julie on a coop with Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains we've worked really
closely with the school based
health centers and specifically
the other Nancy Rodriguez for
many years we working coalition
together we're really thrilled
that school based health centers
are taking this next moved we're
also thrilled that their budget
is increasing and why this is
important to Planned Parenthood
of the Rocky Mountains is
because we really feel like
young people need to have access
to medically accurate care when
they need it thank you Mr
chairman thank you Julian.
Yes the Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam I did I.
Lost my mind.
Members of.
Okay.
Chair members of the committee
Linda Siegel and I'm here
Representative the school based
health plans but I'm also here
for the nurse practitioners and
nurse practitioners are the
primary providers in these
clinics and they're they're
essential to helping our school
children just a little quick
personal note in the eighties
Iran are sort of comprehensive
nonprofit and we started the
first school based health clinic
and for Santa Fe public schools
great good thank you Linda.
That finally.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm great frosted
with the public education
department and we strongly
support this bill of the Public
Education Department recognizes
the importance of health on
academic outcomes for a host of
reasons not to mention one.
Small way that day improve
support for students academic
outcomes is attendance when
they're able to receive services
at the school directly then they
don't have to leave the school
site in order to to receive
services and that saves a lot of
time and provides access for the
students as well so we we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward and we we whole
heartedly supported and and hope
that you all do as well great
thank you Mr frost we have
several people who say who are
under the the zoom I'm just
gonna read off the names given
the late hour
mad props to the under a the
physician's assistant in in el
Centro in Las Vegas basically
meadows so I'm not sure she is
but probably well known to you
all and Melissa Candelaria all
signed up to speak on this bill
will go to the committee and
we'll start with Senator guys
with thank you Mr chairman thank
you ladies.
And senator just Google a
question so in the discussion
you're talking about this isn't
mandate put in offering to
schools is that correct.
Mr chair Senator great because
that is correct so in and I
appreciate that
I'm just curious because in my
alerted shows that PED and and
school board association are
part of the people are for this
in in your handout it's is
community driven are any of the.
Offerings in the so so in my
district Hobbs and Lovington
both have
school based clinics so are they
mandated to do certain things or
is it totally community during
print.
that's your answer that please.
Then so it it is Community dress
sorry Mr chair and senator it is
community driven the way the
school based health center
services are determined is that
the individual medical operator
of the school based health
center in your case normally
hospital negotiate the
memorandum of understanding with
the school district and they
determine which services are
provided and then that medical
operator may discuss with the
school district whether they
want to apply for department of
health contractual dollars and
then they would have contractual
obligations associated with that
at present time orally hospital
does not contract with the O. H.
so they do not go through those
contractual obligations but they
do have an MO you with the
school district that determines
which services they provide and
actually that's a good example
of how things are different
because Hobbs and Lovington
though they have the same
operator offer different
services at those sites Mr
Chairman Sen gentle lady so as
long as they don't contract they
have.
Options once a contract then
they have to take the state's
options on services is that what
I understand.
Mr chair and senator di it goes
So the D. O. H. approach to this
also does not mandate services
what we are going to do is
incentivise Services so we are
here to for those that are
interested those local
communities that are interested
and utilizing this model they
can receive funding that they
are not obligated to or mandated
to provide certain services what
we're hoping to do is actually
set up our fund because we
already have a base increase our
base budget for this purpose
we've been doing this for twenty
five years we're not doing
anything now but we would like
to start establishing the fund
in a way that incentivizes of
services some communities don't
have access to certain.
don't want all the services so
in that sense they are award
with the pandemic on what
they're providing but nothing is
mandated.
I think that Mr Chairman.
Center and ladies of so and and
my other question was the others
Planned Parenthood New Mexico
Center for law in my thought
we're can be pushing abortion
down at that level and so I
appreciate that you're going to
be community driven because our
community stands against that so
I appreciate the tell I don't
mean that from that I just like
the Opry that you guys gonna let
the community drive that
dialogue Mr I yield.
Mr chair if I may I want to make
a clarification that school
based health centers are
federally prohibited from
providing abortion care period I
think status to put thank you.
Senator Tallman followed by
Senator McKenna.
The.
Thank you Mr thank you
secretary.
During this bill says here
Georgia.
Point five million and three
million.
Colorado or again.
Thirty million.
The the.
Michigan the the spending forty.
Seven million total but there is
a drawing down eighteen million
Medicaid match going down in
Medicaid.
I think regions.
And senator to to hold the
button to yeah
can you hear me now no and no so
it's a push that we got better
yeah thank you keep it down like
that with your fingers thank you
but.
Mr chair Senator Tallman we do
drive down Medicaid we have an
administrative claim that we get
to our office that is under the
general fund every general fund
dollar we get we can draw down
in Medicaid administrative
claiming that ends up being
roughly thirty cents on the
dollar so having an
administrative claim increases
the our our overall funding and
helps support the overall
offices one at adolescent
health.
Basis in addition to the three
million dollars this is here
yes.
How much would you order.
Health it's already I mean that
yeah through school.
Representative fish.
Efficient funding.
to have a school based health
center every school in the rise
of every screw that would want
one.
need one.
What would it cost Mr chair I
think that we would have to do
the math on on that to be honest
but the fact is here.
Every school that wants one is
that getting funded.
That correct okay.
Thank you thank you thank you
did you need additional response
meta we can try that here
because of the funding is
already at the department of
health within their budget so
they estimate they they go
throughout the year based on not
only history but what they for
C. coming and that's a request
they always make and and have
money in their budget so that's
why we don't have as an
appropriations bill yes we just
made it just a strictly just in
simply codify this into statute
yeah.
Did you need any more for me.
done thank you Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
said Rodriguez and I'm trying to
remember I had a conversation
with a provider last year and I
believe she said and I.
I think she was talking about
our state.
Because we were talking about
school nurses and.
I was
sharing with her how I had one
it was fantastic and I think she
said that our our nurses or that
the providers at the.
The clinics in New Mexico there
They're being stretched then
because they're having to cover
more than one or even two
schools and so I'm wondering is
that accurate and how will this
possibly health it if it is
accurate.
Thank you for the question
Senator McKenna.
Mr chair and members of the
committee school nursing is
separate from school based
health centers and it is true
that we have not enough it's a
school nurses statewide
school based health centers
sometimes exist in in schools
where a school nurse isn't but
they do have separate functions
and we we could use more health
care all through schools my
opinion.
As a follow up chairman and
senator so what is the accurate
right I mean how many.
We've got one nurse and here she
is covering approximately how
many schools do you know that
Senator McKenna and Mr chair Mr
chairman members of the
committee yes I I it depends on
the community so there are
about.
Roughly five hundred school
nurses statewide and over a
thousand school campuses.
Well okay.
great thank you chairman and
thank you center thank you
because that's something we
could.
Think about you and how to
address it right okay thank you
we get when you factor more
nurses we could do a lot of
different having.
Senator Hickey you're next.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator and experts for bringing
this forward I could go on and
on about this is that DA why
don't we have a state nurse in
every school and a nurse
practitioner in every high
school providing these services
it and so what I'm gonna do is
requests that over the interim
in the summer Mr chair
that we up here about a plan of
what that would look like
actually put it on paper kind of
costed out and and with with
with the again nurse
practitioner care certainly and
and the high schools maybe even
in the middle schools and nurses
and in the elementary schools
this is so fundamental to to
health care and you know we're
we're in a crisis we heard about
the fentanyl today I mean is
there's there is so much need
and demand we have to do this is
just basic this is air
and so what I would like to see
is the department of health
coming with the plan I'd be
happy to help sponsor it next
year to put this in place and
get it funded it because it will
save so much money for the state
if we do this that we spent in
other would become chronic
diseases and in other areas but
the most important reason is the
valuable health of our children
is at stake and we have to
address that and we we can't say
oh no that's and I think this is
elementary this is basic this is
foundational and I hope and look
forward to working with you you
don't have to comment on it it's
just been opportunity for me to
say I'd like to go for the
essentials with the diagnosis
quick treating symptoms let's go
for the disease diseases lack of
care in nurses in the schools
and we have to address it thank
you for the opportunity to up.
This is just a fundamental so I
I can't keep quiet about thank
you so much for them before we
go to Senator Sedillo Lopez I'll
just mention that because tari
the the head of the social work
association for New Mexico is
online and she supports the bill
to so I Senator Sedillo Lopez
you're next and then Senator
Maestas thank you this is such
an important bill thank you
senator for bringing it and
thank you everyone for for
working on it so hard
Hello and if I just this before
in another committee I apologize
but we saw problems with
children.
Youth who didn't want their
parents to know about the
consultation and how does the do
the school clinics protect their
privacy in that in that the.
This circumstance.
Or does it vary from clinic to
clinic or.
Schoolbased health centers sorry
Mr chair and then Senator
Schoolbased health centers
follow the same New Mexico state
laws on consent and
confidentiality that every other
clinic does so they're no
different in that respect in
terms of providing that service
to young people in accordance
with the law one of the things
that school based health centers
do have in terms of a difference
with other clinics is if a
school based health center takes
funding from the department of
health they can turn no child
away so it's an increased level
of access for children that
other clinics do not have.
Mr chair that is really
wonderful but what the what we
got hung up on and decide
because you're accepting
Medicaid dollars Sir you do I
assume you accept insurance as
well.
Is the explanation of benefits
the go to the parents Mr Mr
chair so is that is that a
problem and is there a way to
address it.
Mr chair and Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
We have a relationship with a
really close relationship with
HSD and we're really fortunate
to to have that and are able to
work with them to be able to
suppress the bees for every
student to has medic.
for students who have commercial
insurances which are those that
very is for commercial
insurances are a little more
difficult to this is a little
more difficult to work with so
many commercial insurances most
of those students would be seen
again regardless of their
ability to pay but in but to
protect the confidentiality they
they mostly get seating free of
charge.
Excellent excellent on that
point Senator Hickey sorry
the insurance companies have to
have to.
Send the E. OB to the family but
if they don't if they don't bill
the insurance company if you
don't bill the insurance company
and they do not have but again
one of the things I want to look
at because I'm not sure how much
of this is federal law E. obi's
what's into recess self insured
not self insured commercial you
you for a two week me to realize
that one of the things thank you
Mr chair for getting the bill
passed in rules today of
staffing the L. HHS that is one
of the things we need to look
into in case we can do any state
law to protect that
confidentiality were E. obi's
would otherwise have to go out
thank you the the Senator
Sedillo plan thank you I I just
wanted to say that for many
communities this is that the sum
total of their health care so
I'm really excited to vote for
this bill and when you're ready
for a motion Mr chair please
Senator must disclose next.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator reassess want to echo
the sentiments and proud to
support this bill it it's like
an.
No brainer is as a mention it
talks about.
Within the boundaries of the
school campus or within safe
walking distance and I could I
can visualize they can lots near
the how this the schools in my
district but just quick question
I know that health care means a
lot more to be some folks and
others how how with this how do
you think this would benefit
particularly LGBTQ students here
in New Mexico.
We have some.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
chairman Senator will be right
with sure thank you Mr chair and
thank you senator my Estes for
your support so schoolbased
health centers the services that
they provide very based on the
relationship with the medical
entity and the the school
district but what is universal
about the model is the
integration of primary care and
behavioral health care in
behavioural health care is one
of the largest number of
services the school based health
centers provide and many
students in the LGBTQ community
maybe seeking behavioral health
care services and many school
based health centers have
official safe space of
accreditation through the state
public education department and
find individual counseling to
students in that community the
suicidality right in that
community is very high so school
based health centers in this is
anecdotal we don't have Survey
data on this but from our
experience as an organization
school based health centers take
that very seriously and make
sure that they're providing
behavioural health services to
that community thank you Mr
chairman thank senator recently
the so.
Two thousand fourteen was
terminated his house bill one
seventy three which was at home
based health center for west
mesa high school so I got kind
of run out run out on a rail
here but it was but it's it's
with my track record Mr chair
every bill I do becomes a
reality within the within the
preceding decades.
Senator Candelaria Aaron PED
yeah so mess of my bills.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes I move to pass seven
seconded by three people versus
Tallman.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator DiSanto us like to
explain Michael Senator Hickey
yeah.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna.
Senators BT's Senator Lopez yes
Senator AUMENT yes center if you
know yes.
Congratulations you Mr chairman
members of the committee Senator
Gallegos to explains the Mr
chairman thank you sent thank
you senator I hope to change my
vote on the floor but being a
the only legislator still on
school board I don't trust
government so we'll see how this
works thank you by a vote of six
in the affirmative one of the
negative you have to do best and
the last bill of the night will
be chaired by Senator Tolman and
I will presented on the
interstate compact for the
placement of children.
Yeah.
The three.
We get to it in better.
Those.
This is actually a for experts.
Two more.
Mr chairman I I held this bill
for the end because we wanted to
have some audience and and all
the experts made up.
So Mister chairman what you have
before you is not a new compact
we had an interstate compact on
the placement of children for
probably forty fifty years I
remember when I was a social
worker with the department for
the predecessor to the
department which was the Health
and Human Services Department
that we've placed children using
the interstate compact it was a
way in which the child from
Kentucky could could come in and
be placed with a foster family
or kinship the family here in
the state and vice versa New
Mexico kids using the compact we
would contact the agency in
Arkansas or Kentucky or wherever
and then they would do a home
study and call back and say yes
fine this is a good family you
can send the child there that's
what the the the the for years
that's what the compact been
this no updates the compact and
I'll let my experts explain how
it does that.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer actually and I
I work for the CYFD protective
services division as a deputy
director.
so yes we are here today to talk
about the interstate compact on
the placement of children or we
call it ICPC.
The current ICPC was drafted in
nineteen sixty and enacted in
all states the district of
Columbia and the U. S. Virgin
Islands it is the only public
law in existence to ensure that
children across state lines for
foster care or adoption.
Our place with persons who are
safe suitable and able provide
proper care.
It also assigns legal and
financial responsibility and
responsibility for supervision
and the provision of services as
senator Ortiz Y. Pino explained
an example of this is if in New
Mexico if New Mexico needs to
send a foster youth out of state
to a family member in Colorado.
Colorado would have to conduct a
home study provide ongoing
supervision provides support
services to the family and will
also send regular reports back
to New Mexico and to the court.
This ICPC bills will help
continue to support many
children and you.
Currently in New Mexico we have
a hundred and thirty six
children who are in this state
placement.
So only fourteen of those are
placed in treatment facilities
so the majority of those
children are placed with
relatives or pre adoptive
placements essentially finding
their forever home.
On a yearly average New Mexico
receives about two hundred
requests from other states
needing to place children in our
state.
And we sent out about the same
amount of requests to the other
states.
The states recognize that the
current ICPC is outdated and
there are many problems with the
compact as it is currently
written and implemented there
are concerns about the
timeliness of the ICPC process
causing unnecessary delays.
It has an outdated
administrative process and
there's a lack of accountability
or provisions to adequately
address violations of the ICPC.
And so with this over time it
because the rules and procedures
to not be widely followed or
understood.
The compact was written before
the interstate highway system
and long before the computer and
internet technology
revolutionized the way we live.
Recognizing these issues the
American public Human Services
association or act that adopted
a policy resolution directing a
re write of the ICPC.
Abscess and assembled a
development and drafting team
composed of a diverse group of
state Human Services
administrators state and local
welfare directors.
Have to administrators and
representatives from a broad and
diverse group of national
organizations.
When I say broad and diverse
group group that includes the US
department of health and Human
Services administration for
children and families.
And chilled the children's
bureau the child welfare league
of America national casa the
court appointed pointed special
advocates program American
academy of adoption attorneys
American Bar Association and the
list goes on but it does include
family court judges and most
importantly the national Indian
child welfare association.
So you can see that it was a
very thoughtful and thorough
process absent allowed time for
reviews and comments from the
states and stakeholders before
finalizing the new ICPC.
So it's important that we passed
Senate bill three fourteen
because we want New Mexico to be
one of the first thirty five
states to enact the new ICPC.
Only the first thirty five
states will be able to be part
of the interstate commission the
first thirty five states will
have a seat at the rulemaking
table.
Not only will we have a seat but
we will be involved and have a
state regarding rules and
procedures.
R. I. C. P. C. staff some are
some are here with us today
participate in on going national
ICPC meeting.
All states have expressed
intentions of moving forward
with the new ICPC compact so far
fifteen states have adopted or
enacted the new ICPC.
One state currently Oregon is in
their legislative process and
others have started their
internal process to move
forward.
So today I ask that you vote to
pass Senate bill three fifteen
so New Mexico can be one of the
first thirty five states and
have a state and something that
affects so many of New Mexico
children.
Thank you thank you did you want
to say anything about all the
all the really very my name is
Amanda Romero I'm the inspector
general for the children youth
and families department I'll be
really brief because the start
of of the covered it really well
so Mister chair members of the
committee the only thing I'll
add is there are gaps in the
current ICPC language as it
stands because it was written
just so very long ago and those
gaps have been filled in by each
individual state in their own
ways and unfortunately because
each state has taken it upon
themselves to fill in those gaps
now you know New Mexico's doing
it one way Colorado's you
another Texas is doing another
and so now they're they're in
construe it in a and so if they
is doing it in a way where they
don't align anymore and so what
this new ICPC does is it creates
this interstate commission which
we really want to be part of it
is Mr to that said so we have to
be one of these first thirty
five states to enact it to be a
come of voting member of this
commission.
and so that's why it's really
urgent that we get this past now
because states are really taking
an active effort to to make this
happens because everyone wants
to be a voting member of this so
this fills in a lot of those
gaps most notably the one that
that all state most notably
there's other gaps but most
notably is that it addresses a
gap where biological parents are
concerned as you know you know
family separate that moves
across state lines and right now
there's a gap in how different
states cover whether or not and
I see PC's even completed when a
child maybe shifted from foster
care here in New Mexico to a
biological dad see in Tennessee
And whether or not the Tennessee
would even require an ICPC home
study to be done so that's a
huge gap that needs filling and
and this would cover that and Mr
chair members of twenty thank
you for allowing me to speak and
we will stand for questions.
I believe there's others here
who could answer questions Mr
chairman if you if you have any.
Thank you for the presentation
that the I think all of us can
agree with certain incentives to
be this needs to be done so
anyone in the audience in
opposition to this bill.
Hearing anyone in support.
We'll take.
Two for the side and one for
this.
I think we're all Mr chair.
Thank you for this market nobody
wants to come in yeah.
So you you speak for all.
We have a one online.
The once the speaker just be
recognized.
Hi this is Allison and cockiness
again from advocacy incomes
going to keep it quick and say
this is a really important step
for us to have a voice in the
ICPC process so I'm just gonna
ask that you all are going to do
passed so that we can actually
be part of the development of
this new incarnation of the ICPC
because it is a system and it is
a set of laws and rules that we
use regularly and does make a
difference for kids here thank
you.
Thank you is this the only
percent times of.
Okay with that will open up to
members of the committee we have
it's in center with Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you Mr chair this is
excellent we need to pass it
tonight of the I'm gonna vote
for it discussing this question
because it's in the FIR and I
don't know if you are planning
to deal with it or help thank
you.
as I said I'm I'm voting for
this so don't get stressed by
the question at all but the FIR
said that there seems to be a
possible or possible
inconsistency with state law.
In that of one point four dash
one point four one dash one one.
Then New Mexico prohibits any
contractor agreement from
containing a provision requiring
the state to indemnify a
contractor and then so the
requirement in the bill article
ten do providing immunity
defense and indemnification
would violates it's unclear
whether it would violate state
law and be in an enforceable
read the next paragraph okay the
compact covers both both
children were in foster care in
children.
I'm reading of the FIR yeah
that's what I'm reading too so
this is CYFD is response to that
CYFD makes it clear the cut that
comes both children in foster
care children involved in
juvenile justice system.
The job the contact is not cover
children I don't think that it
necessarily addresses the
question I see what you're
saying where you're saying for
maybe does just explain it to me
because.
Immunity defense and
indemnification would be to any
entity that we're dealing with
in the contact right the
department is the only Mr
chairman and senator as I as I
read that the department said
they are the ones who have legal
custody of all the children.
That's right and and the contact
requires that we indemnify them
if they screw up or if there
isn't something to indemnify.
This is that maybe okay just
explain it to me and I file set
up.
No problem Mr chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez so I did take a
look at this that have of one
point four point.
Title one chapter four part one
open here on my I pad I did want
to take an extra look at it so
this
is it's the procurement code
that's what we're looking at
here right so obviously what
that pertains to is when the
government as you know you know
I please don't take this is to
be condescending in anyway I
don't yeah as you know what what
that relates to is when the
government goes out through the
procurement process process go
through an RFP or through a sole
source and if your prayers
Services with another entity
that's what this is doing the
bill and on page twenty seven
just in case you want to check
out the language there this is
giving the interstate commission
staff director and its employees
immunity from suit and
liability.
so I the reason I don't think
that that one point four point
one at FEC apply it because
they're not being contracted for
services in the state of New
Mexico they're being
Created through the federal law
not.
That we're adopting yes however
we're not contracting with them
we're just becoming a one vote
on the.
Thirty five voting commission so
they won't really be taken any
action here the actions are
going to be between the sending
states in the receiving states
which will be one or the other
depending on you know which
direction the child is traveling
and it's so I can't imagine any
situation where the interstate
commission staff director or
employees would even be taken
any action in New Mexico.
Thank you I really appreciate
that I think you're gonna have
to be very clear with Judiciary
because I I agree with you that
that that's a real powerful and
strong argument
But the AG's office doesn't
think it's clear.
And.
For Dennis less availability I
think one way of looking at it
is the the procurement card
quarter is talking about
contracts.
And this provision is talking
about towards the amount fees
and.
So that would not be necessarily
waived.
If there was a you know what I
mean.
If there was a contract issue
that came up.
I mean.
Sorry Mr chairman and senator
this is exactly the issue that
the they've Judiciary Committee
is hung up every come back for
it absolutely this is a compact
we've had for forty for sixty
years.
And why they would raise that
issue now we've already had this
there's never been a suit
decision is never come up but
you know for sure they're going
to raise exactly which is what I
want to work it out now and
really well there's nothing
there's nothing to work out I Mr
chairman I I don't know what
what we can say I mean you I
have beaten my hat now there is
a bill Senator Marian Matthews
is work at a bill that tries to
make clear that all the compact
alright contract that we're
we're dealing with something
different here this is an
agreement among the state's a
multi party agreement it's not a
contract is just the the shared
process for for having kids move
back and forth in our case and
they apparently they work that
out with the judiciary chairman
and vice vice chairman but
Senator Ivey Soto who usually
races issue issue there and so
we all we can do is run up the
flagpole CEO for guests before
they can start firing thank you
Mr Mr chair the the only I saw
it and I said oh no because I
did have a discussion with
Judiciary members who were
saying words like although it's
giving too much away of our
sovereignty you know using using
words that I think my.
I'm voting for this I support
this I don't even see this is an
issue really because I think you
can easily distinguish them but
I'm just wanted to hear what
would be said and and how maybe
I don't know strategize to make
sure the judiciary's understands
that this is by the state's oil
and seeking to participate and
it's also very important that we
be part of the thirty five and
that they shouldn't get hung up
on on the internet because
that's.
For some reason that bother
them.
And.
I think it's key to the bill I
don't think you can strike it
was going to chair next this the
next up that that Mister
chairman Senator that's exactly
where Marian Matthews
Representative Marian Matthews
is trying to work something out
because there are like eight
different compacts backed up in
the four Judiciary.
Who always says is exactly the
same that we can't give up our
sovereignty we can't let people
not be sued by us will in none
of these instances.
Is there any point in suing the
compact I mean the compact this
is a way of organizing the
different states so they can
work together did did nothing to
sue their.
Well lawyers can see let the
whole I.
I really appreciate the
explanation and I hope that
Marian Matthews.
A bill succeeds if you know
however however results this but
you're going forward probably
before that bill comes over from
the house and I just hope we can
work it out and anything I can
do to help
I'm happy to do it I I agree but
those words about.
And I thought I thought your
responses very good thank you.
Okay anyone else would and
committee with questions.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ortiz please so this is
This reminds me of kind of like
the uniform law commission
that's which is a national
organization which is over a
century old what does state law.
And and hopes everyone adopts it
right in other words this this
decision this is under the
purview of Congress and so it
might understand that section
one.
Is the same language that that
is being floated and and and all
the other states are many
states.
Mister chairman Senator Maestas
yes you're exactly correct so
section one is the language that
was developed by all of the
stakeholders that research with
mentioned and so all of those
stakeholders came together
crosses Nichola everyone came
together and developed section
one and that so yes in order for
us to be at the table we we
can't make any substantive
changes to section one that has
remained the same because in
order to of course to have a
compact there needs to be in the
need of the money from all the
parties to that.
No thank you action and so
there's so that's that tension.
I get up to to serve on the
uniform law commission a couple
years back and
It's it's just like of.
The.
Uniform commercial code of you
don't realize how many acts in
our statutes are uniform
statewide and it just
It just makes things live all
echo a lot easier and makes it
easier to practice live because
you you you know you don't have
to.
You don't have to read your act.
In particular you just are
familiar with that with the
general.
The general action so we did
this with the protective orders
I mean there's other examples in
which we've done this.
So I think I might.
Druthers to award here there I
mean it's it's something that.
I believe needs to be it needs
to happen and and the the
contingent affected is pretty
interesting it goes into effect
on that thirty fifth state has a
has an active this very same
stature thank you Mr.
We have a a motion and a second
from the Santo more miles has
this.
please call the roll Senator
