We also listen to um, I think
you can talk.
About many, many different
issues that deal with.
Um, the public.
But we also look at issues uh
with uh healthcare authority,
the Department of Health,
Children, Youth and Families
Department and sometimes the
list grows, but we'll see that
as session continues to unfold.
Uh, what we'll start with though
today is so that we can.
Um, I'll listen a little bit to
our committee members.
Um, I'd ask each of the
committee members to please
introduce yourself, a little bit
something about you.
Um, and then we'll go to our,
our team, our staff.
That each one of you have an
opportunity to introduce
yourself also, both um minority
and majority.
And then um I'll have a few more
particulars and guidance as to
um how I see fit for the
committee to run.
Yeah, so I'll start with ladies
first, Senator Nava.
Thank you, Madam chair.
Good afternoon, I guess, yes,
afternoon, afternoon. Uh, good
afternoon, everyone. I am Cindy
Nava and I proudly represent
Senate District 9, which
encompasses.
Uh, Sandoval County as well as
Bernalillo County, and I
Started my advocacy time in this
exact room in 2005, advocating
for the Senate Bill 582, which
allowed undocumented students
who have access to the New
Mexico Lottery scholarship.
So to say that this is ironic,
uh, is an understatement, but I
am extremely proud to be on
Spack. I'm very proud to.
Join my colleagues here and.
Senator Lopez, thank you for
your leadership, uh, I, this is
not a new place for many of us,
but I know that representation
matters, and I know that our
voices matter and I am deeply
passionate and committed about
healthcare access, um, and I
hope that I can represent my
constituents at the best of my
ability, always having open
communication and dialogue and
ensuring that we're working
across the aisle. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, we'll go with Senator Pinto,
we're introducing ourselves, so
you please.
Thank you Madam Chairman to turn
out here, um.
And this is a different
committee room for me, um.
Wandering around where I needed
to be. But this will be my first
turn into back.
Me from Senate education.
And uh chair of Indian Cultural
Affairs.
Great to be here and great to
see you all. Thank you, Ma.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Gowaihapa. Good afternoon,
everyone.
Um, I'm Senator Angel Harley and
I represent Senate District 30.
I live right in the heart of
that in the blo of Ama, so I'm a
citizen of the pueblo of Laguna
and a descendant of the Navajo
Nation and the Zuni Pablo, so
I've joked.
Um, I'm almost every single in
my community if it's not a
pueblo would adopt me.
Um, it's an honor to be here
with all of you today. Thank you
for coming and, and advocating
and this is an issue that is
very close to my heart, um,
public safety, public health.
I'm honored to just be here and
represent in a space where, um,
my community.
are overrepresented in a lot of
the data and underserved in a
lot of ways. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Serio Lopez.
Thank you Madam Chair. um, I
have to comment on.
The red that the women seem to
be wearing on this side. I know
it's lobo day, but I didn't even
remember it was Lovo day, so I'm
glad that I uh I wore red. The
other thing I need to comment on
is.
The diversity of this committee
on this side of the aisle, uh,
I've never been in a committee
with basically all the women are
women of color.
This, this is amazing.
Um, so I just really felt the
need to, to talk about how
special that is for me.
Um, so my name is Antoinette
Sadi Lopez. I represent District
16, which is the university
area.
Both um
The
The basically a southeast and
the northeast part of the
university area. And now after
redistricting, it includes the
base as well. Um, I've been on
this committee for 6 years, and
I'm passionate about this stuff.
So I'm glad to be here.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Martin Hickey, um, I'm
not in red, uh, I'm in white
with a lot of my colleagues
today, uh, also just uh wanted
to prove to you that I really
did was a real doctor at one
time in my life.
And um as I said this morning,
though, you don't want to stop
me in the hallway. I could be
dangerous.
But um uh after uh starting New
Mexico Health Connections and
true healthy Obama healthcare
plan after 8 years, I retired
and uh having been up here and
testifying in a number of bills.
I thought that I could hopefully
bring some experience, uh, uh,
to the legislature on healthcare
and, and the workings of it and
hopefully how we can improve it.
So I'm honored to be once again
a member of this committee, and
I look forward to all the bills,
the debates, the finances and
everything else that goes on and
uh um don't ask me to defend the
current healthcare system. It's
a a uh evolution of uh good
tension's gone, uh.
Not thought through very well
and and uh we've got kind of the
mess we have today, but part of
what we're doing is solving some
of that and mostly for the
people of New Mexico and their
health and their care, and so in
that role, uh, I'm glad to bring
my experience and my passion for
integrity of being healthy.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and we'll
come here to the side, Senator
Scott.
You.
Uh, this, I'm Larry Scott.
State senator from District 42,
southeast corner of the state.
Mm
Including portions of the
communities of Hobbs.
Artesia and Carlsbad.
I spent 10 years and they
House of Representatives.
And in all 10 of those years.
My assignment.
Where an energy and tax.
So health is a new rodeo for me.
And I'll look forward to the
conversations.
And learning a lot.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A state
Senator David Gallegos, I'm from
Eddie and Lee County.
Oh we
Actually used to office against
next to each other.
Um, in Lee County, uh, I was in
the house for 8 years. This is
my 5th year in Sack.
Uh, always willing to learn.
Not a doctor and don't play one
on TV.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Boone. Madam
Chair, members of the committee
and guest, uh, my name's Pat
Boone, um.
state senator from District 27
out on the eastern plains.
Uh, represent parts of.
Chavis and Curry
And Lee
Have all at Dubaca County and
then my home county, Roosevelt
County, which I get my mail.
At a little town called Elita
and uh.
I'm, I'm greatly interested in,
in, uh, the works of the, uh
Health and Public Affairs
Committee and I look forward to
working with these people and
and with these good people and
and learning something new.
I'm glad to be here. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Block. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and uh I want to welcome you
back from, uh, your, your
hospital stay, you look, uh, you
look amazing, by the way, after
going through what you went
through, so, uh, welcome back
and uh I wish you the best on
your recovery from here on out.
Uh, my name's uh Jay Block,
Senate District 12, basically,
uh, a good portion of Rio Rancho
in Northwest Albuquerque and uh
freshman senator, I was a county
commissioner in Sandoval for 8
years before that, and before
that, I
was um retired Air Force
Lieutenant Colonel, um, combat
veteran Afghanistan. I was a
nuclear launch officer for the
country, pulling nuclear alert.
Um, my private business, I'm a
nuclear weapons operations
expert.
And I'm very excited, Madam
Chair, to have this committee.
This is my number one choice, by
the way, and there's a couple of
reasons why, um, on the
professional side I have 2
hospitals in my district, Rust
and uh Lovelace in Northwest
Albuquerque by Smith's, which is
a great place to shop, by the
way.
And the other reason is to, um,
on the personal note, and I'll
talk about it in here from time
to time.
His mental health has affected
me personally, uh, being
diagnosed with PTSD coming back
from, from Afghanistan. So I'm
very open about that if you
wanna ask me about it
personally, publicly, I'll be
more than happy to tell you my
story.
Might be a little emotional
sometimes, but that's OK. You
gotta get some.
You got to get it out there.
The other reason why this is
important to me is because I
grew up.
Uh, back east in Manchester, New
Hampshire in a drug-infested
house.
My mother was a uh.
A drug addict, alcoholic, and uh
I grew up around that, so the
substance abuse and the mental
health is near and dear to my
heart, and I look forward to
working with the committee
because
Um, and lastly, I'll just say as
a pro-life guy, I believe that
these people that are on the
street or having mental health
issues or substance abuse. They
have value and they deserve an
opportunity as best that we can
give them.
So I'm excited to be here and to
work with you, uh, on both sides
of the aisle and uh Madam Chair,
I, I wish you all the best and
um I wish you a speedy, speedy
recovery, and thank you for
being here and thank you for
leading this committee. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Black.
Um, we're going out to our
committee secretary.
Ms. Flores?
Hi everybody, um, my name is
Cecilia Flores, and I'm the
committee secretary. This is my
3rd year serving in this
committee.
And I'm just so happy to be here
and keep learning.
Mhm
Thank you. Um, what we'll do now
is, uh,
Starting on this side of the
room in the backside.
Asking our committee analysts.
Um, to please introduce
yourself, and that will be
committee analysts, our pool
analysts for the majority, pool
analysts for the minority and
kind of just waiting our way
through here.
And I think we also have our LFC
persons, if you all could, um,
introduce yourself.
As you know, LFC has also been
added. We appreciate you to be
support.
Um, with all the different
information that we need as we
continue to talk about
healthcare and other issues here
in the state. So we'll start
here with Miss Baca.
Everybody, my name is
My name is Shirley Baca. I am a
former state representative from
District 35 in Las Cruces, and
then after that I became a PRC
commissioner and um for the last
13 years I was a majority
analyst with the state senate
and this year, uh, Senator Lopez
had called me uh to come and
work with her because of the
situation, uh, her health
condition and then the
committee, her becoming
a chair for the first time. I
have a degree, a law degree and
a master's in public policy from
Harvard and so I have a big
background on, on a lot of what
this committee uh has, will be
addressing and also at one point
with the majority and analysts,
I also sat with um SA and so I
will be uh legislative and
administrative assistant to
Senator Lopez. I'm so glad to be
here and to help her in any way.
I will be her watchdog, so if
you need to come, you will have
to go through me, uh, first to
see the senator, but I'm very
eager to take your messages and
to get the messages on to the
senator. Thank you everybody for
being here today. It's wonderful
to see the crowd.
Good afternoon, everyone. My
name is Isella Anondo, and I am
from Anthony, New Mexico, born
and raised in New Mexico. I went
to undergrad at New Mexico State
University, and then I went to
law school at UNM. I am a
lawyer, um, but I took 2 months
off to come be a committee
analyst.
Good afternoon. My name is
Patricia, or as many of you know
me, Pat Mooya, um, native New
Mexican, my undergraduate in
nursing from the University of
New Mexico and my master's in
public administration, health
administration, also from UN um
um I, uh, retired after 44 years
in healthcare, um, working in
various areas. I got interested
in policy very early on, had the
great fortune of working, uh,
both at the federal level at
HHS is a political appointee and
also as the Secretary of Health
for New Mexico. So as you can
see, very involved and engaged
in policy, so it was a great
pleasure to be able to come and
work with the senator, as I tell
everybody that I've seen, she's
brought me out of retirement,
but it was because we were so
excited to have her in as the
chair, but also because of how
critical these issues are, and
so um and I also still maintain
my, my registered nurse license.
So welcome everybody.
Mm
I'm Marlene Gross close.
Excuse me, I'm um a nurse by
trade. I worked for 30, almost
30 years with the public health
service. Uh, my expertise is in
public health and in behavioral
health. This is my 4th year on
this committee, and I'm looking
forward to, um, the things to
look for uh for the bills that
are coming forward and how we
can address some of the health
issues in our state.
Hi, I'm Doctor Elier Hernandez.
Uh, I was born and raised in
Deming, New Mexico and came back
after I finished my PhD, uh, we
at the LFC are here primarily to
write FIRs, but we're also here
to help you on a day to day
basis with whatever you need,
um, and in assisting this
committee.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
everyone in the room. My name is
Doctor Harry Rommel. I am an LFC
analyst. I am new to the LFC but
not new to state government.
I've worked with many of you
before, uh, in my prior work in
higher education, uh, I'm really
excited to be on the Health and
Human Services side now. I know
I have a lot to learn and I'm on
the steep end of the learning
curve, uh, but I'm also here to
provide you with any support you
may need, um, from the LFC and
I, and I'm really glad to see
everyone here.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Ruby
and Esquibel. I've had over, uh,
a mem nice to see a lot of
familiar faces. Over 20 some
years experience with the
legislative finance committee
and approaching, gosh, almost 40
years' experience in health and
human services. So we're happy
in our new kind of combined
roles and supporting both the
legislative finance committee
and LHHS and Smack and HHHC with
um all the health and human
services areas.
Thank you.
Carol Parker, PhD in public
health, I am the majority
analysts that looks at most of
those um healthcare bills, um,
this is my 6th year on this
committee, and um
It's living my dream.
Hi everyone, I'm Elizabeth
Jeffries. I'm an attorney. I
also have a master's in public
administration, and I work for a
Senate Majority pool along with
Carol.
And I think we have one more
person back here who's in charge
of the Zoom operator.
If you could introduce yourself
also, please.
Hello, everyone. My name is
Matthew Gutierrez. Uh, I am from
Albuquerque. I went to the
College of Santa Fe. I'm a
filmmaker, which led me to
become an audio visual
technician, um, please bear with
me. Um, and I'm here for you, so
please let me know if I can help
you in any way. Thank you.
Hello, I'm Sid Schulte. I'm the
sergeant at Arms attendant for
this committee.
Thank you so much. Did we miss
any?
What else
I'm, I'm sorry?
Yes.
He takes a
team for all of us to
just started here.
OK.
Hi everybody, I'm Lucy Bhill.
And I am Senate security and
I've been here 3 years and I
love this job.
My name is Mickey Howard. I'm
from Denver, Colorado, and it's
my first year of security. OK, I
think we've, I appreciate
everybody.
I'm introducing yourself because
we don't do this work alone. It
takes the team in order for us
to be successful, so I want to
say thank you and welcome to
everybody to the committee.
Um, I'm Linda Lopez, state
senator, District 11 in the
southwest quadrant of Bernalo
County.
This is the beginning of my
twenty-ninth year here in the
legislature. So I've been around
a while. I've seen a few
administrations and kind of all
the above, right?
Um, I did serve as chair of the
Senate Rules Committee for 19
years.
So I'm not new to chairing a
committee.
Um
I understand how to run a
committee.
There's precedent and a whole
bunch of other things that I'm
sure as we go through as to
Um
How our committee can
Move forward during this coming
session, we're already here
anyway.
Um, and, and just in case, I do
appreciate those of you who are
wearing a mask.
I was hospitalized for 17 days.
Dealing with a sundry of
viruses.
Double pneumonia
And a couple other things, so
I'm still immunocompromised. I'm
still on medication.
I'm grateful to be here, but I
do ask for those who can to
please consider wearing a mask.
It's not mandatory, but I do
ask, so I appreciate those who
are wearing a mask.
Um, I don't want to land back.
Um
In the hospital again, just FYI.
Uh, just for committee purposes.
Um
The
As we start committee, I will be
asking our committee secretary
to take role once I gavel us in.
And that's just so we have on
paper that we have uh aorum
present.
If there is not a quorum
present.
And then we're in the middle of
testimony, we can operate as a
subcommittee.
But we will not take any formal
action for amendments or on the
bill until we have a quorum once
again in the committee.
OK.
Um, for amendment purposes,
I know it's always kind of a a
balance as to how we do
amendments, but how I've done in
the past and I'm going to be
doing at this point in time, is
asking if, you know, bills, you
will know ahead of time of
what's going to be on the
agenda.
Some of us are studious, and we
already have some bills that
we've already tagged.
If you have some amendments, I
do ask.
That you submit them to
legislative council service 24
hours in advance.
So that we have something that's
written legible so that we can
proceed to um a doctor or
whatever needs to happen for the
bill.
But I also recognize that
sometimes we have to do
amendments in committee.
And we of course have Miss
Flores and a couple of others in
committee who will help us if
it's a very long amendment.
We will take um the, the
information, but again,
Depending how
tedious, the, you know, the
punctuation and everything else
may be, we may wait until that
goes back up to ledge counsel
service for verification.
Because what we've done in the
past, and I've been here long
enough.
Sometimes we've amended bills on
the fly.
And let's just say that we've
adopted them, and then we have
to come back and amend the law
later. That's not how we should
be doing law.
Um, statutes in, in, in this
building.
So that's where I come and ask
for 24 hours.
Please submit and um your
amendments to urge counsel and
of course that's delivered to
our committee secretary, so it
can be reviewed.
If we have a committee
substitute on a bill. I also
asked for that to be done 24
hours in advance.
I don't like to have a
substitute presented to us in
committee.
Um, because that takes too much,
um,
In other words, we have to have
an analysis on it for us to be
able to review it in a timely
manner.
Now again, I do understand the
last week of session, there's
some leeway as to how we can
work with it.
But I do ask committee members
to please work with me on this.
That way, all of us are one on
and have something in black and
white that we can all read.
Cause I know my printing is
surely not the best at all. You
can ask my 12 year old. She
can't read my writing either.
Um
For
Let's see what else on the
quorum.
Voting purposes again.
Any actions?
Um, what we have already, um,
As we get closer to the end of
session, we have already
reserved.
Um, a room for us to meet.
Um, because during at the end of
session, we go crazy trying to
meet and trying to take care of
a lot of the different actions
that need to happen. Both
chambers are working furiously
to make sure that we can get
bills from here over there for
they're here, um, to the floor
and of course up to the governor
for her signature.
Um, but we've already reserved a
room, and we will be meeting on
Sunday afternoons.
It'll be for 2 Sunday um
afternoons towards the end of
session that we will be meeting.
Um, and that's just part of the
housekeeping that we do, um, and
I like to do it for in advance,
so we've already done that.
Um
So we already did this one
weekend.
What I would ask committee
members if you would mind,
please give our committee
secretary, your contact
information.
So that if we need, if we change
the room or something happens,
she can contact you um and let
you know if something changes or
where we're meeting or time.
Or if I need to find you where
you're at.
So please and thank you. I hope
you'll do that. Um, sometime
this week so we can have that
ready. Um.
Monday when we will continue to
be meeting.
And then, um
Sometimes this committee does
work a little bit later.
Uh, during session.
But, um.
I, I will
Do my best to not keep us here
very late at night.
Um
I have a commitment to my own
health.
And I just want to make sure
that I stay healthy and also for
those of us who are on the
committee.
But we don't work without food.
Just so you know, I'm mindful.
If you have any allergies, do
let um Miss Flores know.
If, you know, so that way if we
do order food that we don't get
anybody sick.
All right.
And
I think that kind of
And it covers it at this time
unless any of you have any
questions.
Yes, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Will we
be following the
Rules of questions and answers.
That's in the legislative
committee handbook.
That is
Will there be any time limit on
the question and answer period.
And secondly,
If
Additional questions arise after
someone has already spoken, will
they be allowed to speak again.
What my style has been, and I
appreciate the question,
Senator.
I, I really don't like doing
time limits.
I never did before for 19 years.
However, with the caveat.
Um, we now have Zoom.
So for those who are on Zoom,
I'm not asking or requiring
anybody to register 24 hours in
advance.
Because people
Ma just become aware of Bill and
they'd like to give some public
comment.
So that that that's.
In other words, you don't have
to register the day before.
Um, for a time limit.
If the room is packed like this.
Um, I will ask for a show of
hands.
How many are here in either for
or against the legislation. If
the whole room raises their hand
in favor.
I will ask for maybe 10 on each
side or I'll limit just
depending what the response is
and ask them, um, of course,
using a microphone for everybody
to hear, to give their in favor
or not.
Um, what I would hope, and I'll
mention this before every
meeting that the public would
work with us so that you don't
go on for 5 minutes.
Um, because there are others
who've taken their time and are
joining that, and I will say it
before every committee meeting.
But I, I do not.
A very limiting where you only
have 1 minute or 2 minutes. I'm
just hopeful that those in the
public will work with it with
us.
Um, to be mindful that there are
other persons who've driven up
here to Santa Fe also.
Um, but I do try and keep
mindful and, and again,
Um, if there's a a question in
committee from a senator, those
who have not spoken go first.
If you're coming back for a
second time, I'll duly note and
then I'll come back to you
after.
But we, I always try to make
sure that our senators have
The first time to go through, if
you're a 2nd round, well just
hang tight and make sure that
there's no other senators who
have a first round of questions
to ask.
OK.
That answer, Senator?
Thank you very much, Madam.
That's perfect.
Anyone else?
OK.
I look forward to working with
each of you, and if you are so
lucky to join us on the
legislative Health and Human
Services Committee for the
interim. That's even more fun.
So we'll have some fun on that
one.
Um, and again, I appreciate
those of you who did add some
masks, I really appreciate very
much. Thank you.
And if I kind of get a little
winded, bear with me.
So with that, our first bill for
today, and I think I did see
Senator Munoz. Yes. Oh.
Mr. Chairman, if you join us.
Senate Bill 1, the Behavioral
Health Trust Fund.
Senator Munoz and Senator
Stephanics.
And committee members, you will
have the bills listed in your
book.
analysis is there also.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm glad
your health on the mend and.
We get through the session and
try to be short and and answer a
lot of questions today. I'll let
Senator Stefanik start us off
and then I'll roll through some
things and then Senator Woods
will wrap it up and we'll stand
for questions.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Today we're
presenting Senate Bill 1, which
is the behavioral health trust
Fund and this uh bill was
endorsed.
By the interim legislative
Health and Human Services In
Committee.
We realized $1 billion is quite
a bit of money.
But this fund would also attract
quite a bit of federal money
depending.
And I just, depending.
So this bill really would
provide some long term
investment.
In public health, and as we
know, we have a big crime
problem. We have substance
abuse.
We have people stealing, we have
robberies, we have uh shootings
and many of things, these things
are related to a combination.
Of conditions.
So this uh trust fund would
provide funding for many of the
programs that you're gonna hear
about in Senate Bill 2 and 3, so
this bill is not programmatic.
This bill is about a fund.
It would provide comprehensive
support for behavioral health.
It leverages additional funding,
as I mentioned.
It would comply with all federal
requirements.
There would be regional health
plans. One of the things we
heard from LFC in the um program
evaluation of behavioral health
is that we are more successful
when we plan things at the
regional level.
And this would address
behavioral health.
As a statewide priority.
And I'll turn it over to the
sponsors.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senate Bill 1 creates a big
Health Trust similar to the
Higher Education Trust Fund in
the early childhood trust fund.
a million dollars is a lot to
target for the corpus of the
fund.
But when that fund is full, it
will spin off 5% or 15 $50
million a year.
And our goal is to take the
state's non-reoccurring dollars
and make them reoccurring in our
health system.
Lieutenant Bill one serves at
this serves as a sustainability
a piece of the package.
They compliment Senate bills 2
and 3.
Section 1 of the bill creates a
non-reverting fund in the state
treasury of income from
investment of the fund that is
credited to the fund.
The state in investment council.
Will follow prudent investment
rules for this fund.
Quarterly and annually reporting
requirements to the legislature.
An initial annual.
Reimbursement will occur
sometime in 2026 to 2028.
Our target is 5% of the of the
average year in market values of
the trust.
Similar to the education fund
and the corpus of the trust is
counted as a part of our
reserves or in fiscal year 2026.
Section 2 creates a program for
in the treasury that is subject
to an appropriation by the
legislature for one, mental
health and substance abuse
treatment intervention and
prevention.
2
Necessary infrastructure
technology workforce supports
that facilitate the delivery of
a health.
Behavioral health
Service and programs.
3 matching funds from federal,
local, private money and grants
related to behavior health
services and programs including
Medicaid.
4 offset costs incurred by
complying with federal
requirements related to
behavioral health services and
programs and 5 implement
implementation of a regional
behavior health plan.
Throughout the state.
And be it requires revisions of
unexpended funds at the end of
the financial year. The third
number, uh section 3 is fund
transfer. We're gonna one.
Valion dollars, that's hard to
say, madam chair, billion
dollars is transferred from the
general fund to the trust fund,
funding sources subject to
changes in Senate finance.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you, senators for your
presentation.
And we'll go to the audience
first and then we'll go to Zoom
after.
Is there anyone in the audience
in favor of Senate Bill 1.
OK, so we're gonna test this
out, right?
So with those of you who raised
your hands.
Um, I'm gonna ask for, let's
say, how many members do we have
on Zoom?
OK, let's take about 7 on each
side.
Plus the 3 that are on Zoom.
And I know you're gonna have to
self-select, but if we could,
please, and there's a microphone
for you to use.
So we'll start on this side.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is David
Burke, and I am a director at
Serenity Mesa Youth Recovery
Center in Albuquerque and also
board president for Nami
Albuquerque. Mental health,
we've been trying to rebuild the
system for 10 years and
This money is so desperately
needed. We talked to countless
families of young people who
have overdosed. We've count,
we've talked to countless
families who've lost people to
suicide veterans through Nami,
we do as much as we can and it's
not enough. I know a billion
dollars is a lot of money, but I
would say we need 2 or 3 billion
if we could.
Um, people of our state of our
country are suffering, and uh
the one thing about mental
health is it's not red, it's not
blue. It affects everybody and
we need to pass this billing and
rebuild our mental health system
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Pierce Faragal. I
am the CEO at the Community
Lighthouse. I also sit on the
board for the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association, we are the largest
behavior health association in
the state. Um, we have members
in each one of your guys'
districts, uh, and we are in
support of this bill. Um, it is
very important that we invest in
behavioral health services, uh,
you know, I think that it's
money well spent when you look
at a lot of the
Data
and the backing around
behavioral health and the
I want to say the pressure it
puts on our state and our city,
um, I think this money will be
well spent.
A move
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee, my name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to
you today representing the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce.
It seems like we have a lot of
differences of opinion over what
the best public safety policy
is, but there certainly seems to
be consensus that we need to
strengthen and rebuild our
behavioral health system in our
state.
This legislation takes a big
swing for the fences by seeking
to appropriate such a large
amount of money, um, providing
support for those suffering from
addiction and other mental
health issues. It does not come
cheap.
But neither are the associated
devastating crimes which are
often committed in pursuit of
drugs and also the price of
ruined lives, the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges this committee to support
this legislation and this is the
best time to do it. The state
has the resources to do it. This
is one of the best investments
we can make at this time. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
This is Barbara McEnany, former
in New Mexico Medical Society
president, former AMA president,
the AMA has had for many years
work on opioid addiction and
recovery and feels that
innovative new projects like
this one are exactly what are
needed to address this horrible
problem in I'm a cancer doctor
and we run a cancer clinic in
Albuquerque and Gallup where we
see a huge amount of people in
need of services. We have tried
on the private community side to
fill this gap finding telepsy
and others out of state because
there aren't enough in state,
and there are none who will
accept Medicare or Medicaid. So
we have worked with the private
community to find these
solutions, but the ideal
solution is what Senator Munoz
and others have brought forward
Senator Stefaniks to try to
find a way to bring mental
health care here to New Mexico
so people can access the care we
need. There is good data that
shows that if you address the
mental health issues. People are
healthier, they're more adherent
to their other care, and they
just do better with every
illness out there from cancer to
diabetes, to everything else.
So, thank you, senators for
doing this bill. And thank you
committee for considering it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am Angelina Vas
Adams. I am a physician and
president of the New Mexico
Medical Society. Thank you for
your service and passion to care
for the citizens of New Mexico.
Thank you for the bill writers
for presenting this. I am here
to advocate for patiences and
physicians. Health care, medical
care takes a team.
A vital part of comprehensive
health care is behavioral health
care.
We all work together to take
care of the whole patient.
Senate Bill 1 would support
development and growth of
critical care so desperately
needed in New Mexico. I am
forever grateful for the work of
our mental health colleagues. We
need them and we need the
support to create a healthy
medical ecosystem for your
constituents, the people of New
Mexico. Thank you.
Senators, thank you for having
us today. My name is Aaron
Schneider. I'm the New Mexico
American College of Emergency
Physicians presidents, um, my,
uh, colleagues and I take care
of all of you and your families
when no one else can because we
work nights, weekends and
holidays, preventative care is
better than reactive care, and
when they end up in my clinic,
that's reactive care. So I urge
you to support this bill,
aggressive, proactive behavioral
health care.
is going to help reduce the
overload and non-emergency
departments. It's going to
reduce the complications from
using these substances and the
substances that also lead to
violent crime. Please vote yes.
think about it, chair, uh, Troy
Clark, uh, president and CEO of
the Mexico Hospital Association,
which includes uh the
psychiatric hospitals in our
state.
Uh, you've already heard the
number of reasons on the
clinical side and the crisis and
issues we have with behavioral
health and the need for this,
I'd like to just add to that,
uh, we are grateful of the
sponsors for their wisdom.
To not subject this to a
one-time fix that is subject to
uh changes in the future by
setting aside funds that we can
draw on in the future as Senator
Stefaniks mentioned, uh.
Some of the chaos at the federal
level recently is a great
example of how we can end up
passing good bills, good
programs, and then they're
subject to cuts later setting
these dollars aside at this
point in time to have a
consistent uh feeding of that
program for its continuity for
continued success in these
programs is vital, so we
encourage your passing of this
bill.
Thank you. And now we'll go to
those who are on Zoom.
The first person um on Zoom.
Is Connie Elizabeth? Uh, yes,
can you hear me? We can hear
you, yes.
Thank you, Senator Lopez, um,
and Chairman Hickey.
Uh, I really appreciate this
committee. This is like the best
Christmas gift I could ever get.
I've been a behavioral health
volunteer, uh lobbyist advocate
for about 12 years and I can
tell you that SB 145 sure has
come a long way from last year.
The concept of regional
treatment facilities, staffing
support has all been something
I've I've been working on for
many, many years and I can't
think Senator Munoz and his
assistant, Adrian Obula, enough.
For the efforts that they put
over this past year since SB 149
was introduced last year. Um, I
also want to acknowledge the new
sponsors including a bipartisan
sponsorship um by senators Woods
and Stefanis appreciate that
very, very much. I just have two
lines of questioning if I could,
um, is it time to talk or just
say that I'm very much in
support of the bill.
I'm sorry?
Do I have uh time for question
or is it just time for
supportive to go at this time?
Uh, Miss Elizabeth, it's just
for you to say if you're in
favor, um, those who are on
Zoom, we don't usually take the
time at this point for you to
ask questions.
OK. Thank you so much. I, I
really appreciate it. Um, I hope
this bill will also fund the
scholarships and fellowships to
our universities to build the
pipeline, and I can't think
Senator Munoz enough. Thank you
very much, Senator Lopez. Thank
you, Connie.
Next, we'll go to Richard Mason.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member in a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The league stands in
strong support of SB 1, the
behavioral Health Trust Fund. To
think of voters supports a
healthcare system that provides
a comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexico
residents in behavioral health
services are a key part of that
healthcare.
Our behavioral healthcare system
is not fully recovered from the
dismantling that went on over 10
years ago. It is time to invest
in rebuilding that system and
SB1 sta starts at reinvestment.
I wanted to, uh, the league
wants to thank San Eunos and
Senator Sheer, introducing SB1
and we urge the committee to
give it a due pass. And Madam
Chair, I can save the committee
some time because this testimony
is going to be the same for SB2
and SB3 since they're very
It's up to you. You tell me what
you want.
Uh, let's just continue with
Senate Bill 1 at this point, Mr.
Mason. Thank you.
OK, thank you.
Thank you.
OK, so with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Go ahead, please.
Senator Scott.
Oh,
thank you.
Is anybody opposed?
if there's any opposition,
please feel free to come
forward.
OK.
Thank you, Senator.
Is there anybody
On Zoom?
OK.
So with that, now we'll go to
comments or questions from
committee members.
Senator Serio Lopez.
I
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
this is such an exciting uh
bill, um, such an exciting fund
because I think one of the
speakers talked about how
sometimes the state builds
programs on a rule, and then if
they go down, you have cuts and
then we build and that's really,
really bad for, for, uh,
behavioral health in our state.
So I am thrilled about it. I
have a few questions probably
more to educate myself, but also
probably serve to educate the
public, the FIR um
that
Um
Based on the introduced version,
there will be insufficient funds
in the general fund in FY 25 to
provide for this appropriation.
So it would overcome the general
fund appropriation. I know we
can't do that because of the
Constitution. So how, how are we
gonna do this?
So when we started on this
journey uh about July and and
we're building the budget for
the session we hadn't really
targeted behavioral health.
We're working on Medicaid. So
there's several different ways
that we can gain resources to
build this fund. Uh, we can take
it from Spongebonds which is
overnight money. We can take
some uh cash balances from
reversions from
uh capital outlay, that's a
target number. uh, and we can
fund it with general fund
balance.
And so
Of non-reoccurring money. And so
we're targeting that we're
trying to get to the largest
number we can, uh, it's hard
when you build a budget to, to
set aside a billion dollars in
one lump sum.
We'll get there. It may take a
little time, but we'll get there
over time and we will get to the
billion and we'll get to the
return.
that we're targeted, so.
it, it's hard to tell you how
we're going to put it all
together maybe 300 million here,
200 million here, may be an
extension next year.
build another 500 million in and
fill it up completely.
Thank you. Well, um, Mr. Chair,
I have confidence, Madam Chair,
that the that the finance
committee will figure it out,
but that kind of I, I just
wanted to know how that would
happen, and then there's in the
FIR.
Um
It it's also talks about the
state investment council and I,
and I, since I serve on IPAC,
they always uh provide reports
and it's an impressive,
impressive group of people, um,
but they're, they're saying that
they need um additional FTEs to
manage a fund of this size, and
I'm wondering what provisions
are being made for that as well.
Madam Chair and Senator, so when
we had budget hearings, uh, this
was not in play, they submitted
their budgets in September and
we had not told anybody about
this. And so as their budget
hearing comes back up in house
appropriations or Senate Finance
we'll make the adjustments for
the proper amount for the fund
for FTEs to manage this fund.
And so,
We'll have to make adjustments.
It wasn't in the original
budget, but we'll make those
adjustments as we move forward.
Thank you. I think that's really
important because this is a lot
of money.
And it would be really important
to make sure that they're
adequately staffed, we can't
have.
Uh, an investment, uh, group
that is just understaffed for
this, um, and then this is just
a little tiny thing on the
language of the bill, um.
And I might have already asked
you this, I don't know. Um, it
says mental health and substance
abuse, and I think we were gonna
use substance misuse.
Um, are you gonna change that or
I don't know.
Just to be consistent.
Madam chair and Senator, uh, uh,
when he first started down this,
you know, they're, they're
intertwined.
All the,
but we will make amendments in
Senate Finance on the alcohol
issue so that, that
section is removed, so we target
just one section out of there,
so it's funding that portion of
behavior health. Thank you,
Madam Chair. um, I'm very
enthusiastic. I'm looking
forward to talking about the
substantive parts of this, um,
you know, how, how it's going to
be allocated, but I think the
idea of setting aside this much,
um,
I am a little concerned and I
think we'll probably get into
that later about whether cause
this will generate my
understanding is about 50
million a year, Madam Chair, and
at least the work that we did on
the alcohol, um, excise the the
work.
That we did on, on what the
needs are in the community when
we're talking about raising the
excise tax on alcohol taxes,
we're looking at a need of
between 200 and 250 million.
So, um, well this will be
important as a steady source of
funds, which I think is
absolutely crucial. I don't
think that it will.
End up being sufficient. I think
it'll be a big step.
But I am concerned about um
I mean, a billion sounds so
huge.
50 million sounds so huge. I
never thought I'd be saying
this, but I don't think it's
gonna be enough.
Um, so I, you know, I think
we'll just have to continue
looking at that and looking at
other, other sources of support
for the huge needs we have in
the state in order to move the
needle.
About the problems we have.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you to, uh, to Senator Cio Lopez
for those questions because that
that was basically on my mind as
well, so I appreciate you
talking about the, the fiscal
issue of this because a billion
dollars here and a billion
dollars there, it turns out to
be kind of a lot of money after
after a little while.
Um
And I want to thank the three of
you for working together on a
bipartisan effort on this bill.
I very much appreciate that.
Can, can one of you tell me, um,
Let me just real quick, I, this
is kind of an interesting bill
with the, the background. I
want, I think I know your
background a little bit.
But I, I'd like to public and
the people here to know your
background, Senator Woods,
you're, you're a rancher, right?
Uh, my background is in
agriculture. I'm uh.
Um, Madam Chair.
Uh, you've known me a long time,
but, uh, my background is in
ranching, uh, I've got other
experience and other.
Other details of
A lot of utility type work.
But I have had very little work
in the medical field.
And
But I do realize something that
What we're doing is not working.
We've got to change.
Something in our society.
And I'm, I'm a little different
than a lot of folks.
Because
I find great comfort in
believing in a God.
And I believe that uh.
Much like a a or other places
that they can put their spirit
and their hope.
Into a higher place.
Um
I feel that that.
There are people that can
counsel other people.
And I think that is very
important to happen in our
society.
And there's people that have
Fell off in holes.
And, and, and lost herself.
And how we come back to, to
bring that together. How, how do
we help our fellow men.
And
This is a whole lot of money.
This is as uh Senator Sedanna
Lopez says.
a billion dollars
Is 10% of our budget.
That's a lot of money.
Uh
And just to be honest with you,
and I say this very often.
The only way we can do this was
is with a very vibrant oil and
gas industry. It even makes this
possible.
But with that investment that
we're receiving from them.
We can do a lot of good and this
is one place that I hope.
And pray
That we can reach people, reach
out to people.
To touch their lives.
To curb
crime
It's no substitute for family.
But counseling
People
It's very important to me and
trying to
Give them a place to go.
So
An odd place, odd place, Senator
block for me.
Very odd place.
Um, I've never tackled anything
like this.
So
I appreciate the
The question, thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator Woods. Uh, Senator Munoz
and Senator Stefaniks, um, Sen
Munoz, you're, you're a
businessman in the Gallup area
from what I believe, did I miss
anything?
Yeah, I'm kind of a jack of all
trades and business, shopping
centers, trader parks, and
construction and so.
On my background, it, it was not
in behavioral health.
When we are taxed with this, uh,
We had a conversation after the
special session, and we said,
how do we target crime and how
do we target the other issues in
crime and uh Senator Worth and
with his leadership and Senator
Stewart, we, we sat and
discussed it, we decided we want
to attack behavioral health.
You're gonna see a 3 bill
package today.
One is long term funding.
The next one will be the short
term funding.
Uh, you will see reoccurring
funding in the budget the
sheriff in Grove.
When that 140 runs out, and then
you're gonna see the guardrails
and how the operational side and
how we keep this all in place as
we move forward and attempt to
rebuild behavioral health in the
best way that we have.
Uh, me and, and Adrian who works
with the Senate Democrats, um.
spent a lot of hours. I, I know
I spent at least 60 hours on
Zoom and my wife threatened me
if I didn't get off the
computer, but this was such an
issue.
Uh, that
Everybody has passion about it.
It affects almost everybody in
this room.
If you don't have someone that
has a mental health issue, you
see them on the corners.
You see him in the streets.
You see him in the food lines.
And and our baby health system
was
Tore down 8 years ago, and it's
never been able to rebuild that.
We spent roughly 70 $800 million
a year for the last couple of
years in behavioral health.
And it hasn't worked.
And so we're spending a large
amount.
Money on behavioral health.
And so how do we really fix and
target that system, you know,
without Adrian and without
leadership, without us working
together to figure this out, we
would have never come to this
where we're at today.
And is it perfect? No.
But we had 3 goals in mind when
we started this journey, right?
Number one, funded, fund it
correctly.
Number 2, how do we make it
operational?
And I mean operational that
they're not waiting for funds 6
months from now. If they make
the decision, and you're gonna
hear this later on in a
different bill that they can get
to those funds and they can make
those operational in a hurry.
His mental health is a crisis.
And, and so as we do that,
that's kind of where we were,
but I am no expert on mental
health, uh, Senator Woods may
know more than me, Senators
definitely knows more than me.
But we learn, you'll learn this
in the legislature. You're gonna
learn everything from what the
janitor has in his closet to
what the banker has in his
closet and uh you learn in the
legislature, and so that's
what's gonna happen in your
journey in the legislature and.
It's kind of where we are mental
health today, Senator Stefanik.
Thank you for the question. um,
I have 25 years in health and
human services.
I, uh, work on health and human
services, and I also work on
conservation, environment and
water.
There is a junction between the
two, but I started out in a
private psychiatric hospital
working. Then I went on to work
and run uh a various nonprofits
in the state. I went on as the
deputy secretary of the Human
Services Department, which is
now the healthcare authority. I
was the director of the state
risk management.
Department and I also was the
director of the Health Policy
commission.
So
My
Background in state government
tells me what can work and what
cannot work.
Uh, I am retired, you know, for
several years now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, senators. I guess I,
uh, Madam Chair, I'd like to ask
my questions to Senator Stefanis
because she's obviously more
well qualified than the other
two gentlemen.
Um.
You don't even need to sit there
right now, it just needs to be
Senator Stefaniks, um, well,
any, will any of this money, um,
Madam Chair and and senators,
will any of this money be
Uh, appropriate and maybe this
isn't the right bill uh to
discuss. It could be coming up
in 2 or 3.
But will any of this money be uh
appropriate toward 501c3s
because
501c3s that I have seen in my 8
years as a county commissioner,
um, in Rio Rancho, uh,
specifically like desert
mountain healing, uh, which is
an amazing place. Uh, they have
some incredible metrics uh
regarding
Um, I don't know if
I can't pronounce, that's the
word.
Uh, is the right word or not,
but I mean they have some
incredible metrics there for a
501c3 that uh really has
impacted um my, my district and
our, our communities, is any of
this gonna be going toward um
those type of organizations
that, in my opinion, have uh
really on the ground.
Uh, experts and people who've
been through the program
themselves. Well, as, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator for
the question. Yes, through
grants, um, the money, remember
this is the trust fund and the
next bill, Senate Bill 2.
Spell out the different
categories, planning, diversion
programs, outpatient services,
inpatient crisis response,
mobile units, behavioral health
service education, homelessness,
corrections, equipment and
vehicles and housing.
I also spent 8 years as a county
commissioner.
And we had a very here in Santa
Fe and we had a very strong
health planning commission and
we actually were able to use
county indigent funds to work
with.
Um
Nonprofits in the community,
whether it was helping people
get health insurance, whether it
was funding behavioral health,
outpatient services, and now we
as a legislature have provided
money for some for the Santa Fe
recovery Center, which has some
inpatient all over the state,
but those are nonprofits, so I
see that continuing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, um, because it
seems to me again, I'm, I'm new
here, but as a county.
Uh, when we had discretionary
funding as commissioners, we had
a lot of flexibility, and we
were able to get the funds quick
to these 501c3s which was
extremely helpful and um
And I hope that can happen here
as well because
Yeah, you don't want someone
waiting for treatment because
what we are seeing at a lot of
these places where these people
weren't getting qualified for
Medicaid.
And obviously the 501c3 was
getting paid through, through
Medicaid on a lot of these
people, and we couldn't get them
treatment. It was just, it was a
complete disaster and then
One person
Young man overdosed on fentanyl,
and died and we couldn't get him
the treatment, which is stuck
with me because I, I met that
young man, um.
That being said,
Can you tell me if in this
Senate bill, again, if it's it's
another one.
I, I firmly believe as with my
background as a, you know,
working with engineers and all
that type of stuff. We look at
root cause analysis, because
when you're when you're doing
spending.
A lot of money
Um, on the tail end of the
problem, we got to be focusing
on the beginning, and I think
education is a huge part of
that, uh, especially in the
schools in other areas, and what
I don't see in here as well,
just, you might have to write my
questions now cause I'm on a
roll here. But what I don't see
as well is um
That's near dear to my heart
from Sandoval County is our
tribal partners because we got
14 tribes and pueblos in
Sandoval County, which is the
2nd most.
Of any county in the United
States behind San Diego County,
California. So I, I don't see
that in here, but I would like
you to just discuss because I
really want to know what we're
gonna do with a billion dollars
and it's going to be more than
that, quite frankly. Tell me
about if this is gonna be
focusing on preventative care
and any type of other
mitigations to really get a
return on investment that we
once and for all can end.
Cause this is an epidemic.
Not just in New Mexico, in the
state, and uh we, we got a lot
of young people who are exposed
to this and it's these, these
pills are only, you know, 50
cents a buck.
In, and your life is gone.
So if you could just, I'll,
I'll, I'll defer to centers to
Fox because Senator Munoz, she
knows way more than you. Um, if
you could answer that, please.
So I think that part of the
question you're asking, Madam
Chair, Senator is in Senate Bill
3, which you will be getting.
Senate bill to outlines a great
deal about how some of the 1
billion we spent that 1 billion
will not be spent altogether,
but I really would, um,
Uh, recommend, Madam Chair, that
you be able to distribute or the
staff the behavioral health
program evaluation from LFC that
Eric Chenier presented to the
Health and Human Services
Interim Committee and the big
emphasis in that report is that
you plan at the regional level.
The steak doesn't come down, you
come up.
To receive the money, but the
education and all the different
services are incentive bill 2
and 3, which you will be hearing
about and I'm not sure senator
if there was another part to
your question.
Madam Chair.
Do you remember what I said,
madam chair?
Mhm
Uh, I, I think, I think you
answered it because I've read
Senate Bill 2 and 3. thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I, I just wanna
kind of get into, we know how
much the state of New Mexico
right now is spending on on the.
On the sorry, nobody heard that.
On uh behavioral health.
We're roughly spending about
$700 million annually, have,
have done that for over the past
3 years. It's very across the
board, whether it's Medicaid
reimbursement, uh, a lot of it
is in there, uh.
I'm looking to our LFC Ellis if
they're on top of that.
Rubyen
how much do we spend annually
and where does it come from for
behavioral health?
1.1 billion total.
Um
You're going to have to come to
mic or we're gonna get.
I
OK.
All right, thank you, um.
Yeah, I got it in here, Madam
Chair, um, so we expended 1.1
billion and that's across higher
ed everything for behavioral
health.
And then if you want to look at
special appropriations and how
much we've encumbered and how
much we've expended for that. We
also have that data which.
I, well, I can just give you the
numbers off the top of my head,
so um.
It was about 400 and.
0, 450 million.
Separate and then for special
appropriations over the last
years and so of that.
A little less than 1/3 has been
expended, but basically overall
you're looking at over a billion
dollars that it's gone for
behavioral health. Thank you and
uh thank you. So, will this
money, that 5% that this fund
generates, is this money going
to be on top of, of, on top of
that to um.
Street, um, behavioral and
mental health?
Uh, yes, and so I'm, I'm gonna
tell you a story of, of 2019
when Senator Smith was here and
they took $360 million and now
is 11 billion.
We're going to take a billion
dollars and if we make changes
to way funds are are transferred
and everything else.
This one could hit if the market
holds.
If the oil economy holds.
Uh, could hit $10 billion within
5 years if we had the current
past situation with the current
situation. This fun could hit
that. That is roughly spinning
off about 500 million.
Uh, annually for early childhood
and so as we build this, we
don't plan on cutting any
general fund dollars. We plan on
adding to what we need and
taking less of the burden from
the general fund and making
non-reoccurring money
reoccurring.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Sara Munoz, and that brings
up a good point, um, because
when we had our Medicaid um
training class, um, a couple
weeks ago, they talked about
Um, we're gonna, we're gonna
double our Medicaid spending
here in New Mexico from 2017 to
$55 billion to coming up to $10
billion here plus this and then
the other money I see in Senate
Bill 2 and 3, and this is an
important issue, but it's a lot
of money, um, getting, getting
into just the, the meat of this
on a couple of things I just
want to clarify that I
understand because uh words,
words do matter.
As I was told when I was a
Pentagon briefer, um,
On section 2, page 3.
And I think Senator Woods went
through the
Money in the fund is subject to
appropriation by the legislature
to provide money for services
and programs related to
behavioral health, including on
sex on um second bullet there,
necessary infrastructure. Now I,
I was told.
That the state of New Mexico has
roughly 500 beds statewide for
behavioral health treatment. So
when you talk about necessary
infrastructure, you're talking
about building more facilities
in targeted areas around the
state that are seeing an uptick
in mental health and behavioral
health, um.
Issues.
What we're talking about is is
regional groups.
around the state
Over in in my area there's uh 5
county.
Region
That have already got money for
a critical care facility.
And what we're talking about is
expanding those and figuring out
and let that group.
That those counties because
we're different cultures all
over the state.
But certain areas.
Have a different critical issue.
And what we're trying to do is,
is
Regionalize.
These areas of of of support.
And so what works?
In downtown Berlio.
Probably won't work.
In the Clovis area, but we're
gonna let those areas try to
figure this out.
And make a working.
System. So yes, we've got to
build some infrastructure in the
short term. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator Woods.
So basically what you're telling
me is that these, how how many
regions are there?
I think we, I, I'm not sure how
many we.
We designated.
Madam Chan Senator, the regions
are gonna be done through the
roughly the judicial districts
and that way the judicial
districts are the ones managing
they're starting the program,
they're going to do that. I
think we're at 1513 judicial
districts, so there'll be 13
regional.
Thank you, madam, uh, chair,
thank you, Senator Munoz. So on,
on that point, um, this regional
planning obviously has to
happen, which is, which is
critical for this to succeed. I
think you would agree with that.
Who, who are the people that are
doing the regional strategic
planning to um to implement this
plan and to kind of be able to
spiral the the program to make
sure it adjusts to the needs of,
of the um.
Uh, citizens, Madam Chanen, if,
if you want to divert those
questions to Senate Bill 3,
there'll be right on topic and
on, they'll be Senate Bill 3
when they're up to them and
they'll be right on topic and,
and I don't have uh every
detailenate Bill 3 in my head
and, and so when they come up,
they'll be able to answer a lot
of those questions. I'm sure,
um.
Senator Worth and Senator Sher
and Senator Stewart are more
than capable of answering those
right here.
like a jury pool.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator Munoz. Uh,
just a couple of things here. In
that same paragraph, it talks
about necessary infrastructure,
technology, um, one of the big
technology drivers today, uh,
besides cyber is now AI and when
you're looking at um
Through massive records, uh, one
of the things that my particular
firm is very good at is AI and
data mining. How are you, does
this, is this new whole program
in the department, whatever
department it's gonna lie in, I
can't remember, but are you
looking at doing any AI tools to
look at efficiencies and
government operations.
Uh
So Madame Chair and Senator, the
one thing is it's gonna have to
comply with all federal and
state requirements because we
are intending to request some
matches, so all of those
programs currently do require
collecting data, uh, mapping,
determining what's sufficient,
what's not efficient.
Uh, I'd like to give you one
brief example, Madam Chair,
Senator, in San Miguel County,
uh, several groups of the DWI
Planning Council, the juvenile
Justice group and the all the
nonprofit advocacy groups
created their own 100% San
Miguel County, and so they came
together and in the past we, the
legislature have funded an
inpatient behavioral health
treatment for them because they
came to us and they said, all of
us, the entire county decided
this was our.
our number one need. So that's
the intent here is that local
groups will band together and
work on this.
Thank you, Madam President.
Thank you, Senator Stefaniks.
And lastly, um, and this is one
thing I'm gonna be asking on
Senate Bill 2 and Senate Bill 3
is
Um
Metrics I think are critical to
make sure that we're, we're
going down the right path, you
know, we're, because it
Really our goal is to put
behavioral.
Uh, providers out of business,
that would be just a lovely
thing that we could do, it will
never happen, but we want to
make sure
Uh, with, with the funding here,
uh, which is a lot, how do we
know what type of metrics and
goals, are we setting up where
from a from a overall
programmatic view.
We can figure out if we're
For making progress or
I would imagine we're going to
figure out where we're going to
make adjustments, but if we're
not making progress, we just
can't keep throwing more and
more money at it, so I'm looking
for the return on investment is
not gonna be anything empirical
because in my mind the in turn
on return on investment.
Because when you say somebody's
life.
That's a return on investment in
my opinion.
However
How are we making sure the
people that we're treating or
these people here, these
incredible providers are
treating are, they're not um
They're getting the treatment,
they're going to become
productive citizens. We have to
have some type of number. We
started off with
You know, 40,000 people in, in
the program of whatever issue
they had in a year or 2 years
later, hey, we're down to,
we're, you know, the glide
slopes declining. We're down to
32,000. That's something I
definitely think, you know,
we're, we would know or could
look at that metric and say,
man, we're doing the right thing
in the state of New Mexico,
because we're
We're losing people off this in
a good way.
Thank you. Madam Chair and
senator, that is an exact direct
targets to Senate Bill 3 and,
and when they get up here,
they'll they'll answer those
questions, but it's 3 parts of a
bill and we're we're.
Oh, long term funding. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
I'll, I'll defer those questions
if, uh, Senator Scher and
Senator Wirth over there and I,
I don't know if Senator
Stewart's here. I'm sure they
can remember that and remind me,
but again, uh, the three of you,
uh, I want to thank you for that
as well as the staff, uh, to put
a lot of the data together and I
want to thank our providers here
for uh everything you do cause I
know it's just a a tough, tough
job, um.
And you have successes and
failures and, and um that's it's
just.
Thank you for what you do. Thank
you, Madam Chair, I appreciate
your time.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senators.
I wish we had heard Senate Bill
3 1st.
Well, that would have took a lot
of weight off our shoulders.
This has the feel of ready shoot
aim.
And
The objective of this piece of
legislation.
is to develop
An ongoing sustainable.
Revenue stream of about
At least initially 50.
Million dollars a year is that
accurate?
And it and church center, yes,
that is.
And we are already spending I
believe it I've heard.
Madam Chair and senators.
A little over $1 billion per
year.
Oh
over, sir. Most more, a lot of
these comments.
Yeah, Senate Bill 3, but the
billion that we're spending now.
Doesn't appear to be.
Be a very effective.
So
As part of this package.
Are we going to end up with a
comprehensive coherent.
Plan
With some.
Entity
Responsible
For the successful
implementation.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes.
When we embarked on the health.
It, it, it takes everybody in,
and I mentioned we spent 60
hours on Zoom, right? The number
one thing that we said we want
to do, we make sure I want to
functions.
We want to make sure that we can
get you the money and we and we
want to make sure that we get
the data and accountability
back.
Tennant Mill
Uh, one is long term funding.
And Bill 2 sets up the money and
where it goes. Senate Bill 3
will give you all the
accountability and how we're
going to do that.
You know, he's been 1.1 billion,
but it's a mix we spend.
311 million, 311 million
Medicaid behavioral health
managed care.
520 million in Medicaid health
managed care.
And I'm gonna give you the big
ones over 100 million, 108
million behavioral health
services division.
Um, 353 million or 300, that may
not be 3150, 67 million in a
behavioral health Medicaid.
And so that's how we get to the
to the billion. There's a lot of
smaller ones in the DD waivers,
opioid crisis transfers.
And and so as we get there,
we'll start targeting this and
say, is what we doing correct in
Senate Bill 3.
And what is the lending cost?
But when we start something new.
And with everybody in the room
and and a lot of behavioral
health collaboratives helping us
understand that in different
regions in different areas.
We'll be able to target this
money even better as we go down
the road, but we have to
understand how it operates
regionally.
And what the needs are in each
region.
And Madam Chair, while I have
the chair of finance answering
these questions don't have any
money.
We have moved.
From a general appropriations
process to
putting money.
Into
of funds.
Now to the tune of about.
20
$5 billion.
Over what we had just several
years ago.
And
Why did we change that process.
From years ago when all of these
programs.
Had to compete for funds.
In the general appropriation
process.
Madam Chair, and Senator, we
rolled the oil, oil and gas
roller coaster in New Mexico.
When I came in 2009, that was
the, I think they call that the
Great Recession now.
My freshman year we cut a
billion dollars out of, out of
the budget.
We never knew what capital was
for 3 years.
There was no money for capital.
We've ridden this roller coaster
and we could get you the AFC
wreck and if you'll look at the
funding, it's just, just like a
roller coaster.
We've been getting an
opportunity.
And since oil and gas revenues
are up.
Uh, we fix some things within
our budget. We, we got agencies
where we think they're correctly
funded.
Uh, and we're going to try to
maintain that. But what do you
do with the rest? Well, you try
to make today's money tomorrow's
money.
The most important story over a
two-year period is
3 things. Number 1,
New Mexico by 2040 investment
revenue will exceed oil and gas
revenue in the state of New
Mexico.
Number 2
We've always operated on a we've
operated on a cash capital
outlay basis.
By 2030
We will no longer need to bond.
Camp Alley will have the cash
balances to pay capital with
cash.
Number 3, the first time.
Well, I, I can't say the first
time, but the first time since
I've been here 16 years or maybe
even longer, New Mexico has got
a bonding rate increase.
And that's unheard of, and
that's because we took our money
invested in funds, invested in
polls, and now operating on
those investments.
OK, one, Madam Chair and
just one last question.
And that is, in the event that a
higher priority develops.
That the state needs money.
Good.
No problem.
How hard is it to get.
Access to this $1 billion fund.
Mr. Madam Chair, Senator, and
section 3.
Where the money is transferred,
right?
Uh, the, to the general fund is
counted as part servers, maybe
it's not section 3.
But it's counted as part of our
reserves.
But when we count something
that's part of our reserves,
depends how we set up that
structure. Does it take 2/3 vote
for the legislature to come in
and tap the fund with early
childhood that does. with this
one.
does not
So anytime we, we, our reserves
come to zero.
Uh, either the governor would
have to call us in and we'd have
to make the transfer.
Uh, as a legislature.
Or if our reserves hit below are
getting target level, the
transfer could automatically
happen.
OK.
Thank you, sir, for your
answers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all I have.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
We would do pass
For a 2nd time, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I just want to
re-attack one thing.
Um
Uh
I don't know if you're the right
person, Senator Munoz. I think I
want to go back to Senator
Stefanis, definitely not Senator
Woods.
Um
a billion dollars.
We know, and I know every every
little situation is a little bit
different on the treatment for
inpatient versus outpatient, um,
I'm, I'm looking at how many,
how many people do we think this
is going to help.
And how many people right now in
New Mexico.
You probably don't have the
number and that's OK, but in
your, in your opinion, if you
could just take a, a best guess,
how many people are being
treated in the state of New
Mexico for behavioral health,
mental health issues because
Um, Sandoval Regional Medical
Center.
They come and provide uh the
county commission a quarterly
update, and when you look at
the, the metrics, especially on
behavioral health.
During COVID they were through
the roof. So, you know, there's
some outliers there. I get that.
But that's where we're seeing.
A ton of increases in in
behavioral health.
Uh, all across the board.
Uh
Tribal partners, Rio Rancho,
old, young, rich, poor.
And um
I'm just, I'm just wondering
what, what do you think the
target is our bogey on how many
people this will help and how
many people right now do we know
getting treatment?
And again, I, I, I keep hitting
on the the data, and I'm sorry
about that. I just, I, I like
the numbers so I can visualize
it.
So manage your senator, I would
turn to LFC for the actual
numbers being served and they
may or may not have it, but I
could, and I think we all could
look at the potential number of
the state.
And I don't think it would be
wrong to say at least 50%.
When you're talking about mental
health.
PTSD
You know, substance abuse,
alcoholism.
Whether it's misuse, I think
that we're talking whether it's
uh.
Addiction to prescription
medications, I think that we're
talking about a very large
number when you mentioned COVID.
I think many people, a lot of
young people.
Develop depression because they
were so isolated and I can talk
about that for my own family
they just didn't have anybody
they couldn't go out and
socialize. If they didn't have a
friend living close to them they
were isolated and that took its
real toll on their uh
personalities, so.
You know, that's when we had all
the um rise of the um.
Telehealth
And the counseling on the
phones.
So that people could just dial
up and get a little bit of
support from somebody and not
even be recognized, but they got
some support, so I see LFC
conferring here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We have
some specific numbers that are
looking at component pieces, say
like teenage suicide, etc. like
that, but I'm gonna give a
broader answer, Madam Chair. If
you look at just the Samsa data,
the substance abuse and mental
health Services Administration
data. If you look at HESA data,
the health, the federal health
resources Service Administration
and you look at all of those
areas, so whether it's PTSD and
Senator Block mentioned earlier,
whether it's substance use
disorder, whether it's mental.
health disorder co-occurring
disorder, all of the above.
Basically, the numbers get to
over 50% of our population, so
it becomes when you look at all
of it together, it's a lot, it's
a significant number. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, panel, um.
Lastly, it looks like New Mexico
here ranks poorly on key
behavioral metrics.
Um, the number of behavioral
providers is growing.
There's a focus on providing
more high quality evidence-based
services, uh, is needed, which
That's what I'm looking for is
that evidence-based empirical
data, uh, just from my old life
as a Air Force commander trying
to get as much data as possible
to make a decision.
And um
When you look at our state here
for behavioral health and rank
overall mental illness
prevalence, adults and children,
36.
36 that we can do way better
than that. Adult substance use
disorder 32, youth with major
depressive episode 42, uh, that
probably, that's, that's
definitely a, a huge concern and
substance use substance use
disorder at 47.
Um, basically, what I'm saying
is, uh, Madam Chair and panel is
I'm, I'm willing to support this
because I believe our role in
government.
is not to
Those two obviously.
Secure the people to make sure
those people are safe with
public safety.
Um, I would also, and sometimes
we don't do a good job of that
in New Mexico.
But that's a different issue.
But I think we have a compelling
interest here.
As legislators and leaders.
To use the resources that we
have and I worry about our
future.
Resources Senator Munoz was some
of the bills that are going
through the, the roundhouse on
on oil and gas.
That being said, that's going to
be an issue that we can't kick
down, you know, kick the can
down the road, we have to watch
it very closely.
My main concern over this, and I
guess we'll talk about it in
Senate Bill 3 is the legislative
oversight to make sure that we
are making that we're
We're improving.
And if we're going to use this
as the baseline where we are and
start measuring with
evidence-based data.
To see where we're going, if
we're making a difference.
We as the legislature really
have, should have strict
oversight on that.
I, I am more.
I have my concerns.
With SB1.
But I'm going to support it.
Because I can't paint hard on
this issue of mental health and
substance abuse. Uh, you already
know my personal story.
Um, dealing with some of the
stuff I came back with and uh my
childhood and I don't want
another kid to go through what I
went through.
Or another veteran to go through
what I went through.
So I'm more than willing to do
this because I'd rather spend a
billion dollars on this, Senator
Stefaniks, Senator Munoz,
Senator Woods, and something
else that uh doesn't quite have
the impact on the citizens of
New Mexico.
So I want to thank you again. I
swear, Madam Chair, that's the
last question I have.
Um
But I, I'm looking forward to
supporting this and uh thank
you.
And I'm not going to do the
Colombo, one more question.
Not, not doing that. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Was this bill endorsed by LHHS
in the interim.
Yes, it was.
Man, senator, yes, it was. Thank
you, senators and Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
um
Did we have comparisons with
other states, surrounding states
on how much they spend on
behavioral health.
Well let me answer that.
Hm
Right.
Madam Chair, um, Senator Stefani
just raised the issue that there
are different models in every
state, so actually what I was
thinking what I was gonna say
that's not quite an apples to
apples comparison because.
Different models and we'd have
to look at percentages, so I, I
guess to answer your question
now, we don't have that data.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
because when we talk about
budgeting and we're saying a lot
of this is gonna be used for
infrastructure, we should be, we
should know what we're spending
on infrastructure.
Especially when we talk about
health.
Um, even with technology, even
with workforce, you know how
much each one of these costs are
state when we talk about
spending 1.1 billion.
And
Like that, I hope we can uh get
a handle on that.
But why are we choosing to put
this in HCA.
I
Are center
Where are we choosing to put it
in? Yes, so, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, the
healthcare authority when we do
have a behavioral health.
Service division.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, all
investments are managed by the
state Investment council unless
their retirement funds and
they're managed by PRA or ERB
SIC has a great had a great
return over the last couple of
years above 7%. We went from
investment funds in 2020 of 40
billion to almost 86 billion
right now and so the returns are
good. They're the ones that
manage the money. They can
diversify the fund if there's a
downturn in the economy that
that the fund doesn't completely
get hit.
And, and so that's who the
agency is charged with managing
investment funds.
And Madame Chair, so why did we
are we putting this into the
healthcare authority.
When we have a behavioral health
services division.
So Madam Chair and Senator,
right now the behavioral health
services is located in the
healthcare authority and they
can draw down the match. So it's
like one state dollar to almost
3 federal dollars and so we
would want the healthcare
authority to be able to pull out
the money, utilize and hopefully
have it matched in federal ways.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee is the um state
Investment council fully funded.
Um, Madam Schoener, uh, it
depends who's determined fully
funded. They're always going to
say they're underfunded and
we're going to say that we're
going to fund you at the right
level, uh, and their FYR when
they say they don't have an FTEs
to manage another billion
dollars, that's probably
accurate. And so as we go
through Senate Finance and the
budget will start looking at
what the resources are needed
and how many FTEs are needed to
manage another billion dollars.
And uh Madam Chair, members of
the committee, so the
projections are from 50 to 60
million, but when we talk about
33 counties, 16 municipalities
and including our 23 tribes,
nations, and pueblos, um, you
know, just even dividing that
equally doesn't come out to very
much, um, on an annual basis,
um, even though we're trying to
say, well, we want to increase
the funding on what we are
already spending.
Don't I hope um.
You know, it it's this the only
way to stabilize funding or
behavioral health.
Madam Chanen.
There's a lot of ways to
stabilize funding, right?
But we have enough money right
now.
That what we need to do is take
this fund and, and I'm gonna use
the early childhood education
fund again.
Take 360 million in in in five
years turn it to 10 to $11
billion. When you get to 10 to
$11 billion there's $500
million. What absolutely fill,
stop filling the gaps? No, we'll
still need to use general fund
to backfill some of that. But as
we learn lessons,
When 2 and 3 become active in
the regions are, are
appropriated, we'll know what
those dollars are needed and
targeted and how that is going
to work, and we'll make better
decisions as legislators, what's
targeted in Tohatchie.
What is that facility look like?
What are the needs are? Because
between Gallup and Tohatchie and
Shiprock in our district, you
know that there, there's nothing
there. And so that's what we'll
have to figure out. There's
still a billion dollars built in
the budget. No concerning no
downturn, so this is just, how
do we stabilize it? How do we
create it? How do we create
generational equity and wealth
without uh just burning through
dollars.
Madam chair members of the
committee, so this is the best
way to stabilize the funding for
behavioral health.
Madam Chair, Senator, the
general fund is based upon
returns, taxes, uh, oil
investment income, personal
income tax, uh, GRT.
That has fluctuated over a
period and so this is the best
way to stabilize long term
funding.
And Madam Chair, members, do we
have anything in here for
indexing for inflation.
Madam Chair, the legislature
does not index certain inflation
because they budget every single
year. And so as those
inflationary costs run up as
long as we have the general fund
reserves, we make those
adjustments.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd like to
move for a due pass unless there
are others who want to comment
because we've got two other
bills to get through, and we
aren't going to be able to run
late. Um, but I, I just want to
point out that in the
literature, uh, only 1 in 10
people with an addiction are
diagnosed. Um, so we're talking
about moving from the data that
we do have here and also and
people with severe mental
illness, only 50% are, are
diagnosed at any time. So it's,
it's a huge issue.
in the state and we're finally
paying attention to it and uh
unless there are other comments,
I would like to move for Du pass
so that we can really consider
some of the meat of these other
two bills that really rounded
out.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I.
Uh, thank you very much. There
is a motion for a due pass from
Senator Hickey with a 2nd from
Senator Sidia Lopez, and before
we go to the vote, I did want to
say there was an oversight on my
part and I sincerely apologize.
But there was a zoom comment
from Patsy Romero, who wanted to
uh say she was in support of
Senate Bill 1.
So I apologize, Patsy. I did not
recognize you. My bad, but I'll
get better.
So with that, if you could
please call the room.
Senator Block.
Senator Block, I'm sorry.
OK. All right. No, I understand.
I just didn't hear.
In here boom.
Yes.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos.
And another.
Pinto.
The nur
Yes.
Center Lopez.
Senator Hickey, yes.
Pinto.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
You have a unanimous due pass
recommendation.
First
One.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
The committee on behalf of all
of us.
Next we go to Senate Bill 2.
Senator Shando, Senator Munoz.
If I could please ask if you
have comments to please take it
out in the hallway.
So that we can continue.
Thank you, Senate Bill 2,
Senator Sendo Munoz and
Gallegos.
Senator Shando.
Thank you, uh, let them chairs,
members of the committee.
Um, here on Senate Bill 2.
My co-sponsors of Senator Manos
and uh Senator Gallegos.
And I know that uh during the
previous uh discussion and
debate. There's been a lot of
references made to both SB2 and
SB3. These are all sort of
companion bills.
And so forth and taking various
pieces of this whole uh.
Um, a process in building our
behavior health network and so
forth. So what SB SB2 is making
a 140.
Million dollar appropriation to
fund on a regional basis and
initial down payment by the
state to expand behavioral
health services throughout New
Mexico.
SB 2 addresses community needs
for a broad range of support.
And services including planning.
Diversion outpatient services,
inpatient care.
Crisis response, mobile units.
Behavioral health services, uh,
education, homelessness,
corrections of discharge
equipment and vehicles and
housing.
Eligible entities to receive
funding under HB Senate Bill 2
includes state agencies, local
governments.
Tribes and federally qualified
health centers.
Uh, SP2 represents a new and
innovative approach to
behavioral health healthcare for
New Mexico.
I'm going to turn it over to my
colleagues Senator Nielsen, and
then we'll, we'll go down like
the senator Gus.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
gonna go through sections of the
bill so people understand this,
may I answer Senator uh blocks a
lot of his question in section 7
Section 1 in points, 1.7 million
to AOC for regional planning,
state resources, and mapping of
judicial grant districts.
Section 2 does 7 million to the
AOC.
judicial districts for regional
planning, including regional
case management, and that's
behavioral health grant writing,
regional case management, crisis
response and recovery support
services.
And behavior health and
homelessness outreach and
engagement.
Uh, section 3 appropriates 10
million to the healthcare
authority, the county's Metallis
Indian municipalities, Indian
nations, tribes, fellows for
regional planning, including
varying outpatient treatments
and best practices and evidence
informed outpatient and aversion
services, promising practice and
community-based wraparound
services and resources.
Uh, outpatient treatments
include assisted outpatient,
medicated out assisted,
outpatient and assertive sort of
community.
Section 4
Uh, appropriates 43 million to
the healthcare authority for
regional planning and
transitional acute facilities to
counties and municipalities
facilities.
And it restricts no more than 8
million may be used to.
used to establish or expand
behavioral health investment
zones based on epidemic
epidemiological data and other
sources.
That combined incidents in the
following manner.
Morally related of alcohol use,
drug overdose, suicide, and any
other behavioral health data
deemed necessary.
Section 5 appropriate 75 7.5
million to the healthcare
authority for regional planning
grants and crisis response
facilities that are federally
qualified.
And funding uses 24 hour crisis
response facilities associated
services, technical assistance
support, service logistics and
lease Costa in no eligibility
for Medicaid funding in multiple
year.
Section 6 verbrates 1.3 million.
The corrections department for
Regional planning for
discharging for correctional
facilities to, to assist
discharged persons.
Connect discharge persons with
recovery support and treatment,
community-based behavioral
health supports and that
supplement or enhance
transitional services covered.
Medicaid, correction department,
Charlton shall consult with DOH
when making these grants to
counties.
hand it over to sender.
OK.
I'm tearing centers I'll
continue on with section 7. It
is 5 million for grants to the
Department of Public Safety in
consultation with the HCA
regional planning for crisis
response and recovery.
And to be used for law
enforcement and behavioral
health services providers to
purchase regional mobile crisis
response, recovering outreach,
equipment and vehicles.
In section 8, we have 11.5
million for grants to the HCA.
This is in consultation with the
corrections department and
regional planning for request
your response and recovery
teams.
These will be regional mobile
crisis and recovery response and
intervention and outreach teams.
In section 9 we have $1 million
to the HCA for education and
outreach with behavioral health
regions based on health plans.
In section 10, we have $10
million.
For grants to be to the
Department of Public Safety for
regional planning.
A crisis intervention and
response plans.
These are versions, Christ
intervention, collaborative and
embedded crisis response.
Mental health, social work.
And community in interception
resource training.
Then we go on to section 11,
which is $1 million to the
University of New Mexico for
health.
Outreach to homeless persons.
Health Outreach will have
Mobile health units and
medication assisted treatments
and other health outreach.
The homeless persons including
telemedicine.
And Madam Chair, in section 12
we have $1 million to the
Department of Health.
Or health outreach for homeless
persons, which also will have um
Health outreach with mobile
health units and medication
treatment and other health
outreach to homeless persons,
including, again telemedicine.
In section 13 there's 48 million
to DFA regional planning for the
expansion of certain housing
services to support the
expansion of housing services
providers, that facilitate
behavioral health services
substance misuse recovery,
homelessness assistance, and
prevention for persons with
behavioral health needs and
transitional housing.
And section 14.
I cherish the effective date.
Mm
Yeah
question
for questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
And we'll go to the audience.
Once again, if I could see a
show of hands of who is in favor
of Senate Bill 2.
OK. Um,
It looks like we could still do
about 7 on each side.
We'll start on this side first
and then as you had done
previously to line up.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and senators. My name is Anna
Hansen. I am the registered
lobbyist for the Pueblouake
and uh we are respectfully in
support of this bill, um, we
also um have a regional uh
behavioral health center that
you have funded, uh, over the
last 5 years.
We have been given money to
develop our behavioral health
center. We are expanding it, um,
We already provide services to
both tribal and non-tribal
members and we are asking for 1
million this year to finish our
expansion, which is shovel
ready, so this is completely in
line with what we are doing at
the Pueblo Apoake for the Puake
Valley. Thank you.
Thank you.
I.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Conrad
Chino.
I'm not walking off stage, um.
I represent the publics of Aba
Taos, and we strongly support
Senate Bill 2.
Um
The Behavioral health needs for
public communities statewide is
is really immense, but also
believe workable.
And um I think that can only
occur through
A uh partnership and investment
by both the tribes.
And the state
In short and long term
solutions, and I think that can
be done with the funding that's
identified in Senate Bill 2.
There is an immediate need for
behavior, uh, outpatient and
treatment and services, uh,
there's also a need for
workforce development and
Other long term solutions such
as educational opportunities to
To boost, I believe, uh, staff.
within our own tribal
communities, um.
And I also saw there was funding
for regional plans and I'm
hoping that those plans include
leveraging what already exists
at uh college universities like
UNM, at its uh uh department of
psychiatry and behavioral
sciences division of community
behavior health, uh, to provide
the necessary services and uh uh
technical assistance to tribes
so they can begin to administer
uh critical emergency behavior
health support.
So for those reasons, I'm sure
members of the committee.
I urge you to strong support SB2
because this will go a long way
towards addressing uh what's
greatly needed within our tribal
communities and for those
reasons, I ask for your support.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sylvia Serna, and I'm
the department of public safety
Deputy Cabinet Secretary, and I
stand in support of Senate Bill
2.
This legislation will afford DPS
the opportunity to provide
statewide law enforcement for
crisis intervention teams and
recovery response for things
such as vehicles and equipment,
uh, crisis intervention team
building, um, as well as
training, uh, the department has
submitted an FIR.
In support of this bill, but we
have proposed some amendments
that will allow, allow us to
more accurately and decisively
distribute these funds, um, to
law enforcement only, as well as
add some language in section 8,
that will enable the, the New
Mexico State Police to apply for
these funds by adding some state
agency language, um, and in
addition, we are proposing a
direct allocation to the New
Mexico State Police, uh, so that
they continue, can continue.
the great work that they've
already started in building
their crisis response team.
With that, thank you very much
for the opportunity and your
support.
I piercerle, uh, CEO of the
Community Lighthouse and board
member of the Mexico Bay of
Health Providers Association.
Um, we are in support of Senate
Bill 2, and hope that um uh we
get you guys to support. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, David Burke
with the Serenity Mesa Youth
Recovery Center and uh Nami
Albuquerque.
Uh, as an example, we have 14
beds. We are a state facility
and we take kids from every
county. We've had a kid from
every county, um, in the state
for our substance abuse
treatment program.
And we have 14 beds and we have
12 kids on our waiting list. Um,
there's a need um for more
services around the state. When
we are in New Mexico and we have
a kid who needs help from Las
Cruces or dimming or Farmington
or Espanola.
And we get numerous calls from
kids all around the state, um.
Where did they go if our beds
are full.
Um, so we need to be able to
expand our services. We need to
be able to um
Provide more services.
Our youth of New Mexico are the
most underserved population, I
believe, um, in the state. Uh,
there's not a lot of services
for them for either mental
health or for substance abuse
treatment. We are the only youth
detox center in New Mexico. Last
week we had a young person uh
from Deming who called, but they
weren't able to get to us. So
their only option is to go to an
ER.
And
I don't know that the ERs
provide true detox, long-term
detox. Our kids will stay here 5
to 14 days. Uh, we have medical
staff, we have nursing staff, of
course, all of that costs a lot
of money. Um, so we're hoping
that this fund and uh the in the
bill after this can help to
expand services for our young
people of New Mexico. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. I think we all know
it's going to take collapse
collaboration and the adoption
of best practices to rebuild our
behavioral health system, which
is multifaceted, and the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
feels that we, we're a little
bit behind the 8 ball on this
issue, like a lot of us do, and
then it's time to provide the
necessary resources to
accelerate giving, the help to
people who are trapped by
addiction or struggling with
mental health.
challenges. So this is a
targeted approach, and this bill
should lend itself to measurable
outcomes that will allow
successes to be shared
statewide. Thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in opposition
here in the audience?
see none we'll go to Zoom.
I have 2 persons on Zoom,
Richard Mason.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico and the lake stand strong
support of SB 2, along with SB1
SB 3, this gives a long way to
rebuilding our um behavioral
health system that was um
dismantled over 10 years ago.
Um, I wanted to thank Sen Sendo
and I really appreciate the
bipartisan support for all of
these pills in a commitment to
rebuilding our uh behavioral
health system. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Jason. Um, next,
we'll have Dorothy Seaton.
Yeah, I just found my unmute
button.
I am Dorothy Seaton,
representing more than 560
members of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. I'm a
retired army officer and a
former licensed chemical
dependency counselor following
my military career, I was in
prison for 13 years as a
clinical director and trainer
for a substance use disorder
program. Um,
The caucus supports all three of
these Senate bills, you're
hearing this afternoon because
due to conditions experienced
during military service, many
service members experience a
higher than average incidence of
physical and behavioral health
problems. And when we do, our
families experience those
problems along with us.
As we know, the uh
The Behavioral Health Network in
New Mexico was dismantled
several years ago.
We can and will do better with
the passage of these pieces of
legislation.
Our lives depend on it.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak and I'm in support of all
three of these bills.
Thank you very much, Ms. Seaton.
So with that, we will go to
Just a second.
Oh, OK, one more.
Uh, Connie.
Elizabeth, if you'd like to.
Yes, thank you very much, um.
Senator Lopez, um, members of
the committee. Thank you so
much. I am in favor of this
bill, except I have a 22
questions and concerns on
section 11 and 12 of
appropriations of a million
dollars to both UNM and DOH for
homeless uh outreach.
I believe just as a, you know,
and as a resident of
Albuquerque, we have the
gateway, and I think we have
other things going on here in
Albuquerque particularly, and I
think if there were to be
homeless, uh, support, it
should, it should be to the
entire state.
That's, those are my comments,
but otherwise I do uh I do uh
Support this bill. Thank you
very much.
Thank you very much, Connie.
I think that was it, just to
make sure we covered on Zoom. So
with that, we'll go to questions
from committee and we'll start
with Senator Sidel Lopez.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you very much for the bipartisan
support, um.
It's so exciting that we are
really taking this this problem
so seriously. I have a a few
questions, um, and, and this I
think is where the rubber meets
the road, right? This is how
we're gonna spend the money, and
this is a lot of money.
I'll start with, I guess just a
basic question. It says
recurring, is it anticipated
that this would come out of the
general fund, or is this
foundational until enough funds
are generated from the trust.
Madam Chan center, so the 140 is
initial down payment. Uh, we are
looking at adding additional
money to the grow for years2 and
3 and see where the behavioral
health fund gets, you look in
the FIR in the previous bill, it
takes a while for it to start
kicking out $50 million a year.
We do not know the operational
costs.
We targeted what we learned from
behavioral health communities
and what the needs were and we,
we felt the number of 140, uh.
Pretty much stood it up. It
didn't, it's building the tires.
The rubber is gonna meet the
road in Senate Bill 3 and, and
how we do that. But this is uh
the start, the down payment,
initial payment, and then the
funding behind it for
reoccurring funding for those
that they're successful, and
those are things that are
working.
Madam Chair, since it is a down
payment and it's gonna be
foundational. I have a couple of
concerns about.
Things that are left out.
Um, schools are not included in
the planning process, and a lot
of our children have behavioral
health needs, and a lot of them
are met in the.
In these school clinics.
And so I'd like to see schools
included in in the planning
process.
You're having the AOC, um.
Are they? I'm sorry, was I
wrong? Was I incorrect, Madam
Chair?
Madam, I was just making sure my
response is gonna be correct. So
mental health in schools is
funded through the PED and in
specials in supplementals and
how they want to handle mental
health.
I miss Madam Chair, I understand
that, but I'm talking not, not
in necessarily funding them, but
included in the planning
process, as I understand this
bill, and I could be mistaken.
But the AOC is gonna lead this
planning process and AOC is
gonna bring the stakeholders
together and they're going to
either contract out or create a
report.
And
Maybe I was missing something,
but I didn't see, well, there
are 2, I'll just tell you I
didn't see the schools, and I
also didn't see populations uh
or the stakeholders evolving
people with uh disabilities,
physical disabilities.
Um, and so I, I just feel like.
As part of the planning process.
We should have as many people at
the table and I.
Maybe I missed it, but I didn't
see him here.
Or maybe I don't know.
Uh
If I'm wrong please correct me.
Madam Chair, um, and, uh.
Senator, uh Lopez, I was
approached by, you know, folks
from the public school as well,
and you're right, they just want
to be consulted, and I believe
uh that framework.
sits in Senate Bill 3 as well in
terms of uh consulting and so
forth, so, uh, uh, so yeah, this
is a work in progress, but I
think they will be included in
that.
I
I do, does it need to be amended
to make sure that they are
because I mean I, and then I'll
get to my question about the
AOC. I, I understand the AOC is
extremely competent agency. And,
you know, I, I think.
It was wise to choose them,
they're regional and a lot of
the behavioral.
I, I
We're getting answers, so go
ahead and
and I'm listening but I haven't
asked the question.
Yeah, we're gonna answer that
question completely right if you
look at, you know, section C
behavior health stakeholders
means representatives from
administrative offices to
courts, health and, and it lists
all the various entities of what
you're saying is that since
they're not specifically listed.
I worry about about being
excluded.
OK, all right.
They they, Madam chair and
Senator, they currently are not
excluded, right? And the
regional planning, they should
be part of that regional
planning and the courts may
bring them in, depending on, on
how the regional planning goes.
So there are eligible, there is
an opportunity for them to play
if they need to be spelled out,
we could probably spell out out
in the legislation just so
everybody feels a little more
comfortable, but they are.
supposed to participate. This is
not.
This is not exclusion.
Uh, Madam Chair, my problem with
that is, is just what you said,
the courts may bring them in.
Which leads me to my, my other
concern.
I think
But as I started to say, the AOC
is extremely competent agency.
They've done a really great job
with the with the pilot money
that we've given them a lot of
the behavioral problems end up
landing at their lap.
Um, so I, I understand why
they're the leaders, but they
are not necessarily the
specialists in community-wide
behavioral health problems.
For example,
Uh, and, and maybe we'll, we'll
see this, but I've, I've worked
with the courts on domestic
violence issues, sexual assault
issues and um
And I want to say this not in a
demeaning way at all, not in I,
I just
I think that that they the
courts themselves are about
resolving disputes.
Um, as their core function has
it, and I think actually Supreme
Court Justice Thompson said that
when he gave his speech, his,
his, uh, state of the state,
state of the judiciary speech.
He said he's the that he thinks
the judiciary wants to step up
to help our problems as long as
it didn't undermine their core
judicial function.
And my concern
Isn't so yes, I know that they
will not do something that's
gonna undermine the core
judicial function.
But
In terms of a building a
network.
That has not
Be what they have done.
And um
My concern is if we don't spell
out.
I'm going back to my earlier
concern exactly who needs to be
at the table and what was he
expected.
Um, I know it says a report and
it says that the report could be
contracted out. I, I mean, I, I
understand, but I think that
they need a little bit more, at
least in my view, if I were.
Um
I, I just feel a lot of my
behavioral health experience
didn't come from being an
attorney. It, it came.
From other places, running a
domestic violence agency,
attending legislative Health and
Human Services hearings going
around the state visiting
people, it, it's different from
their experience and my worry
is.
I identify the the disability
community and um
His being not here at the table,
and I identify just sitting
here, the schools has not been
at the table. There may be
others that are not at the
table. I, that I'm not even
aware of, um, it didn't
specifically identify domestic
violence and sexual assault. I
assume that they would be.
Because they are behavioral
health services providers, um,
And I, and I'm not so worried
about them because the courts
see that all the time.
But there are problems that the
courts don't see all the time.
And so how are we going to
ensure in this foundational
investment because I think what
comes out of this first year is
gonna set the stage for decades
to come.
And it would be horrible if I
like and I really appreciate the
tribes are included, because
it's very important at the very
beginning that a population that
has
That
As I learned, um, drinks less,
for example, alcohol, but has
worse health outcomes.
That that population be that
that community be at the table.
And so
I, um
would ask, and I don't know if
I'm gonna ask for an amendment,
I guess I'll, I'll see what your
reaction is. I would ask for a
little bit more specificity um
in the planning process in this
foundational investment.
Um, and I understand that that
33 is here.
Um, but this is the foundation.
Madam Chair, and so I, I, Madam
Chair, I would just like to see
the reaction to that concern.
Madam Chanener, you know, the
guard rails and everything you
expectly talked about it is in
Senate Bill 3.
This is the funding sources and
how the funding sources should
go and where they should be
targeted. uh, we left a lot of
flexibility like on page 2,
section 2, page 2, section 2 tab
C.
Just
That's not eliminate anybody.
And so in in Senate Bill 3,
you're going to see the real
guard rails of how the
functionality works and, and
who's eligible and who's not
eligible and what the needs are
and, and, and how this,
this inner working I
I saw that that that that they
they're gonna do it region. I
love that it's bottom up.
Um
And maybe, I don't know man I'm
sure, maybe uh we should if.
It, uh, maybe.
Vote on both, um,
Senate Bill 2 and 3 together.
Because maybe uh a lot of my
concerns would be alleviated by
questions I have about 3, no, I
know, I know, um, you know.
Because I do think that section
uh that Senate Bill 3 is more
specific.
But I, at least my experience is
when you make an appropriation
and you don't give.
The guidance
Um
It could go, yeah, it could go,
so it could go sideways, um, so
I would appreciate maybe the
discussion on Senate Bill 3
before voting on the
appropriation. I believe that
that was on the other side too.
Uh, we're going from the money,
then the the specific
appropriations for 150 million
and then to the guardrails.
Um, and, and like I said, this,
this bill.
Um
Made me concerned about the
guardrails.
Madam Chanin, uh, and what if
the other bill doesn't pass that
I would be really freaked out.
The,
the committee can do whatever
their choices. I'd urge you,
well, it's up to you.
But the guardrails in in 3 are
gonna be so defined and so
detailed.
That you're gonna say or they,
they covered that I should have
kind of waited. uh, just
remember, we're funding right
here. We're appropriating money
to these agencies. This bill
goes next to Senate Finance
Senate Bill 3 that goes to
judiciary next.
Right
Oh
Why didn't you go to Senate
Finance, 3 goes to judiciary
next to look at all the details.
And so as we gather this
information, those committees
with your information, we can
amend them there if you want to
amend them in this committee,
that'd be the pleasure of the
committee, but there is another
detail as we move along before
they go down to the floor.
OK. I um
I respect that, and I, I respect
that concern or that that
explanation, um.
Perhaps it's because my only
experiences with growth funds.
And my experience with Grow
funds is has been mostly
positive, but also if you're not
specific enough.
The money has been used in ways
that I did not intend.
If you're not
Specific enough and
And then if you're too general
also if you um.
I'll, I'll just leave it at
that. And so maybe that's why
the language here.
was fraud, as you said.
Uh, and not not specific enough,
so I will, um,
I guess I would like to have uh
3 discussed before we vote on
two Madam Chair, if that would
be possible. Uh, I understand
and I think that'll clarify
maybe my concern, the difference
between giving money and giving,
giving the appropriation, and
then the specific substantive
guardrails.
Madam Char would not argue that
the order of the bills could
have been a little better
because we're, we're dealing
with a lot of questions from
Senate Bill 3, and so it's a
prog of the chair. I don't see
an issue with us having to wait
to ask questions on this one and
then come back and you can, you
can do whatever you, you, the
committee wants to after that.
That's not an issue for us.
And I look at it a lot of my, a
lot of my rest of my questions.
As I think about 3.
Um, I mean, I still do have
that, that, uh, concern about
the AOC.
Ensuring that the AOC does what
we want, um.
But I, I'm looking at my little
notes, and I realized they might
be more appropriate for SB3.
Before we go on, are there any
other comments on
Suggestion being made by Senator
Sah Lopez.
Senator Scott
Just on the recommendation.
What she's asking for to put on
hold Senate Bill 2.
This point
Going on with Senator Wirth to
present Senate Bill 3. I'd like
to hear some discussion before I
make my, my comments also.
Yeah,
Madam Chair, just also to make a
comment.
The effectiveness of this bill
will be contingent upon the
passage of SB 3.
So these are, that's why I'm
saying, these are all connected.
So
Just don't put that out there,
but I think the guardrails
you'll hear a lot of that from
Senate Bill 3. This is strictly
an appropriations bill to these
various agency has nothing to do
with what this has been
discussed and and so.
No, I appreciate that. Thank
you, Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
A question.
That I have is this $140
million.
Appropriation.
Purely to support.
The reorganization of behavioral
health.
In Senate Bill 3.
Madam, this is not a regal
organization. We know what's out
there is really not working.
This is
How, how do we make things
better? I mean, uh, our expert
witness Adrian Avila has a lot
of detail, but when we started
with this is what, what works
and how do you regionalize it
because that's what the
That's what everybody's telling
us. Every region is different.
Rio Rancho may be different than
Albuquerque.
Definitely Gallup is different
than Farmington, right? And
those as you regionalize those,
you need to target those.
And so that's why we regionalize
them and said, OK, tell us 5
things at work.
Pick 5 things in these regions
that work that you aren't
currently doing and let the
state fund that.
And that could be from, uh, I
need to open the doors and turn
on the lights and I'm a licensed
psychologist and I need a bed
and I need everything else to
open up that practice.
It could be, I need uh
Treatment.
And uh I will.
Mention, you know, Santa Fe
recovery, who works in Santa Fe,
does the same thing in Gallup
under four corners.
two completely different needs
to completely different
scenarios.
Gallop is completely different
than Santa Fe, uh, and they're
working through the differences
and, and I can get them to you,
but I don't know off the top of
my head, but how do we work
those regionally? And so we know
what we do now does not work.
So we don't want to rebuild
something that already exists.
We want them to come from the
bottom up, just like we said.
Develop what things they need,
pick 5 things in that region
that that currently are
happened.
And, and let's go do them. And
then let's check the data, let's
check the performance, let's
check where the money is being
spent, and then let's come back
and say, OK, we're, we're not
doing that because you guys
didn't do it or there's no
performance in it.
And let's strike that one and
what's the next thing we need to
move on?
So Madam Chair and Senator, this
$140 million.
Yes.
Specifically targeted.
But those efforts.
That or
Hm
A part of SB 3.
Is that accurate?
Madam Chair, Senator, that is
accurate. OK.
that I tend
Madam chair to completely agree
with Senator Cedilla Lopez.
Much to my surprise.
I think we all might be
surprised.
That we should be discussing
Senate Bill 3.
And, and this.
On its face.
Looks like a scatter shot.
I mean, we're, we're looking at,
at grants for certified.
Community behavioral health
clinics and then down here we're
expanding housing service
providers that looks like a
scatter shot that would not fit
into.
Madam Chair and senator and
organization chart.
That deals specifically
With behavioral health.
So
I, I, I would.
I would like to hear SB 3 1st, I
think.
If that's possible, Madam Chair,
we, we completely agree, we
don't want any confusion on
these baby health bills, right?
They need to be
Comfortable, you need to know
how this is targeted and how
it's gonna work.
Um, we just like, if there's any
other questions on Senate Bill
2. We can move to Senate Bill 3,
we'll stay in the room other
than a bathroom break and then
uh come back and then if there's
questions between the two, we
can, we can answer questions
between the two and wrap them
up. Madam Chair, I, I move.
Sorry.
Hold on a second. The chair
still has the prerogative to
move things around on the
agenda.
I'm just asking for input from
committee.
I don't have to ask, but I'm
asking for some input.
Understand?
OK.
So, what I'm hearing at this
point cause I don't wanna, I
mean, we all have a timeline.
I do.
And, um,
It the presenters, the sponsors
are OK if we kind of reverse the
order.
Um, what we can do, and I think
there were some questions that
were being asked by a couple of
senators earlier on Senate Bill
1 that has some, I think some
Reasonable concerns, maybe they
wanna make some.
Amendments to Senate Bill 3.
So what the chair will do, just
listening to some comments made.
Um
Let's put on hold Senate Bill 2
at this time.
OK, we'll put it on hold.
And I think we'll bring Senator
Worth up.
And others will be presenting.
Um, and let's talk about exactly
what the regional plan, the
first, you know.
What the, the plan is going to
consist of
Because I think that there are
some concerns. I have some
concerns, by the way, also.
Um, so let's just go ahead and
do so at this point.
Um
So Senator Wirth, if you would
mind coming forward.
And we'll just ask Senate bill
to presenters.
Hold your thoughts.
OK.
And we'll do
Senator Wirth.
On Senate Bill 3 and the Senator
Stewart going to join us or she
won't be able to? I think she's
in judiciary. Oh, she's in
judiciary. That's right. They're
meeting at the same time we are,
Madam Chair, what is your
timeline? Um, I actually, I need
to be out of here by 5:30.
OK.
I have to cause I have some
medication I have to be taking.
OK, so
I, I think we've had enough of a
discussion at this point, but
let's look at Senate Bill 3.
Let's put some concentration and
focus.
Now what I will suggest is, I'm
sure there's gonna be some
amendments to be made.
What I have done in the past and
it's looking at the sponsors who
are here in front of us.
We can take do notes on any
recommendations for amendments.
So as not to hold the bill up,
but then predicated that you're
going to the next committee.
And you can have those
amendments drawn up out of ledge
council service.
You could review it with the
persons who are making the
suggested amendments to make
sure that we're all, and I think
we're all honorable.
So that those amendments are
then proposed at the next
committee.
Um, hearing.
And I think Senate Bill 3 is
going on to
Uh, Senate Judiciary, am I
correct?
So I'm sure it's currently
scheduled there, although in
thinking about it, these 3 bills
are so integral together and I
think what I may do is visit
with Senator Cervantes. So the
reason we didn't send it didn't
have a fiscal impact, except the
reality is it does because
they're all together, so I think
I'm gonna ask Cervantes and
Munoz, if we can drop the
judiciary, send all three to, to
finance, but with the condition,
and I really appreciate.
You know, the the
We will
Assure you that.
The comments that are made, the
tweaks that need to be made,
that those all are done in
between and can confirm that
before the bills get presented
in the next committee so that
the sub that comes out of
work here, there's going to be
additional stakeholder work
between here and the next
committee.
Uh, is something that the
members that have raised
specific issues.
can feel that those concerns
have been adequately addressed
before we move forward.
OK, no, and I appreciate, I
mean, and it's been done before.
Um, but again, we can take due
notes with our committee
secretary.
Making sure that any amendments
that are proposed for Senate
Bill 3.
Are incorporated.
Um, and we can do a due pass on
a committee substitute.
And then subsequently that could
be shown to each of the persons
who have made the amendments.
Um, and then predicated of
course on the chairman.
Where'd you go? OK.
Um, for him, and if, if that's
the change that you'll be making
on the floor.
Um, after discussing with
Senator Cervantes too.
Ma'am, I appreciate that very
much and
Good to have you back at the
helm.
OK. I mean, we've done that
before and that's what we will
do.
So, um, with that, if you would.
Your duty in doing presentation,
you know, the presentation on
Senate Bill 3.
Yeah we'll share this
presentation with Senator Sheer.
This is a continuation again of
the bipartisan work and I also
wanna let the committee know
that the
Um, Republican leader in the
House, um,
Neil Armstrong indicated they
also are going to sign on to
these bills. Um, so again, I
think it's just this is
something and, and we got to
work on the details and we're
happy to do that.
So Senate Bill 3 basically
creates the behavior health
reform and Investment Act. This
is the guardrail bill to ensure
that there's accountability for
the management and use of these
funds, and it's got the
oversight for how the different
regional plans are set up.
Senator Cedillo Lopez notes it
is the administrative office of
the court. I think there's a, a
real precedent for that, which
came out of our special session,
uh, and I really appreciate the
court stepping up.
To do something which is a
little different and it's above
and beyond, but I think it's
also a recognition that they're
the front line.
For this behavior health crisis,
and I know our just as Zamora.
was instrumental in putting
together the working group on
criminal competency.
And the reason for that is that
when she was a district judge,
seeing the same folks over and
over and over again.
And so there is a lot of
parallel here to what's
happening right now with the
pilot programs for assisted
outpatient treatment.
Uh, in Santa Fe, which is a
collaborative effort with an MOU
quartz counties providers and
also with criminal competency.
And what's super important is
that we make sure that
When we are changing
The laws that deal with the
criminal side and the civil side
for behavioral health treatment.
That the services are there.
So that the folks that are going
through the system are able to
get the help they need.
And I think that's, that's the
reason these things all work in
conjunction.
So let me just read to you just
real quickly and go through, I
want to go through one section
and then I'll yield to center
share and then we can get into
the specifics. I think on page 3
of this bill.
is the key, the key sentence
that involves the definitions
that really direct where this is
going, and it's
Page 3, section 3, line 14.
The administrative office of the
court shall designate behavioral
health regions.
Coordinate regional meetings.
Complete sequential intercept
resource mapping and coordinate
the development of regional
plants.
So a behavioral health region is
defined on page 1 line 19, a
geographic area of the state
that encompasses one or more
counties or judicial districts.
For example, the AOT program and
assisted outpatient treatment
that's happening now in the
first judicial district. It just
got kicked off last week.
Involves the three counties in
the first judicial district, Rio
Riva, Los Alamos, and Santa Fe.
Uh, I think what's envisioned
here is, as was mentioned, the
13 districts are gonna be the,
the jurisdictional.
Uh, regions under this bill.
So they coordinate regional
meetings, uh, page 3 line 1, a
regional meeting means a meeting
held by behavioral health
stakeholders.
At a government owned facility
within a behavioral health
region.
And so then you've got to go to
what's where the behavior hall
stakeholders, and this is the
issue that Senator Sidil Lopez
was focused on.
Papa page 2, line 1.
Representatives from the
administrative office of the
court. This is the definition of
behavioral health stakeholders.
A representatives from the
administrative office of the
courts, behavioral health
patients, behavioral health
service providers, the
healthcare authority, the
Department of Health, the
University of New Mexico Health
Sciences Center, Indian Nations,
tribes and Pueblos, local and
regional governments or other
appropriate state or local
agencies or entities.
Uh, so once the, the
Regional meetings are, are done
a complete sequential intercept
resource mapping, that's a
defined term, page 3 line 7.
A strategic planning tool that
helps communities identify the
resources and develop plans to
divert people with mental health
disorders and substance misuse
away from the criminal justice
system and into treatment.
Um,
and then it says and coordinate
the development of regional
plants.
So a regional plan is a plan
developed collaboratively by
these stakeholders to provide
behavioral health services to a
behavioral health region.
So that is on the front end.
And then I might yield to
Senator Sheer to talk about the
accountability because the next
question becomes, OK, we've set
these things up.
How do we make sure we're
following this?
And so in the bill and you wanna
go through this, Senator
Sheriff?
Yeah.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I hate it when you do that to
me.
So first, let me just say that I
would not have signed on to this
without the guard rails.
So that to me is the piece of
this that makes this.
Me, uh, worth doing.
The guard rails in general terms
really involve all three
branches of government,
certainly the AOC is the lead on
this.
And uh that is followed up by
the variety of of uh
Executive offices, but primarily
the uh
A health care authority with all
of the others that are in there.
And then, of course, as the
appropriating authority, that's
us.
So all of these performances
then come together through this
collaboration in the regions,
but it also certainly includes
us because
The region doesn't get the money
unless they meet the performance
standards.
But the performance standards
are based on what's right in
that district, so certainly it
includes nations, tribes, and
pueblos.
But
In Clovis, that is not a major
issue in Farmington, that is a
very big issue.
And so we don't want to have a
standard since you have to
include this, they'll be there.
But
It can include whatever other
issues are there. So if it's
schools,
Then it's schools.
If it's some other group or
organization out there, then
that's, that's what's included.
Now, in some cases it can be
across the board.
So, but in other cases, it's,
it's whoever happens to be
present.
Uh, that needs the help.
So
I think that's an important part
of this.
There can be standardization.
But there doesn't have to be a
single standard for the state.
So what's important where you
are.
But then the, the, the last part
of this is the performance
measures.
Again, we all get to participate
AOC, the Healthcare Authority,
the legislature gets to look at
these and say, OK, well, these
are the performance measures
that matter.
And so that's what we ought to
measure.
The bottom line is
This money goes out.
If the performance measures are
met.
If it's not met, then we come
back and say, OK, what happened?
What are we gonna do? How are we
going to meet this next time?
And to me, that's the critical
part of this.
So
It requires right here.
Um
Yes, page 4, I'm gonna start on
line 13, section D. Beginning no
later than June 30th of 2027, so
that gives us some time to build
this.
And every June 30th thereafter,
the AOC, well, it says
administrative Office of the
courts shall designate a
government entity within each
behavioral health to provide a
written report.
To us, the legislature.
That's how we're going to know.
Whether things are being done or
not.
So, um, on page 5.
Uh, let's start on on line 7.
We're looking for generally
recognized standards, so it's
not just some weird idea coming
from Cheer.
These are actual uh
professionals that are in that
are involved in this, the
generally recognized standards
for behavioral health services.
adoption and implementation of
the regional plan.
And these are the kind of
safeguards that I think
Uh, we're being asked earlier.
So what are we really doing to
make sure that this money
It is used.
the way it's supposed to be used
with the intent of this.
The intent of
Senate Bill 1 and Senate Bill 2.
So man up here just one other
thing I think uh that's
important to address. And I
think this goes to some of the
questions being raised about
schools and other groups that
might not be included.
So the language at the top of
page 2 on behavior health
stakeholders.
Contains some broad inclusive.
Groups. So it includes
behavioral health patients,
behavioral health service
providers, and then it goes into
more specifics.
My concern with trying to start.
Adding some here.
is that you could also then not
include others.
And so I mean, I think it's the
point Senator Sher makes is, is
spot on.
Each district is gonna be
different.
The reason this was drafted the
way it was was to give that
flexibility, but I think all
those
Would come under if in fact the
issue in that particular
district involves
A certain community or certain
Um,
voice that needs to be there. So
I think that's the challenge
and, and having said that, I, I
understand and here Senators up
is what you're saying as to
whether or not we need to, and
that's a choice that we can
make. We want to try, try and
start listing groups. I just
worry that then we, we're going
to get in a situation where
We're gonna have every single
group in the state try and say,
well, I'm not in there, and if
you're not in there,
Then is that some indication
that we're not going to include
them. That's what I worry about.
venture, that's, that's the
general gist of it and we're
happy to get into the specifics.
Again, I just want to say I
really appreciate the courts,
um, you know, for, and, and
there's still things we need to
tweak with the courts as well.
And I, and I want to be clear,
and I said this the other day
when I was actually sitting in
on the House Judiciary Committee
when the Chief Justice presented
on an update on the AOT.
This obligation is in addition
to the courts do.
There is no way that we should
ask them to do this and not give
them the funding above and
beyond. The pilot program
funding for the current runs out
at the end of June.
And so I think these two bills
will provide that funding in a
recurring manner or those
specific pilot programs, but
also to make sure the court has
the resources to be able to do
this job.
So with that, Madam Chair, we're
happy to stand for questions.
OK, thank you very much.
With that, we'll go to the
audience first.
For those in support of Senate
Bill 3.
If you would please raise your
hands.
OK, I think there's sufficient
if you'd like to stand up for
those who raised your hands to
please stand in.
Share with us.
Your support.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
My name is Conrad Chino and I
represent the Pueblos of Aquaman
Houses.
And I promise not to abuse
legislative equipment again, um,
but we do support Senate Bill 3.
Um
But we have a few concerns to
the bill.
Largely because it appears to us
that uh the AOC has been
identified as taking the lead on
the reforms.
And the only way that Tribal
members for the enter the
criminal justice system off
reservation is if something
occurs, happens, or they get
arrested.
And end up in the courts.
And it appears to us that a lot
of that could be prevented if
there were behavioral health
services and programs and
programs.
Available on reservation to
begin to address these issues
and concerns.
And so one of the things maybe
we could
I
The sponsors might want to take
a look at.
In creating reforms is to work
with teaching hospitals like
UNM, which already has community
directed programs.
In existence
As well as centering a lot of
its effort on um
On uh
Um, counseling, uh, school on
education, for short, in in
various colleges and
universities begin to produce.
kind of professional staff
that's needed to build capacity
within
The um health and human services
and behavioral health services
that exist on tribal lands. So,
Uh, with those comments, uh,
Madam Chair, we stand a strong
uh behavioral health and um
improve the behavioral health
system in the state. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Ellen
Pines representing the
disability coalition, we
represent the interests of
persons with disabilities of all
types, including behavioral
health issues. We stand in
strong support and thank both of
these co-sponsors for bringing
forward a bill calling for a
serious effort at planning for
behavioral health services. You
don't need me to tell you, but
I'm about to tell you anyway, we
have a severe shortage of
services and
of coordination of services and
planning in a meaningful way in
a bottom-up way, is an important
thing to do. Uh, I also want to
express our appreciation that
the bill specifically mentions
sequential intercept mapping and
diversion from the criminal
justice system because that's
really important. There's been a
great deal of focus on public
safety and to a certain extent,
scapegoating of people with
mental illness as an issue in
public safety. If people are
committing low
level crimes, things that may be
crimes but are really a
manifestation of their illness.
They should be diverted from the
criminal justice system and
treated as patients and not as
defendants. And therefore we
appreciate those mentions in the
bill and the fact that that's a
core part of this planning
process.
We do have some concerns that I
want to mention now, and it will
sound like I'm cribbing from
Senator Sio Lopez, but she and I
actually haven't talked about
this, um.
We do have concerns about the
administration, the
administrative office of the
courts being put in charge of
this process.
Behavioral health is a
healthcare issue. It's not a
judicial issue, and while I've
just um congratulated and
thanked the sponsors for
recognizing the need to divert
people out of the criminal
justice system.
I also think it's important to
stress that while we appreciate
the courts being active on a
certain piece of the behavioral
health.
Landscape, they do not have the
expertise, and we do not believe
they are the proper party to be
leading a behavioral health
planning process. And the other
um comment that I'd like to make
that I hope we can clear up, um,
you've all had some discussion
about the um uh the limitation
on stakeholders and Senator
Wirth read out the um uh
definition of stakeholders and
what one of the omissions there.
We feel as advocates, it's very
glaring, is that advocates are
not included, and we think that
advocates should be included in
the group of stakeholders. I
appreciate Senator Wirth's
comments that he doesn't want to
try to list everybody because
that's um
You can't, you can't, you're
never going to be satisfied that
you've gotten everybody and
somebody will feel left out. On
the other hand, I would point
out that the horse is already
out of the barn on that because
several groups or entities, a
number of them have been listed
and therefore, if you're not on
the list, you're already being
excluded. So I would really
encourage the committee looking
at those changes to put somebody
to put an entity with behavioral
health expertise.
in charge of the process and to
add advocates and others to the
list of uh stakeholders. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Jim Jackson
representing disability rights
in New Mexico today. Um, I too
would like to thank the
sponsors, uh, and all of the
work that went into this, um,
it's just great for us to
represent the interests of
people with mental illness, uh,
and other disabilities and to
see this kind of commitment to
to really developing our
behavioral health system and uh
encouraging local plant, local
and regional planning to address
these issues. Um, so we
We are really thrilled to see so
much attention and focus being
made for and on behalf of people
in our case, uh people with uh
mental illness, it obviously
clearly also includes people's
substance use issues and so on.
Um, my, uh, colleague, Ms. Pine
says outlined, uh, most of what
we had to say, so I'm just going
to let that go, but I appreciate
um this bill moving forward and
the commitment to a really
inclusive
planning process that really
goes beyond the court system,
but addresses the whole
behavioral health system. Thank
you.
Thank you committee. Uh, my name
is Sun Vega, and I'm the
executive director for
TeamBuilders Behavioral Health.
We're also a member of the New
Mexico uh Behavioral Health
Providers Association, and in
support of this bill. Um, I do
have questions, um, myself
around the role of the AOC I
think all um all behavioral
health providers, um, do, um, if
I can speak for some of them, if
not all of them. Uh,
We typically haven't had a close
working relationship with the
courts, although we would like
one, we're not opposed to it.
Um, I do believe it's a steep
learning curve for the courts,
and uh something that we have to
be aware of and prepared for.
Uh
I also, um, reflect on and I am
very familiar. I've been in
behavioral health for over 20
years. And uh was uh present
during the behavioral health
shakeup in 2013 and was impacted
significantly. And um
We've forgotten about the
behavioral health collaborative,
and its role in our system. And
I know that it's been defunct.
And I say defunct because I
don't think it's met and maybe
last 2 years, and I don't
believe there's a council that's
even active or local
collaboratives, and I believe
that this system, uh, under, uh,
Senate Bill 3, perhaps maybe a
replacement of that. I don't
know. Um, but we have to
contemplate what's already
existing in statute around the
behavioral health collaborative.
And
Um, whether they involvement
should be considered.
Uh, I believe that, um,
Given that they are at least
existing in statute today, they
should be and what their role
will be as a part of this. Thank
you all.
Hi, my name is Chris Faraggo.
I'm the CEO at the Community
Lighthouse, um, and also a board
member of the New Mexicover
Health Providers Association,
um, and uh I'm in support of the
association as well and um I
think San did an excellent job
of some things up. Um, there's
just one, I think very important
piece I would like to add is to
consider uh professional
development of behavioral health
providers. There is an
incredible shortage, not just in
New Mexico, but in our entire
country.
really need to continue to find
ways to invest in developing the
workforce, um, so that we have
providers to actually do the
work on the ground. So, um, if
you think through this, please
uh keep that in mind. Thank you.
OK, seeing no one else in the
audience in favor, is there
anyone in opposition to Senate
Bill 3.
And would you please come
forward?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Tanika
Sosa Gonzalez.
I am a board certified
psychiatric mental health nurse
from Las Cruces. Um,
There are moments in your life,
and this is one for me.
Where you have to choose courage
over comfort.
And I'm a board member of the
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Providers Association.
And I'm president of the Board
of Disability Rights New Mexico.
So,
Having said those things,
My views are different because
I'm a nurse first. And everyone
trusts their nurse because your
nurse is your advocate.
I have sat through in Donana
County 2 rounds of sin mapping.
The reason that the question is
coming up, I think I believe
deeply in the spirit of this
bill.
But I think the question about
youth is coming up.
Because there are 2 different
types of sin mapping.
There's adults in mapping, which
has very specific intercepts.
And there's juveniles sin
mapping, which has very
different intercepts. There's so
66 intercepts, and you're only
allowed to choose 5 initiatives
based on this bill from the so
if sequential intercept mapping,
that is a promising practice
from Samsung, the Game Center.
It was established in 2006 is
the way that we're going to
decide what these priorities
are, then we have to maintain
some sort of fidelity to sin
mapping.
It's um highly prescriptive.
And takes a lot of work. We're
in our 2nd round in Donana
County. And there are, among
other things, I have, there's a
there's, there's a lot to unpack
here. And
When I'm sitting here, I'm
feeling, I feel like when Jamie
Michael came to me and said,
years ago, came to me and said,
Tanika, I want to do this AOT
thing. Will you be our provider?
And it, I did it. I did it. We
stood up AOT. It was really
hard.
But because things weren't
defined early on.
We're now all these years later,
barely getting another AOT.
And
It's, this is really, really
hard for me. Like this is really
hard for me to lean into my
values and say we have to take a
minute and reexamine this. But
the reason that we have to take
a minute and re-examine this is
because this is elements, the
elements here.
are
People who are involved in the
criminal justice system if and
have SUD or mental health
diagnosis. This is a highly
vulnerable population, the
population of people that I've
cared, like, for my entire life.
These are invisible people, and
so we don't get this right from
the beginning. There's gonna be
problems. So I really would
encourage you all just to take a
minute and look at it and think
about the execution, and think
about, um, the other part of
this is the evaluation. Let's be
really clear.
And how we're evaluating this,
because the proof and the
evaluation of AOT in Las Cruces
through the funding of SAMSA was
able to show
It it was really clear then to
show that AOT was effective. So
there's a lot of, there's a lot
of other pieces that I have
concerns about, but I think
that's the most important thing
for me is that we get it right
from the beginning.
I'm sure. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
in opposition?
See now, we're gonna go to uh
Zoom.
And I have this for Senate Bill
3.
Dorothy Seton
OK, Madam Chair, this is Dorothy
Seaton again, I've introduced
myself to you in the committee a
little while ago, so I won't
take more time with that.
Uh, I wanna say first, uh,
representing the uh veterans and
military families caucus were in
favor of all three of these
bills. The concept is great, we
think it'll help a lot of our
veterans and their family
members.
Now I want to speak from the
standpoint of having worked in
in the prison system delivering
substance use disorder.
Treatment and being a clinical
supervisor.
Um, I have a little bit of
concern, uh, as has been
expressed by some others about
placing the management of this
within the courts because as was
said, the courts and the
Providers of these services.
Don't think alike a lot of the
time, so I would urge the
committee and the, and the, the
sponsors of the bill to take
another look at whose hands this
is going to be in, um, and with
that, uh, I will thank you for,
for your time and hopefully,
Madam Chair, you'll make your
timeline.
Thank you. Next, Connie
Elizabeth.
I'm sorry, can you hear me now?
Uh
Can you hear me all right? We
can hear you, Connie, yes.
All right, thank you.
In premise, uh, this section of
the third part of the 3 bills.
I, I do have concerns, uh, of
AOC as well as uh Senator Lopez.
I also think there's been some
missing pieces in the
discussions. Number one is
infrastructure.
Now, we do have existing
facilities, DOH uh runs their,
their mentally, you know,
capable. There's staffing,
there's, you know, facilities at
BHI. There's turquoise lodge and
there's Roswell rehab. We
haven't yet had a discussion.
Could the initial funding go to
our existing facilities. How can
we improve those? Because I
think those could be considered
regional treatment centers. I
also disagree with the premise
of some of the language.
of definition in the regional
being defined as at least 1 or 2
counties and depending on the
judicial districts when in fact,
I think we, we've been ignoring
part two, workforce, which is
all of our universities and
colleges, and even our um
Our community colleges such as
Santa Fe College, and I would
like to acknowledge that we
haven't discussed how are we
going to make sure that our
students coming from our
colleges are gonna be the
workforce and we make sure that
they come out debt-free and
licensed ready to go, and I
think that, that piece of the
discussion I haven't yet heard,
so I would like further
discussion on, well,
scholarships, fellowships, we're
working on a bill right now for
all of our colleges. I've,
there's been concerns on
every level about not enough
funding. The third piece that
someone alluded to is criminal
justice. At the end of the day,
we can all acknowledge the bulk
of our behavioral pro uh
problematic individuals. When I
say problematic, I say unhoused,
untreated are right now,
unfortunately sitting in our
county jails. Burleyo County is
almost at capacity at 2000
people, and we do have to
recognize that this model that
you're talking about the
intercept in the mapping, all of
that.
Can be best seen and I just want
to promote the Miami-Dade model,
Florida, because many people
have gone there as well as
Adrian Avila. I would recommend
that
We do go to Miami that we look
at what they have created as a
successful model using the
sequential intercept model but
also community involvement in
terms of our group uh that we
call the stakeholders. If you
can see on that list, it's only
UNMH as our, as our schools, and
I would say that the other
missing pieces are public
defenders and, and our defense
attorneys who see individuals
and yes, we have to acknowledge
that unfortunate
many of our unhoused and
mentally ill end up in our
jails. So with those things that
I would, I would like to know
how can we um maybe make
amendments. There's uh several
recommendations I'd like to say
and as a, as a stakeholder, I
also agree that advocates need
to be included in the next
doctor's nurses, um, and open it
up a little bit wider, but
again, in premise AOC, yes,
they're working.
you know, they've been working
in the communities. I appreciate
that. But as, as, you know, this
is mostly a health issue. Maybe
we should rethink who does the
regional meetings, and then
again, if we could just
acknowledge that Miami made Da
is the best model in the country
right now as far as success, as
far as community buy-in, as far
as transitional housing, as far
as all kinds of treatment and
the, the biggest factor I want
to acknowledge that someone
mentioned, if someone is
nonviolent, and they're sitting
homeless or they're in jail. We
have to provide treatment to
recovery, transitional housing
and job skill development, which
I haven't heard in this
discussion at this point, but I
do appreciate the efforts
because it indicates to me that
we are really serious and I, I
strongly appreciate the efforts
of this committee, but I do, I
would say I, I would recommend
several um
Several considerations that have
been discussed today before
going forward. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Connie. Patsy Romero.
Can you hear me, madam Chair?
Yes.
OK, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Patsy
Romero. I am representing the
National Alliance on Mental
Illness for New Mexico today in
this conversation and uh thank
you, Madam Chair, for allowing
me a few minutes to speak. The
National Alliance for Mental
Illness is in full support of
Senate Bill 1, Senate Bill 2,
and Senate Bill 3. We have been
involved in behavioral health
for over 35 years in the state
of New Mexico.
Actually, almost 37 years and
I've seen the New Mexico
Behavioral Health System
transition, uh, year after year
after year, and we never seem to
come up with a with a with an
appropriate behavioral health
plan for how we're gonna address
the numerous issues in New
Mexico, and I believe and have
hope that Senate Bill 3 that
includes all of the planning and
the inclusion of a real attempt.
To put together a strategic plan
about how we're gonna address
behavioral health in New Mexico.
I think we're moving in the
right direction. It's not
perfect. I, we also see some
concerns with it being
administer being administered
through the administrative
office of the courts, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, but we have to start
somewhere.
And I'm hoping that with the uh
wonderful legislature, this,
this legislature in 35 years,
regardless of who's been in your
positions have always been
generous and supportive of
behavioral health. It's never
been a partisan issue. And so I
think moving in the right
direction as, as it's being
presented today with Senate Bill
1, Senate Bill 2, Senate Bill 3,
we've got to start.
Finally moving in that
direction, Madam Chair, and I,
my agency happened to be one of
the behavioral health, uh,
agencies that work uh closed
down in 2013, uh, devastated so
many people in New Mexico from
my agency, I lost 7 individuals
who died because of the debacle
of 2013. So we've got to move in
the right direction. Lessons
learned.
Thanks to all of the sponsors
for bringing this together, and
let's start moving in the right
direction and we can clean up
all the issues that I think have
been brought up here today,
Madam Chair, that I think we all
need to be paying attention to.
But again, thank you very much
for your time. Uh, thanks the
sponsors for their support and
hoping that behavioral health in
New Mexico is finally moving in
the right direction.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Thank you, and I have one more,
Richard Mason.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Dick
Mason, I'm a board member, and
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women voters of New
Mexico, and we stand in strong
support of SB 3. I've already
expressed my support for it. SB
1 SB 2 in rebuilding the um
behavior health system, but the
league Artel has positions on
accountability and effectiveness
of programs and that we think
that SB3 does that.
And on a personal level, I just
want to defend the role of the
courts. I work very closely with
former Chief Justice Ed Chavez
on the Citizens redistricting
Committee, and I saw his total
commitment to engaging the total
community and bringing the input
from all of the community
together. Um, so I, I, I do
think
Judges in the court systems have
to have that expertise of trying
to bring input from a lot of
different people and try to come
to a conclusion. So, um, I, I
respect the the the uh
reservations that have been
expressed, but I do from a
personal experience, see the how
effectively the courts can play
a role like this. So thank you.
Thank you very much.
Uh, so with that, um,
But I wanted to ask Senator
Wirth before I go to questions
and we starting with Senator
Sidil Lopez.
Um
Is there anyone here from AOC or
someone that could answer some
of the concerns or questions
that can clarify.
Um
What what we've been hearing at
this point.
So man, I'm sure I'm not sure if
there's someone here, I'm sure
they're listening in. I know Mr.
Avila has worked extensively and
talked to them and can also
explain, I think there may be
some, the idea that the AOC is
going to be doing everything is
not correct. They're going to be
the oversight, and I think he
can explain, you know, the role
of the healthcare authority and
the different pieces that tie
into that and also address some
workforce questions that came up
that that I think could help,
certainly the key thing from the
course.
perspective that I've been.
told is they've got to have the
funding. In other words, it
can't be.
They're asked to do this as part
of their existing budget.
And so my understanding is
there's a willingness to
To step forward by the courts
based on the representations
that have been made to me, um,
contingent upon the funding
piece of it.
Mr. Avila, if you'd like to.
Share some more information. Of
course, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. So the
administrative Office of the
courts was deliberately chosen
to help with the planning, and
the reason for that is the
sequential intercept mapping
looks at the community, that
region, identifies all the
resources or assets that are
available related to the
behavioral health system, and
you know the criminal justice
system at the same time and it
identifies the gaps. So that is
half of your regional plan
already. And that's something
that the courts.
That, you know, the mapping only
exists within the courts. So a
natural springboard is for them
to oversee the next step. It's
like, how are we going to plan
to expand the services, better
integrate all of um.
Our services throughout the
region.
Um, part of that also is AOC.
Uh, hasn't invested interest in
knowing what's available. So
without them taking an active
role, they're going to be left
out and up to this point,
they've been left out of the
behavioral health process, with
the exception of the pilot
project that you all funded
during the special session and
the work that's gone on in
Donana County in regards to uh
AOT. So, uh, that's the reason
for that. Now, in terms of the
role of the healthcare
authority, they are still the
foremost experts in the state
that oversee.
behavioral health services. That
rule is not changing.
They are the ones that ensure
whether an entity's.
Delivering on the standards
whether they're eligible for
Medicaid, all of that still
stays there. That's not being
touched. So the administrative
officer of the court's only role
here is since they're already
gonna have to do the sequential
intercept mapping, well,
oversee a few more meetings and
get the regional plans, you
know, wrapped up with those
community members. And I'd like
to point out on page 3.
Line 17 through 20.
Courts have the ability,
depending on the region, because
not all regions will be created
equal. Some already have
infrastructure. Some already are
organized, some are not. So the
courts have the ability to
request from any behavioral
stakeholder to help coordinate
these meetings, so they can ask.
The Healthcare authority. Help
us coordinate in this specific
region. They can ask the cogs
who are the foremost experts of
the nonprofit work that's being
done in behavioral services to
help coordinate those meetings.
There's no limitation in that
regard. Now, in terms of
workforce, workforce is
something that's being addressed
within House Bill 2. It's not
explicitly appearing in Senate
Bill 2, but it is something
that's being addressed in House
Bill 2 through other funding
mechanisms, for example,
dedicated funding for social
work programs at higher ed.
You all have fun at the
Opportunity scholarship, which
pays for, uh, you know, um,
tuition free college throughout
any of our institutions. And
actually, I'd like to point out
in Senate Bill 2, there's
actually a clause for, you know,
the acute care facility. So
that'd be section 4 of Senate
Bill 2, where if we're going to
expand beds and those type of
services, let's start off by
expanding them in locations
where there is a higher ed
institution, so then you start
creating a clear pipeline,
right? If the jobs are in that
community, the higher
institutions can start.
training people in that
community to fill those roles,
and they stay home in that area.
So the workforce issues
addressed in a different way.
It's not explicitly funded in
here, but it is addressed.
Senator Earth
Is that
Yes, ma'am. OK, um, we'll go to
questions and Senator Cedil
Lopez, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
I respect the AOC enormously,
um, and I think with regard to
the planning process, I think
that that's fine.
With regard to, I think somebody
said that they were managing it,
that would be a major problem, I
think if AOC was managing it.
But if they're setting up the
planning with the SI.
Sequential
Intercept resources, is that the
same as SIMs? OK, that's what I
was kind of gathering, um.
So
If they're doing that process
and and making a report.
Um
Over, over time, it says a 4
phase plan.
And then um my question about
page 3 is identifying no more
than 5 state funded priorities
per phase.
Um, could you explain what you
envision with that manager.
I could have Mr. Avila again
address.
Yeah.
Madam Chair, Senator Di Lopez,
uh, with that, the idea is if
you have 4 phases, think of
every 4 years, you need a new
regional plan. So each phase is
a year. What are your top
priorities to accomplish in year
one? What are your top
priorities for year two? And how
do you build on your successes.
Right? So in some cases, it
might take 4 years to fund
something and get it fully
operational, so it might be your
priority to get funding for it
in your 12, and 3 and 4.
For other things, for example,
if you want to create a crisis
response unit to branch out from
a hub where you happen to have
beds, you only need funding at
the beginning for the vehicles
to do that, right? But then you
might need funding, recurring
funding for the 4 years to hire
the team that goes out and works
with the community, so.
Not everything is created equal,
and that's kind of the idea and
the other part is.
There is a limited amount of
money.
When with the SIM um mapping was
done in the first judicial
district. There were 34
priorities that were identified
as needing funding.
That's a lot. And realistically,
if you were to fund all of them
on that same day, they wouldn't
all get done.
So you need to prioritize and
really strategize. And that's
the idea of setting the cap at
5.
Um, within each phase.
So, just to follow up on that a
little bit, so let's just say
I'm I'm thinking out loud how
this work. So the AOC has all of
the stakeholders in and they,
they conclude like maybe.
I don't know what kind of
community this would be that.
Maybe it'd be bad for me, but
sexual assault.
Uh, domestic violence and um
Mental health, substance abuse.
For the priorities.
OK, so they identify the
priorities and then.
What next they then say, well.
They already mapped out what the
needs are. Maybe this is a
community with no sexual assault
agency, no domestic violence
agency, and they're seeing this
problem. Maybe it's a community
with no.
Um
No substance abuse treatment
centers, so they've identified
these priorities. What's the
next step for them?
Um, and, and for us.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Serio
Lopez. So the next step, right,
they have identified their
priorities. They identify how
they're gonna solve those
priorities, right? So if you
need, for example, more lawyers
for civil legal services or or
something along those lines,
right? You identify the need and
you create the ask, how much do
you need to make that happen?
What's your stand up? Can you
leverage federal dollars cause
we don't want to leave any
federal dollars on the table,
right? Do you have some funding
at the local level, at the
regional level that you can
commit to this to a degree.
That goes into your regional
plan along with how, what, what
are the results that we expect
from this funding? How many
people are going to be served?
You know, are is the incidences
gonna go down? That goes in the
regional plan, and then the
regional plans get distributed
to the state agencies to the
legislative branch and the
judicial branch, and depending
on what's being asked, the money
would then flow to that
community or that ask.
Uh, depending on appropriations
from you, Madam Chair, I love
the way that was just stated,
but here on page 4, it just says
identify local resources,
provide a timeline, provide a
continuity of care plan continue
continuity of care plan.
And then when appropriate to
establish a plan to obtain
federal, local, and private
resources. I mean, some of what
you said is incorporated in
this, but it's not.
As I suggested that the AOC is a
very strong institution. They,
they're very competent.
Um
And maybe, I mean, maybe if
you've got all of the
stakeholders there, they can,
they can put it together, um.
But I'm a little bit worried
about, I, I would like a little
bit more specificity and
guidance to the AOC I'm not
saying.
And I, I'm just suggesting that
has something.
That would be helpful so that
these reports look alike.
So that, you know, you don't get
somebody that does a report one
way, another report, and and
then it's, it's.
We have 13 different regions
with 13 different kinds of
reports, um, coming, coming in,
and then
It's difficult to compare. So I
would like to see a little bit
more guidelines. I love the way
you said it.
It's not how it's laid out here.
Um, and then, um, and maybe it's
intended and I'm missing
something I don't know, and
then, um, on page 2 where you
list the stakeholders.
I'm trying to think of something
broad, and I'm just gonna throw
this out for your consideration.
I'm not.
Um, I do think that if their
universities or colleges in the
district in the region. I think
that you should put them in, um,
you know, and make sure that
they're there cause it's a
resource that we have in this
state, the resource we pay and
you find expertise, um, my God,
with, with
Islands and their social work
program in that region, you
know, so I, I would suggest that
you add universities or colleges
or what, you know.
Schools something
Um, and then I was trying to
think of a word, um,
And I'll throw this out maybe
culturally specific.
Um
Services
Service providers and advocates
or what I'm thinking about is um
Including the tribes, I think
brings in a perspective that you
want these services to be
appropriate for their members,
but there are other groups.
Um, that also
In my experiencing may
experience running in lasse, um.
I have a lot of expertise and
see gaps that the mainstream
organizations don't see.
Um, and so I, I, and I'm just so
I, I don't know what word to
use, but I think culturally
specific.
Organizations and advocates
might pick that up, you know,
these.
Uh, and it'd be different in
different communities, maybe in
the south, they would look
different from from in the north
and, you know, the whatever the
culturally specific is, because
you don't know what the culture
is in that community. You don't
know what.
You know, what, what we're
talking about, um, and then, um,
It doesn't specifically say.
Uh, agencies and advocates
serving um.
Serving people with
disabilities, and I'll share why
I think that's so important. I
have had the unique experience
of having a town hall at pa,
which is in my district.
is a is a resident facility that
serves um deaf, blind, and
higher and well it's.
It provides housing for deaf,
um,
Deaf, hard of hearing and blind
individuals.
And some of them also have
mental health issues and, and
whatever, and
It was one of the most moving
experiences I had. First of all,
they'd never had a senator come
and talk to them.
Many of them had never even met
the senator.
Um, you should have seen the
thank yous and the thank you
notes I got. And then the
The
Uh
It just made visible issues to
me.
That had not been visible
before. And so I just think that
it's really important to include
the communities and advocates
that serve people with
disabilities, because otherwise
their mental health issues might
be overlooked.
I'm not saying they're different
or unique, but they might be.
Um, like, how do you provide
services, it, you know, using
sign language, how, you know
what, what are the unique
issues. So those are just off
the top of my head.
People that I'd like to see at
the table, I recognize that it
says or appropriate state or
local agencies or entities.
I, I think that that people
won't see schools as a local
entity. It doesn't say
advocates.
Um
And so that's why I just
suggest.
Those additions to the list, um,
and as, as being more inclusive,
and definitely that appropriate
state or local agencies or
entities or advocates or, you
know, something like that, but
there's something that we're not
thinking of now that could come
to the AOC and say, hey, we
provide X services and we want
to.
Provide our perspective on
what's missing.
Um, so, Madam Chair, I think
that
Um, oh, I did have one thing
about, so the guidelines for
giving the grants is on page 5,
it says the legislative finance
Committee.
Um, will provide the
administrative office of the
courts and initial set of
evaluation guidelines.
Or behavioral health, where
would they get those guidelines,
madam chair?
Uh, Madam Chair, Center Cio
Lopez. So that's section section
B or subsection B of Section 4
is focused on promising
practices, right? So most
behavioral health services are
already adopted by, you know,
national associations like this
is the standard. So we have
those already. That's in section
A. It's other things that aren't
necessarily at that level of
recognition.
That might work in a very
culturally specific um context.
Those are the ones where we want
to provide them guidelines so we
can get them up to that level,
because those items are not
eligible for Medicaid at the
time, but if we can elevate
that.
And eventually get them to be
eligible for Medicaid?
We suddenly get a 3 to 1 return,
you know. So that's the idea. So
LSC would prepare those and I
think it's excellent, excellent.
I just wonder, so they would
develop those guidelines or I
just wondered if they would just
take them from somewhere else or
that that was my question. It's
just a little question.
Like, but if you, if you're
saying they would develop those
guidelines.
No, yeah, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, I believe they already
have a general idea. Now it's
just refining it. Like how would
it look within the map, right?
So everyone would be like this
is the standard, this is what
you have to produce.
And I am very grateful and
thankful that you included the
idea of promising practice.
Um, as well, and then this, I'll
just point out the consistency
about substance misuse, but
thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I really thrilled that we're
paying attention to this and
that we're making such a big
investment and this is
excellent. I'm, and I'm also
thrilled that it's bipartisan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Said a little context here.
Wearing a white coat today.
Doctor, um, I've mostly been an
administrative position in my
career. I have administered
mental health, behavioral health
programs and, and health plans
and health systems and so forth.
And what I want to point out
from that point of view is that
for the first time, I'm seeing a
plan in this state. We have not
had a plan, and I would
Please do not go back to the um
behavioral health collaborative.
That has been a failure. It's
time to take things that are
failure. Now I'm speaking as a
businessman, put them aside, and
yes, this is different to go
through the courts, but it's a
structure and it's
accountability through the
courts, which we've not had
before, which is why we don't
have a plan because the people
become accountable.
And that's hard.
So
We have a plan, and I
congratulate uh Adrian and the
leadership in putting this
incredibly complex issue into
some format of a plan and within
like accountable oversight,
oversight structure that already
exists. That is huge.
From my point of view as a
professional administrator in
healthcare, having worked with
behavioral health.
I also, um, to take off this
coat. I'm a father.
I have 2 children, and you've
heard me many times say they
have both gone through their
addiction periods. It was awful.
Uh, alcohol, cocaine, and what
have you.
And they
grew a plan sequence of events,
and here's the point I want to
make. We're not talking about
breaking a finger and fixing it,
or maybe an infection and taking
the antibiotic. We're talking
about something that in
individuals, that's gonna take 3
years.
I mean, and, and all this has to
be segmented out and coordinated
together in order to have a
chance at sobriety.
You have to have 18 months of
sobriety. How do you get 18
months of sobriety with a
coordinated plan that uses one
word, connection.
That's how people deal with
their craving pathways is they
have someone to talk to, someone
to relate to, someone who's
helping them. That all has to be
planned out and I see this while
it's a start. I see this
evolving in that direction. And
again,
For an individual to really get
there, we're talking probably 3
years, in some recidivism and so
forth. But again, as a
businessman, I see a plan, and
I'm so thankful. And that brings
me to my last comment. There is
one glaring
Missing link here.
And, and it, it's, I'm gonna go
into it in a second and like any
missing link or in chemistry
rate limiting step.
Unless we address it, we won't
be able to do this. And it comes
down to uh what was mentioned
earlier by Senator Sheer
accountability. Well,
accountability and other people
have said measurement. You know
what?
Like it or not,
Yes, you can do checks that we
build this building? Did we, did
they hire the lawyers.
But measurement in discours for
the LFC.
Comes from claims.
I mean, some of this is going to
go through MCOs. The only way
you have to measure all of this
is through a claims methodology,
and as I read this, the LFC is
the accountable agency to come
back and tell you.
Senator Sheer, that we are
meeting our projections, our
goals and what have you, but you
have to have something to count.
So, I, I'm glad the governor's
representative is here today
because this issue has to be
addressed, or we will not be
able to measure.
Right now, the all-payer claims
database is housed in the
Department of Health.
Number one
That should move to the uh
healthcare authority. It needs
to get out of there.
Um, the health care authority
knows how to deal with claims.
They don't.
They can do some epidemiology
off the things that has to be
Somewhere in the legislation or
voluntarily through an executive
action. It has to be moved.
Number 2, the LFC must have.
Pa access
to
Raw be identified the identified
that.
access. Without it, you can't do
your job.
And it's not about asking the uh
pair claims database over there,
or would you look at this?
Anybody who works with data in
healthcare knows it is a fully
iterative process. You go in
with question one. You go into
your databases. Is there a
correlation. Then as you get the
data out, you see that was the
wrong hypothesis. There's a new
hypothesis. I then play with the
data to see do I go deeper in
that hypothesis. It's a fully
iterative process. It is not.
A process of, oh, would you
please and then get back to me a
week later.
It is a fully iterative process.
So,
We must put
The resources into the LFC.
To do IT.
Staffing who can go in and know
what they're doing.
Be able to look at the
de-identified raw claims data.
That comes out of basically any
institution, individual, I mean,
that's, that's all you've got to
work off of other than the check
boxes.
And there has to be, if, if
needs be, a legal agreement.
Or a bill.
Added to this that requires
That while the healthcare
authority can house
The, uh, the all-payer claims
database and the payments.
E
Both the healthcare authority
and the LFC need to have their
IT staff who can go in and fully
work with the data and get to
the conclusions, to be able, as
you look at page 2, and you look
at the standards of care,
psychiatry, psychology, social
work, how have you, and what are
they going to be? Yes, they're
learning. Um, they're there and
actually the OSI through the
mental health parity bill, is
building a whole lot of that
standardization. It's there. So
you can
go to them to get what it should
we be looking for in terms of
are, are we moving in the right
direction. So, um,
We, we really, the answers are
very close, but we must, uh,
and, uh, uh, I
Leading to the governor's
representative here. We must
have a legal agreement to have
full unfettered access to that
raw data in the LFC.
Otherwise, the LLC has to
Pay for their own database. We
can't have this back and forth.
That's not how you analyze data
in healthcare. The the question
and then a 3 weeks later answer.
It's an iterative ongoing
process.
So with that
that you look at
And, and, and ask the executive
of the HDA and DOH, you gotta
get this solved.
He won't be able to measure
anything.
Thank you.
New Hampshire. Thank you. Can I
just make a suggestion because I
know the time is at your window
and I'm sensitive to that. I'm
also sensitive to
The committee having the time to
ask the proper questions, and
that hasn't happened.
Y. And so here's what I would
suggest, I think you meet again
on Monday.
Uh, it feels to me like between
now and Monday if we roll this
bill over. I don't want to force
this.
Feels like there's certainly a
discussion about the behavioral
health stakeholder definition
that we can work to something
that
Yes
Closer to, it may not be
perfect, but addresses those
issues.
And it just would then give time
for full questioning. I don't
want to push this is too
important. And we have the time
and I appreciate that you
scheduled this first and perhaps
you could just hold the
committee report on the first
bill as the three go together.
They really do. And then on
Monday, there's proper time for
folks to
Again, absorb this, and I really
want to, I think it's important
to hear from everyone on the
committee, and I don't want to
rush this, and I'm also very
sensitive to
You know, you're here and we
appreciate you being here and
don't want to force this.
You know, or stay late or do
something that, that doesn't
work for your time frame. So I
would just suggest that
We hold this over, we work on
some language to come back on
Monday, perhaps Senator Cedillo
Lopez and maybe there's someone
will get a point person on your
side to
Coordinate and see what kind of
tweaks and amendments we can do
and
Let's take that step and tune
this up and then move it to the
finance committee and probably
do a few more tune-ups there
because it's too important to
not get it right.
You know, and, and I appreciate
Senator Worth, your willingness
to do that because we still have
a few more questions from a few
more of our committee members
and that would still take us
another probably 2 or 3 hours.
Um, and it, it's just the
process that we have. It's just
a process.
And I understand. So what I will
do is I will roll.
Senate bill 2 and 3 over until
Monday, Monday afternoon after
we get off the floor.
Um, and then we will hold the
committee report.
Um, until we can get all three
bills taken care of and move
those forward together.
So, um, we'll do that and if I
could ask those of you, and you
all know who I have on the list.
Um, please, you know, um,
approach both Senator Scherer
and Senator Wirth.
If you have any questions or for
some further clarification or
also, Mr. Abby, let's you, I
appreciate because this is
important.
Um, you know, there are areas in
here that all of this works
simultaneous, so it's not just
one entity, but
The bill has, I think, some good
points on it.
And everybody's supposed to be
working together, which is, I
think it's a good thing.
It hasn't happened in a long
time.
So, uh, with that,
Uh, we will stand adjourned
until Monday afternoon. Thank
you.
