This subcommittee I think of a
couple of other members joining
us in a minute or two Senator
Ingle I think it's still
important less I'm sure Senator
Sedillo Lopez is presenting a
bill in Judiciary social join us
as soon as she's finished with
that and I assume the other
senators will be here soon as
they finish whatever they're
doing up so in the in the
interests of making it clear
where we are there are a couple
of bills that have been pulled
off of the agenda today at the
request of their sponsors so if
you're here for three forty
eight over time for certain
motor carriers that's been
pulled from the agenda.
We're if you're here for the
three seventy Senator Hamlin's
Bill and collecting demographic
data that's also been pulled
from the agenda today well I
thought you'd be in district.
First.
The last issue of okay.
We're just going to we are on
the verge so with that we'll get
started in the first bill in
today's calendar is Senator
Stefanics with the because
sharing contributions for
prescription Senate bill fifty
one.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I am carrying this
bill for the Legislative Health
and Human Services interim
committee with me today I have
Dr Matt barber mac in any from
the U. NM cancer no New Mexico
cancers.
Right.
From the New Mexico cancer
center and on zoom my other
expert witnesses page do Hommel
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance.
So Mister chair of this bill is
about cost savings to those
individuals in the state who are
on commercial insurance.
It does not cover you if you're
on Medicaid Medicare or in any
of the large group purchasing
Plans so when you think of the
state employees yes it doesn't
cover any of those or in a
research plan or interests
either right now that's that
could be debatable there was a
court case that we're not going
to get into but right now when
you think about all the people
who are insured in this state
we're only talking about this
bill affecting ten to fifteen
percent of the insured in the
state who are under a commercial
policy the intent of copay
accumulators is to assist people
in saving money on their
insurance plans in deductibles.
Fourteen states have in fact
passed a copay accumulator this
summer during the Legislative
Health and Human Services
interim committee we actually
had a full day of presentations
on farm pharmacy and
pharmaceuticals in the pharmacy
drug task force the drive
mechanism chaired but NCSL
national conference of state
legislatures also had a staff
person who came to present to us
righty ways that states had
implemented cost savings for the
people in their state and copay
banning co pay accumulators was
one of those it just so happened
that I came to that meeting
prepared to talk about been in
co pay accumulators because one
of the specialists that I have
said to me if you can get rid of
this it would really help
consumers paying out of their
pockets for deductibles so I'm
gonna explain of the tiny bit
and then of course my experts
are gonna correct me and really
explain.
manufacturers often offer
patients copay assistance
programs to commercially insured
patients to reduce their out of
pocket drug expenses as I
mentioned through may of twenty
to fourteen states have enacted
laws banning payer and PBM
pharmacy benefit managers use of
copay accumulator programs are
there are a list of
organizations national
organizations that in fact are
behind this model language it's
in this bill and I'm gonna give
you a couple of examples the
allergy and asthma network the
alliance for patient access the
American autoimmune related
diseases association the
American cancer society the
American kidney fund arthritis
foundation chronic care cystic
fibrosis diabetes epilepsy go
share community alliance
hemophilia HIV immune deficiency
foundation lupus multiple
sclerosis national eczema
national him he with Philly a
psoriasis spondylitis and some
of the aids communities in the
Texas rare alliance so it's a
widespread
support group and specifically
it sounds like those with
chronic illnesses or diseases
are part of this group again
it's only for those people who
are under a commercial policy.
So copay accumulators have been
present in the specialty
pharmacy space for oral drugs
for some time and it's causing
many challenges for chronically
ill patients as they fall under
financial hardship I did pass
out I hope you have received an
article
and it's just one cancer patient
who wrote an article with some
assistance from one of the
foundations that might explain a
little bit clear of the
situation.
A copay accumulator or
accumulator adjustment program
is a strategy used by insurance
companies and pharmacy benefit
managers that stop manufacture
copay assistance coupons from
counting towards to cost the
deductible and the maximum out
of pocket spending.
So with that Mr chair I if you
haven't followed me I'm gonna
turn to my experts Dr mac in any
who's gonna probably give you
another perspective on this and
then agency page two Hummel to
drive drive locally thank you
for joining thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it's an honor to be
here and to have chaired the
governor's task force on drug
pricing.
I would like to give you an
example of how copay
accumulators harm patients in my
practice and how this really
works on the dated day event of
trying to take care of patients
I'm a cancer doctor and when we
prescribe oral chemotherapy to a
person on a commercial plan and
about a third of all
chemotherapy is now oral and for
and the assumption is that that
will grow to nearly sixty
percent over the next five years
what happens is that the
insurance companies charge
either a co insurance which can
be twenty percent of the cost of
the drug or a significant co pay
or deductible for all of the
above and this transfers money
from the pockets of New Mexico
patients to the insurance
companies because they don't
have to pay that twenty percent
of the cost of that drug so the
way it works in my office is I
paid a staff member to work with
the foundations created by the
pharmaceutical industry that as
soon as there's money in those
copay foundations they grab it
for my patient my patient that
is allowed to meet the full cost
of the drug and can fill that
prescription with an
accumulator what they find out
is that when they think they
have paid enough of the copay
through this foundation that
they should have been hitting
their out of pocket maximum they
provide that no the insurance
company has passed a rule that
says that money doesn't count
towards your copay we need you
to start over with your copay so
a patient who is doing well on
a medication suddenly finds that
they don't have the money to
continue that medication for
cancer this can be deadly but
you heard the list of other
organizations this affects any
patient who has been dependent
on some of the really important
and really good but.
Very expensive personalized
medicine type diseases what a
ban on co pay accumulators would
do what I would say to the
insurance industry in particular
to the pharmacy benefit managers
that this particular part of how
they move money from patients to
their own pockets is not allowed
that they are forced to count
anything that affects their true
out of pocket expense any
donation that a relative gives
the foundation gives or anyone
else gives toward their out of
pocket expense so that they can
get into that process where they
do what they expect from
insurances to cover catastrophic
care and when it reaches that
full out of pocket it is
supposed to be a hundred percent
paid for so this is harmful to
patients what you will here is
that if the insurance industry
loses this ability they will
have to raise rates the aids
foundation study this and rates
did not go up and this is been
found in several status is
several states that when these
were banned insurance premiums
did not go up they will also say
that it's important for patients
to have skin in the game and to
make wise choices and this is
just to make sure that the less
expensive generic drug is used
when copay accumulator programs
are working less than one
percent of the drugs they apply
to actually have a generic
alternative usually this is the
only drug that is an option for
the patient in their specific
condition there are no
alternatives there is no way for
them to make a rational choice
other than I will forgo care to
keep food on my kids table or I
will find way to to pay this
this fee so you will hear from
the insurance industry.
That.
These coupons are somehow used
to manipulate the system I will
agree that we live in a very
strange system of drug pricing
but given the fact for
individual patients especially
here in New Mexico where we have
so many people who cannot afford
it that if there is a way for me
to get the copay paid for the
patients whose cancer I'm
treating I will do whatever I
need to do to get that funded
and doctors in all of those
organizations that Senator
Stefanics listed are doing the
same thing if this is the system
we have we would love to change
that system but right now unless
we can Dan this process of
penalizing patients by taking
away these copays that have been
donated to them we will really
seriously harm New Mexicans with
serious chronic illnesses thank
you.
And you Mr this level of yes
issue Yang if you could make a
short statement that be great.
I'm okay there we go sorry I
wasn't being allowed to and meet
myself my name is Paige do him
all at Mr chair of the members
of the committee and I am a
representative from the office
of the superintendent of
insurance and I'm here to answer
any technical questions about
insurance insurance coverage you
may have at this hearing.
Okay thank you page with that
we'll go to the audience is
there anyone let's just get a
kind of a straw poll who's here
in support of this bill.
Who's here in opposition to this
bill.
Okay.
Is there anybody on the zoom.
In person but they haven't said
if there and support or
opposition to the project.
Okay check with them amendment
okay let's hear from those who
are in support of the bill.
I don't know okay is it on now
yep okay Mr chair members the
committee Linda Siegel for the
American cancer society cancer
action network and we certainly
support support this bill copay
accumulators are unfair to the
patients and we have a lot of
vulnerable people that are that
have cancer and are receiving
treatment and the fact that
their copay are that their
discount coupon or it can not
apply to their copay is
ridiculous so we support this
bill thank you.
Thank you than anybody else in
support want to speak.
Okay let's go to those who are
opposed the person on the it
turns out the president zoom is
also in opposition so
there's about eight eight or
nine of use as I could remember
want to take a we'll just take
for.
For and and give you a two
minutes each of you line up and
and.
This.
Mr that's it Mr chair.
okay Mr chair members of the
committee money can you hear me
there's a button to.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
M. registered lobbyists for
America's health insurance plans
national trade association
health plans and we stand in
opposition to this bill and we
stand into this in opposition to
this bill for several reasons
the first and the foremost you
should note that the federal
government considers copay
coupons illegal kickbacks under
the federal health care programs
like Medicare Medicaid because
these coupons induce page
patients to use specific drugs
which after stand about coupons
is that they are you selectively
they are used to in certain
categories for certain drugs for
certain periods of time if in
fact manufactures wanted to try
to improve the situation for
affordability for patients make
those coupons available for
everyone in the all categories
and make them available
throughout the year not just the
first part of the year for you.
Meet your minimum minimum
amounts that are owed for cost
sharing that Q. pandemic coupons
are essentially a manipulation
and the federal government has
recognized that we would hope
that this committee and state
government would recognize that
coupons are a practice which
should just go away thank you.
Thank you event at yes next.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez on behalf of CVS
health on behalf of CVS health
we rising respectful opposition
to Senate bill fifty one we
appreciate the Sanchez
dedication to addressing the
continuous rise in prescription
drug costs however as rain
Senate bill fifty one puts
patients with high deductible
health plans with a health
savings account at risk of
losing their eligibility to
contribute to the health savings
account due to existing IRS
rules as were in Senate bill
fifty one may require health
plans to turn off existing
programs that allow plan
sponsors to provide high cost
specialty drugs to patients at
zero dollar out of pocket even
if there is not a coupon offered
or the coupon has expired CVS
health to suggest has some
suggested in recommended
language to address these
concerns and we hope to work
with the sponsor in addressing
these concerns thank you for
hearing us Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you
recruiting.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee.
Pat block registered lobbyist
with terra consulting registered
lobbyists for prime therapeutics
we respectfully oppose the bill
coupon for pharmaceutical as
much like a coupon for anything
else like Cheerios at the
grocery store it's a marketing
strategy to encourage you to use
the brand name and generally a
more expensive product
When insured members are
encouraged to use the more
expensive drugs you do get the
short term gain of a lower
copayments but you also get the
long term pain of the drug
company or the excuse me your
insurance company is still
paying the overall higher costs
for that more expensive drug so
eventually those cost catch up
to you even though you save a
little bit on the front end it
is going to be a cost driver
that is one of the reasons as
Mister Moore mentioned that
these programs coupon programs
are not eligible to be used in
Medicare and Medicaid
they are an inducement to that
the government just does not
agree with so I hope the
committee explores that a little
bit more and
I think just the look at the
whole picture not just the cost
at the counter when someone
picks up a prescription are
there are there in fact.
Competing specialty drug for the
same thing.
Mr chair and members of the
committee as doctor Mack in any
said sometimes yes and sometimes
no but what you said was one
present no right and my
understanding of the one percent
yes in ninety nine percent no Mr
chair that's correct that's what
she said my understanding is
that it's a different proportion
and not quite ninety nine to one
but closer to more brand name
drugs versus generics the not
just like in the grocery store
when you don't have any
competition you're not going to
get a coupon.
Thank you Pat.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist preclude Cross blue
shield of New Mexico we stand in
opposition to this legislation
for many of the reasons stated
just to emphasize drug
manufacturers use coupon
programs to incentivize members
to opt for higher cost specialty
and brand name drugs these
coupon programs are designed to
be temporary but ultimately the
sticking the patient and plans
and employers with the ongoing
bill for the higher cost medic
medication and economist with
the Harvard Kennedy School
recently published an article
the reported that the share
brand name prescription drug
spending that included a coupon
rose twenty six percent from two
thousand seven to ninety percent
and twenty seventeen and has
resulted in high cost compared
to states that have prohibited
the use of coupons we encourage
the committee and the sponsor to
consider that if this bill
should move forward it should be
amended to include reasonable
limitations including to ban the
distribution of coupons when a
lower cost alternative exists
and that coupons be made
available to all consumers
including those without
insurance coverage thank you
thank you Martha.
Okay let's get the let's go to
the zoom we have we do have one
person in favor and one person
opposed so we'll start with
miles to can no.
Who is in favor for.
Hello chair members of the
committee my name is miles to
open a with.
And I'm actually here to support
SB three fifty but also upon
listening to the presentation I
out fully fully support this
bill as well the fifty one
anything that
saves costs for patients is
important I think for all New
Mexicans that is definitely a
value that we can all share
thank you so very much thank you
Mr to connect up and then a
Jonathan Burton zoom in
opposition.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee at appreciate your
indulgence in line with this
time to yes I for you remotely
with a little bit more time I
would be with you in person and
more importantly eating green
chili enchiladas this evening
but my name is Jonathan Buxton I
am senior director of state
affairs for the pharmaceutical
care management association we
are the association that
represents pharmacy benefit
managers these are the companies
the pharmacy benefit specialist
the minister the drug
prescription drug coverage for
the vast majority of New
Mexicans.
In the drug supply training from
drug manufacturers all the way
through pharmacies PBMs are the
only members of that supply
chain constantly working to
drive down the prices of
prescription drugs.
To just the opposition's fifty
one which spans thank you for
letters this bill this bill
fails to hold.
Receipt of manufacturers
accountable for their outrageous
drug pricing and the the limits
the abilities and lawyers and
others the insurance to direct
those patients toward lower cost
alternatives.
Funds are just used to gain
market share think about the
coupon in need so that they I've
never seen a coupon for
Storebrand laundry detergent
coupons are only offered for
name brand more expensive
Products in an effort to
families on the using those more
expensive alternatives the drug
manufacturers use coupons the
exact same way as mentioned
before chair sees what it is and
and keep preemption bands them
under the anti kickback statutes
continuing to allow big drug
manufacturers to use these
coupons to buy market share
without any constraints will
increase the cost of drugs in
New Mexico use these coupons was
estimated to be an increase of
over forty eight billion dollars
in the Medicare program in the
next ten years if their ban on
coupons as a listed.
Enter the building tools to
leverage those coupons to the
benefit the entire plan without
getting big pharma went.
Please we ask for your
opposition to Senate bill fifty
one to allow members to continue
their work to drive down the
cost of those projects thank you
thank you Mr Burton okay did you
want to respond before we go to
the committee a doctor did you
want to respond to anything or
Senator Mr chair yes and
committee members there is one
this is actually from the drug
task force report the drive
mechanism chaired
in terms of states that have
passed laws banning copay
accumulators Virginia had an
overall premium rate decrease of
six point nine percent after
they passed this banning of the
copay accumulators No issuers in
the fourteen states attributed
rate increases to having to
count copay assistance towards a
beneficiaries costsharing so Mr
chair this really is about
assisting the beneficiary the
of.
Individual under a commercial
plan only in terms of what is
counted towards their deductible
and Dr MacNamee might have
something more to add.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity answer some of those
questions you're correct
Medicare and Medicaid do not
allow.
Excuse me copay assistance
however the total out of pocket
for Medicare and Medicaid is
four hundred and forty five
dollars when a medication it's
not uncommon for them to cost
five thousand dollars a month so
the twenty percent coinsurance
is a thousand dollars and that's
every month so how many New
Mexicans can't afford twelve
thousand dollars as opposed to
four hundred and forty five if
you are on Medicare Medicaid and
week it we cannot provide
assistance to them but we can
provide assistance in other ways
that we can to these commercial
populations the data that we
cited from the prescription drug
landscape published by CYFD said
that point four percent of
purchases made with copay
assistance had a generic
equivalent eighty five percent
of the drugs more or less in
this country that are prescribed
or already generics this is very
specifically aimed at very
expensive specialty pharmacy a
term that does not even have a
definition but generally means
expensive drugs so that
we can help patients to get
these medications it is true
that many of these medications
are brand name drugs but if
they're still under patent and
they're the drug that has no
competition and no genetic
generic alternative then
patients deserve to be able to
have those drugs to treat there
cancer and not wait the fourteen
to eighteen years for the patent
to expire for generic that
that's simply impractical
there are significant barriers
to patients of being able to
afford their medications but we
know that when they go to the
pharmacy and they are told that
they have a twenty percent co
insurance a lot of people have
to decide whether or not.
They're going to put food on the
table or whether they're gonna
take that medication and a third
of patients dropped their
medication when they can't
afford the copay this is why
oncology practices arthritis
practices multiple sclerosis
neurologists worked very hard to
pay someone in our office on our
dime to provide the money to
help these patients be able to
afford to be able to get these
lifesaving therapies.
Thank you doctor nope to the
committee.
The finish discussion from the
committee a question Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bring this and thank
you Dr MacNamee for helping
elucidate this and and it is it
is a complicated topic I have to
say that and doctor Machen any
thank you for clearing things up
that the testimony against this
is totally confabulation.
With the coupons with what this
bill is intended to do
This is the this is helping
people who otherwise could never
afford cancer therapy to be able
to get it because these
alternative sources do exist and
that's what this bill is about
it's about helping people who
cannot otherwise get the therapy
they need for the cancer and as
you mentioned rheumatology and
Number of other area anyone
which was through pharmacy
benefit managers profited but it
did grow hundred and four
thousand percent in five years
Mr chair
we have page and and if you're
if you H. do you have any
information on the overall
profitability of the health
insurance industry.
Mr chair Senator is I actually
do not happen to know that
figure off the top of my head.
Okay Mr chair that was a
rhetorical question on my part I
actually have the answer what's
the answer dancers eighty
billion dollars I'm sorry.
Yes eight hundred billion
dollars I'm sorry the eight
hundred billion dollars.
So.
In this actually I mean this
goes to cover.
Not just the copays but the
deductibles you know which for
some people can can be signed up
but overall that as a component
as a cost to health care is
minimal so I just don't see a
new provided the evidence that
this is driving up healthcare
costs again that's not
confabulation devising the right
word could confuse the the
purpose of this bill which is an
able people who otherwise could
never afford to have a chance
against cancer that's what this
is all about and I I would also
like to comment just for the
committee's been played I think
was a remake conflate with thank
you Sir
it says.
Been a long comment period
anyway the
that the pharmacy benefit
managers I'm sorry and I and
doctor Machen any thank you for
bringing this back up again they
have not saved anybody any money
they're probably driving up
health care costs somewhere
around twenty percent with the
game to get played around
rebates so I would wish that
testimony in the future would
stick a little more to the facts
in terms of some of the
opposition and and I'm sorry I
just feel that that needs to be
pointed out this is about people
getting care that otherwise
wouldn't happen and it's easy
and it is not having been in the
industry at various times for
years and years it is not going
to affect the profitability and
as matter of fact the health
plans have spent eighty five
percent or eighty four percent
under federal law so in fact in
some ways this happened a little
bit thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for bringing this bill
thank you senator Senator
Maestas next followed by Senator
Gallegos thank you Mr chairman
Senator products thank you
doctor McKinney pretty were
appreciate appreciated
tremendously let me just in
reading the bill I didn't
understand it but I think and
now I'm getting it is actually
here many of the health care
purchasing Act fifty nine eight
article twenty two fifteen
eighty article twenty three and
health maintenance
organizational law section and
then some new language of.
It's all the same languages
basically repeating itself and
so the magic words are are the
insurer shall credit the
enrollee for the full value of
any discounts provided or
payments made by third parties
that's basically the bill right
there in terms of the wording so
so and the enrollee is the
purchaser the patient Mr
Chairman.
Dr yes Mr chair Senator yes okay
and then the the whole concept
of the.
Of the coupons is like freaking
me out a little bit.
So there is if I got this.
So someone is in need desperate
need of a particular medication
they have to have a state if
they paid cash you would say
cost a thousand dollars.
But because they have health
insurance they it costs let's
say a hundred dollars
Where would they get the coupon
and.
And so they that they have a
fifty dollar coupon how did they
get it and.
Ultimately does the insurance
company get the fifty dollars
reimbursed how does that work.
Mr chair dot all we defer to Dr
MacNamee thank you Mr chair
Senator good question there is
no actual coupon.
what happens is the medication
cost say five thousand dollars a
month and that is not an
uncommon price unfortunately the
insurance company is required
that there is a co insurance
often more than a copay for the
that drug and it is often twenty
percent of the cost of the drug
every month so what happens is
the patient who says I don't
have a thousand dollars a month
to pay for this we then from the
practices employee somebody
whose job it is is to sit there
and look through the copay
foundations and find that
patients some assistance when we
find a copay of foundation which
is funded by pharma.
Or the particular often farmers
give it to up copay assistance
foundation for example is a
common one then we fill out a
lot of paperwork on behalf of
the patient because they're too
sick to do it themselves and we
fill out this form and we send
the form in and they come back
with a new approval that says we
can use their money to pay for
that drug.
So what happens is the insurance
company still has to pay their
eighty percent.
Instead of paying zero because
the patient couldn't afford it
and the foundation pays that
twenty percent when the patient
hits there on out of pocket
maximum which usually happens at
four to six months into the year
the copay foundation no longer
will pay that deductible because
then it is supposed to be
carried full freight by the
insurance company those were the
policies we all bought.
So the accumulator says no we're
not going to follow that we have
defined this as not contributing
to your true out of pocket cost
so we don't allow that to be
considered and you have to start
finding that thousand dollars a
month but the copay foundations
are exhausted by that so the
patients out of what.
All right thank you Mr chairman
thank you doctor the
But up until that point the
insurance companies getting paid
correct.
Mister chairman Senator the
insurance company is supposed to
be the pay or not the person
okay I misspoke stated thank you
so the insurance company still
has to pay their eighty percent
whether I have the money myself
for my copay or whether somebody
else has the money for my copay
understood okay thank you
understand so I misspoke Mr
drive to Senator back to the the
seller of the product is getting
paid the insurance companies
paying out as if there wasn't a
funder there wasn't help they
just don't credit to their to
their calculations on their
policy and this would prohibit
that practice.
Mister chairman Senator that's
correct okay I think I I think
Senator Gallegos followed by
Senator Tallman and then Senator
Hickey for a second to.
Mr chair Senator
gentlelady I I just got a couple
questions so
I didn't understand the coupon
for I get to do it I've got a
bill for ninety eight that works
against well not against the
PBMs to try to understand their
cut of the action what does my a
pharmacist in my area often pays
more than what you get
reimbursed but I noticed Mr
chair Senator deal Tinker from
the pharmacy associations not
here have you guys had
discussions with them all what
this bill does to them.
Mr chair and senator of deal
Tinker was present during the
interim committee where we
discuss pharmacy all day and we
we had people from NCSL do a
presentation document committee
did a presentation on the
pharmacy task force we had
pharma we had in pharma did
actually I don't know if it was
form or another group the did
the whole chart about how the
money flows
from one entity to the next to
the next and then we had some of
the insurance companies and
Mr Tinker was in of was present
and their part was really about
pharmacists and trying to
bolster their practices out in
the rural areas so he didn't
take a position at that time I
don't believe Mr chair I mean.
Mr chair was the chair of that
committee so I don't remember
misty was there but it but and
and and you have but he didn't
he didn't I don't think is part
of the panel the specific panel
that dealt with this issue.
The COVID center thank you for
that Mister chairman Senator
then I have another question
just because the numbers hit
really really weird so Senate
bill fifty one and house bill
fifty one I have some work there
Jackson numbers but house bill
fifty one works with the
prescription cost portability
board.
Is this in relation to that Mr
Mr chair Senator that's the P.
dashboard the pharmacy board and
this bill has nothing to do with
that four there is another bill.
That the executive has Senate
bill fourteen that'll be going
through taxed business that
actually incorporates many of
the ideas from doctor mechanist
drug task force that met in this
copay accumulator is only one of
those items in a specialist of
mine brought it to my attention
to try to do something about it.
Thank you Mr chairman center
actually I was told that my bill
will not move because the
governor's as P. fourteen so I
think it takes care some of the
questions I had in in
Of the pharmacy benefit
management restrictions might my
last question is just trying to
understand Mr chair Senator is
the opposition to the coupon so
the way I understand this if you
walk up to a
Walgreens for instance they have
a little box there you can grab
the number you use that as a
reference to find a cheaper cost
of generics is that what the
coupons are Mr chairman Sir.
Mr chair I'm gonna drive
mechanism to that question Mr
chair Senator no I wish it were
that simple for this of there
are no coupons floating around
that a patient can grab hold of
and use for their co pay or
deductible the whole process is
convoluted the the manufacturers
and other interested people who
wish to help with that the high
burden of copays and co
insurances donate money to a
foundation you have to apply to
that foundation and prove that
you meet certain criteria like
there is no generic equivalent
that it is for specialty
pharmacy drugs that you do not
have the where with all to pay
on your own for this copay or
coinsurance and then when we
fill out that form it goes to
the foundation board which that
approves it once we get it
approved in the practice we tell
the patient okay we've gotten it
approved you may now go fill
your prescription until then
they can't the the little cards
that you can pick up there are
often for cheaper generics at
different pharmacies and are
significantly lower in price
than the drugs were discussing.
Chairman Senator gentle lady I
and I think that's still a
quantity of purchasing so I ask
question Mr and etcetera it just
came to mind was
on this bill is it helping just
insure for the chair or both
looking at it to me someone's
got to take a hit in and I I
would almost destroyed it's the
pharmacy company is that correct
Mr Mr chair and Mr chair center
I'm going to defer to doctor
make many Mr chair Senator not
quite the the current the entity
that ends up Hey is the
insurance company who then must
pay when the patient hits their
full out of pocket of costs all
of our insurance policies have a
process in this is when you get
to a certain level the insurance
company will take over and pay
all of your costs and so the
insurance company wants to not
do that so if they have a copay
and a deductible then they don't
have to pay that twenty percent
until you get to that point
where they are contractually
obliged to pay that full out of
pocket amount what they're
trying to do with the
accumulators that they put in is
to say well we don't count those
donated funds to you still have
to pay it so they can basically
get two sets of copays instead
of just one so this bill would
ban that practice it will
benefit the patient who'd who
needs to have that drug it would
benefit the employer who
purchases that insurance and
knows that there are employee is
going to be able to get that
drug that maintains their health
so they can come back to work so
it really is a the it is a win
for the patient it is a win for
the purchaser of the insurance
which is often the employer and
the patient.
And it forces the insurance
companies to live up to their
contracted obligation.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
Senator and I just went through
cancer with my mom and so I know
that you know there's a lot of
benefit to it I'm still a little
bit fuzzy on the process
probably for the debate make
that determination with that are
you thank you thank you senator
Senator Tallman followed by
Senator Hickey thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator brings before I don't
have a question just Google
statement you know we would be
having this conversation if we
had single payer.
With you in service companies
like we need to hold a head just
a middleman is grabbing money
you can buy anything and
everything on the internet now.
My last two cars I bought
directly from the manufacturer
so we don't.
The number big pharma gives more
money the current is there any
other industry think of how many
millions of dollars so if
anybody thinks.
Congress is running this country
The be wrong big oil big ag big
pharma big banks are running
this country because they donate
millions and millions of dollars
and believe it or not this is a
casual two thousand four
Congress passed along with the
drug company thank the
government could negotiate drug
prices and that doesn't come to
us on on her of only because.
Thank you so much money the
congressman that they refuse to
do anything to hurt big pharma.
No only only in America we we
have this discussion
Where people stand up and say
Yes if I get the program is
trying to help people who can't
afford drug we think about it
this is craziness.
And lastly.
I guess would be here one of the
opponents said that the use of
coupons are going to drive up
the price of drugs.
I mean think about that
statement this is a we live in
an upside down world thank you
that's all I have.
Thank you senator Senator.
Senator Hickey for the second
time.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators to fed ex
The the comments by the PBM
kayak.
Took me for a loop so I'm settle
back down now I mean basically
again I really want to point out
and confabulation by the
Insurance companies conflating
with coupons is really got
nothing to do with that again
and at the end of the day this
isn't about pharma this is
really about the insurance
companies and just one other
little truth that everyone
should know who owns the PBM the
insurance companies are by and
large they own eighty percent of
the PBMs in the country so when
they start cafe the least in
this are together but often
times a point fingers at each
other it doesn't make a lot of
sense but again I just I really
want to emphasize because this
is complex when we talk about
the deductibles and how they
roll up again this is a look at
this bill is creating
affordability for those who may
not be able to have it at all to
be able to cover their co
insurance are up to their
deductible and get the relief
and and cures often that they
need that's what this bill is
about plain and simple and so I
would urge my colleagues to vote
for this bill
this is this is about getting
health care to people who
otherwise aren't would not be
able to get it and in my
experience in the industry I've
I've seen it because we've had
these crazy rules I have seen
people not be able to get the
care and it's unfortunate
because it often results in
death not just the worst disease
so I just really want to re
emphasize that point and for
senator Clemente
it yep pharma's pharmacy big
time but eight hundred billion
dollars is really big time in
this insurance companies and
within those insurance companies
are the our amazing profits that
the PBMs are making for them
because and the reason I brought
is that they have to adhere to
this M. L. hours of eighteen
eighty four percent we're is in
the PBMs if they aren't.
Mmhm they can make all the money
they want there are no
limitations thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Stefanics and thank you senator
Senator messes for the second
time.
Mr Chairman says the drugs Dr
moved past.
Motion for it to pass seconded
by Senator Tallman any further
discussion.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Harris.
No ma'am I'd like to explain
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator COVID yes center to the
piano yes and to explain is both
senator Davis Mr Chairman center
thank you thank you for bringing
this forward and I understand
the dilemma of people with
cancer and and I just until I
understand more about the
discussion on how this all works
I hope that all have that detail
from floor but it's just I still
have a.
Avoid in hope my understanding
thank you for the discussion.
Thank you senator by a vote of
five to one with the three three
absences you have a do best
thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Diamond will go to you next for
the tier C. water line
improvements Senate bill three
fifty nine and I guess we have a
sub for this.
Mr chairman members there is a
committee sub before you.
So can we get a motion on a
committee served.
Do you have a motion from
Senator Tallman for a do not
pass on Senate bill three fifty
nine.
And the due process for the
health center health and public
affairs committee substitute for
three fifty nine for discussion
purposes and Senator Diamond how
did you go change your one page
bill just one page bill bill one
page Mr chairman and members of
the committee we come before you
with an issue that is beginning
to make headlines throughout New
Mexico when when the City of
truth or consequences was
fortunate enough to bring their
new city manager on he at that
time began to raise the alarm
about failing infrastructure
with in truth or consequences
and made progress to identify
quite thoroughly that the
progress the planning and the
design of the necessary water
lines that were to go in
throughout the city and just a
short amount of time as recent
as the time they were submitting
capital outlay today we have
we're now facing a complete
almost collapse of the water
lines in downtown truth or
consequences it is it is
imperative that we that we would
at least we're fortunate enough
to be ready to go in there and
fix the programs and and that
and system but we have not only
our veterans home we have
spaceport America employees we
now have water lines and water
leaks that are broken every
single day I think I went home
this weekend just briefly I
think there was a six hour
window in which there was no
water that is actually not as
long as normal but there is
always someone in Sioux city of
to the consequences that is out
of water it's a continual
problem so we we I've brought
the city manager here today to
explain that every Avenue of
resources for foot funding has
been exhausted I personally
pledged a million dollars
towards a city wide improvements
we were hoping to get a match
from the governor's office and
on Friday when we got our just a
small list of what she approved
it was not on there either I
mean it I'm gonna let our city
manager explained really just
how this is our last hope we're
hoping to get for the Senate
finance committee to see if we
can get some emergency funding
the substitute change the the
location of money we're gonna go
through the environment
department be.
Because there is already in in
you at a funding mechanism in
place and it also was the
addition of an emergency clause
okay very good yes yes Sir of Mr
swindle that is okay yes Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
the city of to the consequences
quinces is in a dire emergency
right now
We're averaging this past year
about four hundred sixteen water
leaks city wide throughout city
that's typically main lines and
some ancillary lines we produce
about four hundred and seventy
five million gallons of water
we're losing over two hundred
million of that water in in
water leaks so forty three
percent of the water we're
producing we're losing due to
water leaks we currently have
Seven loans and or grants that
would match money to NMFA we
have
CDBG money that we are using we
have last year we received
funding for from Congress and
congressional direct spending
appropriation we ask for fifty
four million we got one point
six million.
It's certainly better than a
state you know how to stick in
the eye we're very appreciative
of it we have funding from the
water first poured from the New
Mexico environment department of
clean water state revolving fund
we have money from the
environment department the
drinking water state revolving
fund CDC CBD need funding as
well as an M. D. O. T. funding
we have really exhausted all of
our meetings at the point of
going through the environment
department and other entities
where there is a match point of
loan grant component we have
capped out we have no more
capacity for debt
so it will be absorbed within
the water department's budget
three years ago the city
conducted a rates steady and
increase their rates almost
sixty percent and then every
year after that the rate
increase was based on the CPI
right the overall CPI right here
one it was five point four
percent increase last year was a
nine point one percent increase
so the city is doing what they
can they floated up a bond issue
to our Representative referendum
in our community it passed by
eighty one percent it passed in
the community all those dollars
are for this.
An impoverished community
they're stepping up to the plate
to do everything they can we
just need some assistance.
Through the winter months water
leaks tend to slow down because
the volume of water being used
consumption is low.
Com.
may June July.
Water is gonna be flowing down
the streets of of to the
consequences and there's not
much will be able to do about it
at this point.
Okay let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who wants to
show support for this measure.
Come on up and stand in line and
and we'll give each a couple
minutes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm J. R. me how I'm
the executive director of the
south central council
governments I stand in support
of this bill in our cart region
of Sapporo Sirin Donia counties
and the projects that I'm aware
of for water I would consider
this the most critical project
in our planning district in our
economic development district
and I just this committee to
please support this bill thank
you for your thank you Sir.
I
chairman members of the
committee dismissed as a
registered lobbyists on behalf
The New Mexico coalition
conservation districts I was in
a strong support of the
legislation I think is if you've
heard today this is a big issue
in the city's done as much as
they can other sort of active
passive the for the funds that
they can allocate and when we
look at building water
resilience the water
conservation the state this is a
project that needs to be
invested and ensure that we're
conserving water thank you.
Thank you Jason.
Anybody else here we have on is
there anybody here opposed to
this.
We have online one person who's
in support and nobody opposed so
let's have a Travis day.
Speaker on this.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members the committee trying to
stay speaking to you on the
capacity is here county
commissioner and the sponsor the
bill and expert witness
expressive developed a dire need
for this funding as the county
were always look at economic
development opportunities one of
limiting factors and that is the
aging infrastructure within our
municipality and so we look at
this is not only a water
conservation bill but also an
opportunity to help build
economic development
opportunities within our county
so for that reason we I stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr day
I just had a quick question for
you in the article it talks
about the previous two year
coming on board Mr Swingle the
city commissioners were in the
habit of using money paid by
ratepayers.
For other purposes besides
maintaining the water system.
Is that really is a big factor
in what happened to the I mean
it wasn't just a sudden.
Decline in the in the system I'm
sure of that is that stopped and
and and and and can we be sure
that won't happen again.
Thank you Mr chairman that's a
great question members of the
committee it's stopped one
because they have no money to
give to the other entities this
this problem didn't just to
materialize over the last month
six months last couple years
this is something that occurred
over decades and when you're in
a rural impoverished community
you're very limited funds very
limited resources and the the
governing body had to choose
over decades projects and over
time enough of a neglect
occurred over the water
situation that we're in a crisis
today I think it's a very
valuable lesson that it be
entire communities learned
certainly this commission the
commission is
exercising every resource they
have to address this problem
right okay we'll go to the
committee then we have Senator
guy some Senator Maestas Mr
Chairman center gentleman so
just got a couple of questions
I've never been to spaceport I
know it's proximity to you I
anticipated I Arby's is sure tax
base not getting anything from
spaceport.
Mr Mr chairman and senator get
got a ghost in the let I'm gonna
let the city manager explained
just what that tax distribution
is there's been some recent
changes page here to.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
get clarification.
Mr Senator on your question
would you ask about the revenue
that we're getting from
spaceport.
Mister chairman Senator can
Madam Matt a yes so in my
thought is you've got a funding
problem.
And if your tax bases and strong
up I'm in support of the bill
but I've got a few technical
questions and I was just
wondering spaceport America gets
a lot of our money and they do a
great job of what they do but I
know that if there's an I. R. B.
in there someone of that area
should be receiving a benefit
for an official and if that is
percentage wise and how that use
of Mr centers gentleman that
tried.
Thank you Sir Senator members of
the board of the commission
Get this the spaceport does
contribute largely to our
economy in Sears in tier C. as
well as Sierra County
The community pays to H. gross
receipts tax to the spaceport
and we received far more that
than that just and salaries of
the employees but we are hotels
are very active very busy with
residents our consultants are
working at spaceport if
individuals and live and tier C.
in Sierra County as well so yeah
we're receiving a great return
from spaceport thank you for
that Mr centered in years back I
was just trying to find a couple
of ambulances because of health
viewed in that that sort of
gives me the pause that it's not
just what you guys do for your
community but during the summer
you have hundreds of other
people that come into your
community for services that it's
it's a larger picture than just
of tier C. because of the volume
we use up my next question.
It is and and just trying to
understand your infrastructure
our most your water lines in
alleys or in highways roadways
Mr center.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the water lines are in
both their on streets sidewalks
and alleys.
Mr chair Senator I don't think
you're gonna have multiple
issues because once you take it
out of the roadway you're gonna
have asphalt curb and gutter
everything has been.
On up to code so but my
hopefully last question is
there's discussion earlier Mr
center that in the winter you
had low a lower loss of volume
and I'm wondering is that due to
pressure difference you have
higher pressures in the summer
because of the amount of people
you have in the area verses
winner I'm just wonder if
there's a relationship between
pressure and losses Mr Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Yes during the winter you have
less consumption so there's less
water produced there's less
pressure in the system Celeste
pressurized as well as versus
when you get into the summer
months where you have peak
consumption we can increase the
pressure and the flow of water
and ultimately that's what's
causing the brakes the lines are
in the neighborhood between
fifty and eighty years average
sixty years old that are we're
talking about in this phase that
would like to replace Mr chair
at that keep coming up I
apologize and but to inform six
inch steel or galvanized is that
what you're infrastructure is
now.
Mr Chairman.
Senator members of the the
committee we have all types
including would that we have
located in the in the water
system we have a lot of the C.
meant that has just passed the
Senate it's a galvanized steel
that and if you saw the article
in the paper but
That picture is of one of our
lines that's our roughly sixty
year old line that's the area
that we're talking about
targeting completely saturated
and filled with sediment and and
salt and minerals that have you
know developed accumulated over
time that that material that
type of mental.
Creates this what Mister
chairman Senator Madam is when
you get your money purchase all
your PVC as rapidly as possible
it fluctuates and it's always on
the increase my last and I
promise this last question is I
saw for you guys as a
congressman.
Yes senator Martin Heinrich for
fifty four million you got one
point six there ain't been any
discussions with other money's
coming from the feds Mr center.
Yeah Mr chairman and and Senator
guy a goes there has been
there's been several
conversations and that's the
it's the only funding that we
perceived right now from the
feds you put in several
applications I believe they were
included in the package I'm not
she got the whole thing as well.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we yeah we in fact
have a meeting with him on
Wednesday again to talk about
next fiscal years congressional
expanding we just for emergency
appropriation
Almost a year ago our problem
one is because it is today.
But it was still a significant
problem a year ago so we are
looking at all federal assets as
well it had grant writers
That are looking at this for
them to work with us right now
correct the congressional direct
spending appropriation is the
best mechanism that they've
identified for us.
Thank you for that Mr just in
closing I do utilities I don't
physically do we we didn't we
don't rate in your area but it's
all those things that I
understand the dilemma you have
and I would say that one point
six is just a leaking grip in
the book I hope you get more
help because I think this is
valuable for statewide look at
preserving water.
Fix the infrastructure so with
that you thank you senator
Senator Maestas followed by
Senator Tallman thank you Mr
chairman thank you that I think
you Madam the of.
Couple things one is I don't
know one is that the committee
so this fantastic because it
starts fiscal year twenty three.
We don't have to wait till
fiscal year twenty four and
because it's an appropriations
bill will be they're going to
affect the Senate sign so if we
fall short of the emergency
clause no worries but I don't
know I don't think
I know the legislature has the
authority to declare an
emergency but that doesn't
matter because it's just
emphasizing the importance of
the projects and then do you
know of.
Roughly how much it would cost
to fix.
Some of the big some of the
larger leaks if you've
identified them.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it's great question
Senator
the total cost of updating our
entire water system is a hundred
fifty million dollars we're not
asking for that.
What we're asking for is where
we have the water leaks we put a
map together with our engineers
identifying where our water
leaks are occurring and again.
For the last years of four
hundred sixteen water leaks
significant leaks
there in two major areas of the
community one on our east side
between to the consequences and
Williamsburg we provide water
for them as well water and sewer
and then in the east side of our
community is those are the two
oldest dated Water.
Light areas those two like Aries
can get combined a quite to the
the twenty million we have other
areas but they're not in the
crisis mode.
At least at this point thank you
Mr chairman if you could call me
a second time.
Thanks.
Thank you Senator Tallman
followed by Senator McKenna
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for.
Four.
Representative I just sort of
got this question.
Twenty million twenty million
centered fifty million for total
A million just to do
The leaks that you.
Anticipate over the next few
years as a hundred and fifty
replace.
The entire system which needs to
be done right that correct.
Mr chairman members the
committee twenty million is not
to identify leaks they've
already been identified for
shovel ready and then there to
most critical areas the town so
the water lines in those two
areas dependent identify date
back to nineteen thirty some
pipelines have almost ninety
percent blockage there's no
water coming through it all and
so those are two most critical
areas in which this is no longer
just a conservation issue
because we're losing so much it
became a health and public
safety concern because we
weren't able to provide water to
neighborhoods and businesses in
those two areas so the twenty
millions already been identified
to immediately go to to to
identified areas map
neighborhoods Mr chair and
senator.
Service some of leaks so bad
this people are without water.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on on a daily basis
there are there's there's
temporary lines emerged.
water leaks being fixed every
single day I'm certain now that
as we speak there's anyone.
R. I'm sure going to see more of
this is us a certificate of ten
the.
Small towns come up with a
hundred fifty million that's
that's one half billion dollars
the server and so that you just
have one quick comment Senator
the status before Senator
remember the state engineer.
The last engineer resigned in
the summer of twenty one any
stated publicly that the
recently resigned is because he
didn't have the resources are
needed in order to improve and
correct our water
infrastructure.
So.
And the Biden infrastructure
bill that was and act like.
Congress in November of twenty
one and and we called for three
hundred and fifty million for
New Mexico.
The state engineer who quit so
he needed to billion so.
We're only going to get one six
of what we need so this problem.
From going to get worse and
we're not going to have the
resources to take care we try to
do everything on the cheap here
in America we we short change
infrastructure for many many
years and it's catching up with
us now thank you Mr.
Mr.
Thank you senator Thomas Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman I move to
pass for Senate bill three fifty
nine.
Seconded by Senator Gallegos so
you want to speak on the
secretary okay also is there a
second seconded by Senator guns
now we have two people done for
a second time nope.
Senator guidance you want to say
something about this.
yeah I'm thank you senator yes
so I.
I.
We do have a committee
substitute Senate bill three
fifty nine and a do not pass on
do not pass the Senate bill
three fifty nine.
Okay then that's when you
seconded right that's what you
meant yes Representative Mr.
Anything else did you have a
comment to do I just a couple of
questions came to mind so
thinking about the two areas
sectors in your community that
have the leakage are any of
those areas main trunk line from
your well system to and I don't
know you you have a river so you
may not we have to have well
system to bring it from point a
to point B. to community are any
of these in your main crop
plants this turns Senator.
Mr chairman and senator you I'd
have to defer to the city
manager.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the commission.
Committee I'm sorry what was the
question so in in our area we
have to have deep well so we
have Trump plan so I don't know
how it works from the river but
from that say the river wherever
you get your water towards
distributed to the community or
any of these in a complex Mr
center.
No they're not the we have six
wells and other wells are
located kind of in the southern
part of the city and none of
them or that are affected at all
thank you for that Mr chairman
in center then my last question
is because of cost of
infrastructure are any of these
areas really hampering your for
a fire hydrants.
Mr Sir Mr chairman members of
the committee absolutely
if fire.
department has complained on our
hydrants and some of the the
pressures of some of the
hydrants most importantly the
veterans home there's something
going on with the construction
of the.
The Alzheimer's unit from a few
years ago five years ago is to
be connected to the city's water
system had very low pressure in
those hydrants
We have many hydrants that are
actually serviced by four inch
lines in some of the old parts
of the city those all of do not
provide enough water pressure
for our fire apparatus and we
have many of those throughout
city.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
centers just another fear that I
have because I I know a critical
that is at the point time we
have fire so with that I promise
I yield.
Senator Hickey did any other
equipment so the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator gave us this spans
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
center Maestas Senator McKenna
yes Senators metes yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator Tallman
yes center to the penal yes.
Six
seven by seven to zero vote you
have a due pass Senator thank
you thank you
okay now we'll go to Senator
Lopez for
Renaming the juvenile continuing
grants Senate bill three thirty
nine.
And we have a sub the.
Mr chair we do also have my
expert witness judge Snyder who
zoom zoom.
She had a court hearing today
and is able to join us the
assume today is down in where
she and Alberta.
Yeah
So can we get a motion from the
committee she's on to look at
the.
Do not have Senate Bill.
Purposes.
Representative bill.
Three thirty nine perfect thank
you senator.
Okay we'll turn now to you hear
about I we have a committee
sept.
Thank you Mr chairman again we
are here in front of you a kind
of a continuation from a
discussion we had last week.
on another
Senator opportunity for us to
have talking about our juvenile
justice system that we have here
in the state but what we're
doing here Mister chair members
of the committee is renaming the
juvenile continuing grant Fund.
And requiring of some of the
services to be provided to be
equitable.
and I know that judge Snyder can
at a think a few more words to
this out for us if we could Mr
chair.
Judge Senator welcome.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee can everyone hear
me okay yes.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to appear remotely I
had at day one of a jury trial
today that just could not be
continued and so otherwise I
would I would absolutely be
there in person so my my
apologies to all of you for that
and I introduced myself last
week on our other bill in and I
think I.
You know a number of you but I'm
the chief judge of the twelfth
judicial district Lincoln and
Otero counties and I preside
over to want justice not child
abuse and neglect in adult
criminal cases and I chair that
you on that vice chair excuse me
service vice chair for the July
justice advisory committee and
chaired that J. Jack planning
and legislative subcommittee and
additionally I serve on a number
of other two addresses boards
and committees.
And I there in the courtroom I
just wanted to introduce they
can speak obviously on their own
behalf that Mr aveeno Garcia is
there of course everyone knows
Mr Garcia's the founder and
executive director of occupancy
tax instituting Albuquerque
intersection Ampion for doing
justice issues and and reform in
and and number of ways in the
number of ports and and
collaboratives and we've got
also John trucker who is there
again L. a lifelong deal justice
advocate and in a formal former
hearing officer in the second
judicial district in Albuquerque
and let me see before I get into
what the bill does and what
we're asking of all of you I I
do want to let everyone know
that that J. Jack.
Committee is in support of the
of the legislation I'm kind of
in an odd twist Mr chair members
of the committee while it with
the bill is to have the name
change bill that the name change
is not in the committee so that
was just introduced and so we do
ask for a friendly amendment to
to change that the name of the.
Rant to the juvenile equity
community grant and it's it's my
understanding that that CYFD
isn't in support of the name
change
originally there is a little bit
of
Confusion about that but we we
do believe that it's an
appropriate name change given
what's what what changes were
requests in in the legislation
so we'd like that to be a
friendly amendment to here today
and
What this does look much like
the the visit as the three
sixteen that we presented on and
and got.
Legislation about it a unanimous
do pass last Wednesday there's a
significant fund balance that's
not being spent in this
legislatively allocated part of
money and the money is intended
to get to our communities
through our Representative
fiscal management agent but to
our stakeholder continue
continuum's to provide services
and programs for at risk youth
and youth involved in the
justice system to navigate them
through the justice system and
to keep them from entering the
adult system and this the
changes made to the bill what
what will ensure that this
happens the we open up the that
parameters for which the funding
can be used by.
It will provide.
The version Services I. programs
specifically
Mandating that in the statute or
allowing that in statute
individualized services where we
look more closely at not and
that doesn't mean providing
individual service creating
individual services for each
juvenile but in really
meaningful looking at what that
individual needs and placing
them in to the available
programs in their community we
also add that this funding can
be used for system improvement
and I can speak a little bit
more to that that should should
the committee Mr chair have
questions on it.
But we we open up the stream of
funding to support for those
purposes we also in in the
legislation yes G. Jack a
larger.
I'm sorry role in the in the
allocation of this grant funding
and as I said last week on the
other we all the reason for that
is we do serve in an advisory
capacity by statute and we're
we're that the the group of
folks that are working with the
continuance and hear from the
continuum six across the state
and we've done a lot of work in
terms of outreach and listening
to to what what changes would
make would streamline this
streamline this process and and
make.
It is down are more user
friendly process for for one of
the better way to to phrase that
and so we we seek that again
just advisory we know we're not
all an equal decision making
forty with CYFD but we want to
be able to advise them and
clarify that in statute and
that's just a general overview
and all kind of wait and see
what questions there might be
for me that I can give and give
more life to should be requested
of me I I do though Mr chairman
members of the committee
committee before I yield I I
want to thank.
CYFD we we really first all the
secretary when we reach out to
her about the need for these
changes so that we can really
use this funding and not lose it
because we know the need because
they are in our communities and
the secretary immediately heard
us and listened and and has been
just receptive to this and she
has
had staff.
Working with with with us on
this and it's just been eight
are refreshing and
collaborative.
Process and I appreciate that so
very much I think there there
might be
you know I think I believe
there's one area that they they
may have some questions are
concerned about but beyond that
we've we've really worked to
narrow the narrow down what the
issues are and I just want to
acknowledge that and Mr chair
members of the committee I will
I will yield to and I am
available for for question
should there be any thank you
senator Senator thank you judge
Schneider of politics Senator
Lopez did you want to introduce
your other witnesses thank you
very much and thank you judge
I'd also like to introduce and
we have I'll be no Garcia from
left a seat the in the south
value Albuquerque but otherwise
doing many wonderful work and
throughout the state and we also
have Mr Shipp Shipp Nur sorry
it's going to was pronounced her
name who also has a wonderful
experience working within the
juvenile system if both of them
Mr chair because state supports
do you want to say anything Mr
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair Senators
appreciate again the opportunity
to come
the I not only serve as an
alternative to detention in all
service providers and and New
Mexico but I also serve as the
data and system improvement
chair of G. Jack.
and this along with three
sixteen last week Senate bill
three sixteen
Is part of actualizing racial
equity
statement that we constructed
and was approved
slide on J. Jack and
and supported by CYFD.
this is not only you know.
Having a statement but
this provides T..
To practicing racial equity
community inclusion
transparency and
and system improvement so we're
very happy the be in support of
this bill
and I know that's it over to
John thank you Mr secretary you
as anything of Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for hearing us today I'm
John Shatner
I'm not this I'm not paid by
anybody to be here I'm on the
board of directors from.
The level of CIDA judge either
asked me to be here I can ask
you questions for the issues of
transparency racial equity radic
hating disproportionate audio
contacts use of color the system
or what we're all about in this
bill and other system changes
and and so the other two
witnesses cover those areas and
all answer questions and asked
okay great now I did want to ask
you judge Snyder looted the name
change but we drop that is that
right.
Miss miss miss more if I may
Mister chair members and me I'm
sorry Senator Lopez I did speak
over you.
go ahead judge thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee when we when we
first the first iteration of the
bill there were some and.
Because I think and and that's
that's my word on from the
department on the on the name
change and then so we went ahead
and that initial version of the
bill was dropped and then in
working on this can committee
set up I didn't have that
information from CYFD that they
were not in opposition that the
name change and in fact in the
FIR acknowledge that it really
is a reflection of the race
equity statement that we that
we've crafted in and that we are
really believe in and and the
language from the race equity
statement that we've included in
in this committee sub.
And so we're asking today that
that that that name is changed
by.
A friendly amendment to the
juvenile equity community grant
fund.
So you do I do the name change
yes we do want to do the name
change.
Okay and the CYFD is okay with
the name change so that would be
on.
All through it well.
We really have to go back to
another set of.
Do we have to do another set up.
Number of other places as well
as of August fifteenth.
Out of state.
Okay well we'll go out here is a
committee set up it'll be a
point to.
Committee so.
Going to miss that we would
change forever it says juvenile
justice continuum's.
To use the same name as you are
in the first place to juvenile
equity community grants.
Yes Mr chair so we go back to
originally why it was introduced
Taos.
So that would be on and then
it'll be on on the line nineteen
what to do that again in the
title that online nineteen.
Line twenty.
By twenty five like twenty five
year thank on page two line nine
of those on the very top we have
to do migliori have their on
line nine.
Page two okay line nine good.
And then on page two
Line twenty three.
Okay line twenty three.
And that would also be on page
three line seven well
how about online three.
yes sorry I agree that it marked
down yes.
And in line seven.
And that doesn't.
Nope line thirteen thirteen
fourteen right so you have lined
thirteen fourteen fifteen and
nine fifteen.
Nothing else changes though I
mean it's just the the label
we're putting on the on the
interest change are also on line
eighteen also Mr chair.
Through by the juvenile.
So that so by the by the last
night line the area of of the
juvenile equity.
Yes.
Okay.
Are you confused we just change
wherever you see it currently.
You will Justice continuum's we
change that for.
Juvenile.
The last words.
Do know equity community grant
from.
Then juvenile equity community
grant fund.
But it doesn't mean it it's the
same correction over and over
and over and over again nothing
different so.
Okay let's go to the audience
who's in the audience here in
support of this measure yes
please.
Come up and use my.
With
that on it to push the button a
little bit there we go the
better yes.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
name's ten or more can tell I'm
the deputy director for the
children youth and families
department I oversee our secure
facilities CYFD did initially
have some concerns with this
bill however through
collaboration with the judge
Snyder Mr Garcia and of course
the bill's sponsors we were able
to make the necessary
adjustments through the
committee substitute
and we also support the the name
changed as we agreed to that in
the first iterations.
so with these changes we can
support the bill and opportunity
to build have more engaged
stronger inclusive continuum's
well meaning to while
maintaining the integrity and
intention of the continuing
grant to provide alternatives to
detention and evidence evidence
based services for at risk youth
while advancing equitable
outcomes thank you for your time
thank you Mr close good to see
you again thank you anybody else
here in support anybody here in
opposition.
Thank did you meeting nobody on
nobody online members of the
committee.
Senator Maestas thank you Mr
Chairman said look this
gentleman.
We I want to come up to be but
I.
of like to make the motion you
know we do not pass sensible to
thirty nine and make us do pass
on Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill three thirty nine
point two version four to
version thank you senator
consistent with the their second
language we just built a
finisher McKenna seconds it any
any discussion question Senator
Tallman real quick yes thank you
for your.
With questions that is.
Senator Sedillo Lopez would say
what is the problem we're trying
to solve here.
Mr chair Senator could you
restate that so that maybe judge
fire can hear that to place.
The judge nighter he's asking
what is the problem you're
trying to resolve here.
Mr chair.
And and and senator I don't add
on which Senator that was so my
apologies to all the.
Senator sorry sorry about that I
don't mean to be disrespectful
we have got a the problem that
we're trying to solve is that
we've got a fund balance
in this legislatively created
you know about part of money if
you will that is is intended for
programs and services for young
people across the state and
there are barriers to getting
this money spent and and and we
absolutely believe and I know in
my work as a as a judge who
presides over these matters that
the money is needed we need
programs in our communities so
it's not for a lack of need and
so the changes we believe will
help get the funding to our
communities where it needs to be
opening up the scope for which
the the funding can be spent and
giving J. Jack again the body
that communicates with the
communities what their needs are
and what their issues are giving
us a larger advisory role in
this process we we believe will
help streamline will help
address their concerns directly
on getting the money to the
communities and we believe the
system improvement piece will
help the money gets spent again
it's a heck of a lot of money
that is is
desperately needed our
communities to keep its out of
the system you too are risk for
coming into the system and to
divert our young people from the
system and to prevent them from
going into the adult system.
Thank you Mr chairman of thank
you judge for the answer.
And then one other quick
question I'll take a.
Short answer so it says in the
first sentence of FY are.
The focus of the funds
expenditures change from cost
effective services to introduce
individualized services so can I
assume that individualized
services will also be cost
effective.
Mr chairman Alan and Senator
absolutely and the only reason
that the cost of well a couple
of reasons but we're under any
any expenditure of of public
funds is governed by the
accountability in government act
so there's this money already
has to be spent in a in a cost
effective you know fiscal weigh
in and responsible way and and
so that continues to exist we
removed that language from this
bill because it's sort of R.
Peroni initially placed in a
system there are excuse me in in
a on a list of services for
which the funding can be used so
it and it doesn't need to be in
there because we're already in
the expenditure of this money
responsible in a cost effective
way D. under the accountability
in government act so it doesn't
replace cost effective with
individualized we remove cost
effective because it's really
superfluous in terms of the
responsibility of the
expenditure of the funds and we
add individualized because we
believe it's important to take a
look at what the specific
individual needs of a child are
and to connect them to the
existing programs that address
their needs whether it be mental
health or substance for you know
whatever the array of services
they need so it I think the FY
are in my opinion kind of.
Misstated what we're doing but
but hopefully it sure that
answers your question thank
thank you Mr chairman Senator
okay thank you for your answer.
judge that that's all I have
thank you Mr thank you just one
commented that these funds are
matched with local money I mean
it's a sixty forty match so
there's always that requirement
that the local community come up
to forty percent and and I think
that's one way of making sure
that they are cost effective.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator guided us step to.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
senator Clemente yes this.
Go back to Senator Hickey.
Senator Ortiz Pino yes do you
have a I I Senator vote to do
Senator through thank you expert
witnesses thank you judge
Snyder.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee think
of thank you now we'll go to
Senator how to me for two bills
we'll start with the protected
utility customer data Senate
bill three forty two.
Yeah.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
I'm just pulling up my laptop.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I want to tell you how
this bill first came to be.
they were to residents of Los
Alamos County to women who left
a battered household.
And they spoke to me
individually about a fear of it
broke when there it printed
based on their utilities
utilities the most Alamos County
are run by the county the names
and addresses would be published
both women left homes of where
they were abused and are worried
if those that they left we're to
catch when that they might be in
Los Alamos.
Good April for their utility
bills for their names would be
published in their address
putting them and their family in
danger.
It meeting with Los Alamos
County about the fear of these
two women we then went on to
even more discussion about a
utility bill to protect our
utility customer data.
Spoke about smart readers which
required information on the use
of utilities such as electricity
gas and water and improvements a
small is fifteen minutes.
The detailed usage information
can help customers to understand
and conserve the use of energy
and water however the small
increments can be analyzed and
provided distinct pattern of
usage as well as when possibly
who is in the home or business.
Seeing the the smart meter
portal gaps which show a home
transitioning from on occupied
to occupied is also something
that we're concerned about the
increased usage of a Tricity and
water is easily visible to show
those who might want to track
when somebody's home or not.
And so those were the major
components of the bill and
joining me today as my expert
witness is Cornell right who's
with Los Alamos County and I'm
gonna yield to my expert witness
to add anymore information but
he thinks he may need Mr
chairman thank you senator Mr
right up Mr chair committee
members on small correction I'm
not directly with with the
county of Los Alamos I am the
vice chair of the board of
public utilities and formerly
the chair.
And up so in Los Alamos county
as as the senator stated we have
we have a a up a county run
utility and also the any records
that the utility keeps are
naturally subject to April as it
should be all for other
utilities in the state the ones
the regulated by the PRC for
example statute specifically up
prohibits their release of
customer data to third parties.
Not so with our utility because
we are not regulated by the PRC
and and we are regulated by
April and up so for the reasons
that under our meal I described
in you know for fear of
potentially up all arrester
abused individuals and just
generally in terms of personal
privacy wanting to be able to
not have everybody in the world
figure out what time you go to
bed when you come home from work
or whether you're out of town on
vacation R. I think that that
it's it would be fair to
included an exception to
detailed utility records in the
in April.
Now we spoke with the friends of
open government who expressed a
concern with this because it's
potentially could be used to
ferret out some sort of
corruption and based upon their
concern all we've modified the
language that we propose to the
Senator the so that it wouldn't
up operated a release of monthly
information but would prohibit
release of finer detailed
information than than a monthly
basis and with that I'm happy to
answer any question was if I go
okay with that.
For me was the foundation for
open government is okay with
that OB Mr chair I don't know
what the response with that one
okay Mr chairman Justin closing
so whether it's marketing
companies are predators every
utility customer in Los Alamos
County deserves to have their
behavior in the Homer Business
shielded from third parties and
with that Mr Chairman will go
ahead and let you ask if there's
any support of the bill.
Okay of anybody in the audience
of here in the room want to
speak in support of this bill.
Anybody opposed to it.
Anybody in like nobody's online
members of the committee.
I I have a question how many
besides Los Alamos there are a
lot of other municipally run.
Utilities are there and I
thought at one point there were
Representative toner somebody
had their own Electric Company
and Mr chairman there three are
on.
But this is a good and this
would apply to all of.
And this and if we do that local
energy choice act that would
apply to a lot more probably the
communities Mr chairman would be
Los Alamos Gallup in Farmington.
Mr chair pop that is for all
electric electric almost all
communities are provide water
utility yeah and and this of
this applies to all utilities
not just director is correct so
the yeah.
So okay anybody else in the
committee.
What's the will of the
committee.
Senator Hickey sure.
It may.
Just in the three counties.
Three.
Of.
Mr chair of top Senator Hickey
on.
The bill would prohibit full
disclosure without any request
on behalf of the customer.
And and they would apply to the
three communities described for
electric because those those
communities I have initially
owned electric utilities will
also apply to any other
community that I'd municipally
owned water utility electric is
a more serious concern because
it is recorded in a finer
increments of time and provides
more was stronger inferences to
what what might be happening
within the household.
Senator Mestis thank you Mr
chairman thank you center how to
meal prep for acting on this we
have a your community the up so
existing law talk says.
The a personal identifier
information may be redacted of
the bill drafters use the exact
same paragraph it's just change
the words protective utility cut
customer data may be redacted
so.
So do you think up.
The municipalities the utilities
will kind of do this as a matter
of course I because right now
the laws they the NMAA Reduxio
sturdy number.
You know stuff like that how
confident are you that they will
that they will reject it because
it's easier to redact
associating number with the with
the black marker then like the
graphs the the the grass on the
utility bill where it says like
when you're using your stuff
view of what I do anticipate
them redacting yes Mr Chairman
I'm gonna defer to my expert
witness just so up Mr chair
Senator Maestas I can only speak
for Los Alamos County certainly
Los Alamos County we would we
would not us a release any
information that was more
detailed than the monthly bill.
Thank you Mr.
What's will the committee.
Senator phone I have a quick
question yes you Mr and thank
you Senator Rience forward so is
this it doesn't apply to
investor owned utilities.
No Mr chair Senator Senator
Tallman all it does not cause
investor owned utilities are
regulated by the PRC and by New
Mexico statute that already
prohibits the release as opposed
to municipal utilities the fall
under a proper authority yes.
So you could look at this
Martin.
Rule applies to investor owned
it already applies this that
it's in the PRC here okay I'm
sorry I missed that thank you
again for bringing this for this
all I have Senator Mr chair.
Does anyone want to make a
motion we have a motion for a do
pass for seconded by Senator
Hickey secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz if you know yes.
So I I zero two of the best
thank you chairman senators
thank you thank you Mr right
Senator don't go anywhere we
have to use your bill next year
Senator folk.
Three fifty seven we have a
committee set for it
the parents of children in
performing arts.
Mr chair I don't know if you
want to move on the side of the
before I.
Do my bill introduction yes
Senator McKenna you want to move
on the surface.
Thank.
We don't require performing arts
to do that we just.
Hi moved a do not pass on Senate
bill three fifty seven and a due
pass for discussion purposes
only Senate bill three fifty
seven the committee substitute.
Very good so you want explained
that the bill's up Mr Chairman
joining me today is Lee Levin
who's my expert witness as well
as my co sponsor senator heralds
pope and I was going to act out
this whole script for you on
what this bill means but I was
right they might think I was
Mario Lopez and asked for my
autograph so just to the right
place for the Mr chairman it's
part to let you know that child
performers who are sixteen years
and under under are currently
required to have at least three
hours of daily classroom
instruction well on films that
were location no many production
companies hire qualified
teachers but some did not and
there's nothing in law to
preclude this this bill sets the
teacher licensure standard that
was a former educator this
minute bill means a lot to me
because child performers who are
sixteen years and younger spent
a lot of time on the set or
location where informed adult
supervision is needed to oversee
the general health safety and
well being of the child when
they are not in the classroom
most production companies
require the teachers attendance
at all times but I realize that
big US about the teachers
required attendance outside the
classroom and it's been
interpreted in different ways
now what this bill does is it
closes the loophole of all the
ability for a child by requiring
that an informed adult
designated as a studio teacher
in this bill be there to feel
the dual role of teacher and
welfare worker on behalf of the
child performers whether inside
or outside the classroom.
A parent may wish to intervene
but not know how or be
intimidated to do so and if you
want me to explain what the
differences between the bill and
the substitute the substitute
version of the bill does it's
the same concept as the original
but we found that certain
exceptions needed to be
clarified about when a child
performer must be accompanied by
a parent or guardian or studio
teacher the substitute also
allows more time for existing
studio teachers to meet the
minimum licensure standard and
I'm not going to yield to
senator pope if he has any
comments you'd like to share.
Senator pope welcome thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
committee members happy to be
here for the first time this
committee job.
this is just a as senator your
mentions the importance of this
and making sure that.
Protecting our young folks
there are working in the
performing arts so I was happy
to help him find under this and
that's all I really have that
thank you senator thank you
senator Lee let me know if you'd
like to see if you were.
Sure
It's been the experience of most
studio teachers that because the
law is ambiguous.
And the rules and regulations.
That implement the law have been
in conflict.
There have been some productions
that interpret in one way and
other productions that interpret
in another way and.
Some productions insists that
the studio teacher not only
teaches the three hours of
school but is present at all
times as long as this miners on
set other productions.
Split the job employ a teacher
to be there for the three hours
of school and then bring in
somebody else who may or may not
have any qualifications to
monitor the health safety and
welfare so what we are doing is.
Making it very clear that the
studio teacher is the health
safety and welfare agent as well
and needs to be there at all
times that Mr Chairman it's
important to note that I A. T.
as the local you for eighty is
in support of this bill.
Okay let's go to it do we
already went to the audience we
go to let's go to the R. and
anybody here in the audience
want to speak in support of this
bill.
Anybody opposed to it in the
audience anybody online members
of the committee.
I I have a question years ago of
a constituent approach me she
was a teacher working on on
productions and from the same
same issue but her concern is a
little different her concern was
that of these production
companies were coming in from
California and in bringing their
teachers with them.
And they were in effect you know
not New Mexico teachers they
were.
California teachers and and they
were in.
They weren't the.
You know subject to the same.
Regulations I guess the they
were complying with the letter
of the law it is is that the
time but she felt in New Mexico
is getting short circuited we we
weren't our local teachers were
being hired for that is that
still the case reserve improved
I think the case is a little bit
different than that I think the
case is that if a production is
based in California if the
contract was signed in
California and if the child is a
resident of California the
production is required to bring.
A California studio teachers to
New Mexico there's a there's a
corollary concerns there are
there is a company that is an
out of state company that has
been exploiting this separation
of teacher and welfare worker
and it actually acts as an
employment agency.
lays all of the responsibility
for the taxes on.
Individuals that they bring into
the state from out of state and
those people.
To put New Mexico studio
teachers out of work because
they work for a lot less
okay good but that's the the
within this bill it's a super
national although this this bill
could.
make those employment agency for
profit businesses think twice
because it's raised the bar on
studio teacher qualifications
know your bill makes it the
substitute makes it a
requirement that by July first
twenty twenty six.
The studio teachers have to
possess a valid in current level
two license that is correct Mr
chair that gave the teachers
were currently a level one time
to to get their level to
licensure and and why would you
need to level two specifically.
Mr chairman a level one is a
brand new teacher it's a
provisional license and need
supervision.
And that supervision is to take.
Just over a three year period
before a level two license can
be achieved okay so it's it's a
matter of.
Professionalism issues and I do
they have to me do they have to
pay at the same level as the New
Mexico teachers salaries or or
is it like a private school we
could pay whatever they want.
I'm not Mr chair to my
understanding that it's the same
rate as a teacher in a public
school.
but pro rated.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure I'm not
sure what your question is maybe
but we have we have to this year
level one teachers get fifty
thousand level to get sixty and
so on and so do they have to pay
at that rate pro rated for the
number of hours I guess to be
have time Mr chair yes.
Who I'm Mr chair I'm confused to
you who are you asking pays the
teacher that he that okay the
the answer is yes okay.
The teachers to get paid at a
level comparable to what our
tears would just yeah other
questions from the committee for
discussion.
But so will the committee.
Senator again moves a due
process seconded by Senator
Tallman.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
This is a do pass on the
committee set up to do not pass
on the original SB three fifty
seven.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
maintenance Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Six.
Seven.
How do we get Senators
preventive by six zero vote.
You have a do passengers perfect
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you senator both.
I think it was moved.
Global chair it is the by happy
to let's be.
Okay next as Senator Sedillo
Lopez you ready.
We'll go now to
U. visa certification act and we
have another set up Senate bill
three fifty.
Is it.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
So a couple weeks before the
session started.
I was in the mall def
the Hispanic Bar event and I
made an attorney who's an
immigration attorney and which
she told total what you told me
actually stopped my heart she
said that she was having trouble
with of various agencies around
the state certifying people who
have a U. visa the reason is
upset me so much is I was I I've
been previously director of
unless the committee I you the
executive director and we relied
on the U. visa.
To help to help witnesses come
forward to help are victims of
feel comfortable going to the
police and the idea that the
police were substituting their
own judgment about whether
someone was worthy of a U. visa
is that was just outside the
scope of what they should be
doing because the decision is
the is
F. given what they call the
agency now is service the United
States yeah United yes
that's those are the people who
make the decision not the police
officers so this bill is
responsive to that and it's it's
to make sure that the entities
within our state do with their
chat what they're supposed to do
within our state and I'm very
happy here to have an expert she
wanted to Bobroff support our to
bottle to Shonda top bottom job
lateral to Shonda chip out of
who is with the New Mexico
immigrant law center and is an
expert on immigration law and
really helped really helped us
you notice we put a lot of work
into this bill because anytime
you're dealing with immigration
you have to worry about the not
trying to preempt the federal
government but we're just
focusing on making sure that the
entities in New Mexico establish
a timeline and do what they're
supposed to do under the
Immigration Act that allows
people who are eligible for very
set to apply for the visa and
with that I'd like to turn it
over to my experts at the
discerned a chip on the bottle
she's not a product.
Thank you of.
To to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you senator
Yes my name is to Shawna to
follow I am an immigration
attorney at the New Mexico
immigrant law center I'm also
the chair of the immigration law
section of the state fire
my work focuses primarily on
working with survivors of
domestic violence sexual assault
and human trafficking and I'm
here today to explain why we
need to just be three fifty
S. U. B. for certification act.
The use of the humanitarian visa
like the senator said for
victims of severe crimes whether
system law enforcement agencies
and the detection investigation
and prosecution of the
underlying criminal activity.
You Mr certification form as a
required piece of evidence for
victims of crime to be eligible
for the Senator.
When federal Congress created
the very phone program Congress
empower federal state and local
law enforcement agencies to
certify the applicant is a
victim of a qualifying criminal
activity and whether the
applicant was helpful in the
investigation or prosecution of
the underlying time.
At this point in time there's
not a standardized process for
health certification form
requests are processed by
certified entities in New Mexico
each jurisdiction has their own
process and timeline or none at
all.
In two thousand twenty one I was
working with a victim of
domestic violence fifteen a very
so certification after two
separate attempts to obtain the
U. visa certification.
We were unsuccessful.
I have to tell my client that
she and her three children would
not be able to apply for you
Senator and we have.
Currently I am working with to
victims of domestic violence for
waiting for their certification
forms to be processed.
I have been waiting since last
April.
The other I have been waiting
since December.
That does not mention the many
cases that we've had to close
because we have not been able to
obtain the U. visa certification
request.
Without the certification form
and becomes of crime cannot
apply for the the stuff which
means they cannot obtain
employment authorization nor
legal status without this form
of relief immigrant victims of
crime maybe stuck in abusive
relationships for minor Victor
victims of crime a very second
be the door to moving away from
abusive family members are going
to college.
In terms of domestic violence I
repeatedly told by their abusers
that law enforcement will not
believe them if they come
forward or that they will be
deported if they have any
contact with law enforcement
agencies.
The result was created to
empower immigrant victims of
crime to come forward and not be
afraid of law enforcement
entities as a state we should
assist our community members by
standardizing the very
certification process so
immigrant victims of crime what
feel confident that their
request will be processed in a
timely manner and they will not
be cut off from eligibility for
the very staff.
SB three fifty accomplishes this
goal by imposing a timeline for
certified entities to respond to
requests requires certifying
entities to publish their queue
certification process to the
public.
And insurers victims are not
subject to additional
requirements not mandated by
federal regulation for obtaining
a certification form.
Twenty one other states have
already enacted similar
legislation let's make New
Mexico the.
Very good thank thank you Mr
chair with that we stand for
questions or will I guess you
could go to the go to the
audience is there anyone in the
audience was to speak in support
of this bill.
What we take for of you can you
pick for them we have one
online.
Who wants to speak in support.
Thank you.
I think we got a motion for use
up in the we could all have did
we think I don't believe I don't
use it for you are made.
Okay.
Thank you yes.
Chairman I I move a do not pass
on Senate bill three fifty and a
do pass on Senate bill three
fifty communities such
committees committee.
Committee substitute for
discussion purposes.
Okay now we're we're all legal
and official.
So would the four of you want to
speak of the pick four and could
line up and will give a couple
minutes each.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Minnesota
yes I'm the executive director
with me though we're statewide
immigrants rights immigrant
advocacy organization we
organize in eight counties most
of them are rural communities in
early two thousand seventeens
almost worked with the Santa Fe
police department our city
council and advocates for
survivors of domestic violence
and sexual assaults to revamp
our local U. visa certification
policy this created a
streamlined and predictable
process for Santa Fe immigrants
who are victims of a crime and
who need the crucial protection
a U. visa affords this was
necessary because we documented
much like the expert witness and
are good Senator talked about
disparate treatment of you visa
applicants depending on
differences of understanding by
police department officials who
at that time and are still it's
experiencing a lot of changes in
staffing and turnover in other
communities we organize such as
funds one County for years
immigrant victims and witnesses
were turned away by their local
sheriffs who just refused to
sign any U. visa certifications
leaving people without
protection and very vulnerable
to re victimization for
deportation Senate bill three
fifty it would streamline the
process for certifying agencies
and also serve as an educational
tool for them was a turning
which applicants to certify this
is so important for families in
every New Mexican community to
feel valued safe and served by
their public safety officials
this is why some also for the
legal just this body to pass
Senate bill three fifty and we
are very grateful to our sponsor
and to New Mexico.
I think you MMOs.
Seven.
It's very thought I was can you
hear me now.
Okay thanks my name is Jim
o'sullivan I'm an immigration
attorney and currently serving
as executive director of Santa
Fe jewelers project a nonprofit
legal services organization
serving immigrant families
across New Mexico in my time at
the dreamers project I've
personally Representative over a
hundred families and you these
applications all over the state
of New Mexico I've worked with
over a dozen certifying agencies
across New Mexico the reason is
a powerful tool that was created
by Congress to support law
enforcement agencies in the
investigation and prosecution of
crime.
By creating a way to formally
protect immigrant victims of
crime and their loved ones the
UV said empowers law enforcement
agencies to make connections
with immigrant communities and
creates real community buy in to
assist in the investigation and
prosecution of crimes as part of
my work at the dreamers project
I started a legal clinic program
in Valencia County in
partnership with my colleagues
at once you shelter services
providing immigration legal
services to crime victims in
Valencia County our partners a
BSS noted that after the first
year of our partnership that the
amount of program participation
for immigrant survivors of
domestic violence increased
exponentially once we began
providing that service by making
it clear that all victims
regardless of immigration status
have a right.
To protection under our laws
this means more individuals
seeking protective orders more
individuals reporting crimes and
work cooperation with law
enforcement agencies in the area
who investigate those crimes by
providing the service to victims
law enforcement agencies and to
domestic violence service
providers were able to make
important connections to
vulnerable communities like
metal it can also mission
resulting in increased
effectiveness at domestic
violence investigation
prosecution.
As an immigration advocate I
also need to mention that the
youth creates a path to
citizenship for many individuals
who would otherwise never have
won it is truly transformational
for applicants by obtaining
immigration status they have
access to financial independence
and legal stability that is
absolutely crucial perfect for
crime victims and survivors of
domestic violence to be able to
recover from the traumatic
experiences in the aftermath of
abuse the only way for crime
victims to be able to access a
very so as with the scientist
certification there is no
exception for this requirement.
When law enforcement agencies
support victims with you
basically certifications
families can be permanently
transformed input on to stable
footing for the first time at a
moment when they need it the
most.
I think we can all agree that
our broken immigration system is
a federal problem but the very
set program is one area where
local interests of communities
and individuals are in healthy
and usually beneficial
appointment by incentivizing law
enforcement agencies to
participate fully and take
advantage of this important tool
we are increasing their ability
to investigate prosecute violent
crimes and we are also
supporting crime victims and
their families as well with the
crucial pathway to immigration
status there are only winners
with law enforcement agencies I
need to be so certifications
please go to pass on this bill
thank you thank you.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Victor comment right on this
I will work for you quality New
Mexico the state's LGBTQ
advocacy organization prior to
my role at UNM I worked as a
legal case manager for an
immigration attorney and a big
part of my job was to work with
you yes I applicants
through this process of of
acquiring you recess so I
listened to countless stories of
violence.
And and so.
Unfortunately a really big part
of the the applicants identified
as members of the LGBTQ
community and so when a law
enforcement officer refuses to
sign the certificates they're
essentially denying the
protections that very sub
provides for for people who've
experienced violence so for that
reason I ask that you all
support this bill thank you
thank you Mr.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
let composed I'm a policy
director with gold futures we
work with communities of color
across the state and we know the
impact that very says can have
on our immigrant families we
have seen people being able to
access resources being able to
access employment being able to
move and get better homes for
them and for their children and
so for those reasons we support
just be three fifty we feel that
this is a a law that should be
implemented at our local level
and that everyone who has the
ability to certify should be
requested to certify thank you.
Thank you David we have online
After.
miles to kind of.
Chair members of the committee
my name is miles of deputy
director way representing a
naturalized citizens that we
work with other members of all
the throughout the state
and frankly we support SB three
fifty because we stand with
survivors we support SB three
fifteen because we know the
immigration process can be
traumatizing financially
burdensome and often impossible
to navigate we believe that this
system should be made and
especially these a certification
more accessible our vision for
New Mexico is is is a state of
opportunity for everyone can be
treated with dignity staff one
way to do that is to remove
barriers for survivors going
through the immigration process
to give them a better chance of
establishing safe months here
thank you so very much and I
urge you to to pass SB three
fifty thank you thank you miles
and an American it if you're
from them but to other people
signed up to support Matt
menarche and then the spoke
about both the signed up to say
they were in support.
And is there anybody in
opposition.
And nobody online up positions
okay members of the committee.
We have a motion for a due pass
from Senator Hickey.
their second.
Second seconded by Senator
Maestas and professionals in the
committee senator Maestas.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Lopez for
bringing this the this kind of
going over.
The this is the.
One this great public policy
But if it's not implemented then
what's the point I am so.
This is a kind of on a side note
Mr chairman at some point I
believe victim advocate at the
DA's office should be
independent of that office
because they help the victim
maneuver through the criminal
proceedings but they can't walk
across street for a protective
order or this situation welcome
walking over to to the.
To the federal officials to to
get up to get this this piece of
important but I'm just thinking
who comes in contact.
With the alleged victims in
these cases.
And it's primarily the police.
The DA's office and the victim
advocate at the DA's office in
addition to community
organizations stuff like that.
The
But it also requires the courts
you know it requires the courts
to act.
And
And I'm just curious how would
the court act if.
If there's a criminal proceeding
going on the judges and allowed
to talk to the victim I would
that the court.
Deal with that situation how
could the court help out.
Mr chair Senator they're never
asked judges never certify until
after that the completion of the
court proceedings.
They would they would not be
asked during the preceding.
It would only be after the the
completion.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Sedillo Lopez so the certifying
official the certifying of the
State you can apply for this
piece of.
See if the violence happens
today percent gets a rain they
get charged they get convicted
on the roadway can you apply for
the for the B. so immediately or
after the first after the case
and thank you Mr chair and thank
you senator Maestas for that
question so typically victims
can not apply until they obtain
that certification form and in
practice judges do not sign that
certification form until the
the preceding has terminated so
there's two different types of
court proceedings
that come into my practice where
victims are may ask a certifying
official for a certification
form one could be if their
abusers prosecuted and so
typically we would direct the
certification request form to
the DA's office and thought
specific circumstance but
there's other circumstances
where a victim may apply for an
order of protection and in that
situation a judge can certify
that the victim was provided
assistance and was helpful in
detecting the criminal activity
can I ask a follow up question
and and years because you've
expanded who are certifying
official letter if you've
expenditures include CYFD
officials and workforce
solutions officials which there
might not be.
At the final court hearing can
they see the it doesn't require
the judge signed the
certification for no Mr chair
does not what we did what the
intent was and it's listed on
page two of line eleven
certifying entity has the same
definition is eight CFR section
two one four point one four
eight two and then we listed
everybody that is allowed under
that federal law so that some of
them would not have a completed
court action right we're no I
was I was referring to judges
judges are not asked until it's
a completed because you can't
have an ex parte communication
of the judge so so I I see but
so but besides going to a judge
they could go to.
I don't know who else yes to be
involved as the intent here is
to any other state or local
political so.
If any other agency of the state
or local subdivision that has
some kind of investigative or
prosecutorial but they wouldn't
have to wait until the
prosecution ran its course they
could certified up front they
could yes.
Okay thank you Mr SMC the local
delays so the
So on page two it talks about
form I. nine eighteen which is
in your profession in your line
of work is just you know all
this stuff but.
For my nineteen supplement B.
Hall how many pages is that
important.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Maestas that form is
eleven pages long if I am
correct in practice US
practitioners fill out that form
with suggested information and
we also include a blank version
of the form when we send the
request to the certifying
official that way they can
accept that form as drafted or
they can draft their own
information within the form and
that that's my next question Mr
gently so the the certified the
one of the Feds require the the
signature from.
UP cop prosecutor judge.
What what it what are they
require with regards to
verification.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator Maestas so USCIS
citizenship and immigration
services does require that this
form is reviewed by the
certifying official and that it
be signed by either the
principle of that agency or
someone who is in a supervisory
role and was designated as the
certifying official for that
entity home so each individual.
So each individual prosecutor
may not be able to sign that up
to go to their W. or the elected
DA that is correct okay and just
on a side note are the are the
victim advocates and that
fourteen dust kind of aware of
this process and theoretically
they could have forms at their
off at their disposal correct.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator yes so many law
enforcement agencies including
district attorney's offices are
aware of this process
some of those offices have
internal processes for how to
process these requests forms
they can download the forms from
the USCIS website
That's typically what we do
because the USCIS website
updates their form every couple
of years and so we're required
to use the most recent version
of for yes thank you was left in
touch because the of Mr chairman
the Senator Lopez the of.
Oh one last question for you
right page two line sixteen at
the department.
What department is that.
Those that several tribes around
the state have agreements with
the police departments the
department there is referring
back to police department.
So that's a situation where they
have joint powers agreements.
And specifically a lot of those
joint powers agreements are
involving domestic violence
situations.
Mexico understood thank you Mr
chairman Senator Lopez you may
want to kind of check on that
because the
Because it doesn't say like with
the law enforcement agency or
whatever I think it's a
department might be DPS.
So you may want to take a look
at twenty nine dash one dash
eleven.
You may have to spell it out and
then and then lastly I think
that.
Either of these office has.
Has annual conferences and stuff
but this might be a really cool
workshop of those conferences
because I think that's where the
rubber hits the road is the
prosecutor and the victim
advocate at the DA's office.
you know third if in a perfect
world have a great relationship
with the with the victim
In addition to all the great
organizations that work with
victims thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and that
that's a good suggestion to
clarify that like.
Okay more videos of a of and the
committee have questions.
Hearing none we.
With the pleasure the committee
to.
We have a motion to and we have
a second.
So you can we call the roll
please.
Senator I have a Senator Hickey
yeah Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Schmedes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes senator Clemente yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
So congratulations area of I
will vote to pass.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you.
We see we can so the next.
The need to do is.
Next up we have Senator pope
yes.
Three sixty three sixty nine
thank yeah and then I have a
is three sixty three sixty but I
wanted to sixty nine for four
six okay
okay okay.
Okay so three sixty.
Nine third hope.
Thirty.
One hundred.
So.
We can proceed whatever you're
ready Senator pope thank you Mr
chair.
Together a little bit.
And we're gonna use the Michael
little bit.
Mr chair we're here with sent
for Senate bill three sixty
nine.
Firefighters workers comp
conditions
sitting next to me I have the
vice president of the
international association of
other Mexico professional fire
fighters association Justin
Cheney and on zoom I have doctor
Wu is who is the chief medical
officer at the international
association of fire fighters so
I'll talk a little bit and then
I'll give him an opportunity to
talk as long as as well as Mr
Cheney years well.
Hi Mister chair I I apologize
for the recovery.
What I get for caring for those
looking
This legislation is needed Mr
chair and committee members
those who want to chair the
radically protecting our
firefighters as we all know our
men and women who serve as
firefighters are costly supposed
to toxins as they keep our
community safe
you know myself being a veteran
I understand this as well you
know you're kind of putting
yourself in harm's way and you
see what's happened nationally
how we are always updating of
how we take we're taking care of
our first responders and the
military we see people that are
deployed and we found out when
they come back they've been
exposed to burn pits they may
have been exposed to things like
asbestos another chemicals and
fuels that have been burned and
they've been exposed to it or
breed that then and now they're
getting long term health impacts
later on in life like cancer.
And so what we're trying to do
here.
Is ensure that.
For firefighters are covered
with elements such as breast
cancer lung cancer prostate
cancer because they're exposed
to these substances and they
might not actually show the
signs or becoming ill while
they're on duty as a
firefighter.
And so
we want to recognize these
diseases.
And we want to add these new
diseases
So that they can be covered even
after that the after their
service so that they're taking
care of medically with that Mr
chair I want to give soccer
would opportunity to say a few
words if he's on so if we can I
need him.
Yes.
Yeah go ahead drive.
Mr chair person distinguished
members of the committee and gas
thank you for the opportunity to
speak on behalf of senator pope
very important bill.
My name is the any will W. H. Q.
four certified medical doctor
and epidemiologists currently
serving as the chief medical
officer for the international
association of fire.
I'm also senior disaster
medicine position for FEMA urban
search and rescue Florida task
force one on a thirty year
veteran of the fire service and
you miss.
The cancer incidence and
prevalence and firefighters is
higher than the general
populations in contrast
firefighters exhibit lower rates
of many other chronic diseases
like diabetes COPD arthritis
asthma kidney disease and other.
The lower prevalence of these
chronic diseases is attributed
to what is known as the healthy
worker effect.
Part of the reason why is that
firefighters undergo rigorous
selection process including
general health and fitness which
they maintained through their
careers in order to be fit to
Sir.
Consequently it's important to
ask why answering the fire
service is such a
disproportionally academic it is
killing firefighters at a
greater rate than any other
illness disease or can.
When it comes to cancer in the
fire service the statistics are
alarming firefighters are
disproportionally affected given
the great and many exposures
they sustained and must and do
our during the performance of
their duties as you consider
this bill the following specific
information about your beautiful
state is relevant specifically
New Mexicans have lower
statistical range of long breast
and prostate cancer as compared
to other states in the union as
well as the overall U. S.
population the following
information come from the US
department of health and Human
Services.
The national rate for lung
cancer is fifty two per one
hundred thousand people.
New Mexico's is under forty
eight point three.
Or breast cancer the national
rate is a hundred and twenty
eight point three per one
hundred thousand people New
Mexico's is one twenty two point
eight and lastly for prostate
cancer it is a hundred and
twelve point seven and New
Mexico's is under ninety eight
point six what is mean it means
that when New Mexico apply
studies that show a modest
increase in these cancers in
firefighters as compared to the
general population you must also
factor you're states lower
expected range something that is
not routinely done if you did
the overall effect seen would be
that in fact the true risk of or
these three cancers in New
Mexico firefighters is even more
if you give me a logically
underestimate.
The bill that is before you
today is an opportunity to
recognize the advances in
scientific evidence contributing
occupational exposures to three
specific cancers in firefighters
which all too often are
diagnosed as a result of the
workplace exposures they
encounter in the performance of
their duties.
One study.
Of two of the cancers being
considered today just.
Is authored by David Lee and
covers thirty three years of
data it found firefighters have
a standard rights incidence
ratio of two and a half times
higher for prostate cancer and
one point five a for breast
cancer these are staggering
numbers in and of themselves but
take into account what I just
mentioned about New Mexico's
lower rates when compared to the
populations that this study.
Evaluate.
As for lung cancer.
Studies prove how far far as are
any increased risk for supper
increased incidences of and so
come at higher rates from this
dreaded disease.
Your bill when passed will allow
for breast lung and prostate
cancer to be recognized in New
Mexico firefighters as the
sacrifice that it is and would
allow for these New Mexican
heroes to focus on their journey
to survivorship as opposed to
how they will pay for the cost
of their tree.
By joining joining those states
who have kept pace with
providing four percent the
coverage for firefighters
diagnosed with breast lung and
prostate cancer you will take
your place among other
progressive legislative bodies
who officially recognized what
research has already proven nine
states and all Canadian
provinces and territories have
entrenched long cancer within
their percent of bills statutes
for breast cancer in nineteen
states and ten provinces offer
similar coverage and regarding
prostate cancer twenty three
states in eleven provinces and
territories protect that
firefighters with this form of
cancer presumption and you're
just decision here would be in
keeping with the termination of
reasonable reasonableness
relating to workers compensation
presumptions which steam
occupational physicians such as
Dr do you could already have
reported and written on.
This is important as when
firefighters know they have the
coverage to assist with the
burden of treatment they will be
more likely to see cancer
screening and the inherent cost
savings from early detection
will surely be passed on to the
employers and insurers will
ultimately fund the financial
cost cancer brains.
This is supported by the
nationals into this institute of
health surveillance and
epidemiology and end results
program which shows that breast
cancer survivability increases
from twenty four to ninety nine
percent when it's detected in
stage one as opposed to for for
prostate cancer increases from
twenty eight to one hundred
percent and four long cancer
increases from additional four
percent to fifty four percent
chance of surviving and when
found in stage one.
You Google the statistics with
the fact the workers
compensation schemes in other
jurisdictions payout fatal
cancer claims are costs seven
and a half times greater than
nonfatal cancers and it would
make for a sound ethical as well
**** we do sherry decision to
revise the breast cancer article
within the legislation and to
add both long and prostate
cancer to the list of of some of
the something we cover cancers
for firefighters.
Whether it is the percentages
found impose like aromatic
hydrocarbons Bala tile again
compounds heavy metals asbestos
arsenic carbon monoxide carbon
monoxide rather hydrogen
fluoride gas for shipboard it is
well established that
firefighter occupational
exposure shut such as these
contribute to the increased
rates of breast lung and
prostate cancer you are all
considering tonight exposures
such as previously mentioned
have been proven to be
responsible for a prostate
cancer wait for firefighters
that is twenty eight percent
higher than the general
population with a thirty percent
higher mortality ratio as
compared again.
W..
Are not particularly as products
of combustion are not only a
mechanism to transfer
percentages deep into the
respiratory tract but are there
any doctor will.
Yes I wonder if you could I
think if you get a close look
Benson two or three cents
because summarize.
Yep so I've I've alluded to the
statements to that to the.
To the research that's out there
so I'm going to close with.
Physical exposure in addition to
chemical is also something that
affects and increases the rates
of cancer and I'd like to thank
you for giving me the time to
speak here today it is such an
important topic I will conclude
that the science is settled
physical and chemical exposures
that firefighters encounter on
the job warrant that you guys
seriously consider and passing
this bill thank you all right
thank you doctor.
Mr chair if I can get Mr Cheney
real quick okay.
Mr chair committee members of
the quick a promise first want
to thank the sponsor of this
bill champion this is a great
cause and we appreciate that
fire industry
also a quick story we're we
already have breast cancer in
the presumptive unfortunately it
peaks at the age of forty so you
have to be diagnosed with the
before the age of forty quick
story is we had we have a female
firefighter in Albuquerque who
was diagnosed with that at the
age of fifty file for the
workers comp claim and was
denied because the workers comp
the wait it works is you have to
pinpoint exactly where and when
that injury occurred and that is
not able to be done with lung
cancer prostate cancer breast
cancer we are being exposed to
all types of
exposures like Dr Wu said
another one that just came out
that we're finding it is P. fast
you guys hear about this all
over the news unfortunately it
is in our bunker gear now so we
are going into fires with P.
fast chemicals in our gear and
we are fighting that in DC to
try to find manufacturers that
manufacture gear without that so
we are automatically going in
and put ourselves at a higher
risk I
thank you for your time and urge
your support on Senate bill
three six nine thank you.
Thank you anyone else anyone in
the audience questions speak in
favor of this.
Gentleman in the backseat.
Thank you Mister chair members
of Canadian jobless youth with
The New Mexico federation of
labor AFL-CIO on behalf of our
thirty four thousand member
thirty four thousand plus
members we agree in the state
and then from solidarity with
our firefighters and for all of
the reasons exhaustively I've
talked about we are strong
support of this bill thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
favor of this bill hearing on.
Anyone propose.
Hearing none will turn to the
committee anyone wishing just
thank you.
We have a motion to pass in a
second from us center city
Lopez.
please call the roll.
But the question of the question
thank you Mr sure go ahead of.
You mentioned workers composting
other types of corporate
seedings this applies to any and
all court proceedings or how
does that how does it apply to
the firefighter.
Mr chair committee for the
weight applies is it is a these
presumed illnesses if you come
diagnosed with that while you're
on the job workers comp has a
rebuttable option that they can
fight to say that it didn't
happen but it's automatically
presume that it did happen.
So this is strictly Mister
chairman Senator this is
strictly a workers comp bill
that's correct okay I got you
thank you Mr.
Okay please call the roll
Senator guy Aigles Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes Senator McKenna yes
Senate committee Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
center to the penal.
Graduation Senator I to pass you
off.
Next up we have.
Senator pope.
Again.
Senate bill three sixty eight.
Thank you Mr chair I I love this
committee.
And we have commander Jones on
zoom so we might just want to
give him the opportunity K.
would have questions the one
with the statement or is it just
for.
For questions what is
the number.
Of Aaron Jones.
Thank you Mr chair I have Mr
Damon Martinez representing
Albuquerque police department
here as an expert.
Senate bill three sixty eight
law enforcement body cam
exceptions Mr chair a few years
back I believe in twenty
nineteen but before it gone
legislature
there was a bill that passed to
mandate the body cameras of our
law enforcement throughout the
state and what we're trying to
do here is just add exemptions
to those body cameras now
By myself and I know many of us
support the body cams and we
want to make sure that
things are being recorded not
only for the public and what
happens to citizens but in a way
it also protects our law
enforcement because you're
recording what's actually
happening if they're actually
accused of of things as well
but these are some exemptions
that
we think that are important.
And so the three exemptions that
we would want to pass in this
legislation are when the law
enforcement officers notifying a
member of the Pueblo of a death
that's something that we
wouldn't want to have that
conversation or or or notify
that individual and the
recording that individual to
that Tremont that traumatic
event the next exemption would
be while they were conducting an
undercover operation I think
that's pretty explanatory why we
would want to have that we
wouldn't want to expose that
officer right in and get caught
with a body camera in a
situation
in that manner and third the
exception would be someone who
was conducting explosive
recovery or disposal operations
so say someone who's working and
a bomb squad or swat team in
there around explosives right we
wouldn't want to have any type
of electronic equipment that can
maybe set set it off and it not
only put themselves at risk but
the officers in the community
around them
by having this body camera
electronic device on them
that's really the meat of the
bill
I will let Mr Martinez so make a
few comments.
Thank you senator both.
Chairman senators can you hear
me you get all the.
Yes it's not loud but.
Mr chairman senators
Understanding the purpose of the
body camera bill I really
appreciate that because in a
previous life tourney one of the
things and working with the
consent decree with the City of
Albuquerque an Albuquerque
police department was we
implement the policy in there
for the body cameras in as a
senator was saying it's
important for the public public
to have trust to be able to see
understand what is occurring
with the officers and then also
for this officers.
If they are accused of anything
you can go back and look at the
footage another certain
situations where it is putting
the officers and an untenable
situation I'll just say this
real briefly and then I'll turn
this over to a command of
commander Jones justice makes a
brief remarks to but for example
right now if you're put yourself
in that bomb squad members shoes
whose group called out to a call
and here's the untenable
situation is if you leave your
body camera running you could
potentially debt name of an
explosive.
If you turn it off you're
violating the law.
So with that said I will turn
this over to commander Jones for
some brief remarks if possible.
Good evening can you hear me.
Yes yes we could hear you think
to speak up just a little bit.
Okay.
Good evening.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak in this forum on
more Johnson commander with the
Albuquerque police department.
And I'll briefly just mention I
oversee our our special
investigations division and
within that is our undercover
detectives
since.
The implementation of our on
body recording devices or are
body cameras that we have we've
continued to but had to curtail
ours our undercover
investigations due to the.
Chance of us being notice of us
being identified as law
enforcement during those
encounters one of the I believe
unintended consequences of this
is that when we send detectives
in an undercover capacity and
the required record that with
audio and video those devices if
located could put that
detectives life in peril when
they're in the situations where
they're either purchasing
illegal firearms or narcotics
for conducting by operations to
try to to try to recover human
trafficking victims and so we
have the Albuquerque police
department we support.
This bill and we appreciate you
Giving me an opportunity to
speak on this I hope that that
came across.
Thank you.
The one of education but I think
that's all Mister chair
committee members and will wait
for public comment and a
question for the committee thank
you so.
And one of the the.
We can speak in favor of this
bill.
The.
First.
Thank you Mr.
Get a hold of thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Naomi Valdez I'm the director
of public policy with the ACLU
of New Mexico
we are neutral on this bill
however there is one potential
loophole that I would like to
bring to your attention and I
spoke with the senator about it
and that is defining undercover
investigation we just want to be
sure that that is in a potential
problem that could be you know
used in a in a bad way thank you
thank you.
Mr chairman of the committee Tim
Jones with the state police we
appreciate we're obviously in
support of this bill we
appreciate senator Paul bringing
it forward a couple things we
wish it had a couple additional
items that we can work with him
next year maybe in the next
committee but dignitary
protection is one of the things
that we think should also be
covered and then secondly we
were hoping we would be able to
get some fixes to the failure to
comply which basically now says
you presume to have acted in bad
faith and shall be deemed liable
for the tort of negligence Boyle
ation of evidence if that wasn't
re being recorded
as all of you know that own
technology that is not always
possible to make sure that
technology is working at all
times the US if you're in in
some type of scuffle or the
technology just failed you would
be deemed.
In violation of that which I
felt was a little strict at the
time but we do support this bill
we very much appreciate Senator
pope well working with law
enforcement on this.
Thank you.
To add stuff Sir Mr that will
pass just wanted a certain way
that next year thank.
Well.
We.
Senator none of which are the
committee.
And.
We have center city Lopez I.
Thank you Mr chair this makes a
lot of sense of particularly the
under the undercover operation
although I do think it would be
important to define it because
for example
I was an observer for some of
the some of the I have.
Marches after the George Floyd
thing and there were officers I
don't know if you column under
covered they were.
Everybody knew that they were
officers but they were dressed
as officers there on bikes and
they were you know restaurant
close claim will know they were
they were beyond playing close
they were like with hats
backwards and stuff but
everybody knew that they were
officers and I didn't I don't
know if that's under cover not
because.
It looked like they didn't want
to be identified as officers and
so so that so I think a
definition of what and and and
then to sanctioned by law
enforcement agency I'm sure that
that was sanctioned by law
enforcement but I think what
you're referring to is more the
professional under cover with
their investigating crime not
just monitoring a demonstration.
I that I guess that's my
question what is the legislative
intent here so Mr chair Senator
Mr Martino.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez Senators.
The issue that you're dressing
and that's why we put the
language that we put in there
ascension by the law enforcement
agency.
I understand your concern but
The you know the goal of a law
enforcement agency is obviously
to look at the legal crimes and
so depending upon what the crime
is that of the under cover off
the undercover operation may
need to be tailored to that so
it's a very difficult it's a
very difficult definition to get
to
I guess if you have any
recommendations
Yeah I've I've are not I but it
be interesting to understand
what you're thinking but it's
obviously if of law enforcement
agency is violating its own
mission that is a problem in
itself but right now this
language
Hopefully would be enough
guidance for law enforcement
agency go forward no one that
has to be sanctioned it has to
be something official for the
for the mission of that agency.
Mr Mr chair Senator.
I'm sure they were just hanging
out by themselves it was it was
just interesting to me because
we were monitoring and then
there were these other
individuals.
And we're monitoring the the
community who were marching
but then there were individuals
who obviously weren't part of
the group but they and so people
said all those are police
officers and.
I think the intent was for them
to be under cover I'm not sure
in but it seems to me like that
would be exactly the because the
exact kind of situation where
you would want
Where you would want monitoring
with what are you know camera
monitoring because if the thing
got out of control there's
always a he said she said
situation where of the not
always but sometimes police will
say well the crowd got under
control and the crab would say
that the police instigated it so
it seems like you would want
cameras there so Mr Chairman
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senators
the spirit of this is obviously
for that you know we're we're
dealing here with its three
specific areas so what you're
talking about.
I seriously doubt that well
first of all assuming that that
was an officer assuming that
that was an officer from an
agency in New Mexico as opposed
to like an FBI officer with the
you know different jurisdiction
that type of operation would
have to be looking for in in the
case of this bill our Connick's
under our I'm sorry doesn't say
specifically drugs but.
It would be looking for
something illegal in that realm
as far as now there may be an
officer trying to monitor the
situation.
Would not want to draw attention
to the uniform because that may
cause more problems.
Now my interpretation of the way
that this is written is that
isn't necessarily an undercover
operation in the spirit of this
bill.
I I hope that answers your
question Mr chair that does
accept I think you know I I
would agree with you but I'm not
sure that the language is is
clear.
About what is an undercover
operation.
I don't know whether that is or
not whether the previous defy
define it is under cover they
were.
Not dressed in uniform and they
were hanging out on bicycles and
just hanging and at first I just
looked at them and then other
members who other people are
marching said all those of
police officers and so actually
went up to to chat with them and
yes they were part of the crowd
and they did seem like your
officers I didn't go out I
didn't say well are you a police
officer
but.
I guess my question is would
that be an undercover
operation in your you said yes
it I mean yet you said no it
would not be and I'm willing to
accept that I'm just wondering
whether that'll be enough for
Judiciary because they like
definition.
Mr Chairman center city Lopez
Senators I'm trying to make the
distinction with your example is
that person may not be trying to
solicit or be involved in a
potentially nailed a transfer of
an illegal substance or drug
that person may just be
monitoring which I think is a
which is something separate and
that wouldn't necessarily be an
undercover operation if you if
my understanding and maybe I
would refer to commander Jones
on this
is with an undercover operation
depending upon what those
officers or detectives are doing
they'll be an op plan there's
going to be planning there's
going to be strategy there's
going to be precautions taken to
make sure that certain things
There's controls as best as
possible on the situation if I
may if I could to a referred to
commander Jones if you still on.
I am.
Mr chair and members of the
committee an undercover
operation I think that that that
distinction is that there's
going to be an investigation and
criminal activity and the
example that was given earlier
with the individuals that were
at the the demonstration.
I believe that was probably
twenty twenty that sounds like
if those were law enforcement I
I think we're all assuming here
that that wasn't an
investigation into criminal
activity an undercover operation
is is tasked with.
Continuing a criminal
investigation where law
enforcement is needed to create
an ongoing relationship with
someone who is subject of that
criminal organization or a crime
that's being investigated.
Maybe Mr chair that sounds like
a wonderful definition that
would that would I think avoid
the problem that was described
I'm not going to necessarily
insist but on making that change
here unless you want it cleaned
up before Judiciary but I will
say that judiciary is probably
gonna have that that same
question and when I I had his he
was speaking is sanctioned by
law enforcement agency except.
Except for.
if serving has a monitor of a
public event of I don't know I
mean that you this is a for you
for you and the officers to
decide how to distinguish
because it just seems to me like
that you know that could give
comfort because they're there in
case something happened and they
didn't want to intimidate and
that's good but you also would
want the video tape it seems
like that would be a good a good
thing because these things can
get out of control and and
people and you have a.
Problems.
Would you like me to make an
amendment or would you like to
just think about it and go to
Judiciary Mr chair and senator.
Mr chair Senator what I would
like to do is I I think what we
like to do is is wait and have
have that discussion because we
heard the comments also and and
the public comment as well on
that issue and so I think what
we like to do is if we could you
know my hope is we can get out
here and work on that and then
maybe get some type of committee
substitute.
That
that that I just want to point
it out and then the other
question I had is all.
One of the things that I and
this maybe for next year for
when you deal with that but one
of the things is when
When there is an investigation
and they released they released
video of really.
Awful situations and people in
people's lives and then it
plastered all over the the
social media so there's two
there's one question and that
question you're addressing which
is should the camera beyond and
then there's a second question
about which should be released
under under intra and there are
circumstances I think like rape.
Investigations were it's just
hideous to see that of that
video
all over social media and so
maybe just plant the seed for
next year about separating the
question of I think the camera
needs to be on I'm I'm sick I'm
not suggesting the camera should
be off.
But does it need to be released
under a press so we might want
to think about that Mr Anil with
that Mr chair Senator Senator
Lopez I think we understand your
concerns I think with this bill
we're just kind of dealing with
kind of recording the exemptions
and that's something we can talk
about my if you want to add
anything to that but I think
that's something that would run
addressing here with this bill
as far as releasing but we
understand your concerns thank
thank you Mr chair that's all I
have.
Thank you Sir yeah lot of good
ideas but I think we're ready to
roll and I would move for you
pass.
Go ahead with the case.
Second.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator post and hi I was
wondering if
chairman and senator if the
state police officer could
repeat those two other
conditions he wishes this bill
had I didn't get.
I think I heard failure to
comply and then I missed the
first one is that would be okay
Mr chair Senator all along to
come up but I think I wrote it
down is dignitary protection and
exemption there but also working
on the failure to comply.
Is what I believe I'll let.
Mr chair members of the
committee
Senator McKenna one of them was
dignitary protection
in the second one that we would
like you know to look at which I
think there's there's some
debate on it so far but one of
the the the paragraphs in the
current statute is failure to
comply and officers or presume
to have acted in bad faith and
shall be deemed deem the liable
for the tort of negligence spoil
ation of evidence and there is
not an exception in the current
law for equipment malfunction or
a quick move failure this
I am sure failure correct.
and then chairman Senator up
dignitary protection does so
also we get potus visiting New
Mexico and so the request is to
have them off when you're
helping the the president visit
New Mexico.
Mr chair of Senator McKenna.
That but also ten agents
assigned to the governor and
sometimes the legislature for
various things
so all of those were deployment
and so chairman and senator so
right now.
Those officers their their
cameras have to be on when
they're.
Of guarding the governor.
Mr chair members of the
committee no they do not they do
not road our policy.
stating that if they had
interaction with the public that
didn't go well that they would
have to immediately retrieve
those to grab them for obviously
for
now what is the secret I don't
know what the word is but.
There there's a lot of things
that the that they're they're
doing that shouldn't be recorded
shouldn't have a camera on okay.
In the vehicle what not yes
thank you for that I yep that
malfunction issue I can see why
that.
That's something that is wanted
okay.
You chairman thank you senator
thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center pull.
German mark first Martinez
welcome the
So just some suggestions one is
on on to the bottom of page two
it says conducts an undercover
operation you may want to
consider like participates in I
would you know just for the fun
of it and then also I on page
three line twenty three I would
add a definition that would just
like to talk about it Judiciary
but try to get a definition the
next day or two and get it to
the analysts and that way
they're not.
Do that way it but I would
suggest I have a slightly
different take than Mr Chairman
slightly different take than
Senator Lopez it's not.
Could to the live is yes to me
is that whether you want the end
of the the film or not I'm gonna
be awesome have a film an under
cover.
Operation the to me it's whether
you're putting the ops are in
jeopardy you know they brought
back up.
Back at the two thousand three
when it when the US invaded Iraq
there was a massive protest
downtown I was working at the
DA's office at the time the
we're just left or whatever and
one of the dust told a friend
Hey the guy's a cop and didn't
realize like they get the memo
that when you see a cop that you
recognize it's doing something
don't identify them don't point
them out and this poor lady got
in trouble more so than she
should have but anyway those.
There they may not be
investigating a crime but if
someone down they could help the
cops standing on the sidewalk
identify people that we're doing
this that or the other so to me
it's a question of not whether
it's it's important to get the
film or not but whether they
whether they don't want to be
identified as a police officer
so maybe a definition could be
You know.
In in plain clothes up working
in a law enforcement capacity in
plain clothes and and they
would.
And it would be it would
jeopardize the safety of the
officer if if someone noticed a
camera on their caller whatever
some some to that effect I had
it anymore add awesome sense
moments ago but I can't recall
it
And then my question is I think
you already answered it why did
you X. you know there's a
provision on when you wear a
camera there's a provision when
you use a camera.
And so that's like why would you
Why would you.
We do have a an exemption to the
wearing of the camera and I
think it's because of the the
bomb situation and the under
cover situation if you I think
this would allow the officer to
turn his camera off when
notifying a member of the
public.
And
Just be thinking about that.
Because we wanted to all have it
still have as we we don't want
to lose that happen anyway thank
you for but I think there should
be much more exceptions the
April when we change a pro it's
a big deal but definitely
children and faces of domestic
violence victims things that
nature we we should go in that
direction in the near future
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you so.
So this.
We have a motion is
please call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes.
Senator Ingle center Maestas yes
we to explain.
Senator McKenna.
Yes Senators meetings Senator
Sedillo Lopez senator Clemente
yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Have a.
Is there any of the five oh two
passed he wants to.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee members like I said
before I I really love this
committee who wants to.
Thank you not only do explain
but I'm using this as an
opportunity to say of
Representative the definition of
undercover officer the SO peas
and maybe massage that a little
bit producer thank you Mr.
Okay this bill.
Okay last bill this evening is.
Senator ATP does Senate bill
four to five.
County detention facility
treatment programs.
To.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senate bill four to
five is a bill that the bill
that deals with medication
assisted treatment and this is a
this is the this is the.
This what we call a state of the
art of what's the term the
evidence based standard of care
the standard of care for how to
deal with substance use disorder
and and and.
With people outside of jail of
in some communities there are
clinics where they can go and
get methadone daily
they can get suboxone if that's
the indicated one whatever their
their physician and they have
worked out they can get that
when they're in jail.
Addicts have a tremendous
problem because until we permit
medication assisted treatment in
jails it's going to be very
difficult for them to to deal
with their addictions and so you
have all sorts of problems in
jails and prisons with smuggling
in of of the
controlled substances with
people
at getting very sick and
actually you know in some
instances dying from their
withdrawal well there in this
this the county jail of the the
metropolitan detention center
facility so this bill attempts
something very simple and that
is it's made possible by the
fact that there's been some big
changes recently in federal law
in in in this in the state and
and those include things like
the state is health department
now creates the opportunity for
medication assisted treatment
through all the local county
offices of the county health
offices.
That means if somebody's in jail
and gets in game begins using
methadone and upon release there
is a way for them to continue
that treatment now that wasn't
always the case if you were in
Albuquerque that might have been
true but not in every place
It also means that the federal
government is really reduce some
of the restrictions on who can
subscribe methadone and
suboxone.
and so that's now made it
possible for many more providers
even even people who who may be
employed by the health company
that has the contract to serve
in the present they now can be
able to prescribe that that's
indicated.
And the third thing that's
happened is we've been soon.
The American civil liberties
union has sued the state of New
Mexico department of corrections
over the fact that it by not
providing medication assisted
treatment to people with an
addiction who were injured in
prison we are in violation of
the Americans with disabilities
act that's what the suit claims
similar suits in other states
have been very successful so it
is our belief of the four things
that I shouldn't leave out the
four thing in that is that the
attorney general's negotiated
opioid settlement with a number
of large pharmaceutical
companies and and drug store
chains so that there is now a
pool of money that we would hope
to make some of which we will
help to make available for the
for this this use and so the
bill before you says that every
county.
of by the end of the year.
But by the end of the next year
would have available medication
assisted treatment for inmates
with we are addicted that they
would be able to to to receive
treatment for their addiction
and that the department of
corrections which already has a
pilot program the through a
federal grant at one of their
facilities with the.
Fifty fifty fifty I think fifty
is the number on that one fifty
inmates that are currently going
through that that they would be.
Take steps to make it available
to any any of prisoner who any
inmates who is addicted and who
needs to have medication
assisted treatment and we will
give them a little longer time
to do that but by the end of
next year it would be available
to any addiction India addicts
who were in in in prison my
expert witness on this bill is
of a physician who works with
this population Dr Nathan
Birnbaum and did you want to say
anything.
Absolutely thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
Nathan Birnbaum I'm a family
physician who works at the
university of New Mexico
although I'll be speaking for
myself only.
This issue disproportionately
affects individuals who are
incarcerated so to put a number
on that people are released from
the corrections department are
eleven times as likely to die
from overdose in the first six
months after leaving our
corrections department and their
deaths account in twenty twenty
data for one in eight a drug
overdose deaths in our state.
So what we're saying here is
that a disproportionate impact
deserves a really targeted
response and what we know in
medicine is that medication for
addiction treatment so the FDA
approved medications of
methadone suboxone and Vivitrol.
Reduce that they reduce overdose
and more so than that they also
reduce recidivism and costs
because people are less likely
to commit violent crime as well
as non violent crime when they
are receiving the substance use
treatment that they need and
deserve.
So as a physician first and as a
community member here in New
Mexico who cares about people
who have substance use disorders
and are returning home not only
for themselves but also to their
families and community members
we have to ask ourselves what
sort of chance do we want to
give people to be successful
when they come out into the
community and providing them
with evidence based treatment is
what we should be doing.
And with that will stand for
questions to open up we won't I
propose I move that we do not.
Yes I do not yes
action on Senate Public
I'm on Senate bill for twenty
five but I do pass for
discussion purposes on the
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five and what we
did in this we we just tried to
incorporate several suggestions
that that have been made prior
to our ever having a hearing but
we kept getting input from
corrections from the counties
and from of physicians such as
Dr for inbound and what you had
before uses any calls for the
Human Services department's
behavioral services division to
draw up the regulations to spell
out how this would operate we
also it calls for a ten million
dollar fund for the counties the
million dollars appropriation to
corrections all from that opioid
settlement money which
is.
I hope soon right to rain down
fire.
Any opposition to the amendment.
The hearing is this is just for
discussion purposes the the blue
is substituted to substitute.
So thank.
Any you might want to go to the
committee coming to the if
there's anybody here I don't
know there's any going on and
supportive of this bill this
amendment.
We'll take one from the side one
from the side.
I thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is grace
Phillips I'm general counsel for
New Mexico counties and New
Mexico counties you know operate
the jails in our state and our
detention facilities are jails
have for several years now been
working on implementing and
expanding medication assisted
treatment for folks in custody
and and we've a lot of the
facilities of done that frankly
with help from the state the
rise funding and the technical
assistance to stand up these
programs and so we know that
there's some really practical
challenges it's it is not a it's
not a light left to do this but
we really appreciate the sponsor
working with us on both funding
which is undeniably important
and and a phased in time line
where we would
you know continue for people who
have prescriptions first and
then phase in induction and we
we feel like this is something
that it's it's time that that is
put into law and we we support
the bill.
Thank you Mr ran you out of.
Good evening Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Alicia
to foil the Cerro and I am the
secretary for the corrections
department and I really
appreciate the sponsor so much
for not only bringing this bill
forward but for his willingness
to work with us throughout the
process I've had the opportunity
to meet with senator Ortiz the
Pino and talk with him by email
and he really has taken it to
heart the concerns and the
things that we brought to him
and that's just deeply
appreciated we are as he
mentioned currently running a
pilot project on M. A. T. at our
facility in requests which
services male and female inmates
although we are only using one
medication in fact prior to
coming into this hearing I have
the opportunity to stand outside
and talk with the expert witness
in of course miss Phillips from
the county's Association there
were a couple of things that
they had changed in their
amendment that we were not a
hundred percent in alignment
with but we had a really
excellent conversation and I
think there might be a couple of
concerns and we might of speak a
little bit more with the sponsor
to ask for an extension of
timeline to make sure that we
right but we like miss Phillips
at the counties believe that we
we recognize this is an
important type of treatment I'm
at this point in time our pilot
is use using vivid troll only
and it's my understanding that
the expert is very interested
interested in expanding the
availability of other
medications and I believe that
in order to get to that place
will probably need to do some
more discussion and make sure
that we're able to do that in
the safe responsible way so I
look forward to our continued
work together and I think the
sponsor again so much for his
his help and thank you very much
Sir thank you for your comments
madam secretary
They wanna and so.
It it it's it's it's a sub so
it's on the bill.
So we'll take.
So we have a two people and
support Betty chair over and
Emily can't by they just want to
they want to speak with this
want to indicate that they
support it.
Okay.
All right would turn next to the
committee.
One of first up we have doctor
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chair.
Approving this bill and thank
you doctor
Thank you for the I know you're
speaking on and on your own
behalf that as as the university
does support this and
it is helping to move this
forward is so critical I mean
the logic is all the laid out I
just have one brief question and
that's in your appropriation I
assume this is going to finance
next yes
and Senator and Mr chair
the.
It what.
but what worries me is could the
whole bill get tanked if
finance didn't approve the two
million.
Will.
Yes I mean it doesn't get get
thank you could get delayed
until we get the has to be some
money to for the corrections
department to be able to to make
that that that switch over so I
mean
with the Mr chairman and senator
Hickey what was with the bill
proposes ten million from the
opioid settlement fund.
And then two million from the
general fund.
Ten million for the counties two
million for the corrections
department as a recurring
expenditure in those so this
would then become part of their
of what we would expect them to
do and it it just seems to me
that we have to make the case to
to to.
To the Senate finance committee
and ultimately to the
legislative finance.
Finance committee if we have to
wait until next interim we have
to make the case to them but I
would hope they'd see it right
now this not doing any good to
have people sent to prison if
when they come out they're not
changed and this is a way to
change the.
And and so I mean if if if it
takes two million well we've
we've better spent two million
because it'll make the
expenditure of our other
hundreds of millions of
imprisoning them.
Affected.
At thank you Representative
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and Mr
chair that's a great observation
is the money
the opioid money is that been
put into some sort of bump
somewhere or is that one of
those nebulous things that still
I mean it's out there I know the
money is there that are we going
to put it into a permanent
finder we gonna start making
some appropriations to.
To to move to to to make those
funds available instead of
getting trapped like the tobacco
settlement Miss Mister chairman
Senator Hickey we don't know I
don't know at least and and I'm
not sure that.
First of all what I when I
talked to Mr Abbey about it he
said will those monies having
communion that's all on paper
that the settlement agreement
but they haven't started sending
the money and.
Okay but but it will be coming
in and it just seems to me if if
we're serious about this we
would go ahead and designate.
I mean we're we're Cherry three
billion dollars surplus we ought
to be able to the advance a
little bit of the money until
that money comes in so my hope
is we would create the fund.
And then when when if we have to
start spending money out of the
fund before any caches arrived
from the from the.
Drug companies or the drug
stores drugstore chains like met
Walgreens and CVS and so on
Kroger's that we would that we
would have advantage you know I
find some some waiting to get in
advance and repay it with with
the opioid when it comes in but
that's an argument for LFC
as thank you Senator Ortiz Pena
I definitely want to pass this
bill we don't have a year to
wait I agree with you I I don't
want to have to go back it's
just something here having dealt
with the tobacco fund and the
kind of of the money's not come
in yet stuff
it there may be some wording and
I'm I'm probably too tired to be
able to to get it for you but as
it moves to the next committee
the internet something along the
lines of the attorney general's
opioid opioid
Madam re Reese.
Madam that's received by the
Attorney General in other words
I want to just go get ten
million I I don't want to have
have them mess around with the
frontier and god only knows what
they'll do it in other words as
that money comes in and again
this needs to be worded
appropriately it's it's
basically saying we want at ten
million now and we want on a
recurring basis until
until the funding is no longer
coming into the state but rather
than than even getting them to
think about to creating a fund I
want to get this money spent now
do you understand where I'm
going in the wording
and and
just knowing how thanks are
having learned the hard way how
things sometimes were through
LFC the L. and in the council
and so forth
you know maybe maybe maybe the
numbers twelve million I for me
now that you work at a but I
think probably you can work with
the chair person and the staff
of that committee to get to get
this appropriately worried so it
starts now in its appropriately
funded now and that's what I
would encourage you to to work
on that in the office across the
were approved as thank you
Senator Ortiz Pino for bring
this critically critically
necessary bills and you're right
that the money we will waste if
we don't do this is for now.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Some of you pass from.
He moves for a do pass do not
pass on I thank you I move the
bill for twenty five minutes to
pass and committee substitute
for for twenty.
Representative.
Again thank you so just a quick
comment one thing still for this
seems like such a.
Torkel question.
So long to do this.
Will.
Well I I would I would love to
answer it because I was prepared
to call for a study of the issue
and and the the physicians Dr
burned and doctor Barnett at
doctor very strict nation that
came to me and said you know
don't don't we can't wait let's
get started on this thing and
and and then the other thing
that happened is that the
federal regulations on who can
prescribe loosened up the opioid
settle money came in and the
department of health on their
own announced that they were
going to start making this
available through the county
health of the recount is were
reluctant to do this if when
they released because people
don't stay in county jails very
long just couple months they get
him started on this and then
when they were released they
there was no where to go so that
all affected the bill bility to
do this now.
Filling to please stars are
aligned Mr chair.
About four weeks ago the last up
to the plate and the lawsuit I
mean the lawsuit is not
something to just ignore I mean
we got a response from.
All of the.
So we have a.
The motion a second please call
the roll Senator goes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle center
Maestas yes Senator McKenna yes
Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez etcetera Tommen
yes Senator Ortiz Pena yes.
Senator graduation zero five
over the past thank you all very
much thank and that is the
evening's festivities.
Thank you.
