Earn right now they pay a dollar
it would increase the employer's
contribution thirty three cents
for every hundred dollars point
thirty three percent right now
we pay two dollars for every
hundred earned so it's still a
fairly low cost we've we've
shrunk the budget we no longer
have benefits for children the
contract the amounts that you
have to pay into health care
thirty are fairly substantial
never the less we have sixty
seven thousand members on so
We've we've passed this bill
several times I think the last
time it got it was unanimous out
of both chambers I could be
wrong about that the account and
vetoed by the governor so we've
since then said to her really.
What else can we do what else
should we do so we're back with
this bill and that's very brief
me turn it over to Mr cut key
for to see if he wants to add
anything just keep for welcome
thank you Mr chair
representative I just a couple
things that with no regards to
this bill is we're looking at
going into deficit spending
around twenty thirty to twenty
thirty eight the passage of this
bill would actually be an impact
of about two hundred sixty five
million instead of us going into
the negative in that point of
time it would actually keep us
in the positive so we have a big
effect as far as this little
increase and making sure that we
don't actually start touching
our trust fund which would
affect us and how to make more
changes to our retirees or live
in a fixed income we also know
that this would further extend
our solvency as we can do to
manage that to make sure that
individuals who are paying it
today will have the opportunity
lies this benefit in the future
and with that thank you Mr chair
okay Mr chairman we just say one
other thing we do have a few
members that we call enhanced
retirement plan those are for
first responders such as police
and firefighters their
contribution is slightly more
they retire earlier and get to
get into this authority much
earlier than most everyone else
so they pay a little bit more
with that we stand for
questions.
Okay we'll go to the audience
let's just get a show of hands
is there anyone here who is in
favor of this bill that wants to
be registered as such we have
been getting hundreds of emails
on this I think all of us
Did anybody want to speak on
this bill if you keep your
comments to a minute or so come
up please and use the handheld
Mike and try not to repeat
things that other people have
already set.
the downturn it is you have to
hold it down.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name mystery Dotson
and I am a retired US registered
nurse who worked thirty one
years as a school nurse and
during that time I paid into the
New Mexico RHC a fund while
working for the schools here in
Santa Fe along with my co
workers and we all have the
expectation that these benefits
would be available when we
retired I'm now grateful for the
health care are receive and the
excellent program that are H. C.
A. manages those who continue to
serve the students in New Mexico
schools are expecting the same
benefits please don't disappoint
them on the behalf of the six
thousand one hundred NMAG are
members I urge passage of SB one
ninety three and I thank you
very much.
Thank you very much
Mr.
anybody else want to speak on it
here that doesn't want to repeat
anything she said.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the board of my name
is Theresa Saunders I'm a
retired school teacher I also
serve on the board of directors
of the retiree health care I'm
proud to be up on the board the
retiree health care we've worked
real hard and made some hard
decisions to keep this of as
fiscally solvent as we can I
think we've made good decisions
but we come to you because we
need help to keep going also the
decisions we've made in the in
the past whether it's raising
rates for retired for retirees
for members or cutting back
subsidies for us but also
children one of these things
come on the backs of retirees
themselves well now we need to
get some help we need some help
from the active employees and
employers this is important to
us is important for the
recruitment retain one of
teachers and other public
employees so I ask for your help
thank you thank you very much.
Anybody else here we have some
but yes please.
good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee Steve
see on you so with any in New
Mexico government relations
director and on behalf of our
members are active members and
retirees members we support this
bill and we think the sponsor
for bringing the fourth just to
be brief again we believe this
is a very important bill because
it is a retention and
recruitment tool so we urge you
to support this bill and vote in
favor thank you thank you very
much.
Now we have somebody on the zoom
we once is it the them you see
before we go anybody here want
to speak in opposition to the
bill.
Anybody here opposed didn't want
to speak didn't want to identify
themselves but doesn't think
it's a great idea.
Okay let's go to the zoo.
And the only person we have on
the zoom so far in favor is
Whitney Haaland.
When you're reading this on your
zero to that.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee with the Holland
president of the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico I stand in strong support
of this bill as retirees play a
fundamental role in our educate
you Miss Vigil and disaffected
can you either hold the Mike
closer or tune up your you're a
sound because we we we can
barely hear you.
Yes how about now better much
better thank you okay perfect I.
We have president the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico I stand in strong support
of this bill as retirees play a
fundamental role in our educator
ecosystem now more than ever we
must support legislative efforts
to shore up to retiree health
care fund this would help to
ensure that this critical fund
is more financially stable for
current and future recipients
this is a top legislative
priority for retiree membership
thank you.
Thank you very much miss
Holland.
Okay let's go now to members of
the committee Senator Hickey did
you want to say anything about
this bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Stewart for bringing
it forward
financial solvency is critically
important in health insurance I
think this bill is definitely
it's important for the future
and and is the individual said
credibility for the future for
folks who work so I stand in
strong support of the bill and
also in some other endeavors
look forward to helping the
right heck up of with the
financial impact and efficiency
and and being sure that it will
be there forever thank you
the senator Sedillo Lopez moved
to pass.
We have a motion for reduced
tests is there a second.
Senator McKenna further
discussion
I if anybody else have a
question Senator Tallman the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this for is it true
that this the Senate bill was
introduced a year or two ago.
Chairman we we've been trying to
do this for for five years and
some years it passes some years
it doesn't then and once the
governor vetoed it so we've
we've needed this increase for
number of years Representative
Tomas cells are has been the one
that's Kerry that all these
years I was this bill different
from the last one.
The Mr Chairman.
Mister chairman Senator Tallman
it's it's really not very
different it's hardly different
at all what's different is
talking to people about what
happened and why we need.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that answer so does the
governor's support this.
Mr Chairman you know I I don't
have a crystal ball but we
certainly have talked to her
since the when she vetoed it the
the last time and we think that
she's in a different place now
that's true it's only thirty
three percent funded.
Mr chair Senator Tallman a yes
based on the guys be studies
that are done it's part of a
actuarial process of similar to
the pension plans that go
through the government
accounting standards calculation
they are looking at this fund
and it was calculated this year
to be thirty three percent
funded of looking back in the
past it was lower there's been a
balanced approach between
changes we've made as well as
some of the help that the
legislature as as afforded to us
but it is something that we're
working towards our goal to
increase that of funding status.
Mr chair thank you for the
answer and
this is seems to be
Sir is the of the fusion.
So that's all I have so anybody
else have any question I have a
question so there's no actual
appropriation into this this is
simply an increase in the
amounts that the employers state
and local school districts state
agencies and local school
districts A. N..
And the employees as well.
And we don't put any extra cash
out of of the of the.
General fund.
House Bill to this year Mr
chairman the next up if you all
passes is finance so that's
where we have that conversation
about whether to to put in some
additional money yes okay but
that's not in the bill as a
stance on the bill itself now
okay.
because we already have a do we
already have a motion if it was
the second no we only had a
second actually Senator McKenna
second to you can be a third if
you'd like.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator AUMENT yes
center to the penal.
Yes and I vote of sixteen
through excuse six in the
affirmative line in the negative
with three X. the absences you
have a do pass on Senate bill
one ninety three thank you so
much thank you senators for the
Senator the key.
For your two bills.
These will start with the.
Which one you want to start with
one seventy eight at yes please
okay one seventy eight.
The tobacco fund is not a state
reserve would not be a state
reserve fund.
Thank you Mr chairman and
colleagues I would like to
present to you bill Senate bill
one seventy eight the title to.
Tobacco fund not a state reserve
fund there is a long history of
the tobacco fund in terms of
reserves in the state and at one
time it
a great deal of that was moved
over to the general fund is
reserve when things were really
not good with the oil situation
but as there is significant
improvement in that state
finances and also in light of
the fact that for cessation and
prevention activities between
Medicaid and.
The
our department of health we only
spend about eight point two
million dollars on those
activities prevention and
Cessation and as I say for the
next bill
Getting this funded back up to
par where it will no longer
being in a state reserve
situation in which you have to
have a very conservative
investments going into a right
into the tobacco fund reserve
realize us allows the state to
invest in better producing
investments and so there would
be more money the money and this
is kind of complicated but as
the money that is earned through
this state investment tops out
over the amount of money we get
in from settlements which ran
Act we're only as far as two
thousand and three in terms of
legal getting the money out of
the smoking gap manufactures
that money then goes into the
prevention and cessation
activities and they're
desperately needed in the state
and so this is really a matter
of transferring funds and I'll
let my to experts
RubyAnn just about and is the
that testify to any other
details in regards to the bill
that will move seventy two
million dollars in back into the
tobacco fund fifty from the
general fund in twenty two from
access.
Earnings in excess of what we
thought we would get out of the
two thousand three settlement
thank you okay thank you senator
RubyAnn did you just say I'm
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is LFC
sponsored legislation so we
appreciate Senator Hickey caring
this and this is an effort to
basically invest in a more
robust fashion the funds in the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund and then use the additional
revenues to fund to that tobacco
cessation prevention different
activities just as the senator
said.
Thank you for that we're ready
for questions.
Good.
Your available for questions
anybody here in support of the
Senate bill
one seventy eight.
Thank anybody here in opposition
to it.
Okay let's take a few people
nation you want to speak on this
use the Mike please.
Anybody else who wants to speak
should line up behind them so we
can put this chairman members of
the committee I think we I thank
the sponsors of yourself yeah my
AC though the American heart
association and we think the
sponsor for bringing this
legislation I think as you know
like you know the legislature
has been you know rating the
tobacco settlement fund for the
past I don't know ten years and
and we have been decreasing the
amount of money that goes into
prevention and education so this
is this is the right mo and I
think the tobacco settlement
fund lost and shall be used you
know for prevention and
education so we strongly support
this bill and we urge to you to
support this thank you.
Thank you message yes Sir.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee thank you very
much my name is Andrea such a
Lotta I'm with the impact The
New Mexico outside counsel on
tobacco we stand in support of
this bill funding prevention
programs is a fantastic idea
the state has under funded these
programs for far too long hi and
this bill would help contribute
to
Ending the additional
you know replacement generation
from starting smoking thank you
thank you very much anybody else
want to speak on on this bill.
Anybody on zoom.
Not on this bill okay members of
the committee.
Senator committees.
Mr chair Senator
This is been a long frustration
of money it says permanent fund
will know that's a lie.
I understand that this is a LFC
bill.
can I just throw an idea out
there just so I can go to sleep
tonight.
would you be at all amenable to
striking subsection C. in its
entirety.
To make this a bill that we can
no longer steal from.
And actually make it a funds
that's going to be protected.
Don't tell the finance chairman
I said that.
If.
One point four general fund
services.
He's trying to protect it for
yet no access to on page this is
one of the H. four.
Mister chairman Senator
committees but my sentiment is
is strongly with you but the
practicality the finances of the
state and so forth would provide
that day and family amendment.
Mr etcetera that find that
extremely disappointing and I
don't I I apologize for bringing
this bill is I think it makes
this an in of of.
Maybe a little better
situation.
But.
I I don't understand I I really
don't understand how the state
No wasn't legislature when this
all the settlement came through
the representative Thompson has
sponsored multiple times the
joint resolutions to.
Constitutionally protect this
fund.
And.
I just don't understand I I I
don't understand we say
practicality and all this stuff
it is a permanent if we're gonna
call it a permanent fund we need
to put our money where our mouth
is and do it.
so that is a great frustration
of mine and I'm I'm disappointed
it's not a family member I I
understand why it is in this not
really what you're getting at
what you're you're in the
legislative intent is so I don't
you know I'm not criticizing you
at all
but at least I can like I said
at least I can go to sleep at
night and say offered the
amendment to actually.
Create a legitimate tobacco
settlement fund Mexico which is
I think what the people of
Mexico deserve thank you Mr.
Thank you senator anybody else.
I've got a couple questions so.
This the the analysis I I looked
at reminded me about the the UNM
health sciences center for the
for I think the cancer center
basically at the.
This would not affect that in
any way or would it affect that.
Senator it would potentially
potentially once the earnings
come in to be made available and
how the regional legislation was
set up it would actually send
more money to all of the things
that are listed cancer center
various other programs that you
NM yes they would all benefit
from that so so it doesn't have
to be a specific link to.
At the back of causation for the
for them to spend the money and
that way or the cancer center
can just run with it for any
can.
Generate a well it's not just
the cancer center at other
components but there is a link
in those components to say
that the prop the the issues
that are generated by the use of
tobacco and nicotine products
yes Mr us again please the
enabling statute does say and
how to have a health component
in it so it's it is clear and
then in that
health sciences piece there's an
instruction in general piece but
it's health sciences center so
it's that directly help connect
well what I'm.
What I'm getting at is some of
the other programs that have
come to us for financial support
during the interim we heard from
Dr Wheeler Cosette Wheeler.
And and the P. what is it T..
H. P. the screening would that
be an eligible use for these
funds.
We
have yes technically they they
could be for these funds as more
funds come in and they go to the
university there would be a
discussion and how they are
going to be spent
at and as to whether it would be
completely proportional to what
currently exists today or if
there would be some
differentiation but that would
be in a discussion of by Angie
funding with the over things are
I NG funding at the university
and and is there anyone here
from the health department who
can tell us what they're using
the money for now or do you know
what they yeah so what are they
using it for now in the way of
us is prevention and cessation
Mr chairman the amount that's
currently and for tobacco and
cessation prevention at
department of health is about
five point four million and if
they do a number of activities
from distributing and as does
Medicaid distributing.
like patches and different
things as well as campaigns and
education there it and hand
thing the hot line activity the
number of things like that.
Once.
I apologize that so up what
would they use do they have
other things they would like to
do that they haven't been able
to do because they don't have
enough money over the years
because I'm not sure how this is
all home how well this is all
working right now I mean did
they really preventing anything
do we need to be much more
aggressive Department thank you
for that question
we we could probably be spending
is with that somewhere around
twenty six million dollars on
prevention and cessation that is
what the CDC recommends with
that was a recommendation back
in twenty fourteen for like
twenty one million and so with
time it's gone up there are many
more activities that we could do
particularly aiming and and now
that we have a new
Of but I I use the right word.
The user I mean basically evil.
Out there with vaping that we'll
be talking about in the next
bill in more detail
and to be able to get to use in
particular nine out of ten
middle school students have
tried vaping vaping is out
described in the next bill leads
to addiction pathways leads to
other addictions so there is so
much more that we could do in
the state and this will help us
get part of the way there it
won't get us all the way there I
believe in time we will get up
to the CDC standard but we've
also got to be sure that we have
the person the department of
health and it Medicaid to be
able to take these programs on
the the distraught Committee
over the summer look into detail
in what could and could not be
done in addition I I will say
that I actually got all five
departments coming together of
P. E. T. H. E. D. H. S. D. D. F.
A. N. D. O. H. to talk about how
they would collaborate you will
see another bill of mine that
four eight eight eight tobacco
tax that will generate somewhere
around five or six million and
that will go to a coordinated
effort among those departments
in prevention and use.
Thanks for this year.
So I I appreciate to doctor
smitteez concerns about it but I
can tell you from the year
before this is this is miles
ahead of where we were and I
appreciate that as people look
at the budget they're
understanding the seriousness
which vaping in particular is
going to lead to be incredibly
more destructive health and
addiction issues and this is do
you know does the health
department still have that youth
program that was run a coming up
with ideas for things is is that
still in place I I think you
know I I just I'm skeptical
about the ability of people.
Legislative age to come up with
ideas that truly would.
Reach young people in a way that
would get them to stop trying to
bait for whatever.
Senator and and and colleagues I
think maybe you were referring
to the fact that some of us who
are of a nature we don't even
know how to spell Twitter
and it and utilize social media
absolutely but the department
has been bringing in new person
who are very literate and social
media to be able to get the
campaigns out there is a bout of
sixty thousand dollar a year
campaign at the university of
New Mexico that if we get this
additional five million through
this additional tax we're
putting on vaping and and
nicotine they will take that
program PED said we'll take that
and will spread it out to the
twenty nine other campuses in in
higher add and again I've said I
don't know how to do this stuff
my job is to just get you the
money to do it and then you come
back and tell me what you've
done any given me measurements
and I know you're getting work
done okay Senator Schmedes you
want to share your idea or is
that kind of private all of this
we could we could just ban
vaping outlawed in New Mexico
become the most progressive
state in the country and get rid
of it all.
That would get young people to
stop it.
Mr chairman and senator smitteez
that is my intent and some other
bills we have coming along at
least get rid of it we we right
now you cannot sell to twenty
one and under but we're getting
rid of flow it we we have a bill
to get rid of flavors we have a
bill to raise the taxes taxes
definitely the higher they go
the less use youth uptake of
smoking and nicotine products
the it if if we get nowhere this
year I would like to talk to you
next year about vaping banning
vaping in New Mexico all
together thank you.
Very good so there you have it
you have a an offer to protect
you have.
Thank you flexibility committee
on this bill Senator Maestas
over the past.
Seconded by Senator Sedillo
Lopez any other discussion did
you want to say anything in
conclusion are you all ready to
go.
But Mr chairman and committee
thank you this is this is an
important step forward you know
I'd like to make ten steps
forward but seeing that were in
the legislature in America you
know this is two steps forward
and maybe a little bit of a step
back but it's a hell of a lot
better than where we were last
year when we propose the same
bill and got nowhere.
So thank you it's nice to the
LFC is backing you up on this
this is great no they came up
with the idea and sold you on or
something the secretary will
call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Pass just.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Maestas yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
The
first time all.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote
you voted yes Senator.
Yes Sir but I'd like to explain
it to.
In center to subpoena.
Yes and so Senator guide us to
explain his vote.
Mr chairman committee at I got
in on the very last part of this
I did hear center he you say
that you madam like to stop
thinking of the school for that
I'm on has a serious problem
with baking in our kids so I
would like to hold you doctors
committee together to make sure
that the the taxes are increased
and possibly stop this before it
gets too far beyond that I'll
take Senator Hickey it is word
and vote yes this time hopefully
we'll be able stop hurting our
children thank you Mr very good
thank you Senator Gallegos so I
vote of nine to nothing.
You have a do pass on Senate
bill one seventy eight and now
we'll move to one seventy nine.
Given any expert witness is yes
I do
is Sagal when that and then
half.
How in another.
This is the
Senator Lopez your co sponsors
of yes of pre estimated.
Again the.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm coming forward
with another bill of several of
them actually between that came
out of yes rock tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee this year to really
make some serious impacts on
smoking and vaping and in New
Mexico.
I'm not here I I didn't want to
still on my thunder but I just
want to find some statistics
just how awful this problem is
becoming.
Nine out of ten middle school
students in a survey have tried.
back in twenty nineteen I think
something like twelve percent
we're we're using it regularly
in middle school in twenty
nineteen thirty four percent of
high school seniors were vaping.
And.
You know vaping was initially
thought to be kind of harmless
you know better than getting the
the the tar in your lungs and
and what have you but it misses
it misses this point and and
here I'm going to speak as a
physician and as a physician who
has worked in the fields of
substance use had personal
experience in my family as I
think most of us have with the
substance use issues and.
Addiction.
Is.
Eight a problem that some of us
are genetically inclined towards
some aren't we don't understand
fully the pathways.
But.
Starting to use something like
nicotine at a very early age to
deal with life's stresses and
the to come in and it is early
teenager and and even before
starts to set up the pattern of
self medication.
With the substance that's at
least at the moment appears to
relieve some of your stress
symptoms yet studies are
definitely showing that nicotine
actually increases that stress
much the same way that drinking
why you get a momentary relief
later on you get that you be
GB's and the alcoholic factors
worked off but what it does is a
bill that pathway within the
brain for addiction.
And that addiction then is a
pathway for when it is available
Cigarettes and then after that
alcohol and now the awful
statistic at NASA to say I I
don't have the exact number but
increasing fentanyl use of that
that this state is experiencing
I think this committee while I
was away but listening in when
we heard about the passive fire
being dipped in fentanyl to put
the baby so we we have a we have
a huge issue but rarely do you
have an opportunity to go back
to a source of an issue the
issue being addiction to
substances and we have in this
chain reaction a source that we
can do something about and
that's vaping and at such a
young age if we are able to
close it off now with these
multiple bills and perhaps an
even stronger bill next year
banning it altogether we will
save so many families so many
individuals from the awful awful
pain.
Of addiction.
In those of you who know friends
or have family you know how
awful it is for the individual
and how awful it is for the
family.
So one of the ways that we are
attempting to reduce the
exposure of youth to addiction
pathways.
Is to.
Allow municipalities to set
their own distances of smoke
shops and cigarette sales and
and what have you vaping sales
wherever any kind of store that
sells it to be more than three
hundred feet.
Maybe three hundred feet is the
you know about a two minute
walk.
And many other municipalities in
the country are now moving to
five hundred which isn't all
that much more and even a
thousand but in New Mexico our
municipalities cities and
counties are prohibited by law.
From doing any more than the
three hundred feet and this bill
would allow them to pass their
own ordinances to deal with
setting up a greater distance
and the literature shows the
more distance you have to a
smoke shop a vape shop the less
the uptake it's the same like
raising the taxes is the same as
is getting rid of flavors it's
one of the important tool so we
come to you today to ask that
the preemption that now exist be
removed and that municipalities
be able to delineate their own
length of of geographic length
and they may even be able to do
density of number of shops and
what have you anywhere near
schools and I would turn to
my experts in my co sponsor
let's start with the co sponsor
Senator Lopez did you want to
add anything.
Yeah nuclear use and health much
better.
Especially when you're wearing a
mask this thing just doesn't
pick it up thank you very much
Mr chair members of the
committee and thank you to my co
sponsor I'm not going to say
much just because of my coughing
issue so just want to say ditto.
Thank you and I hope the
committee will support this bill
thank you.
Forget my age did you want to
add anything.
Miss Mister chairman my seat the
the American Association and
thanks for having me here I
think when we.
You know introduced a similar
bill and twenty.
Twenty one you know we we had
support from the months believes
you know City of Albuquerque
city of Santa Fe city of Los
crucis Bernalillo county the
biggest County and the biggest
school district APS Rio Arriba
county Espanola city of Espanola
and experience in the Las Vegas
city I think
you know giving local cities and
counties an option you know to
pass ordinances that are
stricter than the state you know
make sense because as a state
you know for example I can on
the Senator pointed out looking
it's only three hundred feet
from a school and it's it's only
a school it doesn't talk about
community centers baseball feels
skateboard parks other areas
where kids hang out and so this
gives an ability to local cities
and counties to to control
locations density hours of
operation advertising to kids
and you know they they can also
pass ordinances that restrict
certain flavors in E. cigarettes
that are targeted towards our
kids so I think we we we
strongly support this bill and
you know the.
Vote for any questions thank you
Mr.
let's go to the audience is
there anyone here who is in
favor of this bill.
Okay good we have several
if you.
The Get a feel if there anybody
here in opposition to this bill.
Okay so we have a few.
Let's take let's take.
Let's take five of each and try
to keep your comments to one
minute or so of minute or so and
try not to so if you those let's
start with the ones who are in
favor of the bill.
come on up we also have to on
the zoom were opposed to it.
We'll start with those who are
in favor of it if you could line
up we'll take the first five and
then
the switch to the opponents.
Let's go first.
And remember the others can't
repeat anything you've said so
you have a really bad.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you
senator some of my stuff.
and get nervous I want to just
be able to reference I mean up
to hold the the the button on
that on that Mike you have to
hold it down all the time.
My name is Megan bolter I'm with
the preventing tobacco addiction
foundation also can you hear me
OK
L. also as tobacco twenty one
I'm also resident of Los crucis
a mother and a concerned
constituent we whole heartedly
support Senate bill one seventy
nine which actually when you
look at it it simply allows
cities to act it is a
clarification of the tobacco
products act which is a little
bit and biggest us to what
cities can do and it has been a
parent and states and cities
across the nation that those
that have preemption with
respect to tobacco regulation
have not only higher rates of
youth use earlier on set of
initiation of use of tobacco but
they also have poor health
outcomes with respect to tobacco
related disease.
Changing the nature of this law
to clarify that cities can enact
ordinances which help protect
their local communities using
local solutions and innovative
techniques that will empower
their citizens to protect their
own specific health needs is
something that the state can do
in collaboration with the city's
in order to prove improve health
L. health care outcomes over all
if you want to tackle
disparities in health health
equity the fiscal impact of
tobacco related to lead disease
in terms of sharing the costs
burdens and benefits of having
increased tobacco regulation at
the local level in addition to
increasing our excuse me
improving health outcomes you
will allow the cities to enact
ordinances like raising the
minimum legal sales H.
individually to twenty wide at
the local level in coordination
with the state and federal law
that already exist and other
look like P. mentioned zoning
and marketing regulations I
appreciate your time and I
implore you to support this bill
thank you thank you very much
from small next and don't forget
your computer I'm not going to
bother I'll get it okay.
This.
Mr chair members my name is
Joanna Strother I'm the senior
director of advocacy for the
American lung association and we
stand in support of this bill I
want to repeat anything that
Megan had just said but I do
want to remind people that the
D. Johnson clean indoor air act
was started on the local level
local city start passing smoke
free laws and help build
momentum to the statewide law
that we now have so many of the
public health ordinances really
start at the local level and
that's why we have to allow
local cities and towns to enact
what's best for them it's not a
one size fits all the time you
just heard Senator Gallegos
state it's a big problem on in
the school board where he sits
on and we hear that across the
country in New Mexico thirty
seven point five percent of our
high school youth are using
tobacco products so we have to
act now it's a it's an epidemic
and by allowing local cities and
towns to do that we definitely
are protecting the health of New
Mexicans thank you very good
thank you.
Yes.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee.
Again Andrés are to let with an
act I'd like to thank my
colleagues were part of a
coalition as well as American
heart.
The reason we support this this
landmark bill is you know what
we really believe that these are
hyper local issues every town
every community is feeling the
effects of vaping E. cigarette
use all kinds of tobacco use
among youth.
It's we're asking for local
solutions to local issues.
I this preemption bill would be
a floor preemption so we're
asking that I the state laws
would be respected but that
local municipalities can find
innovative ways to combat the
issues they're they're facing in
their communities.
Now.
An issue with at the tobacco
industry that they are focusing
on youth ninety percent of
smokers start under the age of
eighteen thank you very much at
Senator Hickey for for making
that excellent point.
Hi but we keep bringing up the
statistic from twenty nineteen
that a third of our high schools
nearly a third of our high
school students are vaping are
using these E. cigarette
products it's dangerous levels
of nicotine and the reason we
keep coming back to the
statistic even though it's from
twenty nineteen that this is the
last
This is the last data point we
have that is reliable after this
you should remember that
students went to home schooling
they went online and these the
studies became a lot less
reliable so that is why we are
harping on this skyrocketing
number from twenty nineteen.
Now in addition to this one of
the other issues with these
devices these these nicotine
devices delivery devices that
there really single use that
creates a massive amount of
waste plastic waste these
batteries become toxic they're
just thrown out.
For these reasons and and many
many more that I could set up
here and discuss for much longer
but I'll keep it short I that is
why we support how we interact
support this bill thank you very
much for your thank you.
Anyone else who wants to speak
in support of this bill yes Sir
come up please.
Introduce yourself and use the
microphone.
Thank you.
Hello my name is Elliot and I am
ten I go to school and I support
this bill thank you we're we're
to go to school earlier Los
crucis Catholic school.
Good thank you thanks for coming
expressly from my time thank you
for your time.
All right if I thought I saw a
few hands in opposition to this
bill of would you like to come
up and begin speaking in
opposition to it try not to
repeat each other please.
Senator.
Good afternoon my name is Tom
Hennessey.
I'm with brewer oil company and
we have thirty seven convenience
stores around the state of New
Mexico
We got stores in half the
districts that are represented
here by of arable centers here
on this the committee
I guess the the the I'd like to
this time here in in opposition
Isshin of it of today our
business is very complex we sell
over nine thousand different
items in our convenience stores
ranging from.
Milk dairy products and eggs
general merchandise products and
we sell tobacco products to
people that are of age
It's concerning because it will
lead to a to a.
Confusing patchwork of
regulatory structures right now
we're all on an even playing
field and if each town is able
to.
Past their own regulations of we
we would have different ways
that we need to operate in each
of our locations for these
reasons I'd like to ask you to
to oppose this bill thank you
thank you Sir.
This is going to get her
computer.
Thank you Mr Scanlon come on up.
And use the Mike.
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for Altria
and I just standing in
respectful of opposition to
Senator Hickey's Bill you know
preemption this legislature has
passed preemption in the past
for other adult products
including alcohol and most
recently
cannabis and so I think if we're
going to have a discussion about
preemption we need to bring in
all of those subjects and
because the fact of the matter
is is that is that the the most
a product of the product that's
the that were single at the the
biggest increases and especially
with teens is is cannabis and so
I think to have a real good
discussion we need to bring and
everything to be fair and so we
respectfully oppose this
legislation thank you thank you
Mr Scanlon anybody else was.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you first of all
I'd like to apologize to Senator
Hickey is might and can you John
Thompson I apologize Mr chairman
is my training in my practice in
this building to talk to sponsor
before I propose their bill and
I didn't do that to Senator
Hickey so I apologize for that
this afternoon I would like to
say along the lines of what Mr
Scanlon said I think as a matter
of policy when we talk about
preempt perhaps we need to look
at it looking at all of these
things rather than and picking
and choosing and I mean that
with respect on on what we're
gonna preemption what we're not
going to and have consistent
application as we deal with
these substances that are all
regulated under regulation
licensing Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you anybody else want to
speak that we have to on zoom
who wanted to speak really want
to speak for the his so we'll go
to Greg Gregory Conley.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee my name is
Gregory Conley and I currently
serve as the director of
legislative affairs for the
American vapor manufacturers
association a trade association
representing manufacturers and
retailers of nicotine vaping
products which are used monthly
by twelve to eighteen million
adults including many who rely
on them to stay off of deadly
combustible cigarettes we would
like to urge opposition to SB
one seven nine as this bill in
its current form amounts to an
unnecessary repeal of preemption
provisions contained now in the
New Mexico tobacco products act
if the bills the fact was
limited to the five hundred feet
limit Representative referenced
by the sponsor are
Representative our
recommendation would no doubt be
different but this bill as
written will kick off a
prohibition lobbying bonanza at
the local level that will
inevitably harm small businesses
with little in the way of public
health benefits particularly in
the age of the internet lessons
of the past to tell us the
prohibition does not work and
it's especially not going to
work at the hyper level the
hyper local level.
I just like to note that some of
the rhetoric I used in support
of this bill simply isn't backed
by science the FDA has
authorized multiple vaping heat
not burn and snooze products all
non combustible as quote
appropriate for the protection
of public health and at the
national level FDA and CDC data
show the youth they thing has
declined by up to sixty percent
since those youth number some
twenty nineteen this is data
from before during and after the
pandemic the state to do more to
ensure enforcement is increased
but allowing cities to ban adult
drugs is not the answers
particularly when cannabis and
alcohol are left off the hook
please post SB one seven nine
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Connelly and then
finally Tim Andrews.
Thank you to my interest on
behalf Americans for tax reform
and I support it is across the
state of New Mexico we strongly
urge you to vote against this
bill for two reasons first of
all it is contrary to the
principles of good government
and strip good public
administration decisions of this
magnitude need to be discussed
at the state level with there
was transparency that was
scrutiny and there is
accountability these are
decisions made of right right
impact on people's health and it
is only appropriate that they be
debated fully by people with
expertise with a recent hearing
such as this at the state level
this is simply a question of
good government this
constitution puts the state as
the ultimate GABAB to citizens
rights in the state should
fulfill its duty secondly the
vote will troubling we this will
as great calmly stated set off a
troubling precedent which goes
against will public health
knowledge contracted someone
fortune misunderstandings by the
proponents of this bill the
overwhelming met medical
evidence is incontrovertible
that the some of the best
devices to help adults quit
smoking nobody wants you to pop
to coax youth type of fighting
which as was stated is down by
sixty percent after the pandemic
from twenty nineteen that U. K.
government looked at hundreds of
studies and came to the
conclusion that that ninety five
percent safer than did that
combustible tobacco road college
of physicians replicate it takes
over a hundred of the world's
leading independent medical
bodies have said the the I hope
the smoking cessation George
town university did the modeling
the majority of American smokers
take up fighting six point six
million lives will be saved the
call crime review considered the
gold standard of medical meta
analysis looked at seventy eight
studies show that these are the
most effective tools with high
confidence the smoking
cessation.
These are the these are not
drugs demonized by some these
the drugs that have been proven
to help smokers quit the the
products that have been proven
to help save lives I would
struggle of these the science
linking out testimony I'll be
happy to answer questions and
I'll be happy to help assist
with some of the misconceptions
about these locks seven products
that unfortunately so the
proponents of this bill have
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Mr Andrews
now before we go to the
committee did you want us to
respond to any of the things
you've heard senator.
We don't have all afternoon so I
can't respond to all of them
The although I I'm.
certainly where the fact that
that the world is becoming full
of alternative facts and I think
we just heard a a number of them
that are isolated the non
thorough studies so I'm not
going to debate those
specifically I do want to point
out a couple of things one of
the reasons that the tesseract
Committee really picked up steam
this year and became much more
alarmed was when we had Dr
Douglas is it down as the CEO
the new CEO of UNM health
sciences center he is a
psychiatrist addiction
oncologist trained at Yale USC
UCLA.
A number of other institutions
and his.
In the area of research our
tobacco addiction and he came up
with this phrase which I really
want to burn into everyone's
head.
Vaping.
Then smoking because you're
seven times more likely to smoke
if you do vape.
Vaping is indeed the great way
to addiction and that's what
none of these folks are
commenting on and that we're
finding out more and more in
neuroscience how these addiction
pathways are put together visit
vaping is the beginning of the
chain reaction in the
destruction of so many lives so.
To to waive that in light of
some esoteric and really not
highly common sense discussions
about well if you do this here
wind should doing that there and
what have you this is about
vaping this is about smoking
this is about giving localities
the ability to.
Set the road rules the other
very disturbing thing and again
I'm surprised to hear from the
vaping manufactures that they
are not reckoning with the fact
that these vaping pens now
become the tool for fentanyl use
and make it so much easier and
is doctors a Dona said.
All sorts of things are going
into those pants these days and
so it's having even more of a
secondary effect on bad help in
setting up bad health patterns
going forward so again I would
urge the committee to allow the
municipalities to set their own
rules on the proximity of any
shop that sells a tobacco
nicotine vaping products
rather than to continue with the
preemption currently at three
hundred feet thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator okay let's go
to the committee questions from
the committee discussion Senator
committees.
They Mr etcetera
You know you know once again
Center soul said something on
the floor the other day about
allowing what we allow we allow
he said we allow poverty.
I don't quite.
It read that statement but to to
there's a lot of truth behind
that and we can apply to here we
we allow this and we are still
allowing it to pass this bill
we're still allowing it.
You know why does that child
back there have to pay for our
failings the Senate and the
house.
One of the children Mexico have
to pay for.
This right here.
You know and there's a there's a
little tiger that's that's
running around we keep coming
back so all you gotta do is spit
you know little little your stay
away from it and pass a new law
you can only rate in the certain
time you know if you this
certain thing and one day we
walk in here and it's a huge
adult tiger and eats us.
I don't know why.
The elected people the the
people that elected us I don't
know under I don't understand I
I my mind is blown why we allow
this we allow our children
become addicted to these things.
So it's it's of great
frustration as as you can tell
and I think we should completely
outlaw all the building with the
exception of that Cochran review
by the way so let's talk about
some data let's talk to that
they brought in the Brits
against you.
but that Cochran review.
Is
Is.
About an exit to tobacco.
That is actually good for vaping
but why don't we take all the
vaping stuff off the market and
allow either a physician or
health care professional to
prescribe it as a cessation.
Or we could set up these tobacco
cessation.
You know whatever you want to
call it facilities around and
allow them to dispense only if
they know someone is using that
in in very limited ways maybe a
thirty day supply or something
let's do that and let's do it
now there's no reason not to do
it.
Well there is a reason not to do
it once again because of this
and I don't believe that the
house and the Senate are
actually going to take this
seriously enough and get it done
there is no this place no value
at all with the exception of
what that cop interview says to
get people out of traditional
tobacco products I don't see any
value at all in.
Whatsoever.
in in real quick I'm not gonna
get out of this this is the
bipartisan report from the US
Congress that just that came out
pretty recently on fentanyl we
we know what's happening says
Mexico's principal source of
illicit fentanyl the precursors
are coming from the people's
Republic of China.
We know we're doing but we're
conflating immigration policy
with border security in our
country and it's killing people.
The people we have good
immigration policy we know good
border security could save a lot
a lot but instead we conflate
the two and it it literally
kills people so you know I I
don't want to be told that we
can't do something about it we
can't.
So I I don't really have
questions on it I I honestly
agree even though I am I mean I
can go on and on about this I
remove people's voice boxes.
Because of tobacco I've removed
their their jaws their tongues.
Makes me sick.
But this is the I I don't
believe this is good policy
actually agree with with that
person but I support banning
all.
But I I you know I went to
medical school in Lubbock people
just drive down to the strip and
go by their alcohol right down
the road these people are
addicted so it's almost like
we're forcing people to go drive
to these other places that that
sell it or the tribal sovereigns
so it's like okay you're
directed well all right we're
just going to force you to drive
further because you can't stop
so you have to drive got to pay
more gas I don't I just
sincerely don't think it's good
policy but once again let's put
all our chips on the table and
bandit ban the whole thing.
That's all I have Mister chair
thank you thank you.
Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Senator Lopez gentleman
the on.
I'm just one because preemption
is good economic policy you know
and we do it with all other so
called likes and Sen products we
apprehension.
We fought for decades to have
preemption on non alcohol
regulation two years ago.
We we ensure that preemption
prevailed in the cannabis
legislation couple years back
and then the rule making.
No are you here in a.
Sometime the next hour or two on
preemption over county
governments contracting with
with ice.
I I have way more confidence in
us developing good public policy
with regards to beeping and
tobacco than than my home county
for example or Mike city
council.
What we did Mr chair of.
Senators when when we when we
put us vaping regulation on the
books which we had to do because
prior to that there was no
regulation I think that I think
the taxes were too low and and
we didn't regulate the content
of the the vaping.
Tools are pens or whatever we
regulated the.
Of the product but not the
chemical that went in the
product because we could
theoretically passed laws that
that put threshold on the amount
of nicotine in particular
products
and things of that nature but as
of right now the.
The chemical drugs in those
devices are not regulated by by
us and we need to do that at
some point will soon but anyway
that's just kind of where I'm
coming from thank you Mr.
Thank you anybody else the
Senators.
The motion for due process.
Seconded by Senator McKenna.
I have a question for you
That is the entire vaping.
Piece of the of our the.
The statutes included under the
tobacco control act.
Or is it a separate act.
You know the answer.
Mr Chairman are you referring to
the taxing structure of the
weeping or I mean it your bills.
Says it no longer will I mean
we're repealing Representative
that section of the tobacco
pulls control act does that
cover vaping yes it it colors E.
cigarettes.
As well.
Our tobacco it colors the
cigarettes okay.
Okay so that part of it at least
that part of it is under the
tobacco control yes so when you
Wipe out the current the.
What's the word when we.
Preemption the current
preemption clause you will make
it cover vaping as well Mr
Chairman yes the colors E.
cigarettes flavors Senator
flavors and Senator flavors.
Any other discussion.
Senator Gallegos did you have
any questions or discussion.
Cities having hard time with
it's cutting in and out of okay
but he's done I think okay well
let's let's go ahead and have
the secretary take the role.
Senator Guerreros.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator my is this.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Gallegos apparently
can't.
The we can't think about that he
sent you a text would it say he
sent a text that says knows the
lost lost sound lost connection
okay good right registry and is
a no.
Hello is a yes.
This trying to get back on thank
you for but I to for both to you
have been to pass and the on
Senate bill one seventy nine and
where to go next Judiciary this
whole issue of the.
Yeah okay very good at it thank
you Sir thank you.
Preemption.
Or that we're.
No.
Let's just Senator Sedillo Lopez
is going to carry it is going to
carry for Senator Gonzales
Senate bill one thirty four if
we can pull it off the table.
Yes.
Thank you thank
you could please be quiet on
your way out so we can get on
with our link the agenda.
What's that.
One thirty four the exotic
animals in traveling
performances Act.
We just got a passed out to us
and.
Or did we I got that right now
yeah.
The other side of the Senator
yes I do.
This is a bill that we heard the
other night and it was tabled.
I think a committee service been
prepared and somebody who voted
in the affirmative.
The table at the table to table.
You voted to table I voted to
table it still K. for corruption
yeah I believe everybody voted
to table it.
We all everybody on the
committee voted out of so we
know is there any opposition to
taking it off of the table.
Okay.
Seeing none will consider at PED
tabled or un tables or.
Previously table something of
the sort.
And.
And we'll go to you Senator to
explain what we changed over
first of all to make the motion.
About do not pass and and to for
discussion only and then to
explain what we're doing.
Thank you Mr chair I move a do
not pass the Senate health I
mean on Senate bill one thirty
four and a due pass for
discussion purposes on state
health and this on Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty four again for discussion
purposes.
Is there a second.
Thank.
So what we've done here.
Thank you Mr chair has if if if
you recall the last bill was
written very very broadly and so
there were questions about
whether educational programs in
the schools could could the
function there were questions
about whether snakes of the
snake demonstrations could
function and so there's a bit of
Senator Wirth of Gonzalez who is
the this caring this bill asked
me to present it and he worked
very hard to narrow it to get
off to the real harm which are
these traveling circuses who
diet story after story we have
seen don't take good care of the
exotic animals you'll notice it
exotic animal is defined and
specifically refers to animals
that are not livestock under the
regulatory so supervision The
New Mexico livestock for or
domesticated animals and then
we've got a clear definition of
a traveling performance
so that way to take care of this
issue camels at the zoo.
Of those kinds of things and
then
And then of course it's unlawful
to use exotic animals in a
troubling performance
and then it simply goes on to
say that of course this doesn't
apply to competitions
exhibitions including rodeos
film or television production
provided that the performance is
closed to the public animal
rehabilitation program shelter
programs and animal Education
rental conservation programs so
the attempt here was to limited
two of the problems that he's
trying to address which is
traveling circuses it don't take
good care of of animals so with
that I'd like to introduce my
experts who is this person will
send to add her comments to the
bill if you recall Mr chair we
have public comment last time
yes.
then you'll go ahead.
Okay
We've tried to make all the Mr
chairman senators we tried to
make all the changes that you
asked for the one change that
the council service really
wanted in that's what we put in
for the local municipalities but
we've taken all that out and
come we finally figured out that
the Attorney General can step
into any consumer issue he
wishes to so I would think if
there was a if if this was
violated this law the Attorney
General could take action the to
cut C. yep and you know that you
still haven't defined livestock
is that a problem I mean I I I I
stuck is defined in the New
Mexico livestock Act which gives
the board the livestock board
the authority to regulate and it
Lee is specifically defines what
livestock is.
Anything that they regulate this
livestock.
In the old enough is that we
have a new analysis.
Okay yes so that so
All domestic or domesticated
animals used to raised on a farm
or ranch.
Including the carcasses there
of.
And exotic animals in captivity.
That's all included as
livestock.
So the way this definition this
is the way this definition of of
that livestock from the
livestock board reads.
I'm not sure who you're stopping
if all my gosh that it that is a
problem I didn't see I didn't
see that.
I thought it was I was looking
at what the board regulates
because the board of the.
The problem is they have a they
have a couple of different
definitions but
A lot of all of the yes yeah
ostriches the moves re is.
Kabbalists and that's what we're
intending to exclude and if you
could read that definition so
those are on farms yeah but the
but the exotic animals in
captivity piece that would be
issues they're not eight that
would be that would be somebody
who is a of the will the home
will fit home and we're not
trying to interfere with that.
This is this is traveling
Services.
But that you you're you're still
prohibiting it in.
into traveling performance right
so if somebody has a wolf and a
traveling for performance means
the.
Public or private event for
which exotic animals are
transported and delay it
displayed.
Or required to perform tricks
for given rights for the
entertainment amusement or
benefit of a live audience
including services in pairs of
services Affairs pretty clearly
that's what you want to but what
about the.
The guy that takes is
What I don't know what it is is.
The one you want is what Daniel
said the other night was tight
lands Tigers and elephants with
the one you were aiming at yes
so somebody has.
I'm not aware that the left four
regulates elephants yeah that is
that the.
And also we don't want to
include elements that are in the
soup.
Because they don't have no
trouble right they're not
traveling and their their income
captivity but they don't travel.
And the birds and snakes issue.
I are they I'm not an under I
did not understand but I don't
have the new and as an LCS I
would appreciate getting a copy
of your book it's just that he's
taken the book.
I didn't look in the book I was
in my file they did your does
exotic animal.
two very are they under the
supervision of livestock or know
that they aren't well a.
Wait a second.
That's correct but how about
parents who were hawks you know
the the.
I've never seen a.
A bird in a circus.
well.
The issue really isn't and it
it's it's the not because you've
already excluded circuses it
it's the other things that the
people write me you're saying
you know we have this bird Act
the R. train birds
maybe there you know.
Fox is one that I had that I
heard and they take them around
to schools and show kids that
for education.
That's that would be exempted
because of education.
Mr chair if you refer to the to
the left Mr chair.
It does not apply to.
Animal Education or animal
conservation programs.
Okay.
That.
Okay let's let's see members the
committee senators committees.
Thank you Mr center I I have
some follow up questions along
that line these the I think you
have a clear idea of the folks
you're you're kind of going
after right.
what if in in Mr center what if
they just say well this is the
other actor whatever it is and
then they just they have an
education thing they have these
big booths to teach kids about
the the hawks and everything
they say it's for education how
do we get around that loophole
with the bill.
Mister chairman Senator I think
it says right here that it
doesn't include animal
Education.
So so Mister chair that that I
guess that would not be a
loophole because that
specifically exempt so if
service is wanted to turn their
circuits into.
An educational thing that would
be if that would be appropriated
to the bill.
Of the one thing they could do.
Mr chair Senator I I'm not sure.
This is going to accomplish what
you want to accomplish because
it's I think it's how the NM is
it how the animals are treated
in these is that right so but
once again they can still treat
them the exact same and have the
exaction so and they could just
tack on a little education booth
on the side so I don't know if
I'm missing something is this
not Kristin your bill I'm just
this thing how can we drafted in
a way where it's not gonna have
a I I just think it seems like
it's still a big loophole in
same same thing for rehab they
could say well we're we have
these things and we're we're we
having them and we have this
person that you know takes care
of and we have some it seems
like another potential loophole
I'm not I'm not saying I'm
against the bill or the idea I'm
just saying are we going to do
anything unless we maybe rework
it.
This Mr chair there are animal
cruelty provisions and so that
those are still available has a
tool to district attorneys and
and police when you have animal
cruelty so I think that's how
you could get it in this way
this is basically trying to as I
understand it it's trying to
keep up those of.
I don't know if you've ever been
to a service for the the lions
don't have teeth than the.
You know it's it's a I have been
to some of these services are
pretty.
You have to go to small towns to
see seventy for the services if
that is really sad and that's
the that's the goal is is to do
it has I understand the bill and
that of that is so that
certainly Senator of Rodriguez's
intent and the intent of the of
our of our expert the Mr chair
Senator I I guess I'm.
On on the fence I I I support
the intent but these the small
town enough to the to those
lines and things I just and all
they do is put a poster about
how lines are born in.
Their life cycle and stuff it's
education so I and I can still
treat the line just as poorly as
they ever did and I'm just not
sure that then there would be
the animal cruelty provisions
because that's still available
if there were an educational
program that of steamed
educational but actually what
they were illustrating without
animal cruelty thank the the law
prohibits animal cruelty in
those statutes could be used so
as I understand the answer yes
of the bill of bill and that's
why traveling performance is so
important here.
is it is that's what is trying
the tricks than the that kind of
abuse of animals thank.
The body else the lady of the.
David what's the will of the
committee.
Excuse me there is one person
that three people on zoom wanted
to speak to them spoke the other
night so I'm not going to take
them but Debbie Goodrich.
Want to speak in opposition I
don't believe spoke the other
night so miss good rich are you
there.
I am here Sir thank you very
much chair for letting the
address the Committee in regards
to SB one thirty four can you
understand me yes we can hear.
I come from I love foundation a
pair Humane Society that's
located in Washington state and
we do travel across the United
States and to including the
great state of New Mexico we've
actually been there with our
parents I'm I'm in opposition
for this bill in its entirety at
this point because it sets a
precedent for the term
performance as if performance of
an animal is a bad thing weekly
agree with those who are
proposing this bill that having
any kind of animal abuse is very
bad and we none of us Preciado
and of us wanted as you can see
why some of the pieces behind me
maybe you can or cannot see them
but these are the thank yous
that I get from children who are
three years old five years old
will no longer be able to give
thank yous if there's anything
that comes up that is related to
the work performance and related
to the word ban if we put those
two things together in the same
format that is going to cause a
overall federal ban of traveling
animal acts such as myself I've
been doing traveling animal acts
for over twenty years I've seen
over five hundred thousand
people live and in person much
that's what I see online yes I'm
educational yes I'd probably be
the exception yes I'd probably
get the licensing I'm already
going in the USDA licensing for
birds anyway that's fine but
what you're stopping is that
you're stopping people who are
educators right now using snakes
using parents using common
everyday owned animals in the
state of New Mexico from being
able to educate the public and
making sure that those animals
like snakes like parrots in New
Mexico can get the care they
need through educational
programs so I'm really out
begging you please do not
support any kind of legislation
that says that brands the name
performance with the word
animals because no matter what
exotic animals that live with us
are living with us and
performing to perform in the
wild they perform with us no
matter what it's a performance
when an animal is in front of a
human being that animal innately
is not going to.
Seek a human being thank you so
much for your time.
Three thank you this Goodrich
members of the committee.
We have a motion for it to pass.
Anybody second that seconded by
Senator Sedillo Lopez I is yes
all second that they for the
discussion
I I is yep go ahead send thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Sedillo personally the
On so I'm just wondering if this
captures as you right
And so on the bottom of page one
it talks about are transported
and displayed.
but there's no time.
There's no time with regard to
transported a list of animals
born in that particular sue that
that was at some point
transported.
And then on
And then a couple questions
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
I'm not on page two why do we X.
why do we exclude a shelter
programs.
What what the need rather to to
to have shelter programs
excluded from the from the act.
Mr chair thank you for that
question shelter program should
be able to transport animals
and so that's why we exclude
them from the act because
shelter purpose of.
That's not the target.
And you know I was just thinking
it again I this is not my bill
so I feel a little comfortable
accepted uncomfortable accepting
an amendment but maybe
transported displayed and
required to perform tricks I
will refer.
so if you would like to make
that of then that amendment of
at least of the our expert
agrees with it and I.
I hope I believe that if it
makes a difference in getting it
to pass Senator was also
probably executive that Mr chair
of.
And I'm almost all move an
amendment on page one line
twenty three.
Between the words displayed.
And require change the or two
and and.
Mr Mr chair Senator do you want
to call me a and then the remove
the first and so that is.
Online twenty two.
Or do you want to introduce on
page one page one online twenty
two and and twenty three.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
the word display do we need that
word I mean it seems like we
astute exotic animals are
transported.
Thanks for the purpose of
performing tricks are giving
rights I don't know.
Yeah you're right changing the
or to the and doesn't quite
quite do it so well I I think
transported COVID displayed and
required to perform tricks I
think accomplices what you're
trying to do of Mr chair Senator
is that would that capture it
for you of a Daniel so I think
so I I'm a member of the
wildlife center here itself near
aspen L. I don't know if you're
aware of it and they they take
in.
Injured animals the found on a
highway and stuff they have a
lot of birds have a fox and some
of the animals can not.
Cannot be rehabilitated you know
a eagle has a injured wing they
can't put him back into the wild
so what they do the animals that
they cannot put back into the
wild they bring them around to
the school so they did before
COVID keep them like up to the
up keep it up to date thank
yeah.
They bring them around to the
schools and it's a very good
program and these animals are
not mistreated there are.
That but they're not free either
but I had no none of us had any
idea that we were going to shut
down an organization like that
we really just want to shut down
the people who are coming from
out of state with these terrible
records of cruelty just awful
they they estimated some
elephants are ninety six percent
of the time and did they change
their legs to travel I've seen
an elephant that has retired
from one of the services and
they were trying to rehabilitate
him to get into a an elephant
sanctuary and he died before
they could do that your
treatment is just awful and
they're coming in and the friars
come in every year they
performance tingly and.
Frankly we need to we need to
stop.
Senator guy just did you want to
thank you us us Mister chairman
Senator Lopez so on page one
like twenty to strike and and
insert in lieu thereof a comma.
And on line twenty three strike
for the first four.
And insert a loser of the word
and.
Friendly.
Yes Mr chair that is a for the
amendment seconded I'll second
okay so we have an amendment at
Senator Gallegos were you
speaking on the amendment on the
bill.
On the bill okay hang on just a
second on the amendment is
discussion what was this what
was that last in the US so it
says displayed and required to
perform tricks so okay count
COVID that end okay.
Unsupported comma displayed and
required to perform.
Okay I I just
have a maintenance on the bill
as a whole this is a good
amendment I think the the the
will come back to the bills or
anybody else have any discussion
on this amendment any opposition
to the amendment Senator
Gallegos you okay with the
amendment.
Mr chair.
Seeing no opposition will
consider the bill to the amended
now on the bill Senator Gallegos
the late senator still of the
floor thank you senator thank
you said Senator love of the so
I think that that makes the
zoo's legal
But the federal education piece
you know you don't want to write
a because essentially this is
this will go in the criminal
statute.
And you don't want to write a
criminal statute where there's
any ambiguity.
And have juries you know did
debate about what is animal
education you know I mean I'm
just letting you know.
so it would go into the criminal
statute it would up.
It would it's a prohibition it's
a it's a prohibition and there
and there's no penalty the no
penalty for the appropriations
so that's kind of weird that
you're outlined something but
you're there's no consequence
for violating the outlaw so so
the bill still as it's very very
problem thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator chairman what
it is I want to the mantle yes
that's where I into the Attorney
General this this would not be
criminal in the sense that.
State fair would have the choice
of giving a contract and if they
were to give a contract I think
the internet general could step
in and tell them you're not
allowed to give a contract like
that.
That Mister chairman Senator
Lopez LA that's that the weight.
Government works as it relates
to prohibiting specific acts you
you you outlawed and there's
consequences for doing it as
opposed to having bureaucrats
and and law enforcement agencies
meddling in.
In every year up to a week
before the state very one gets
together like the side anyway no
no disrespect thank you Mr Mrs
Mr chair Senator the intent was
to have that's why they got rid
of the enforced by by sector but
that's why they got rid of in
the in force by
Local jurisdictions yeah the
purpose was to just state that
of.
It is illegal to enter into
unlawful contracts and so this
is this is simply to give
guidance to entities especially
state entities that would permit
it and also the Attorney General
would have the power to step in
and
The and advise them they don't
need to say that.
you know if it's needed I I am
happy to work with Senator
Rodriguez to tell us I mean
that's all as good as Senator
Gonzales to fix it before
Judiciary if it's needed so to
senator Gallegos your your
comments Senator Gallegos your
question.
Mister chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez in the Connelly is hi next
you I apologize being away from
the capital right now but as we
heard this last time I had a
concern over the camel known to
the scene the to better First
Baptist just little background
Mr is this was created in
nineteen ninety
there is no charge for the
banter about three thirty five
to four thousand people come see
this the care giver the owner of
the of the camels always there
during the two day event and I'm
wondering if the amendments in
the changes since last time we
heard this bill if you would
protect the nativity scene at
the Santa Fe First Baptist
Church.
Mr Mr chair Senator Gallegos if
you can hear me yes and it it
particularly with the amendment
okay.
Sorry Mr Stewart Mr chair
Senator Gallegos yes
particularly with the amendment
that Senator my S. is just added
that it's transported displayed
and required to perform tricks
so the camels in additivity
seeing or the bottles or
whatever all over the state
would not be affected by this
bill.
Thank you for that I'm shouldn't
listen some debate sure both but
I appreciate that there's at
least some option for those that
are in that position and
statewide so thank you Mr thanks
to the center city office thank
you senator guys now I I I any.
It seems to me that we still
it's like we have this target
here but all of our bullets are
aiming over here I mean if your
target is the mistreatment of
animals especially elephants in
traveling circuses.
Shouldn't we have something that
says.
It's wrong to mistreat animals
in travelling service art
there's some animals in
travelling circuses that are
mistreated that's what miss
Goodrich was saying she brings
her animals run their lovely
animals and their welfare.
It shouldn't that be okay.
The Senate Mr chair we already
do have animal cruelty statutes
of why do we need this because
we're trying to target circuses
and fairs and that's that's what
online twenty five that that's
what it tries to make clear.
This I will turn it over to Mrs
but as well so yeah yeah because
it it just seems to me that you
know the go ahead.
Chairman
Currently Santa Fe has a root
has a similar ordinance and and
Albuquerque has a similar
ordinance in fact Albuquerque
doesn't even allow them to
travel on the streets but
because it's so expensive to
enforce it they do it but they
are allowed on state at the
state fair because it's now if
it's not allowed in Bernalillo
which not allowed in.
Albuquerque's not allowed in
Santa Fe it shouldn't be allowed
on.
On state land and other places.
But.
This these laws are already in
place and they're not in force
now.
Why would passing a state law
who's going to enforce the state
law up there not even enforcing
their local law state law has
more state has more assets than
the city's.
It was a terrible example when
they found some elephants that
payment for free elephants one
was dead and so they had to
there are a lot of us and there
a whole bunch of animals in
there in this band like they use
they thought it was human
trafficking and I order your and
coming out so they opened it up
and they took possession of
these animals and they all had
to be I mean they were just the
public health menace but they
had to pay to their medical
costs and sub most learned as
soon.
Okay bill but but so whatever we
had in place at that time.
Act it it in it it took the the
elephants away from their owners
maybe it was too late for one
but the other ones were taken
away I mean or or is your
assumption that all circuses
every single circus mistreats
its animals so much that we have
to say you cannot come into the
state any longer.
By that have lions Tigers bears
they mistreat these animals just
a mere fact that they're in a
circus it is is wrong the
transportation of them in the
studies show that these animals
to suffer.
These kinds of of animals and I
I believe that that's the that's
what I think this the bill is
specifically trying to.
Get it that
of that particular use of
animals.
I mean
I think it's interesting that
Senator my Estes said that it
would go in the criminal
provision because it doesn't say
any criminal statute no thirty
seven is is being.
No amended so it's not clear
where it would go but I think
the purpose is to stop TB
Coliseum Coliseum in other state
lands for being used from the
service so perhaps we should of
focus on doing that I know that
the state is prohibited from
entering entering into legal
contracts.
And so if if if this is now a
prohibited.
But maybe it should say no state
entity shall allow animals
animal shows like this in their
facilities.
I'm just thinking out loud Mr
chair I'm not sure that we
composition anything at all by
doing this I mean if we were to
passes but let's let's let's see
what the committee does is there
any other debate senator Tom.
So.
You mentioned it's already
outlawed some of the major
cities other circus is being
performed and small in any other
places.
Other than this there if you
there are some but so what is
this what exactly is the problem
we're trying to sell.
With what what exactly is the
problem we're trying to sell
we're trying to stop basically
the Shriners and other services
that have terrible records
you're over a hundred the
department of agriculture has
cited them how many how many
times how many are coming into
Mexico.
I can't I can't answer that but
I know I know trying is coming
every year and I know they've
been cited by the federal
government for so many
violations says a top of page
three of the FIR that the
reigning brothers.
Are not.
As the.
That using animals anymore
right.
Right so they could.
The way they could they could be
coming to New Mexico because
they don't use animals.
The check.
If the circuses like cirque de
soleil the whole industry is
changing well that I'm glad you
said that because the other day
somebody came to me and said
look.
The services are you that there
are elephants who's who's spent
their entire life.
Performing in circuses now and
for those of they're not
bringing any new elephants and
but for those element that's all
they've ever known.
And and what would you do with
them then.
What what what is that service
going to do with these elephants
who have spent their lives
entertaining people and making
them making little children at
this Mr chair they Mr chair they
are they do many of them do
adapt well to sanctuary so those
are actually beautiful spaces
adapt well to thank you very
thanks for centuries I know
there's an elephant sanctuary
and so it okay Senator yes
Sierra six I believe my expert
had something to add.
Yes
many years ago there was state
they went after Ringling
brothers and Barnum and Bailey
the two major services and they
both shut down and one of them
has re opened with that animals
and wants to there are factory
there's one Tennessee that's
really really good and that
Ringling brothers put their
elephants in a sanctuary but was
a sanctuary they owned and the
animal rights people went after
them and now they're in a
sanctuary that is they have a
good life.
Any other states that have
similar law yes six other states
I don't have their names but six
other states have benefited
California Massachusetts is
looking at it I don't remember
what the other states Colorado I
think may have
Mr chair New Mexico state
go that reputation being on the
leading edge of a lot of
regressive laws so it is.
Why we should.
That's.
what we'll move on now.
Next question.
So
What was the answer to the fact
that.
Senator a which is the Pino said
we already have laws on the
books regarding cruelty to
animals that doesn't cut it with
you.
Thank you thank you Mr Mr chair
can you have to dress up thank
you thank you Mr chair Senator
actually that's where I think
this goes is in thirty after
thirty dash eighteen dash one at
secretary to animals of because
of.
Cruelty to animals is a crime
after the fact what this is
trying to do is to prevent it to
prevent New Mexico for
participating in the cruelty to
animals so that's that's the
difference and and I believe
that this would not go in the
criminal statutes and should go
into of thirty probably after
thirty dash eighteen dash one
there's no indication on this
where it would go
Because it does it's not
amending an existing act but I
would think that in the section
involving of cruelty to animals
thirty dash eighteen dash one.
Under.
Senator offenses yeah I I would
think it would go over there
perhaps the other possibility I
can see and I think fixing it
before Judiciary would make
sense is to direct the state not
to not to contract to host these
events is another is another
possibility photo Mister
chairman Senator Costa Judiciary
next yes yes Mister chair Mister
chairman Senator only let them
fix it.
Mr chair really yeah we got a
long agenda and.
With the it's late already and
you know we need to move on and
we we have I have senator Gary
finish Senator that I've Senator
guy goes with some question
Senator guy goes are you there.
Thank you Mr of the questions
I'd like to move to table you
you if we can't hear you Senator
you got to move the Mike closer
turn your sound up Wirth project
better.
Okay.
New Mexico the little better.
I move to table.
We already
a motion to table.
Takes over the and it's not
debatable.
So.
You're right.
Secretary will call the roll on
a motion to table the non
debatable motion to table.
Senator they're both.
Table.
Sir Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Maestas Senator McKenna
no.
Senator smitteez yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no Senator
Tallman.
Senator Ortiz Pena yes.
He wants to go there for three
service is back on if you get
him all right now Senator messes
with your vote with the motion
motion to table yes of a move to
explain.
Yeah so I agree to and senator
Morris with thank you Mr
chairman center gentle lady just
that it's just it's just the
it's a great idea I appreciate
was trying to do but it doesn't
get there.
Within the four corners of the
document thank you.
So I of voted I in the
affirmative three in the
negative with one excused.
Your.
Thank you thank you Mr chair so
now we'll go to Representative
Dixon and Senator look Senator
look just to skate been sitting
there all this time.
And she got away can somebody
get her.
Representative shouldn't come
back and we do have we do have
Representative Dixon there so
someone of Representative.
We'll do years next senator
Ingle.
The.
The.
Look at.
Then at okay so.
You know what what.
One of my.
So the utility bill that that
witness.
Okay.
Is that is that true we're just
gonna roll this over
Representative okay.
Apparently one of the key
witnesses on this bill can't be
here today so we'll roll this
over.
Committee.
Okay thank you senator.
And we'll go to Senator Ingle
for his quick fill.
This this is
Senate bill one eighty three.
Yeah.
Members of the committee.
Basically what the as senator
I'm afraid I'm going to ask you
to use that to get.
Mr chairman members of the
committee what Senate bill one
eighty three does it's very
simple it just re is ri bill
relating to conservatorship and
providing for a waiver of
liability that can service
conservator if a protected
person or a person interested in
concert conservatorship of state
is represented by an independent
legal counsel expert witness
here Jon Anderson and he can
certainly explain this further
but it's very stress just a very
simple build figures correct
something make it easier for
conservatorship should exist
thank you senator John welcome
to the committee good to see
you.
We'll get to see you as much as
we used to well.
Order.
mission and it can you hear me.
Yes Mr Chairman this this bill
is incredibly important not only
to find out I I'm John Anderson
by the way a Representative New
Mexico bankers association
this is a bill that basically
Really causes problems within
the estate planning and trust
arena much because in today's
world is incredibly important to
have very competent conservators
basically name to basically
oversee the US states of minors
and incapacitated
people the problem is that
conservatives in under the law
right now
can never be relieved of their
liability even once the
conservatorship is terminated
the way the law now reads is
that you can basically get
letters termination from the
court but the way the law now
reads under section forty five
five four twenty nine he.
It basically says that in no
case can conservatorship be
relieved of his or her liability
so as a result.
banks trust companies attorneys
CPA's and others have basically
not taking on new
conservatorship so much because
no one wants to have liability
hang in there over their heads
in perpetuity and that's the
case right now so I'll use the
address for example they
basically do not take on any
conservatorship and these are
the very people that these
fiduciaries that you want to be
basically handling these types
of conservatorship because they
have an expertise in the arena
they're insured obviously and
they have a great track record
what not so all this bill would
do is to basically we leave that
liability if in fact now we've
put in a guardrail in here
which basically says that the
protected person and or
interested parties such as
family member beneficiaries and
what not should be or can be
represented by legal counsel and
if they are they basically will
be able to get a from an
accounting at any given time the
courts can order an accounting
of the state at any period of
time usually at the end when the
termination of the
conservatorship is decided
there's an accounting submitted
but they can require at any
given time Ana County and that
can be requested by the insured
by that protected person his
counsel for any interested party
or his counsel so it's kind of a
to be quite honest with you as
sort of a very complicated area
but on the other hand is pretty
simple the problem and that is
is that we were trying to as I
understand it protect
Protected protected persons such
as miners and what not but we
sort of overshot the runway and
basically said in no case gonna
conservatively we laid of his or
her liability even after the
courts German Services.
Now there are some questions
that have arisen with regard to
what happens if after a period
of time is discovered that
there's a.
A prior act that perhaps should
be in look at by the court let's
say for example there was if
there's fraud obviously the
state can bring an action for
fraud all not only criminal with
regard to the Attorney General
or the district attorney's
office but also can also
basically a file to the court to
have the state re open to take a
look at allegations of fraud and
or miss and whatnot and that
happens almost an hour but it it
can be done so again this along
exercise of trying to explain
the problem.
What's interesting is in no
state.
That has adopted the uniformed
probate code has a subsection E.
in this program code this is
unique to New Mexico that is she
we just.
Well we're trying to address the
courts the New Mexico courts
problems with making sure that
there is an additional
protection and that is this
decision to basically require.
The protected person and war
interested parties to have legal
counsel there's been a big as
you recall probably there was
other there were some
conservatorship that were in
question several years ago so
the courts have been sure we say
very protective of the protected
person and the interested
parties good let's go to the
audience is there anyone here
who wants to speak in support of
this bill yes please come up and
use the Mike.
Mr Chairman my name's Chris why
I'm the representative of the
independent community bankers
association New Mexico and we do
stand in support of this bill I
I do think it it fix something
in the law that would allow for
professional associations or
professional entities to take on
these conservatorship rules when
they would have that protection
to eventually be relieved of
their liability so we do stand
support of this.
Thank you Chris anybody else
anybody here in opposition to
this bill.
Anybody online no members of the
committee yes Representative
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator angle and Mr Anderson
you turn your Mike of it is.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator Ingle thank you Mr
Anderson I'm curious I I have
read the the.
FIR in the synopsis could you
offer as an example of what has
happened of course not including
names an example of how a what
happened because this particular
statute as prepared has
is not in place.
There you are you look
transaction the yield in this.
Mr chairman Senator McKenna
what is happened to because this
is in place basically what we've
witnessed is that most
fiduciaries the most corporate
fiduciaries have basically
decided not to take on
conservatorship.
And these are the very groups
that have enjoyed a great
reputation as a doing a very
fine job being a conservative to
be honest with you you really
better know what you're doing is
you're taking on the basically
the running of and state from
top to bottom and you want to
write people in there that can
basically repeat the jacks and
take care of the protected
person and what not is so we've
basically implement them from
wanting to do this much because
of the perpetual liability.
I thank you chairman thank you
Senator Ingle
And I was just wondering just
mistranslated the other.
Is there a case that you could.
Kind of describe what happened
without revealing names
something that is.
I mean the real life examples of
someone's life being impacted is
I think really House someone
can't someone in the room and on
the and the public on the
webcast can understand Mr
chairman members committee there
was one case several years ago.
Where a conservative
basically rob stole whatever you
want to say from the the
protected persons to the tune of
a million dollars and and
because of that and there's only
three million dollars of
insurance and eight million
dollars so there's about a five
million dollar deficit and these
were protected persons that
seriously seriously could not
afford if you will to have that
money nobody can really but
clear these folks could not so
the courts I think got very
concerned and we wrote rewrote
our conservatorship and our
guardianship
provisions and in doing so in
some in one case which is this
case we sort of as I said I
think step beyond what we the
legislature step beyond which is
intended to do by saying that in
no case could a conservative
being we leave of his or her
liability ever.
Now the personal representative
can and others under the trust
code in the probate code but not
conservatives so probably the
most important person in the
chain of command if you will be
in the conservatory is basically
they're very people you wanted
to step to the plate and the the
people to be the conservators
sort of left out and that's sort
of leaves another group of
people that perhaps are less
inclined to worry about about
being perpetually liable for
whatever reasons so anyway if
that.
Thank you chairman thank you Sir
in go thank you Mr.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair
It does kind of look like a
mistake in it that they made in
terms of just going up going
very very far to protect to be
in a in the in the light of just
the abuses that were that were
seen but I'm just so I and and
so I I recognizes you're just
trying to fix something that
they didn't really resolve
Thank and and I'm looking at the
end and I guess that's why they
put in need that that you could
not get a release of liability
which is very common with the
fiduciary if you know if your
fiduciary you can just find a
way writes or or let your yet
Leger protected person signed
away right so that's very common
so I'm I'm just wondering.
Are we are we thinking that this
would occur the release of
liability would be would occur
at the very end when the judge
issues his final approval of the
state or would it end maybe
within six months hello how does
this work Mr chair.
Mr Chairman
Senator Lopez Sedillo Lopez how
it works is basically the judge
would first of all to be an
accounting submitted to the
court and any other documents
that the judge may require the
the judiciary has wide wide
powers under the the uniform
probate code.
And so the the judge would take
in to consideration all accounts
and and and all disbursements
everything.
And then would would then decide
based on that those documents
whether or not to terminate the
the conservatorship.
And with that there would be a a
there would be also a copy at
that any prior acts that would
come to the attention of the
state and then could be brought
to the to the attention of the
court with a petition to re open
the conservatorship based on on
on prior acts that were
basically came to light now one
good thing about if you do a
quicker fiduciary and and and my
legal and and my legal
malpractice is that I'm covered
for prior acts so one of the one
of the good things about having
a confident conservative what
happens is you know there are
things that come on come to life
from time to time not very often
but if they do then basically
you could petition is the
interested party or their
representative of the estate
could petition the judge to
basically re opened based on
prior acts that we're we're not
in evidence at the time and then
the judge could take that under
consideration and then decide
whether or not to to open the re
open the the conservatorship
again most cases that we've seen
are generally those the
discovery of fraud at a later
date and then that's a whole new
ballgame because as you know as
a law professor issue now we
have criminal act as well as a
civil Act regard and in regard
to that have activity.
Thank you Mr chair I I like I
said I I I believe that this is
really trying to resolve an
issue that was left unresolved
But I I'm just wondering.
Because what you wanna do is and
liability so that of
individuals.
Or corporations or banks that
used to do conservative ships
will come back into it because
they don't want to be liable for
ever.
and so I'm just wondering if we
should end it.
It appeared for a period of time
after the conservatives
conservative because of the
conservatorship is closed
because.
I think that there were there
will be people who are not
represented by counsel and so.
There the the liability of their
conservative.
Will be open ended.
And so I don't know that it's.
Is this addressing the problem.
The that we're trying to address
I'm just asking
prior to this change in law
basically the way it works is
exactly the way I described it
Mr chairman and senator it
basically ended upon termination
of the conservatorship there was
not this provision it works as a
personal representative or a
trustee or whatever it just
ended at that point in time and
so the as I said there is no
state that is to drive the
uniform probate code that
doesn't that has this provision
all other states basically have
a provision that basically says
that when the conservatorship is
over terminated the
conservatorship comes forward
with all the documents that are
required for an accounting and
anything else the judge wants
and I mean the judge basically
runs the show and so as a result
it ends at that point time there
is an opportunity as I pointed
out before to go to the judge
and basically say we have a
later discovered fact you know
we have prior acts coverage in
our malpractice and so that was
the intent of those provisions
cell again thank thank you so so
just to be clear the protected
person when they're when the
state is being the state is
being closed if they have
Council then there will be a
release of liability.
Right right and I think executed
but what if they don't well we
have a did we put thing that.
Is there I'm sorry my missing of
of I thought we did we present
management don't oh I'm sorry we
had worked on an amendment
perhaps we we didn't bring it to
the only amendment that we
propose was I'm sorry Mr
chairman an amendment that
perhaps if we move out of this
committee will have to basically
what it would do is have a
provision that would provide for
legal counsel for and for the
protected person and or the
interested party which would
then I think make you feel much
better chair that would address
my problem with this and I don't
see such an immense.
may I.
There it in some of I'm sorry.
Well again I'm sorry I'm I
apologize Mr chairman I thought
we and maybe I can find it real
quickly.
may I.
May I find it is some lines
which is a lengthy to no it
isn't okay
C. will see if we can okay on
page two line twenty after
council.
Insert.
who receives an accounting buyer
in behalf of all three I I see
what you're.
This is quickly I don't want to
take time.
We have we have we have a few of
the way the bills drafted on
page on page two line eighteen
it says in less the protected
person or a person interested in
the conservatorship the state is
represented by independent
counsel okay.
No person shall request so what
it says is what I'm complaining
about right now.
We'll continue in less.
The protected person OR in OR
person interested in the
conservatorship is represented
by independent counsel so
In in in reality what the
chairman said why don't you just
take that out of here well we
wanted much along the year
questioning center in the center
of Sedillo because we want to
add that because we felt it was
important that there be
independent counsel and if the
absence of independent counsel
then we go forward and we have
the end of the we have
perpetuity for liability so
there's that I'm sorry I I.
My service space that out so
that takes care I believe of
your plan you're concerned about
so so Mister chair if if there
is no representation by
independent counsel then the
liability will continue yes.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee and at that sufficient
to you believe Mr chair to to
have the banks come into this
area we have you Mr chairman
center city Lopez we've run this
by the trust companies to banks
and what not and they feel
comfortable with this it's much
better than what we have right
now which is an absolute
liability in perpetuity.
Thank you Mr chair.
Then I've got I've got some
questions of what besides death
into conservatorship.
Mr chairman of minor reaches age
major
death is sick because probably
the most accurate one there can
be times when there are income
the removal and capacity there's
the there's a myriad of things
I'll tell you what really can
and a
conservatorship is often times
we would like to have the
conservatorship perhaps to be a
member of the family but for
those of us that have large
municipalities will say usually
there's a real disagreement
about who should be the
conservatorship can who
shouldn't so often times the
family turns to then independent
conservative a bank or Trust
Company or there's often times
the case where you have no
family members there maybe here
and there all the seeds so what
I'm getting at is that and I had
thought about the the the the
minor who has a conservative and
then when they become twenty one
it goes away.
You need this protection for
that situation I guess that
might be but once a person has
died if you had a of a firm you
know for the next year.
Liability could you have an
accounting we don't have an
accounting with the
conservatorship ins yes.
Yes Mr me you have to have a can
and it's good it's incredibly
thorough document you not only
have to submit an accounting
that you also have to give a
report on assets stock potential
value at the time of the and the
termination the conservatorship
it is a major effort that
usually is a good you utilize a
CPA or what not to prove provide
to the court a very detailed
description of what you use to
conserve energy ed from the date
of appointment until the date of
termination and they can go on
for if you've got that detailed
accounting of everything that's
going on.
That would be to miss something
is that which is that were the
liability the fear over
liability for something later on
come one thing is if if we had a
bit of just a the firm six
months after the accounting is
completed and accepted by the
court let all liability ends
with that do the same thing is
this or even better
well this Mr Chairman hast that
we have to fix this or there's
no way you're gonna have a
fiduciary ever act as a
conservative because liability
the way this laws now reading
goes on in perpetuity I have it
but this legislative six months
after of the accounting is
accepted by the court of the
liability of the conservatorship
bins sure I think that would be
fine I think the only question
that really comes up is that the
court would continue to have
jurisdiction to if there was a
prior act that had been
discovered or what not the court
has jurisdiction perhaps to then
be petitioned to look into
whether or not this choose a
conservatorship should be re
opened and there could be some
question about in the state
court or whatever not that this
happens very often early doesn't
have very often right now since
most of the I think your thumb
slipped off of the lines that
you're probably getting numb in
a yeah the carpal tunnel of
starting I guess that but
seriously I think that the
courts.
In my view have done an
extraordinary job of policing
the conservatorship sin the
state much because of what.
Senator McKenna had just brought
up a few minutes ago there are
there's a lot of us there's a
lot of policing going on in this
arena and much because of some
of events that occurred about
four five years okay members the
committee any other debate or
discussion or questions.
Motion Senator Tallman to for a
do pass.
Seconded by.
Senator Maestas any of the
discussion.
The
secretary will call the roll.
Is going to still up.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
Here.
The state yes he said yes.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
yes.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna yes center street is yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
explain my vote.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Pena yes.
By a vote of eight in the
affirmative with one excuse zero
in the negative you have a
depressive.
And to exploit your vote
I I'm glad that you're fixing
this problem I think that it's
it's really good and I support
that I support this I I was just
thinking of all along the lines
that the chair said maybe a six
time would also be helpful but I
I'm just going to throw that out
this is a possibility as you go
into Judiciary but I'm really
glad that you're fixing it.
Thank you.
Yeah that would just the sure
that any hidden stuff up there
you know would have to be.
Anybody with a claim would have
to produce that before the the
time frame and any time okay
Senator souls for Senate bill.
One eighty one.
Opioid antagonist warning
requirements.
Over the years users never mind.
Are these working.
The hand might use the hand Mike
especially with the mask on it
just well I'm sitting here I can
take that off but I'm happy to
do so what we can hear you
without the mask okay.
Are you ready yep of this bill
was a bill that I carried a
couple years ago that had went
out doctors are prescribing
opioids that they also co
prescribed the antagonised
typically it's naloxone with
instructions about that there
need to be a small increase to
that bill because it indicated
that when giving the antagonise
the person administering the
opioid antagonist should call
nine one one immediately after
administering the opioid
antagonist well sometimes it's
in a doctor's office where
everything is there that's not
needed so it as it lets that
person is a health care provider
provided under the pain really
backed so it that's it just
clarifies.
Did you want to say anything
about that or is that pretty
necessary nurse practitioners
also.
Not to brought me the problem
this right but it but this that
this health care provider covers
and they could not health care
provider is.
Comprehensive easy today that.
Okay.
Anybody in the audience here in
support of this bill.
Is anybody in the audience
opposed to this bill.
Nobody online members of the
committee.
Mr chair I'm just curious how
often does this happen.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
we don't now but it could be
even in a facility or clinic or
something and somebody has to
your health care provider
administers it and they're going
to monitor the person and it
would be kind of crazy to call
nine one one when you got all
these health care providers so
nine one one taking them to Mr
chair would be taking them to
the people who are already there
doing it it doesn't make sense
that all those I I support the
bill I was just curious about
whether we knew how often this
happens thank you thank you Mr
chair that's all I have.
So we've
We are just the audience
presente
So anyway I just want to.
Comment on this.
Hearing on what.
That second they have a due pass
a second from the.
Sedillo Lopez.
So.
Please call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle
yes.
Senator Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Schmedes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
Senator Clemente this.
we have this six yes in three X.
three excuse they have a due
pass thank you thank you.
next.
So Senator.
thank you to the next the Senate
bill one seventy two.
No.
In my so maybe you want to go we
got we got all that.
Bill one seventy to ninety
tenant for federal immigration
violations.
Senator I just this okay.
Senator thank you Mr chairman
honorable members along with the
chair Center T. Pino I will I'm
sponsor percent bill one hundred
seventy two and this deals with
immigration facilities here
within the state of New Mexico
as you know Mr chairman members
there's a massive build up in
the past couple three decades of
incarceration in this country we
incarcerate more people than any
other country in the world of
the past your decade and a half
there's been a massive build up
of immigrants who are housed in
detention centers jails
essentially prisons.
the for the federal government
under present a bomb on outlawed
private prisons as it related to
juveniles and was about to was
on the brink of outline private
prisons in the bureau of prisons
that's the way the the country's
going that that's the way the
state is going.
as you know with that put that
facility in Clayton was was
House bite was a managed by geo
is now how I have managed by the
state of New Mexico.
there should not be a profit
motive apparatus you know a
motive profit motive in the in
the incarceration of human
beings what this bill does in
sections one into section one
essentially would outlaw any did
any up detaining of individuals
of for federal civil immigration
violations section two would
outlaw any contracts with
private prisons for detaining
immigrants
the.
The federal
Comments carry.
You know eight of.
Department.
I controls ice immigration.
This is an important immigration
and customs enforcement I'm
still like an old school I made
up but
But it's it's a
It's somewhat of a big gas Mr
chairman members of but I think
it's consistent with New Mexico
values the towns that utilize
these facilities and have you
know a couple hundred jobs.
They know that they need to
transition out of these
economies we need to invest in
these towns in other ways than
than by contracting with ice in
these private facilities also to
just a touch on that and and
And provide more information
allow me to have my expert
introduce yourself and address
the committee thank you Mr
chairman.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Sophia Jenna yes and I
am an attorney at the New Mexico
immigrant law center where I
supervise the asylum in
detention team we are here today
because at a mile C. along with
our partners have been critical
and monitoring the conditions
and gathering first hand
testimony from asylum seekers
inside of New Mexicos three
immigration detention facilities
at Torrance County detention
facility Cibola county
correctional center and Otero
county processing center these
facilities attain almost
exclusively recently arrived
asylum seekers who are fleeing
horrific violence and
persecution in their countries
of origin and are merely
exercising their human right to
seek asylum their detention is
not mandatory.
Based on our collective
observations of in interactions
with immigration detention in
New Mexico we've concluded that
as B. one seventy two is the
best way to ensure the health
and safety of people residing or
being detained with our state's
and just to briefly recap our
findings that these facilities
at Torrance in August of last
year we witnessed the death of a
young Brazilian asylum seeker
Keathley B. all who tragically
died by suicide in the months
leading up to his death Keathley
consistently reached out to
officials for mental health
support and instead of receiving
the support he needed yes he was
met with resistance and
rejection.
After his death many men
including my client Victor
attempted suicide.
None of them receive the support
they needed from ice or
CoreCivic the for profit
corporation that operates
Torrance.
I'd Cibola county correctional
center another facility operated
by CoreCivic then experience
much of the same as experience
that Torrance principally at
Cibola at there is yet another
suicide attempt in October last
year a young man hung himself in
his cell.
Our clients locally found him
cut him down and rendered aid
they called and yelled for help
from CoreCivic regards those
calls for help went unanswered
for twenty minutes if our
clients had not seen this man
had not rendered aid he would be
dead and we be looking at two
that's by suicide in a matter of
months in New Mexican ice
facilities.
And as a reminder Cibola was
previously shut down after
negligence was demonstrated
there several years ago but just
three months after the closure
ice contracted with ice yet
again and we saw another death
of a of a woman Representative
Hernandez a trans woman an
asylum seeker her death believed
to be a heart attack was allowed
to happen despite their warnings
and indicators of declining
health.
And finally Otero county
processing center this is the
facility where we observed
violent family separation is the
only facility in New Mexico
which holds men and women in ice
custody and the facility that
consistently holds the most
amount of individuals in
immigration custody of the three
detention centers there is
yet another suicide attempt here
at it's here back in December
and likely this individual
survives and given the high
population out of Tero and the
fact that illnesses and diseases
spread faster in carceral
settings like prisons and jails
there regularly outbreaks of
illnesses most recently there
was a scabies outbreak as
reported by my colleague that
less a medic as people try to
hang up their clothes on their
beds to prevent the spread but
the guards with their the
clothes on to the ground people
reported that they don't feel
safe at Otero another person was
place in solitary confinement
demanding safety.
And despite advocates filing
dozens of Human Rights
complaints and civil rights
complaints department of
homeland security those
complaints have gone unanswered
and the department of homeland
security has failed to take any
action so it's now up to the New
Mexico state legislature to do
something as B. one seventy two
will help reduce this human
suffering in our state will join
six other states in doing so and
demonstrating that we will not
be complicit in torture that we
will not be complicit in
jeopardizing the health and
safety of asylum seekers sitting
Mexico market Law Center the
dignity not detention coalition
comprised of many community
organizations here out what who
will issue public comment later
strongly urge the committee to
vote to pass SB one seventy two.
Thank you so if you.
Senator anything else.
Very good let's see in the
audience by show of hands those
are who are here to support this
bill.
Good.
And you have certain one Sophia
have you did you have certain
ones that you've identified who
would speak in support of it how
many of those are there I and
plus several Committee members
from chopper all okay
how but any opposition to this
bill is there anyone here in
opposition we have to on the on
the of.
Three three on the other assumed
were opposed and.
Three who are supporting so of
we'll take we'll take the the
testimony from your I hear you
and have them come up and use
the Mike.
C..
Thank you for keep the keep it.
chairman.
Hi.
Chairman Senator and members of
the committee raise the
expansion of these facilities in
our state is a life and death
matter from my community and
myself as you can see today this
room is full of people that are
done with the evil industry that
is private immigrant detention.
My father was held in the chapel
and detention center for eight
months.
I was only thirteen I don't
understand why he never made it
to Christmas and I didn't
understand why he missed my
eighth grade graduation.
I certainly certainly couldn't
understand what it meant when my
mother said that he was
deported.
All I knew was that our
relationship had become strictly
over the phone now.
It was a detrimental thing to go
from seeing your dad every day
every morning to never seen him
again.
My family was forcibly separated
New Mexico Reshet residents
should not live in fear of being
detained and the federal
immigration center or seen the
family go through what I
experienced my father go
through.
As public servants we hope you
stand by your communities values
together we can envision a New
Mexico that does not thrive off
of Cajun vulnerable populations.
Instead welcomes migrants and
asylum seekers with dignity I
urge you all to support SB one
seventy two today thank you
maybe a but was not clear that
we did you introduce yourself
you know my name is Hannah and I
am in a campaign manager at the
New Mexico Dream Team thank you
and and we we wanted to limited
to about five people speaking in
support so we have at least
twelve lined up there
I can identify them and called
okay great on services that.
Hello.
Can you guys hear me R. eight hi
my name is I learned this and I
am a first generation Mexican
American paralegal at an MLC I
have visited both Torrance and
Cibola detention centers and I
have spoken with detainees
transferred from Otero my first
day I Torrance I was met by
three hundred immigrants all
fathers sons husbands filled
with expiration their voices
were shaky eyes were watery as
they describe their torturous
experiences suffering in the
detention a man came up to me in
clear pain he lifted up his leg
to reveal a broken ankle the
bone sticking out on the wrong
side and almost protruding
through the skin he complained
about severe pain and the
complete disregard for medical
attention others spoke about
solitary confinement physical
and verbal abuse inflicted by
cards deaths they had witnessed
and suicide they had
contemplated I thought my
experience is that the detention
not only to be shocking but
painful as a forced me to
realize the racial injustices
inflicted upon black and brown
immigrants as myself by keeping
the detentions open New Mexico
is promoting violence as a means
of racial injustice I urge your
support for SB one seventy two
that seeks to understand
immigrants instead of humiliate
and destroy them thank you thank
you very much state so.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you members of the
committee my name is as of the
summer if this is a visor for
immigrant business owners in New
Mexico and I sat here in support
of SB one seventy two not only
do I supported as a way to end
the ramp and humane treatment
for follow immigrants in the
state in these attention
centers.
But also for more tangential
purposes according to the
institute for Policy Studies
currently the three detention
centers across New Mexico during
the state of over thirty million
dollars a year and taxpayer
money.
This goes into the same system
the pace less than five percent
federal taxes what CEO receives
and enter your bonus of nearly
five million dollars the same
system that keeps people in
rural communities stuck in jobs
that can prosper it is the same
system that tears families apart
and perpetuate the cycles of
generational poverty the cycles
of state property.
Do we truly is a state wish to
help this wicked system
perpetuates oppression.
If not please support SB one
seventy two thank you very much
thank you.
Good afternoon my name is so we
Bowman and I'm an immigration
lawyer at less America's
immigrant advocacy center based
el Paso Texas I represented
clients it Cibola in Torrance
but I primarily represent men
and women detained here terra
conte processing center which is
run by the private corporation
and DC.
Tero I witnessed again and again
how people in custody are
dehumanized in their safety is
placed in jeopardy due to
mismanagement of the facility
and outright cruelty of the
staff there.
One young woman I worked with
was gang raped in her home and
left with severe injuries she is
repeatedly in arbitrarily denied
release from custody even though
her injuries required medical
care outside of detention.
Our clients describes suicide
have you know what I don't think
you're pushing the button to
keep the they're not able to
hear that sorry about that
assisting our our clients have
described suicide attempts
people having seizures being
left unattended in regards will
make noise and flash lights all
night just to prevent people
from sleeping they've been
denied access to their
commissary shampoo time outside
and have been placed in solitary
confinement out of retaliation.
My experience working with
clients and Tero Cibola in
Torrance has clearly shown me
that detention in New Mexico is
neither safe nor humane and I
there for your need to support
SB one seventy two thank you
thank you in our last speaking.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon that the hold the
button down and keep the eye
because it left in Mr chairman
and committee members today
speaking behalf of Mike pence's
special yes I'm sick is my name
is asking the city on I'm not
the United States citizen I
cannot self employed in the two
six seeking asylum on I was in
immigration detention for almost
two months in California like
New Mexico I can assure you that
the fitment of my guns is brutal
everybody.
It these are these.
These objects of some student
symbols of the humanizing
fitments of Mike Mike Evans
including give onions tax facts
for of blinding Cologne shows
that marks over the.
Are just doing these also some
the drugs that the allied on to
the present medications which
are.
Most of them on extremities
Eckstein and how we can assume
they have no put pip is other
than that the bill of the two
put us on the council and they
can be seriously addictive baton
from side effects while I was
detained I did not feel safe or
that might has with bills being
was ever taken into
consideration in my opinion the
detention facility is a delay to
to immigration proceedings
should be closed first and
foremost because if you listen
to put it the beautician in
supporting human rights and feed
them.
Thank you very much for thank
you Sir.
We'll go to we'll go there's
nobody here who is opposed but
we've got a couple of people
will take three who are
supportive and three who were
against on zoom.
And we'll start with those who
are
opposed on soon so we have done
a Elkins.
Still there.
Yes Sir hi my name is don Elkins
can you hear me up if you could
hold the Mike is close to your
mouth as possible that would
help.
And really project because it
it's hard here.
Okay how's that Senator thank
you yes okay so I would like to
speak in opposition of S. S. B.
one seventy two I'm.
I have been working at CoreCivic
for the last almost twenty three
years and I do understand I hear
some people's testimony about
the negativity that they say
that they have experienced but I
honestly do not believe in
accuracy of some of that
information that would be
supporting this bill it doesn't
Representative to tell any or
the culture of our CoreCivic
facilities.
I left a job at an elementary
school to come to work here and
again it's been almost twenty
three years this job has
provided for my family this job
is been very beneficial in our
communities while I have been
here only was I an officer but
now I am also a facilitator of
training.
And what people are saying the
negativity that they are saying
is not what we facilitate in our
training.
And the benefits that are
facility provides to our local
communities our vendors are
Townsend the surrounding areas.
We have individuals travel from
Albuquerque Rio Rancho Gallup
Rehm of pine hill Crown Point
through numerous areas that have
gainful employment because of
CoreCivic.
I understand that some people
think that this is the only way
to stop
by not allowing collaboration
with private prisons but that's
not addressing actual real
problem the media and
individuals over emphasize the
negative because it's
newsworthy.
But what about all the
successful treatment all the
successful times that
individuals have in house no one
is speaking of that well I would
like to speak about that.
To in the collaboration with
private prisons would have
detrimental impacts on our
economy not just for it the
local vendors like I said
statewide.
It would have a crippling effect
on on families.
again I don't think that this
reflects I do not believe that
this reflects the integrity of
what CoreCivic teaches to its
employees.
So
Mr chair and members of the
committee I I thank you for your
time and again I'm speaking
opposition of Senate bill one
seven two thank you Michelle can
next is a job Giovanni there's
none this.
You should be it no need money.
No.
That there.
Okay well then we'll go to our
B. Nicholas.
That online.
Okay let's talk then to some of
the supporters online Barbara
Schroeder.
Go ahead.
Okay I'm here.
I'm a member of the Santa Fe
faced network for immigrant
justice and we're here to urge
you to vote in favor of this
bill.
I have personally visited the
Cibola correctional facility and
I've seen the.
Inhumane and unjust and soul
destroying conditions the
asylum seekers are subjected to
their.
These are people whose only
crimes that they were born in
the wrong place and wrong time
and they believe in the American
promise of freedom freedom from
torture and starvation violence
and terror.
They have suffered so much
already let's get New Mexico out
of the business of continuing to
contribute to their suffering
there are more using
alternatives thank you very much
thank you very much Mr and
apparently R. B. Nicholas is on
now.
Go ahead Mr Nicolas speaking in
opposition.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members I'm my name's
RB Nichols I'm the county
attorney for Otero county and
I'm speaking on behalf of my
clients though terror county
commission
the Otero county is in
opposition SB one seventy two it
would negatively impact the
county first.
They bond was issued in order to
build the Otero county
processing center in two
thousand seven the processing
center was was built
specifically for the purposes of
ice migrant detention thirty
four million dollars is still
outstanding on that bond if this
bill were to pass those
investors would would would be
on a lock and lose their money
on their investment further it
would damage the credit of Otero
county and harm Otero counties
options for future bonds or
Loans
In the in
the like I said the facility is
specifically designed for this
purpose with with court rooms to
to do the processing of a ice
detention hearings
it cannot easily be re purpose
they would cost several million
dollars in renovations to do
something else with the facility
so Otero County be left with
with the building we can't use
the bond would be paid off in
twenty twenty eight and the
facility if it were to continue
to be in use would be a source
of revenue for a pair County
which is support county and
ninety percent of the Landon
Otero county is is federally
owned so we don't have a large
property tax base
so this facility was developed
as a source of revenue for the
county this greatly needed
another concern is is the impact
on the surrounding communities
if asylum seekers are being
housed in this facility which is
designed to do that
Taylor County certainly isn't a
quick to support the medical
needs the food needs of asylum
seekers where is this processing
center is I I personally have
visited and toured it I observe
people being treated with
dignity respect receiving three
meals a day important that and
clean clothes as they wait for
their processing
So yeah I have concerns about
that other issues is is
potential litigation that could
stem from
this law they could potentially
be challenged whether B. by the
county the corporation or the
federal government for
violations and spermaceti clause
in the contract clause of the US
constitution
Whether those be successful I
don't know but they'll certainly
potential in India source of
expense for the state.
Thank you Mr Nicholas
Then we have a currently
Giovanni here none this was in
support of this bill not
against.
So did you want to say something
Giovanni.
Mr none this through their.
Okay well then how about Gail
early early.
Early.
Hello.
I'm.
Good afternoon chairman and
committee members I'm
representing bend the arc Jewish
Action New Mexico and we have
been studying for a long time
now what goes on it to three ice
detention centers and Torrance
Otero and Cibola County and this
is through documentation through
government agencies as well as
investigative reporters and also
through people that have been
there at that it's been
incarcerated and these reports
are all very similar in terms of
the unsanitary conditions the
mental health and medical
neglect and the solitary
confinement
and abusive treatment that often
occurs which often people wind
up doing suicide attempts and
occasionally deaths in these.
So what he is and the thing is
somebody mentioned who was
supposed to it about how it
would have a crippling effect
when families if in that area
and the the truth that we
believe is CENIC we've seen
documented is the crippling
effect on families already New
Mexican immigrant in mixed
status families their children
some of us have worked in the
public schools for a long time
and we see what goes on the
PTSD and mental health issues
and and the financial issues
with these families have to deal
with because they're being torn
apart and is others have said
very eloquently about how.
I'm people are just escaping
what it has been horrific for
them in their own country why
are we supporting something that
is correct it to them in our
country I certainly don't want
my tax payer money going into
these to these facilities and if
if you would read for instance
studies like to the institute
for Policy Studies that one of
the proponents of this bill
mentioned it's true that these
facilities only thank you very
much Mrs early the the the
helpful thank next we have lutea
L. gross this.
I'm never.
The.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name the city of St
Louis and I am from Tripura New
Mexico and also a member of the
New Mexico Dream Team.
I strongly support is B. one
seventy two and to give some
context management and training
corporation runs a nice facility
in my community.
They came to my community
promising jobs and a good
economic impact the thing that
giving trickiest on a
thanksgiving once every ten
twenty years is enough they
think that forcing humans to
grace some blankets and give
them a way to keep kindergartens
is benefiting my community they
think they they will stop their
understanding problem by hiring
a bulk of people from the bustle
instead of treating their
employees with respect and good
salaries.
I'm not even mentioning the
inhumane treatment to the people
one it came to this country for
a better future.
They were literally killing
people during the COVID nineteen
all right that they had in
previous in multiple years and
they never found a way to keep
employees in the teeny state.
I would like you to know Mr
chairman and members of the
committee on my community will
definitely benefit by getting
rid of M. D. C. in New Mexico
would most likely be better by
just getting rid of all of the
three private detention centers
that we currently have and I'm
not being negative I am being
realistic thank you.
Thank you a yes.
Okay so do you want to respond
to some of the stuff and clarify
some issues it may be that
floating out there thank you Mr
chairman members no I just want
to thank everyone for being here
I know everyone wanted to say
their piece and we appreciate
the discipline and getting to
the crux of the hearing so so I
think the audience members for
being here thank you Mr what
will take up will stand for
questions that and and there was
could you respond to the issue
that Otero County raised the.
The Soviet.
Yes Mr chairman thank you we are
aware that Otero County still
own those thirty two million
dollars on a bond it's worth
pointing out that this was a
revenue bonds that the county
took out not a general
obligation bond and this
specifically means that there is
no public vote required to do
this meeting that the the the
desires that you once were not
considered but usually because
it is a general.
Any bond rather it's at a much
higher interest rates nine
percent versus a three percent
general obligation bond but
further more it was speaking
directly to to the presents in a
report produced by the ACLU of
New Mexico a financial expert
Riley at Y. eight opines that if
Otero were to close tomorrow I'm
prior to paying the bond there
is a an account set up for
paying back the bonds from their
reserves and off take at while
the county continues to decide
what to do next such as re
purposing the facility and I
want to clarify that and
alternative use of the facility
is permitted because the revenue
bond is not tied to the facility
only being used for immigration
detention purposes additionally
this financial expert Riley
white reported that there's no
obligation for the county to pay
back the bonds and that this
would not directly affect the
county's credit rating of a more
importantly Mr Chairman when
discussing the economics of of
human bondage torture and
suffering historically those who
have been who have excuse a
prolonged and humane treatment
of others for economic gain have
not been remembered fondly by
future generations we must stand
firm that we will not continue
to profit off of this human
suffering and I do also want to
just point out this is not a
private prison band that's only
prevent ice contracts this is
not closed on the facilities
this is not impact the job that
CoreCivic where they have many
more and that criminal Cassidy
and marshal's custody for
example and the ice attention
population as a small percentage
thank you very much okay members
of the committee.
The discussion or questions.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center Maestas
and thank you to your subject
matter expert whose name I can't
remember I'm sorry fifty S.
Sophia Sophia
so I've been monitoring this
legislation and the matter
chairman and senator Sophia.
and as of.
February for twenty twenty
three.
We're waiting confirmation but
from from ice.
But we understand the ACLU and
the New Mexico immigrant law
center.
States that there are about four
hundred.
Individuals there at the
Torrance facility.
Which failed at six inspection
and twenty twenty one.
And that's what prompted
congresswoman Melanie Stansbury
visit.
understaffed unsanitary were
some leading words of why it
failed.
And we also understand part of
the problem for this facility is
its isolation and distance to
the nearest emergency
center.
So by ambulance it's a forty
five minute drive to you an MH
an inmate died.
Last year because it took an
hour over an hour for him to get
to the hospital.
staffing sort shortages are
apparently
quite bad.
so it it just seems like for
CoreCivic they really failed
this facility.
And it is really egregious to me
because.
These four hundred people and
maybe others that have gone
through that facility they're
coming here because they are
under threat they're extra extra
up experiencing extreme poverty
and they've been affected by
climate change those are just
some top three
that many of us have heard about
and so I am enthusiastically
supportive of SB seventy two and
any other legal remedies we can
make if I had an a CDL license
chairman Senator and Sophia I
would be driving a bus and
picking up the individuals there
because I think it's just
terrible that this is happening
in this country thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Tallman your question.
Thank you Mr thank you Senator
for bringing this forward
I support what you're trying to
do with this really solve the
problem the federal government
to send them to another
detention facility out of state
right.
This.
But Mister chairman Senator
thank you for that question
that's an excellent question we
have control in New Mexico over
the health and safety of those
within our states that is within
the state's authority and we do
not have control over what the
federal government does or
doesn't do along the border
that's not what this bill is
trying to DO but this would be
joining a movement of states no
longer being complicit and that
human suffering moreover it
because at the vast majority of
these asylum seekers are are
asylum seekers are recently
arrived if we are there's no bed
space available in New Mexico
it's likely that more people
would be released on their own
recognizance potentially or
transfer to another facility in
a different state.
Thank you Mr Mrs Texas all
these.
So Senator.
The Texas at such fifty
contracts.
Yet Mr chairman Senator yes
Texas has several immigrant
detention facilities.
Mister chairman Senator an
expert witness they have similar
problems.
The dispensing it in our Mister
chairman Senator yes
unfortunately I I have
personally worked in several
states have probably been to
about twenty I facilities these
conditions are consistent I'm in
states are being of our like I
said are are part of this
movement to no longer allow the
practice in their individual
jurisdictions there's a similar
bill right now being considered
in Colorado as well.
And finally Senator a Mister
chairman Senator.
this bill would prevent someone
in New Mexico from.
And for converting a warehouse
into a detention facility.
The correct Mr chair Senator
Tallman that's correct we were
not prohibiting someone could
bankroll and build their own
prison facility and and contract
with the federal government or
directly DO see this up merely
prohibits governments.
From entering into these
contracts with ice.
Through a third party.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator and.
said tragic situation.
Congress's shame on Congress for
not solving this problem the
Congress is broken.
It's a.
This is dysfunctional.
Thank you again for bringing
this forward so I have sent
thank you senator Senator
Schmedes.
Yeah the name of Mr etcetera I
mean truly greeted me we we've
had trifectas in the federal
government in both parties.
They're not doing anything I may
assist chaos nobody nobody wants
well.
I think some people do want some
chaos on both sides the economy
that's the only way that I can
make sense of it because.
Or not taking action up there
and you know we need need rapid
work these as we need a just a
whole but just.
you know that's a whole other
thing but I I would I did want
to talk about is that you know
the supremacy clause in
California's law the minutes and
then only if are you guys know
about that of course you know.
Just just realistically I mean I
I you you can make the argument
that you maybe income for this
or against this but the the
reality of being a state in the
union you know we're not a
confederacy we don't you know in
some issues with maybe better
rights is so so red states and
blue states are going to do
their own thing the federal
government we much smaller with
just kind you just do your own
thing but but the reality is is
with this purpose because I
don't we can we just tell the
federal government well we don't
want to treat like a state of
the union in these areas and
then have been here we don't you
know we're gonna ignore that
supremacy clause so that it kind
of seems like we're doing could
you enlighten me on that would
what do you think.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
committee and just for the folks
back at home the the case I
think you're representing is a.
do the geo group versus Gavin
Newsom the the governor of
California at the.
They passed a law in California
basically that a person shall
not operate a private detention
facility within the state the
all the the nice has huge
contracts in the state of
California this bill doesn't do
that of this bill was crafted
with the G. O. K. in mind in
which we're not providing the
federal government doing
anything we're prohibiting state
county and city governments from
doing something and and to
elaborate years us are the big
better expect I'm good with that
if you're good yeah I know Mr
center I'm good with that yeah
and and and yeah I figured we
would you know look at that
issue yep kind of hindsight
right looking at that court
ruling in trying a different
approach I just still think.
You know immigration I think we
have a role to play right and we
are a border state we have a
roll a very important role and
responsibility play not just for
New Mexico but for our country
because we're in a workforce
state and so
but I I still think that it's
whether we like it or not I mean
immigration is you know it's
it's it's a federal government
thing we we we we can't just
look up at the federal
government and say look we're
we're gonna tell you what to do
if that's the privacy clause
goes both ways I mean even the
even this F. R. the age I mean
they that they're basically
saying read between the lines
there could very very very
likely be a problem here and I'm
not I'm not asking you to.
Ask what the tenth circuit's
gonna do or district courts
consider this what's going to do
I'm just you know it it just
seems like a reasonable person
would look at this whether you
support this or not whatever
side of the issue you're on a
reasonable person would look at
this and be like.
You know okay very very will
likely have have some problem so
you know that's kind of the way
the way that I see it is just
like the reality I think and I
don't know yeah I I just I think
this has to be the fix has got
to be from the feds I I just
don't see any other way around
it and and and we can do some
things I think but I'm I'm not
sure that this.
That this approach is is going
to hold up I I want to see those
folks in the C..
You know fix this this rack that
we have and I don't I don't know
if this is gonna hold up or you
know and and I don't want to go
back and forth I'm not
challenging this and and saying
like here it appears that you
know it's bad right here here
and and then I mean the other
issue I have is is that we're
we're telling someone
retroactively to break a
contract and that's even at not
just a federal issue but New
Mexico constitution issue that
it's in our constitution we
don't we don't.
Interfere with existing
contracts and this bill says you
shall terminate that contract
and I think we even on a state
level that could be a problem
and even opus open this up for
not just Federal Aviation but
state litigation that Hey we we
both played by the rules and we
entered this contract back in
where it whenever and then that
agreement is not going to stand
because the state is changing
the rules on us even though we
have a binding contract it seems
very clear that's
unconstitutional in the New
Mexico constitution we in we've
even talked about that and this
committee that we we don't we
don't go in and and mess up
people's existing contracts with
the government just doesn't do
that so I'm just looking at the
reality thing I don't know I I
want to fix the issue.
From that higher level view
I'm not sure that this legally
does it so just to just to throw
out some some some thought so
thank you Mr.
Mr.
We have a motion for a do passes
there is such a did you finish
your quote you you still at the
four zero in on on on this
you're good okay seconded from
Senator Tallman or McKenna.
Sure can because this one's.
The discussion on the motion
Senator Gallegos.
Not a motion for discretion to
the you've got to move your your
Mike closer to your mouth
Senator we we can't hear things.
Better much better.
Okay
question on the bill I may Mr.
My aunt listen live they will be
is that correct yes.
Questions I'm just wondering if
this bill.
And what local law enforcement
in the border areas I know we
already have problems all you
know in areas in us foreign
immigration I'm just wondering
how this works there I know that
you know
government.
Do you know how that would work
you know just me really hard hit
areas with immigration.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for that question this bill
only regulates local governments
this has absolutely no impact
whatsoever on border enforcement
that's within the purview of the
federal government I'm so this
bill does not affect those
activities.
Mr chair and senator and
your lady I guess maybe let me
clarify that we put these are in
rural areas there can be more
easily
one.
Mr chair Senator I think I
understand your question and I
think it's helpful to understand
that the vast majority of asylum
seekers have families and
communities outside of New
Mexico when they are released
because they are indeed eligible
for release at they often go to
other states such as California
and New York other other high
receiving state so they are
they're not sticking around in
in rural communities.
Thank you.
Senator and
and just question I've got a
Joint Memorial coming up that is
going to get of these people
from the fence when Haiti and
Nicaragua opportunity to come to
New Mexico I do construction and
I need them and this is a really
unique way is by
Hello friends it's online group
that is help them to be able to
fill up their budget and be able
to get here sort of work permit.
It's only been out since like
last October Mister chairman
Senator and gentle lady.
Your group is working with any
of that to help and and I know
it's different because you're
talking about but then
disabilities I would rather put
them to work.
Wondering if you guys could look
into that Mr stern.
I think they would rather work.
Mister chairman Senator Senator
I I heard you a little bit our
organization and I'll see does
offer humanitarian immigration
legal services I think I heard
you reference Venezuelans
waiting New Mexico there are a
variety of organizations I do
assist with that and I'm happy
to send that to your office.
Appreciate that I've already
been working on that that.
Good morning Mr Senator can feel
become that by next week.
Bill that Congress will put
Senator you're fading out very
badly if you can just keep
talking close to the Mike.
Okay.
Hi being off campus I'd sent an
immigration bill one twenty
twenty one to ten accomplished
woman for small and also on
congressman your internet goes
back to committee saying the
systems pro can neither side
responded to my idea should
sound like to want to prepare
this so all yield with that Mr
Senator thank you thank you
senator guy goes Senator
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members to send some member the
committee quick discussion we we
are getting back to the question
that Senator Tallman Aston the
points to Senators maybe maybe
it.
I believe it will have a lasting
effect on immigration policy in
this country I think will be the
fifth state to pass such a such
a law
on the margin it may decrease
the number of folks incarcerated
for civil penalties but New
Mexico needs to lead on this
issue the the anti immigrant
sentiment in this building is.
Is is is where the less if not
gone than it than than ten years
ago and we're very grateful for
that we're very grateful to all
the members for Tony not step
down but but New Mexico being a
border state and and and being
who we are what we we have to
lead on this issue and I believe
if we pass this bill that non
that it will have a ripple
effect nationally to change
immigration policy in in the
near future thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
anybody else we have a motion
and a second.
The secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Guerreros.
Like to explain my vote.
The did you say no Senator yes.
Know anyone.
Hi okay.
Senator Hickey Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
Senate vote Senator AUMENT yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
The responsible for his bills
yet fed Services ellipse was.
I want exposed to X. five two
two four two five in the
affirmative to the negative the
two excuse you have to do that
Senator Gallegos to explain your
vote.
Mr chair Senator of superior
allotment Revenue Ripon what is
to put in the work.
Disabilities so and thank you
for the opportunity and have a
great time.
The state they want to work
Senator Wirth top but all I got
were I mean the reason I came to
this country is to work.
Ice policy does not allow them
to work ski your your question
thank you thank you Mr chair I
voted yes with a lot of
enthusiasm I think it's it's an
extremely well crafted bill that
will survive constitutional
supremacy clause of and I also
think it's it's make it sends a
powerful statement to our
federal government of do
something do something do
something so thank you for
bringing the bill and was a
pleasure to vote for.
You you.
Thank you very much.
Okay Senator had a meal.
With certain drug possession and
had Vigil offender.
Thank you all for coming and if
you could to kind of keep it
down on your way out.
This passes the this is it
might.
These folks might be in the
same.
Need to let them know okay so
the two POK.
Senator where we need to read
all this before we can act on
your thank you five minutes to
do some speed reading.
Mr chairman thank you so much
members of the committee for
staying late to listen to our
bill this evening and so we have
dinner coming us or we're
perfect that's right so that's
why he kept me so I can have
dinner right after so I I
believe you're functioning as a
subcommittee and if you'd like
me to begin no no I think I
think of those senator Tom just
read it to the bathroom response
okay.
The Mr chairman the U. petrol
offender statute currently
applies to all felons except
vality D. W. why removing simple
drug possession recognizes that
a person who repeatedly
possesses drugs is not an
incorrigible Fallon who needs to
be taught a lesson they're
suffering from a health problem
that requires treatment not
prison well the one and a half
year sentence for drug
possession can be suspended by a
judge giving them probation
instead if a person has prior
felonies the court has no choice
but to impose the mandatory
enhancement it's common to see
people without any history of of
just drug possession charges
they get to their third or
fourth offense the end up with
nearly a decade of
income and corporation just for
having a small amount of drugs
in these drug possession cases
judges a very often to spend
everything they can and and the
only sending people to prison
for mandatory time they have no
control over.
Sentencing commission data from
the end of twenty twenty two
shows five percent of male
inmates in New Mexico are in
concert incarcerated for drug
possession only not trafficking
fourteen percent of those are
female who make up our inmate
population it is a safe bet that
those individuals are serving
primarily or entirely habitual
offender enhancement time not
the basic one and a half year
sentence possession is simply
not a felony that belongs in the
hip Vigil offender act under
this bill Mr Chairman position
itself would still be a felony
carrying a year and a half in
prison at the judges discretion
law enforcement assisted
diversion and drug court program
still remain the most effective
way to thread position.
The money saved on incarcerating
drug users will be best spent
expanding treatment availability
at other behavioral health
services especially in rural
communities like mine which are
notoriously lacking in such
services this is an issue that
affects struggling communities
who cannot break the cycle of
addiction because they kept it
getting pulled from any support
system that might have sent to
prison for treatment services
are minimal if at all available
and then thrown back into the
community with inadequate
treatment support during the re
entry process keeping people out
of prison Mr chairman and giving
them services and supports they
need to succeed with that will
be much more effective at
addressing substance abuse
disorder in our communities now
I do know that there's handouts
in front of you with me today
are to my expert witnesses which
include Kim Chavez Cook and then
Baur and and we also have our co
sponsor here who just made it in
Representative comment on who am
asking to join us at the table.
Welcome Representative because
then it did you want to add
anything to what the Sanchez
already the your co sponsors
already set.
Mr chair Senator thank you have
that the whole the button
Mr chair and senator is I'm just
catching my breath we would just
in house judiciary and I ran
over I imagine Senator how to
meal has that at all I got to
work on this bill over a couple
of years with the public
defender's.
And it.
This means so much to New Mexico
I've always believed that we
need a smart smart criminal
legal system this bill would
have incredible impact improve
public safety and change the
lives of so many New Mexicans
I'm proud to be here I'll catch
my breath and trust are experts
over there to fill us in thank
you very good can the USA so
thank you thank you Mr chairman
briefly I know you have a long
agenda tonight I wanted to just
point out some of the data
that's in the handouts you have
it's not really database but
just evidence that we have
studies that have been done that
shows that repealing drug
related mandatory sentences and
using that money to instead
instead of funding prison time
to fund treatment programs saves
a lot of money and has a much
larger impact on recidivism
rates and there are so there's
the A. like report from the
American legislative exchange
council that found that most
experts have come to believe
that incarcerating huge numbers
of low level nonviolent drug
offenders is an inefficient and
ineffective method of
controlling crime and that so I
I encourage members who have
questions about these issues to
look at that I think I also
wanted to just mention that we
don't have great data for New
Mexico around the official
offender enhancement versus the
underlying so I don't I can't
tell you how many people are in
prison serving the enhancement
time verses the underlying year
and a half because the database
used doesn't make a distinction
between the two but I can tell
you anecdotally and from my
practice experience that it is
very common for judges in these
cases to suspend the sentence
because they can that one and a
half years and only impose the
enhancement time because they
have to and so I do think we
would see a significant
reduction in the incarceration
rates for these types of cases I
would also just on another
technical know for how this all
happens in court say that the
the presence of the mandatory
and.
Mannerisms very powerful
bargaining tool in plea
bargaining for prosecutors and
so I think a lot of people will
you know we'll see we'll see a
different approach being taken
overall and hopefully we'll see
more people involved in the drug
treatment prodrug courts and
treatment not incarceration
model as we go forward and let
Ben Bauer at a couple of words
here quickly Mr Burke.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Bennett
power on the chief public
defender I'm here to briefly it
ad in explain the human aspect
of this I think I've been a
trial attorney doing criminal
law for over thirty years in New
Mexico now and I'm in touch with
our attorneys around the state
and if you think about what drug
possession actually looks like
generally inquired it is
somebody who's been was driving
their car down the street with
perhaps busted tail light
somebody do a riding their
bicycle on the wrong side of the
street sometimes.
So the law enforcement finds a
reason to search somebody and
often trace amounts or some
amount of possession but not
possessed with intent to
distribute is the top charge and
those people end up in jail and
they actually end up in prison
we have stories I can talk about
those for the sake of brevity I
I'm willing to address any of
your questions about the people
that we represent and why it's
so important that they have the
opportunity not to do mandatory
time in jail or prison thank you
very good.
Mr Chairman we did have some
organizations and support so
rather than have them speak all
right those out to you and we do
have for who are with us for
organized
support of this bill who would
like to make comment but because
we know what we're running late
we wanted to let you know that
these organizations are in
support for the record the drug
policy alliance American civil
liberties union New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association bold futures and
Americans for prosperity so Mr
chairman when you're ready for.
Madam public comment we do have
organized public comment in
support of this bill.
Very good let's go to the floor
in this field you're organized
COVID if I can have Andrew Ortiz
we have to get Campos on to one
of the biggest give I have a lot
in Espanol and and we have a
translator and Lucille to
compost.
And so the translation is
actually by email so one of the
biggest will be speaking to us
and Espana.
So who goes first.
We can go with New York peace
and that the accomplice were
joining us yes so.
Andrew Ortiz are you so.
Okay Mr Ortiz please go ahead.
Do you have anything there Mr
Ortiz.
Isn't muted.
We had we show you is unmuted
can you can you share your
comment with this.
We can move on to Sen Pete
Campos if you're okay with that
Mr chair.
Zoom zoom also she is.
This Campos are you there.
yes.
Go ahead please.
Okay so my name is Cynthia
Campos.
And I was born and raised in
Espanol New Mexico I am in
support of this B. one eighty
seven I am one of the many New
Mexicans who has been
criminalized for my addiction
and I have lost most of my life
being incarcerated not only are
our neighborhoods full of please
but they know who uses drugs and
they target us please wait
outside the methadone clinics
where we are getting help and
Polis over for do you live
because they know we just took
our does for someone working on
recovering being criminalized
makes it impossible to break the
cycle.
I have been successful in my
recovery for three years now and
let me just say that jail.
Have never helped me or anyone I
know Joe makes our mental health
workers and jails are full of
drugs dependency is health is
to.
Thank you Scott those who's next
Mr Chairman body chance has
Andrew apiece still showing up
in a minute.
We can't chase are you there do
you have something to say.
I.
There's.
We can hear you now enter.
You sorry about that.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is on
the lower keys I live in
Espanola New Mexico I am one of
the few from my high school
friends and community group to
survive to my thirtieth birthday
I've been stuck in a cycle of
discrimination and stereo Public
stereo types I don't wish this
live on my worst enemy even
though I've been clean for
several years I still get judged
in mistreated by officers and
people in general I still since
it.
Sure.
All.
I
believe the addicts get trapped
in our region again addiction is
to be treated with medical
facilities and not in prisons so
please vote yes on SB one eighty
seven.
Very good thank you thank you Mr
case Mr Chairman continued on
with our organized support we
have to with us wonder three
guests will be speaking in
Spanish but will in front of you
you should have a translation of
his comments that were sent via
email.
if they have come from.
One.
We come from one.
The transition would have his
name on it.
Okay.
And his name is one but last
name the okay so your yes yes
Representative of of but not
that this into the members of
the committee then members Lujan
Campos.
This is.
Is the overview I in this but no
laugh they kill me from me let
me to go home.
The one that will serve a fast
Eddie.
Is it is so if I will they
lesson is too much and face it
to come on with us from the love
the and I will make equal so
most of my family lives when the
late that are followed.
The thought for the moment the.
As soon as I do need help.
You have to get into.
And one of the.
Dependence.
This is done to come home budget
by the pool was get you there
and that's alright this.
The.
Maybe Quinn thirty no no this
just tell you that in the the
look as young can amount to a
mondo yet then and now you that
will not come.
But the this the free echo a lot
either.
That is so none of us.
Yet those the move the interim
expenses paid no panel so you
that on.
This
in turn the spread but I almost
had is is but I do about a lot
of this was done on seventy
seventies have EC and say loudly
can all well the almost you out
an idea this is yes stop almost
eighty.
You know this or not process.
The young Michael.
Much of this is to be more of
so.
When we first out of pocket
both.
Today most.
Are you there licensed.
This is.
What is the.
The legislature's doing because
a lot of the.
Less competitive tempted and the
second I have perspective which
is much prices in order yes.
I probably got are COVID Mr
chair is Lucille the compass.
Younger sister battle with this
dependence issue for fourteen
years and I far again caught up
in the cycles of incarceration
and relapse.
I can say with all sincerity but
jail never got our coffee.
As it is true for many her
recovery did not begin with the
abstinence it began with
reduction of use.
Her successful recovery began.
The day that she had to leave
the city she was born and raised
in she moved into on April.
With little to no policing.
So that time and space to think
resources like family support
there it be expensive medical
detox general health care
cultural and natural healing
that connected her to her roots
it is them that she have the
space to even dream of creating
a new life.
And to begin reclaiming her
health.
If we want people to have
successful recoveries it is
important that we recognize that
substance dependence is a health
issue and not see this issue as
it needs the criminalization
target and for those reasons and
for the much pain but our
communities are going through
today we ask that you please
support SB one eighty seven
thank you thank you Mr compass
is your sister doing all right
now.
Yes we're very grateful through
all these resources and being
able to get to a better
neighborhood.
She has been clean and she's
been able to get to gain custody
of her children again and so
this is one success story but I
think it takes a long specially
when we know that our
communities are over policed and
we know that they just get
trapped in the cycles of
incarceration so it is very hard
for people to say I'm gonna go
to a detox clinic on Monday when
they have a bed and then on
Sunday they get picked up right
and so I think just keeping that
in mind and really.
Seeing this issue and seeing the
issue with habitual offenses for
people who are occurring
substances to keep themselves
alive and was it your sister who
spoke to us earlier yes my
sister so I'm sorry we thought
we were.
That we thought we were prepared
to speak and you know because we
we live every time we even hear
about these bills thank you
thank you.
Anything else senator the Mr
chairman you heard a snapshot of
people from the valley I love so
much and people that I stand up
for who this bill will help and
that's just a snapshot of New
Mexicans this bill will help Mr
chairman with that we'll go to
questions from the committee.
Did I ask if there's any
opposition to this bill that
just that you didn't Mr
conversation to this bill.
lining them for okay.
Members of the committee
discussion of the bill Senator
my stuff.
Incidently the food is here so I
want to get a plate of food and
and equally finish up tonight
that would be fine thank you Mr
chairman up thank you center how
meal experts Representative.
I got the not the
so this is a.
This so this is kind of our
version Mr chairman of like a
three strikes three strikes law
New Mexico it's ten times better
than than district three strikes
laws in other states but
essentially if you have a prior
felony you face one year you
have two prior felonies you face
for years and then if you have
three prior felony you face
eight years on top of your
sentence for that.
That recent crime the exception
is a DWI for two reasons one
because the FBI has its own
sentencing scheme which which
works and that the tiered scheme
did every I want to the five six
seven the same criminal act but
but if you have prior is the set
the sentencing is harsher and
then also the in and of itself a
D. W. I. is a misdemeanor
so it just doesn't fit within a
virtual.
Offender statute this crime.
Also doesn't fit within the
public to a Spender statute in
fact there was attempts by.
By the predator my predecessor
to
To develop has it all together
you know to take drug possession
off of the felony role all books
and put in the Mr mean around
which it probably belongs and
and hopefully we can get there
get there soon but what I'd ask
All right ask for the legal
beagles it assuming this this
gets out of committee is
currently the way the bill is
written up on page three line
of.
Seventeen eighteen under the
definition of prior felony
conviction but not including a
conviction for a felony pursuant
to the provisions of the W. I.
law and then of course we had or
a non distribution possession
offense within the controlled
substance act and I think that's
the only place you need it but
but you know I know lawyers
don't want to jump around
statutes but I know it's written
in paragraph a program the
project C..
I don't think we need it four
times I think we just needed and
that one time but I'll leave it
up to you guys and then also
And then of course we wouldn't
need it in a subparagraph do to.
Either page template the current
laws working I think we just
need to add it to.
paragraph the one but we have
two guys and then also
But but that what the gentleman
said Mr Chairman is correct
To our there is no misdemeanor
possession charge for narcotic
drugs and I remember that like
back in the day that the chair
that Madam chair of House
Judiciary was always against
these are are up treatment as
opposed to incarceration built
in it and then like three years
down the road is I don't I don't
know it was just it was all
felonies because it makes no
sense to be felonies and then
what happens is if
the Lotto draw distinction with
regards to amount and so if a
pipe is found we created a
statute for drug paraphernalia
if if the officer knows the
defendants up to something they
can't find drugs they charged
with drug paraphernalia which is
a misdemeanor that was supposed
to do away with with the
prosecution of residue but it
didn't so there's contradictory
indictments were their charge
with essentially residue and
then the drug paraphernalia
device that contain the residue
but they will it will be minute
tiny amounts of of narcotic
drugs that will then jump
somebody into this felony tier
and if they have multiple drug
possessions or drug related
crimes they're they're facing
massive amounts of time that
don't add up to the to the crime
itself so I think it's long
overdue I think it's been
attempted in the past just there
was this other priorities in
terms of criminal just reform
but
But I am a support
wholeheartedly don't want to
thank the senator and
representative for bringing this
forward thank you Mr chairman.
We have a couple members that
are out there getting food or
and or on a zoom call senators
to the Lopez those in call of
all the I have a couple of
questions I noticed that Senator
Tallman pointed out to me.
That one of your hand outs is
from Alec.
And we were hoping that this
would persuade Senator Gallegos
to support the bill.
However he's left he's not on
anymore so that's a vote you you
might have had otherwise
The sentencing commission is for
this the courts they taken a
position on this.
Mr Chairman that I don't think
the courts officially take
positions on bills but there
comments in the FIR we're
certainly supportive in town
thank you.
And it looks like like although
we're trending downward overall
in prison population that that
this would be a big step but I
know Senator o'neill has is own
approach to that as well and
there's probably some others so
I think this is a great measures
which is on the right track any
indication from Senator Sedillo
Lopez and she's about ready to
come back and she's the door
shut but I can yeah I'm not
gonna door she said she'd come
voted we needed and I think we
need to.
is there a motion can we have a
motion
there's a motion from Senator
Tallman produce faster motions
for a new path I'm assuming
seconded by Senator
a mechanic.
And as soon as Senator Sedillo
Lopez comes in will vote thank
you.
I already pointed as to finding
on.
So we Senator Sedillo Lopez were
we have a of voting on a multi
do pass motion from Senator
Tallman on this bill that that
that takes away.
Minor drug offenses possession
basically as a reason to kick
somebody does a visual offenders
sentenced for the legislative
we.
We're gonna take the vote right
now another we have a full
court.
Secretary will call the roll
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Pena yes I zero with for
its use you have to do that
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for staying late to hear
Senator on Senate bill one I can
by the way they have so much fun
because all these guys but that
so you don't have to do this.
Anybody in the audience wants
dinner there's dinner in this
next room of your health thank
you Senator Ivey Soto and let me
explain of well he's coming up
but you have a compass is is
compass available can we get him
lined up yeah
but the to daylight savings time
the competing versions of
daylight savings time bills
we have both been rolled over
Senator Gonzales of the as to
rule his over and then Senator
Pirtle said it's better if we
hear them the same time so we're
rolling both of those over so
this bill.
And the fireworks sales bill or
the final two bills in the night
and you've been very patiently
sitting there Madam
superintendent thank you and and
the fire chief as well.
So Senator Ivy Soto please thank
you very much Mr chairman
members of the film Senator
Ingle.
We're no we're just waiting for
you to come in.
But we knew you wanted to hear
this bill so what we would.
Anything
right here thank you very much
Mr chairman members of the
committee and Senator Ingle so
this bill is updates to the
different licensure act
among the this uniformed
licensure act that are
clarifications of the
so that they they don't just
have the option of of revoking
or suspending they can also put
someone on restriction our
appropriations on their license
it also as clarifications as to
the process for the for
different actions that would
take place for unlicensed
behavior by people it also as
you go through this bill you'll
see that it simply clarifies a
lot of the language so that it
it deals of licensees applicants
as well as unlicensed persons
and make sure that the due
process is there under the
uniform licensure act of wind
superintendent Rio brought this
bill to me it was so much in the
weeds I just spoke to minority
hard.
That I that I couldn't help but
but join in on the project and
then at the at the end of the
bill
We have a section dealing with
interstate compacts for
professional occupation patient
licenses
there's been some a difficult
time trying to get those through
and that and so we're trying to
set up some basic rules for New
Mexico this is what we expected
as long as in in them and then
we can adopt whatever the the
compact state of themselves I do
have a couple of amendments if I
may I again
I think I gave it does they just
passed okay very good look
official now they're not
official amendment yet
they're not like you not to
bring is an official amendment
actually it's normally I just
rattle it off and and hope that
that Berwick and and and and
Frank and can keep up but as it
happens yes exactly and and the
only the only change in terms
which have in front of you would
be to
at the first insert we should
start with who is not an active
duty member so basically what
we're doing with the amendment
on the on the compact licensure
is you can't practice for more
than two years if you are not an
active duty member of the armed
forces more the spouse or
dependent of an active duty
member however if you are an
active duty member or the
sponsor depend of active duty
member deployed or stationed New
Mexico you can do up to five
years that most deployments are
really around three years maybe
three to four it was a five
years we won't run into any
problems with that we do want to
make sure that we have the the
proper Kerr about for the
interstate compacts for people
on military who are deployed
military folks and and then the
other thing is hot just in terms
of where we state that that a
The rule adopted by comp compact
governing body
does not have the force of law
New Mexico is rules adopted by
comeback human body up but which
would require the force of law
and part of state effective do
not have the force of law New
Mexico right so like if they
pass rule dealing with their
fiscal year we don't care that
doesn't require it to be the
force of law in New Mexico and
that was requested by one of the
compact bodies that would just
clarify that.
Okay.
Thank you do we have a motion on
the amendment.
So move with motion to adopt the
amendment everybody clear
running discussion of the
amendment.
You guys Senator Ingle you got
them.
Yep right.
Your.
Any discuss any any of the
opposition to.
Seeing no opposition will
consider the amendment to pin it
up and then we'll turn to use
superintendent trio let you say
some things about this.
Very complex built.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee I
do want to thank Senator Ivy
Soto for bringing this bill
forward for us there is some
important cleanup language just
to clarify how we implement the
uniform licensing act there's
two major things that I would
like to point out one is that
the fine for
disciplinary action could be up
to it we're we're we're asking
that it changed from a thousand
dollars up to ten thousand
dollars and there's plenty of
evidence to show that a thousand
dollar fine for a really bad
actor is not necessarily any
kind of a I the other thing that
it does is it requests boards
and commissions that are subject
to the uniform licensing act the
ability to summarily suspend the
license and then provide due
process it doesn't eliminate due
process it just gives us the
ability to summarily suspend so
that we don't have a bad actor
that keeps acting bad for six
months down the road while we're
trying to suspend for the first
bad action that they had they
would have to be we would have
to prove that there was of the
threat to public health or
safety in order to do that and I
think it's probably a fairly
high threshold but as you can
imagine there are some
individuals who are bad actors
and continue to be bad actors
even when we've notified them
that something they're done
could suspend their could take
away their license and the last
thing I just want to point out
and it's in the back of your
FIR.
In order for us to have compacts
in New Mexico it is incredibly
important I have heard from the
military support groups that
missions for New Mexico are
going to begin to be great rated
rated based upon how nice we are
and how well we played with
other states in licensing
professions and the reason for
this is a you can imagine if
you are a military member
Senator Ingle and you get
stationed in New Mexico and your
spouse's coming with you and
your spouse is a medical doctor
or a psychologist and if it
takes them six months to a year
to get licensed here because
they have to get all of the
tease crossed and I's dotted
then it's not friendly for your
family and the military support
groups are very concerned about
that I've worked very closely
with Senator Ivey Soto and very
incredibly gracious grateful
that we have come up with a
solution whereby we can consider
moving forward with compacts
without harming the sovereignty
of the state and without Lujan
harming the the ability for us
to move forward.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm the.
Well before we get into ability
is there anyone here who wants
to speak in support of this
bill.
Mr weeks.
And so so choose Mike yeah
because it will pick you up on
zoom unless you do yep sorry.
But listen.
Thank you Mr chairman Dan weeks
with the hospital association
we're very grateful to
superintendent as well as
Senator Ivy Soto for bringing
this forward we have a
tremendous workforce problem and
health care in the state and
modernization of this licensure
compact in these the uniform Act
is imperative for us to be able
to bring more people in here we
appreciate the attention to the
military aspect to this I know
that Sherman McCorkle who's on
the back committee has been very
active in support of of this
because this is a criteria they
look at when they're reviewing
the base recommendations
so we were very and an addition
the compact is very important to
it's very complex and we
appreciate the the effort on
that route in that regard as
well so thank you very much we
support this legislation very
good thank you.
Thank you very an opposite oh
yes of the missing of.
Thank you Mr chair.
Your windows various okay Linda
Siegel representing nurses
association tees psychologist
we're very appreciative of this
bill because it may enable some
of those other licensing
compacts to actually pass in New
Mexico we do have the nursing
compact there are some always
issues with compacts and and
their requirements one of the
one of the big issues with
compacts without this
legislation is that we never
know who is here on a compact
license because you never have
to tell the licensing board that
you were here and I know that's
not what.
What the compacts lake but it
really helps with workforce.
And in reality I think that the
compacts all the health care
compacts are a benefit to the
licensees because then they
don't have to come to a state if
they're going to be here
temporarily and and get a state
license are the compacts going
to solve our health care
workforce problem absolutely
totally no they are not the
people are not going to come to
this state just because they can
come on a compact license we got
a whole other a lot of issues to
deal with to attract health care
providers to New Mexico thank
you thank you.
Anybody else in favor anybody in
opposition to this.
members of the committee
questions discussion of this
bill.
Could you just for us that would
not all the boards are included
in this which of the ones that
would to the licenses the state
issues that are not under the
uniforms of the uniform code of
Mr chairman that's a really good
question actually anybody that's
under chapter sixty one and that
it does include almost all of
our licensing boards and
commissions and under the
statute board actually the
definition of board includes
agencies so we have a couple of
advisory committees even the P.
I. advisory committee the
respiratory advisory committee
that the support the
superintendents responsible for
even those are considered boards
and commissions the other ones
that are outside of the chapter
sixty one are construction
industry manufactured housing
those are unders subject to the
U. away by reference the only
one that we have at our agency
that is not subject that with
everyone would know about would
be the alcoholic beverage and
they have their own kind of
disciplinary action but we
follow the uniform licensing act
for everything else I'd like to
Medical Board yes and the
nursing board so they always say
oh we're not under RLD when we
have our own board Mr Chairman
that that's there's a
distinction there so the you
will a isn't specific to our
Aldi is specific to licensing
and RLD just happens to have the
majority of licenses that are
under chapter sixty one but it's
applicable to all of the license
types that so whether they're
with us or not that thank you
it's good clarification I didn't
understand he did not when you
say these other for the
construction industry is by
reference will this affect that
Mr Chairman yes it will and the
summarily suspend was
specifically put in there for
construction industry in
manufactured housing
specifically because we have
some bad actors that were having
challenges getting them to stop
hurting the public.
That okay Senator masters and
then Senator McKenna thank you
Mr chairman Santo social
superintendent preceded I
Support the bill but in
But as you know Mr chairman
there's gonna be some bills to
to do away with the court costs
and stuff.
And I'm kind of.
Making the point everywhere I
can that we got a you know tax
and spend appropriately and
because we have a tendency of
giving out tax breaks to help
people and also kind of nickel
and dime folks to make our
agencies go so I want to throw a
monkey wrench into all the
fantastic working your that the
agency is doing but if I can if
I can direct the.
Committee to come paid seven.
It says that you know it and we
know we increase the civil
penalty from a thousand Bucks to
ten thousand Bucks.
and then there's a sentence from
nineteen to twenty one this is
in addition the board may assess
the person for administrative
costs including costs and the
costs of conducting a hearing so
there's a governmental hearing.
Then the person gets a bill you
know so so I would I would move
that we strike beginning on line
nineteen in addition through.
Through a line twenty one no
page page up page seven seven.
With the system.
Beginning on line nineteen Mr
chairman on page seven in
addition strike that sentence
ending at a hearing come up
quotation mark and so.
Five words on line nineteen and
then.
Struggling twenty like twenty
one.
Baker is what do you think.
Unfriendly what do you think so
obviously work we're concerned
about the budget for the board
what actually what what what
we're we're branch talk about
right now is.
Is the consistency issue if if
the.
What a switch that trio's put
out to me was that if if we were
to do that there's also plays a
page eleven out of my next
motion you're headed there okay
I can make one motion what
actually what most of the state
with the so water to make it all
one time thank you Mr chairman
Senator Ivey Soto Minnesota at
so so.
First portion of the motion is
getting rid of those three
sentences and then if we move to
page eleven Mr Chairman
Would just be striking that
striking striking subsection D.
G. lines nineteen through twenty
two of the thirteen to try to
distract the whole thirty I
misspoke thirteen through twenty
two sections rules of searching
through twenty two and then re
read letter.
His reason for doing that that's
all one motion strike in that
last sentence and striking this.
This of subprogram G..
All right so are Mr Chairman so
that is there's existing
language that has us doing this.
It actually puts the department
in the cultural place of having
to try to be a collections agent
as well and so we really
appreciate Center Maestas as
Assistance from the justice
issues that that that.
We would have any objection to
this gonna be a collection
agency on the ten thousand
dollars or two that's a yep
that's it that's it in a
different category that's a fun
collection.
Yeah that's a fine and that's
not like haggling over cost and
how much something should have
been and all of it it just it
gets really messy that's only
ten thousand dollars you can
cover your court is that so it's
a it's a it's a policy decision
by the legislature but it's it's
one that we would not object.
Mr chairman if I could just add
the fines that are collected go
directly to the school fund so
they go do they don't come to
you the costs would stay with us
and it is a little bit of a of a
nightmare for us so I was just
trying to clarify that language
it is if it is it is perfectly
well to get rid of that but the
fine that we charge for bad
actors who are found to be bad
that money goes directly into
the school fund and that's
that's consistent with public
policy don't want the fines to
go to the person's finding.
Thank.
Thank you so move though so we
have a motion is our second to
is motion.
On the second of seconded by
Senator Tallman.
And so we're just waiting for
the secretary to the doctor so
we have a motion from Senator
Maestas for the.
And the the second from Senator
Tallman.
It was accepted as a friendly
amendment on and then there is
that sponsors of the legislation
we don't object.
Is there any any opposition to
the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
second amendment adopted on the
bill and I hi I commend Senator
masters for actually reading
through parts of the book.
Very good anything else Senator
Maestas thank you no no thank
you.
Anybody else have a question yes
Senator McKenna you're next to
throw to have you on the list
thank you chairman thank you
Senator Ivey Soto and thank you
I'm so glad in this building
there's no such thing as a
stupid question.
you know I'm looking through the
different vocations that is
affected by this bill what about
barbers and cosmetologists.
Mr Chairman thank you Senator
are present
Mister chairman Senator barbers
and cosmetology under chapter
sixty one and so yes they would
be impacted okay that's so good.
Because there's a side story to
the thank you thank you okay.
It included the ability to
summarily suspended they're
doing damage to the public
anything else senator McCain.
Chairman thank you thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Question you mentioned.
Direction industry are they in
part of this or that not.
Miss Mister chairman Senator
construction industry will be
impacted by the amendments to
the U. away my reference so
there statute the the
construction industry statute
see Liz what we call it refers
to licensure and disciplinary
action is under the uniform
licensing act and so although
they're not under chapter sixty
one they're under chapter sixty
they got referenced in my
statutes right this will this
reserve fund it will it could
well.
In that respect it's a
possibility that it could but in
addition to the uniform
licensing act the director for
construction industry has
authority to assess fines and I
believe up to ten percent of the
cost of the of the project the
part for that part of this
services is director of
construction industry basically
still calling the shots Mister
chairman Senator the the
director of C. ID will still
have authority to do the ten
percent provide on the cost of
the project if they find the
person to be about actors that
actor me find the.
The RLD as well at the seventh
and serial number of the RLD up
by but if it goes to a hearing
before hearing officer.
the due process provisions here
would apply and then the ten
thousand dollars for each act
would also apply but that would
be if they're going after their
their G. ninety eight.
Or or other licensure that they
have so the constructions
industry director can find
someone without going after
their license right they
maintain the independent
authority however if they go
after someone's Lysons than
these provisions were.
Thank you.
Anything else Senator Ingle.
No.
Okay the a broader scope and I
like
Go ahead I'm done all right any
yes senator Maestas
movie passes amended.
As it does twice a minute the
senator clementa second that
Senator Thomas seconded let me
ask a couple questions for over
a discussion did you look at the
FIR and all the implications do
you have can you respond to all
those or if you want me to go
through over you think they're.
We've we've we were we are going
to work for comfortable with the
implications okay at the board
of nursing the AG's office.
You read all those we have the
AG's office instruments at a
time concern they said there's
not enough time to get this done
with the.
I mean we're only a third of the
with recession no no no not not
to pass the bill but if the bill
passes as drafted the bills
expansion expedited licensure
would not afford you a lay board
sufficient time to implement the
changes by the effective date of
the order actually this
gentleman the expanded licensure
was actually passed house bill
one ninty one last year and so
the RLD is already the process
of of doing that this is simply
a reference to expedited
licensure okay the
implementation of that happened
a year ago that so you've got
one answer about the nursing
board of so the nursing board of
the seven is concerned that that
people may not want to come to
New Mexico if after two years
they would have to register with
the state of New Mexico can be
licensed here if they have a job
here for more than two years
they're not gonna leave just
because of the lessons New
Mexico and they get expedited
licensure a kind of a threat to
the hospitals don't seem to have
a problem with and that would be
the that was what we passed the
compact in the first place that
is correct and Mr Chairman
actually some of these a couple
of the members that we brought
in came from I think that for
the hospital association.
Okay.
Secretary will call the roll.
Okay we have a we're honored
with amended the bill twice and
run to do fast regular the
motion and Frank has.
What nope.
It'll come out as what amendment
but we don't get to separate
things.
Okay.
Though the corporate altogether.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle.
Montoya logo with this gets to
the floor but I'm about no for
right now I need to
go through this a little more
thank you Senator Maestas yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senators maintenance Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Yes.
By a vote of five in the
affirmative.
Two one one one and that one of
the negative with the three X.
three excuse you have to pass on
Senate bill two forty seven and
not public image that if the
committee report would note that
the one negative may reconsider
on.
Of the first.
Thank you Mr members of the
committee.
Right now the final bill of the
night.
We're we're just we're kind of
just telling riders Senator
Campos ten minutes ago said he
would be here in fifteen
minutes.
So and by the way of Madam
superintendent you're welcome to
some dinner senators so the Ivey
Soto dinner.
The office of.
What did you all come on up we
can start talking about this
bill.
And figure out what we're gonna
do when he gets here we can take
action.
This is the final bill the night
is Senate bill one nine six.
You're a good change the number
on that so if you have.
There is no center.
Perfect timing Senator.
Thank thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee so in essence we're
dealing now with a
The fireworks ability so that
says we've been do need you you
want to use a hand held Mike
because sure speaking to.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee so
before you you have
ability is dealing directly with
the fireworks issues and as we
all know over the last several
years dealing with drought
dealing with the fires that
affected us so one of the big
issues that we're also dealing
with the courses fireworks and
how we can work very closely
with our counties municipalities
and of course across the state
to continue to ensure the safety
as we do have a few of the
fireworks but at the same time
to allow our communities of the
opportunity to also have a say
in how they're going to if you
will have their fireworks
displays if whether or not
they're even going to have that
just given the nature of the the
climate changes that were
encountering so with that Mr
chair if I may it like to defer
to the experts that are here
with me let them identify
themselves let him make their
statements if if you will please
and then from there will be
available for questions thank
you Mr thank you senator.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the.
Members of the committee to
rectify the state fire marshal.
So my comments are they do
support fireworks bill as it's
written right now
we do have to look I want to
make one Mr senator Pete Campos
just ahead of the drought to
climate change are we don't know
what the next two years is going
to bring so with that said I
know that under article two C.
of the counties and
municipalities can also limit
the use of fireworks but with
this if there is a drought and
if you look at the ninetieth
percentile and dryness out there
and you look at the fuels that
the forestry you're forced to
look to to fuse with their
hundred percent fuels there
hundred over fuels thousand our
fuels.
If I we do get a drop down a
real bedrock again this year I
think you to be permissible to
in the areas that are facing
this drought that we could stop
the use of fireworks I think it
is support for the life safety
of first responders our
communities
the cost of fighting fires as
you know the cost is outrageous
if you have a fire in the state
but with that said I will refer
this over to the court
enforcement
Bruce dial are interim deputy of
who oversees the fireworks and
the sales of a fireworks permit.
You Mr chairman from committee
my name's captain down with New
Mexico state fire marshal's
office on the in terms of code
enforcement bureau chief right
now
well with this bill I I I do
support it is.
That we work with the bill with
the with the dates of sale and
the amount of permits that we do
give out during the year I I I
I'm I think the the correct
permits last year for just
retail were over three hundred
fifty retail permits throughout
the state that's not including
the year round stands that are
out there.
our guys go up there.
We make sure that they sell the
permissible fireworks.
and if if the county does do a
ban on a certain thing the
county has to be at a higher
level than us but not at a lower
level of of the COVID.
So if they do have a code of no
certain fire works.
That's back on to the county and
and not us.
Of the fireworks us for a retail
so they they start selling on
June twentieth.
And and it ends on.
July sixth for retail fireworks
which gives them.
A little over a week.
Well we we get the permits the
the last thing that we can sell
permit is June twentieth at at
five PM because that's the day
that they can sell anything
after that is is denied.
So I mean we we have had I mean
last year we did have a cut back
on fireworks but we were still
at three hundred and fifty
stands out there just throughout
the state of Mexico the year
prior prior to that we were
probably three seventy five.
And and what when when when what
the droughts that are going on
it is this very good kids sorry
for us because then we have all
the the buildings and art and
everything that are with the
fireworks.
Very good anybody else the
speaker.
Hi good evening chairman members
of the committee I am Brian rose
deputy chief of operations for
Bernalillo county fire
department and I I do support
this bill I do recognize that in
dollars a lot of people like to
have fun they like to celebrate
the like to get out but
everything that we do in our
profession is based on risk in
trying to mitigate as much risk
as we could possibly do to stop
the detrimental effects of a
wildland fires not only wildland
fires but structure fires that
that are secondary to these the
fireworks that come down on
roofs and other areas of of
people's homes so with that
being said I would just like to
say especially with the current
conditions that we're seeing
wildland firefighting modeling
is not working as it did ten
years ago we're getting into
much more significant severe
flashover conditions which is
detrimental to the life and
safety of our firefighters not
only.
It's not necessarily directly
correlated with
fireworks obviously but we just
recently had a loss of life of
our metric to creating that was
on a firefighting mission in
anything that we could do to
minimize the risk to our
firefighters I think is of
paramount to public good and
public safety and with that I I
thank you for your time.
Thank you to.
With that we'll go to the
audience Senator you ready for
us to do that.
Mr Chairman yes please proceed
thank you very good is there
anyone in the audience who wants
to speak in support of this
bill.
Yes.
Mr Chairman committee members
names McGill Tiven
I've Representative five
thousand Albuquerque New Mexico
I physical to forty four percent
County I are sensitive
Albuquerque firefighters I stand
in support of this bill
the main reason is safety all
this bill does is given the
state's amendment and the
counties a little more teeth to
be able to enact when there is a
state of emergency in in the
state that we live in and the
climate that we live in in the
desert that means that if there
is just that circumstance are
firefighters will be a little
bit safer and that we will be
able to and force a little bit
more so with that I thank you
for your time thank you for the
the sponsor for bring this bill
and I rises part of it thank you
thank you very much.
From then we have one person on
zoom in support.
Up is name is Jimmy.
The is your.
Jimmy you want to go ahead and
share your comment with this.
Mr Chairman I'm actually not in
support so I I raise my hand
prematurely I think it's okay
we're done to opposition then go
ahead.
All right then chairman and
committee members my name is
German of this and I'm one of
the owners of the op of
fireworks which is a specialty
retailer in Anthony New Mexico
I've been involved in the
industry for over forty years
and I started selling fireworks
at the age of twelve for my
family business I wear many hats
including that as an insurance
agent so I do understand that
the risks and perils of loss
and.
What can is involved in those
I'm also heavily involved in
legislation at the local
municipal county state level in
New Mexico and Texas so I'm
hoping my comments and
information can shed some light
at the impacts regarding the
safety and and the SP one ninety
six as a stance.
Do I believe the state fire
marshal's already stated that
the the reason for this yes
safety and fire prevention the
reality of it is this is a meter
reaction to the point fires the
last two bills that have been
introduced to restrict fireworks
further they came right after
forest fires and these are
caused by prescribed burns not
by fireworks it's really
important as well from mentioned
that a city like Silvercity
which is in the middle of the
National Forest allows aerial
fireworks and they do this so
that they can mitigate people
taking fire was to force Landen
leading them in the legal areas
of bills like this will
encourage more illegal use and
encourage people to go out to
these places where they will be
state and use them and more
dangerous areas that's that's
the reality of further
restrictions there are a couple
of other really important things
when we're talking about SB one
ninety six but I do want to
point point out before I talk
about the affects the very most
important thing about this bill
is the measurement and the
drought indices that use this
this is referred to as the ERC
that is what this bill is using
to determine whether there are
drought conditions within an
area the problem is the ERC is
not a measurement of drought it
is a measurement to determine
the thought it it's actually I
would go back sorry it is not a
measurement of drought it is an
output of the national fire
danger rating system and as one
of the output it measures the BP
used in front of a flaming fire
to determine the spread of fire
so it does not measure grout
even further this measurement is
only measured on national for.
Course weather stations which
has no impact does not take into
account any of the materials in
urban areas so it it does not
correlate to local
municipalities account counties
and their level of drought this
is just a tool to determine how
fire spreads so it is a very
inappropriate monitor or indices
to yield to determine whether or
not firework restrictions should
be imposed further.
The other problem with the ERC
is that set of the ninetieth
percentile and I have charts if
you would like me to share share
these with you to verify what
I'm saying what the night is
percentile over the last twenty
years has been over that number
Senator ERC has been created
which means for the last twenty
years there would be no
fireworks throughout the state
of New Mexico if this would have
been an active twenty years ago
the other the other concern is I
do agree local municipalities
should have control and I have
no argument for that the problem
is is this bill is in the way
it's written if you read it very
carefully it gives control to
the governor a hundred percent
an absolute whether or not a
company applies to the
governor's office or whether or
not a county decides to make a
pandemic governor may still come
in if the PRC is above ninety
percent and banned fireworks
even if that county or
municipality does not want that
that.
I feel it should be left to the
local jurisdictions it should be
measured by an indices such as
current entities we right now
the Dow broke monitoring system
that's measured in over a
hundred stations through out
Melissa counties counties and
our land and takes into
consideration.
Higher appointment of that
county where the ERC does not
it's a it's a very our system to
use to determine that the other
part that I want to speak about
quickly is the affects affects
this bill will have.
There this is just from one to
one store there's thirty seven
specialty retailers as a state
fire marshal mentioned is over
three hundred retail licenses
that were given out last year in
mind one store at the apple
fireworks I have fifteen year
round employees that will blow
loans up to about seventy
temporary and full time
employees for the month of June
and July.
That's a lot of staff I have
about a twenty five thousand
dollar per month overhead that I
have to make regardless of
whether I have fireworks except
that overhead is accomplished
basically from the four days of
sales that we have my my
location is on the freeway and
about seventy percent of that is
tourism so we're bringing in
money from other states so we we
are not
Have only purchased five percent
actually purchased and used in
those municipalities they're
taking back to other communities
others other states such as
Texas which legal we paid ninety
thousand dollars or more per
year into your keys we pay and
and we instituted this by the
way which is something that I I
would encourage Senator Campos
to look at if we were to be
right this bill but we tried to
what's called a position permit
the in Anthony New Mexico for
every Ariel that soul we've paid
over two hundred thousand
dollars in this special tax
break to the municipality we've
done some great things and all
without causing fires and the
National Forest which is what
we're trying to prevent
I think that currently.
Our current bill.
Is working better than us one
ninety six will propose to do
especially with this P. Garcia
in place New Mexico is a very
very diverse regions in the
climate all of the state are
very different there's no way we
can determine whether farger
should be used by the R. C.
especially only monitored and
enforced areas I would
encourage the committee not to
pass this bill based on the fact
that the ERC is on there and
there there's other several
other things that I could go to
about this bill that make it
kind of kind of crazy one such
little instances there's a
section in there were made took
out fireworks are illegal on
forest and wildlife.
Why would we remove that that's
our primary goal is safety.
It just that the bill is not
come not for me to New Mexico
not friendly to.
To what the industry so I thank
you for your time and I thank
you for your consideration.
Thank you very much to me.
Is there anyone here in the
audience who wants to speak it
against this bill.
Okay come up choose Mike I did
it by yourself.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for Bollman travel
center.
And Bowlin travel centers have
seven locations across New
Mexico we're mostly Jason to
interstate highways we sell to
we sell to truckers frankly we
have
We've been in business since
about nineteen twelve we have a
hundred fifty employees about a
four million dollar pay roll
and roughly twenty five or so
percent of our business is is
far works I'm familiar with this
with this legislation Mr
chairman about twenty something
years ago young senator Michael
Sanchez and I wrote wrote the
legislation that's being amended
and the the the goal of that
legislation all those years ago
was number one we don't want to
make criminals out of families
and and so what we want to do
with fire works as we want to
ensure that fireworks are are
set off on paved or on on dirt
areas and the other the other
notion that we put into the
legislation and that exists
today is that fireworks are
banned in all state and of
federal force in the state of
New Mexico right now twenty four
hours a day three hundred sixty
five days a year fireworks
cannot be enforced
of it also
it also ensures that
well it ensures a lot of things
but the major thing I think
that's important is that
fireworks are not allowed in
force right now we also and we
also created the the authority
to to ban fireworks and in the
in wildlands and then we created
the the whole in the cities and
so frankly Mr chairman members
of the committee over these
twenty something years I believe
that this
legislation that's on the books
right now has worked when when
municipalities and counties
follow the current statute
things work out well we have a
good system we're local
governments can ban fire works
certain types of fireworks the
fireworks that go up in the air
and return something to the
earth they can ban them right
now in times of drought
municipalities and and and
counties have the authority to
ban aerials we banned
bottle rockets we banned all of
those all of those products that
go up into the air and return
something to the earth can be
banned and our in many
municipalities are banned right
now the only items that can not
that local governments can not
regulate or the little fountains
and combs that you see in
Albertsons and Smith's and
places like that in the family
packs so in in summation and and
so I respectfully propose this
piece of legislation on behalf
of Bolan's travel center we
think that the current statute
works when it's followed and we
urge you to not pass this bill
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Scanlon.
Mr trio.
Mr chairman members of the
committee DJ three are
registered lobbyists for TNT
fireworks
I will repeat what's the two
speakers prior to me have said
we're attendees in agreement we
believe that the existing
statute has worked and worked
well as you heard
we do support local control for
counties and municipalities will
have the ability
and and the resources to take
action when is required due to
drought and climate issues we
believe that currently exists
The fundamental problem with
this ability and I'm not talking
on the technical side relative
to the language itself that
different than the previous
Sanchez
one of the major problems is as
you heard the index that cited
in the bill that only gives you
a very small picture of of
what's wrong of the the risk the
central and I'm going to detail
and describe all that of my
client believes that if you
really work to look at using the
energy released component you
want to keep it at ninety
percent of like is this and the
bill that you would also need to
look at two additional indices
to be able to get a meeting full
of picture of whether such a
risk for fire danger fireworks
occurs what I mean by that is
there's an index called the fuel
moisture content we would argue
that a few most are content of
ten hour fuels low eight
throughout the county or the
particular region would be the
most appropriate to consider in
addition to the energy released
component.
In addition as other states have
done they also look at the
burning index we will argue that
the burning index needs to be an
extreme for the entire county of
the particular region you're
looking at so my point is this
particular bill implies you're
just looking at a very small
picture that's that's unfair in
fact I would argue for just
gonna look at the energy
released component you probably
need to set the threshold so
we're at ninety seven ninety
eight percentile in order to be
able to have meaningful risk
assessment one issue as a
technical point with the bill.
Secondly of this bill those a
little bit different the make a
pointed as for once we're that
we argue about this in the back
in the mid two thousands of two
thousand twelve raise this
concept came up of giving
complete authority to the
governor to up that fireworks
the problem with that is before
we argue about this is under the
her plenary powers of emergency
issues this one this time we're
looking actually put in the
particular fireworks statute.
Problems that exist is and
you'll see were of the county
would like to
request the governor to do
something I do with calls for a
petition process my background a
practice administrator loft and
what I'm not locked into those
maternity I have never heard of
the petition process going to
the governor I don't know what a
petition would look like to be
able to petition the governor
don't know what kind of
participation is no rules or
administer process these they
would do with the fission
process up to the governor so in
order to be able to fairly fast
and efficiently be able to deal
with the request of the governor
there's no such mechanism that
exists if we're gonna create
such a mechanism I think we need
to put additional
meet around what that would look
like.
finally one of the other issues
there several issues and I will
take much more time one of the
issues is if you'd September
index you use you to terminal K.
there's a risk
you don't want that band to last
for at leaving the bill
something like thirty days what
a lot of states have done and in
order to do with that as well
figure out the appropriate
indices and then they will
continuously review it so in
other words it could change the
next day you can change.
A week later and the need to be
a mechanism a requirement that
the conditions change in the
indices are no longer math
whatever the program once maybe
that that that needs to be
lifted.
That is Mr Scanlon said we're
not talking because the current
statutes.
Allows counties municipalities
on their own to that and the one
to shoot up in the air we called
in the industry another tool for
most the only ones that are
permissible of the safe in
saying what they want they don't
shoot up there are localised got
shooting are you got a line item
in
a paved areas of we've from
correct is going to be a water
source nearby
so with these technical issues
in their summer others Mr
chairman and committee members
you know simply put
understand that tent definitely
appreciate the the sponsor bring
this forward especially after
the there is in his counties the
the representative but
unfortunately this isn't the
mechanism to get us to where we
want the last several
fundamental flaws that we need
to work on for those reasons to
do fireworks respectfully
opposes this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr trio anybody else.
Did you want to respond Senator
or or.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee and I
really appreciate if you will
the remarks that have been made
because those remarks are going
to go and help us to make this a
better bill and so hopefully the
committee will give us
some favorable support as we
hopefully will be able to going
to move this forward and
continued to enhance if you will
a bill that would definitely
assist us as we continue to go
ahead and fight of fires that
are created if you will buy
fireworks throughout the state
and if I may I'd like to differ
also to the fire marshal to see
if there are any additional
comments or concerns it might be
raised at this point thank you
Mr chairman or Marshall.
Mr chair members of the
committee we do have some
information here we can get more
if needed we do show in two
thousand nineteen and just in
the Albuquerque area we have two
hundred sixty one fires the
total fires for fireworks
between June and July in two
thousand twenty we had a total
of three hundred fifteen two
thousand twenty one four hundred
and thirty five two thousand
twenty two it increased to three
dropped three eighty five.
And for a total of thirteen
hundred ninety six fires and
that's within a four year period
I just spoke with City of Santa
Fe earlier and the had twelve
hundred and sixty firework
related calls for twenty twenty
two.
And I know personally you is
getting some stats for us and
now we have all the departments
are on the state that are
working on getting those numbers
on how many fires a responded to
due to fireworks string June
July and August and we will have
that information available for
you at a later date if you want
to provide it to you thank you
Mr.
I had a question for you how
about that for the call energy
from the R. C. the.
Energy released component of
this the point why use that is
both the several people referred
to that is not a good way of
deciding whether it's too dry to
light fireworks so I do have
some information here on the
your CV this information comes
out of the southwest area and
it's on of Albuquerque and they
provide this information every
three days are the posters on
their website so what the visit
the for service or who yeah it's
out of the four service Sir yes
and if you want I can find
copies and it provides all the
information and a break down how
the energy release works.
But the the question that was
raised was maybe that's not the
right criterion to use when
you're deciding about this
proclamation that there's a
better one Mr chair yes we can
look into that as we proceed
with this if this passes tonight
and you allow us to work on this
we can also make changes and
amendments if we need to and we
can work with industry but I
think it's important that we
continue to move forward with it
and see what we can do to make
this better for their
communities in the state of New
Mexico good members of the
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Cormann.
Thank thank you Mr chair.
On the FIR it's it's a and thank
you for bringing this forward
especially I know how
devastating these fires have
been and I'm also a really
appreciate the statistics in
Albuquerque because of the issue
of of fireworks that are legal
in Albuquerque but they
purchased them just outside of
Albuquerque that's the that's
the need I think for a for a
larger van
and I see him from my window
it's clear that the fireworks
being launched are are are not
not appropriate for the city
the FIR just to the technical
issue.
Was the attorney general's
office says that smaller
municipalities have a council
manager governance structure and
lack of more position so I I was
trying to find it and I don't
know if you're ready fixed it
suggested amending the language
to specify that it
municipalities mayor or city
manager can make appropriation
would you like to make that a
change now and have a it is so
you Mr chairman of course
Senator Sedillo Lopez that so
something is very positive but
again some of these small
communities don't even have a
the city or if you will a county
manager and they indicate that
they do but with a high turnover
a lot of times it does create if
you will administrative issue.
So so with that I would indicate
that again we would leave that
up to the committee in terms of
of what what your thoughts would
be in terms what kind of change
maybe you would like to make.
Regis the municipality yeah and
that's at the end I think that's
a good on page on page fourteen
line twenty four.
If we if we.
If we just put the county or the
municipality.
May modify or rescind
proclamation.
So that would be to delete a
mayor or board of county
commissioners on my twenty four
and twenty five and insert a
county or municipality.
Mr chair in the center city
Lopez totally understood let's
say for example there is a small
community like on from Chico
where in reality than it would
be up to the county commission
or possibly in that case the
county manager to make that
determination but the community
from the county seat is located
about forty five miles away so
I cover on to until she goes
thinking of Rio Rancho to that
that community doesn't have so
so Mister chairman and center
city office it's a very good
point so so within that I
believe that there needs to be
something that would be.
Possibly more overarching and
yet at the same time as as been
mentioned already given the
small not incorporated
communities that local control
or lease that voice so that
they're able to also petitioned
sorry
I'm I'm not really sure I think
that's something that's going to
have to be we looked a little
bit closer because it doesn't
cover I don't think all of small
communities that are
incorporated when for example
would be Pandari and and the
village itself does that mean
that the county of San Miguel
would go ahead and make that
determination in that case
you're probably talking about
thirty thirty five miles away
from the county seat so I I see
some of the concerns that might
be raised because of the
if you will the administration
so Mr chair so how do leading
unincorporated and incorporated
municipalities make decisions
for their community.
So Mister chair and Senator
Sedillo Lopez in some cases the
decisions that they make are
either made by a community board
by community leadership and that
can be very informal or can also
be a formal form of who they
consider to go ahead and be if
you will the leaders of that
unincorporated community but
that does leave a very important
point where we don't have anyone
who is elected or appointed as
the designated to go ahead and
make those decisions outside of
the not incorporated area Mr
chair if if
If the sponsor is willing maybe
we can make the amendment and
then when you get into
judiciary they can look it over
and maybe fix it but at least
it'll flag the issue and my
suggestion is to insert a County
comma municipality comma or
formal or informal leadership in
New Mexico and incorporate an
incorporated.
Area I guess.
Because it can be fixed.
Mr chair and of course a center
city Lopez said so consider to
going to be a friendly amendment
and we we appreciate your help
in trying to also undertake if
you will some of these areas
that don't have that formal
leadership to go and deal with
issues like this thank you so
you're making a motion yes I are
you talking about amending the
bill here in this committee yes
yep just to flag it I I there
may be a bit the more there may
be better language Mr chair but
either will provide better
languages there isn't it over
yet yeah but I just
Think that that would be
helpful.
So you want to go over again
Representative thank you so on
online twenty four and twenty
five on page fourteen delete a
mayor or board of county
commissioners and insert a
County comma municipality or
formal or informal leadership.
In an unincorporated area.
May modify you got it.
Read it again one more time the
county municipality or formal or
informal leadership in an
unincorporated area so that for
number twenty four but then on
lines twelve and thirteen.
Of the yeah.
Will it also insists is
seventeen and seventeen yes so
the same change the two subs on
line twelve change a
municipality or county to a
county municipality or formal or
informal leadership in an
unincorporated area may in
writing.
So the so that would be deleting
a a municipality or county in
line twelve and inserting that
language.
Mr chair.
I just say it again online
seventeen.
So so Mister chair one of the
ways that that we've done this
in the past has always been that
if there is going to be a change
like that that it would be
pertinent to all areas including
the title where that change
would be necessary but again I'm
I'm not going to tell the
committee anyway.
How to handle it but that's been
one of the ways that we've tried
to go ahead and work on those
those type of amendments
absolutely Mr Mr chair thank you
thank you Mr Senator it's in the
title always forget the titles
of.
On line thirteen.
to delete more or board of
county commissioners and assert
a cap state insert County common
municipality or formal or
informal leadership in New
Mexico unincorporated areas.
The governor's.
Is there an issue with
Senator and and Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
There is a problem with an
informal.
Local government local
leadership because they have no
authority to carry out any.
Well they can petition it
because it doesn't granted we we
give them the authority to carry
out themselves.
Okay this may be it may be
something that you address on
the way to Senate Judiciary
because I think you should be
able they should be able to
petition.
But of course they can carry out
themselves but I would imagine
that I just I was thinking of
like a secular Association would
be some kind of formal
leadership they could petition I
think do we consider no yes no
land grants we consider to be
units of local government but we
didn't say that we said mean
County municipality there's a
lot of parts of the state they
don't have land grants so but we
didn't say come government
entity which would include that
but at but I would think that a
land grant is.
Either an informal or formal
depending on org how organized
it is leadership.
So my suggestion is because I
don't think we have the where
with all right now to do to try
to do it now but my suggestion
would be Mr chair of all is to
try to address that on the way
to Judiciary or or the other
option is just to say
municipality or county
government.
And and this is a fun thing
Chico needs to do it they have
to go to the is whether nuclear
or some media summit as well as
the county Mr was of the county
governments say can you do this
for it's that Mr chair I I if I
really was persuaded I how far
so many of our municipalities
are from the county seat and
health of the we have an on to
in Chico telephones I think with
the still that phones and you
know other methods of.
In in the there may not be the
responsiveness of you know I
don't know it Hey I'm just
putting it out there I'm not.
So thank you very much Mr
chairman of course Senator
Sedillo Lopez
it's it's a point well taken and
if this bill is allowed to
continue we will address that
issue and try to come up with
some framework that will work
for those not incorporate
communities the political
subdivisions and the quads I
subdivisions as well.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm not
suggesting what what would work.
You don't you know better what
would work then I but I I I did
appreciate the issue in so I'll
just leave it at that Mr
chairman I believe there was
another.
Another another comment.
More.
Full public fireworks displays
yeah I don't have.
The thank you thank you Mr chair
said the if the the energy you
so that in the of our the.
Yes so be it if if that meant
that then.
Although it their point is kind
of a good one that if you cancel
the public displays and you may
be encouraging people to go up
and put their own into action
and so Mister chairman and and
thank you very much for that
remark because along with that
one of the thoughts and ideas
basically is to have those
public displays because they'll
be better controlled and would
hopefully eliminate quite a few
of the few will the the
neighborhood fireworks displays
that sometimes to create if you
will of those unwarranted fires
thank you Mr chair that's
usually with the City of
Albuquerque does.
Yeah encouraging people to the
public.
It didn't work in four hundred
and twenty one times but it does
work and I am a hundred times
a million during the pandemic
with the council okay excuse me
other than anything else in so I
I don't know if you heard me I
just said during the pandemic
when they canceled the displays
the number of fires went up so
thank you thank you Mr chair.
Senator tone thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator for
forward the those of fireworks
ago two or three hundred feet up
in the air those are illegal.
Let's.
Chair and senator the the the
the ones that go up makes it two
three three three three and a
few more those are illegal to
sell at retail stores.
in in in the state in Mexico
they're allowed to sell four G.
which is.
Less than five hundred grams of
powder.
So the ones that you see go way
up there I column shows starters
or a show wonder is you're being
sold.
All right online illegal
somewhere and we just can't find
the most when they do that.
Others in my neighborhood there
The very plentiful.
The.
Keep me up.
Yes midnight three or four
nights.
We my problem with this bill is
a dozen banned fireworks three
hundred sixty five year.
So it is amazing the noise and
that.
It's this incredible so that I
realize you can if it's online
you can't control it.
So it was suggested by the.
You're the bill uses a
more insurance X. called the
energy release component and.
Budget the ministry of judge.
Suggested the fuel moisture
content.
What.
What's your reaction to that
suggestion so thank you very
much Mr chair course center
Tallman as we take a look at
this and again I really think
the individuals for the idea so
if we use the energy released a
component the fuel maintenance
content and then also the
burning index we have three
sources so I believe we can make
this a better bill four allowed
to to move it along but we can
combine the use of those indexes
in order to better assess how
and when we would band if you
will fire works for that period
of time when we are dealing with
a drought or a serious situation
where
we're close if you will to to
Abbas care to the to the forest
those type of things thank you
very much Mr chairman.
Mr chair supposed to Judiciary
next right yep the disturbance
Sierra you're correct your
available to them the looking at
the
Change in the energy release.
Component.
Mr chair Senator Tallman I'm
very amenable to the changes
that would make this much better
bill.
Some very cooperative.
So well the question for us is
do we want to try to fix it in
here and we were having a year
of the vote and then send it on
virtually say nah you guys
couldn't fix it and take it to
Judiciary were if you can get a
hearing you might get through.
I think that you've identified
to be.
Yeah I agree of support if.
To move in if the Center agrees
to do in order to.
Yeah.
Senator my sister turned.
Thank you so thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
couples and gentleman for you
Mister what is your name thank
you and you Representative home
state for personal stuff.
It is the farm farmers thank you
Sir I will deposit need all day
so I stepped out when you were
introduced the up all get to the
section four here in a sector
that the new material.
just went over existing existing
law.
And
And
And on top of page for you have
a new definition a new statutory
word energy release component.
What's the purpose of off
putting that in the.
The definition section.
Mr chair Senator I believe in
this is put in it was to be able
to see with the moisture content
and all the fuels they're out in
in the forest and in the
communities but of like the
Sanchez mentioned in the back
the we can work with the fuel
burning rates in that and we can
actually work with them and see
what we can come up with in
order to move this bill forward
which I think if we do look at
all three indexes we can
actually work on something.
Thank you and then you put it in
the.
Because you put it in the
definition section it's also
elsewhere in the language yeah
it's all through the okay and
then on page ten
All license applications.
The license application is for
what.
And on line thirteen.
A license to sell fireworks or
to have a public display or when
a test is search so fireworks
and let Mr Bruce dial explained
that since he's in charge of the
cells of the fireworks.
Mr chair Senator of the permits
are are sold for year round
people the the stores and their
retailers and
we don't do permit for display
that comes out of the the
counties and the cities that
that don't.
But are what will we so are you
the license for for.
Seven of the fireworks retail
year round specialties thank you
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Campos German soap someone could
the store could apply for the
slices or or someone could apply
and then set up shop in a with
the tent in a parking lot for
example.
Yes Sir the when when when when
they apply that they have to
fill out the application name
name name of the of the ten
person that's going to be there
the address the fee that they
have to pay for retail if it's a
ten it's a hundred dollars and
then maybe and then once you're
set up.
And they and they get the
product and we we go out and
inspect the tents make sure that
they do need all the.
Like safety exits the generators
and everything like that.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator Campos elements so that
So I see where you're going with
this you know it's like you know
the application the applicants
shall revert.
The application you know the
application itself shall require
the applicant to swear in
writing not to sell or use
fireworks so I up I'm applying
also fireworks done at the local
parking lot and then at the
bottom it says do you solemnly
swear to.
Not cease sell fireworks during
the prohibited period and you
checked that box but there's
really.
That document of an of itself
doesn't have any consequences
not it's not like a.
It's not like up like yours like
your story to an affidavit that
they could be perjury or
whatever but I mean I I see
where you're going I mean you
want to kind of lock and then
you want to to get him to agree.
But that these proclamations are
issued what is the penalty.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you very much Mr chairman of
course center my SS it's a very
good point because with that as
the continue to deal directly
with this that's always been one
of the big issues when we start
talking about consequences so
again I'm going to defer to the
state fire marshal and then from
there see if of they can even
use one of the anecdotal
situations that they've had to
deal with when it does come to
the consequences or the lack
thereof thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair Senator normally you
when we do have a situation out
there illegal fireworks or we
have a minor selling fireworks
we normally contact local law
enforcement to support agency.
And that's how we handle it and
then we move forward from there
are we don't have the authority
we don't have the commissioned
officers to do this so we rely
on the local officers state
police or service or
municipalities thank you Mr
chairman Senator Campos fire
marshal the but the local
authorities are in terms of
manpower and getting to the
location I I get that but what
one of the of the thirty two do
you I mean can they were
shutting you down way way what
you know in other words there
just like we talked about with
that exotic animal I was that
gets the law but there was no.
You know did make it a petty
misdemeanor misdemeanor and also
just lastly the.
The so the the county of the or
the municipality can petition
the gov.
if the energy released component
is at or above the ninetieth
percentile in the county so the
municipality Mr Chairman is
centered those as a village
qualifies municipalities that
capture all legal entities non
County legal entities.
The city of village of.
Of the or or insert gentleman we
have.
At that thank you Sir ledges so
what we have in the villages on
incorporated not that of the of
the incorporated what's what
kind of incorporated
municipalities to the.
To the cities towns and villages
of and the help they help it fit
into the definition of
municipalities.
That I okay that's fine thank
you Mr thank you Mr chairman
thank you sent a couple so if so
if up.
So cities towns villages maybe
the municipally can.
Answer that question but here's
here's kind of a think of a
contradiction to think about is
that.
The municipality competition
that the the governor could shut
it down in a particular County.
you know after the governor's
petition if the governor chooses
not to then the municipality of
the county can do can can can
now that the authority transfers
from the chief executive to the
to the.
To the city or county.
So that begs the question why
not just give the local
authority right off the bat as
opposed to you know kind of
funding to the government what
and then also what it does is
the the authority in paragraph a
is to
two of restrict the sale or use
of fireworks in a county so just
a town or a village.
Can can then three days after
the governor says no can
essentially vote to shut it down
in the entire county.
You know so they maybe they have
a concern over here but they
can't shutdown fireworks in
their area they got a Sierra in
the whole county just you know
and then also
And then to to to do it another
thirty days on page twenty two
it says a proclamation you know
for thirty days so be effective
for thirty days and the
municipality or county may issue
succeeding proclamations if
drought conditions warrant.
So the conditions change you go
from the energy released
component.
A criteria to drop conditions
warrant and I know clearer heads
prevail and another strong
leaders in these municipalities
which is a different it's just a
distinction and then it says I
more or board.
I'm more or the county
commission you know board of
county commissioners may modify
or rescind the proclamation I
don't know how they modify
because of a is pretty clear
temporary ban or restrict the
sale or use of fireworks that
led to the words it's like I
don't know how they can modify
paragraph it does just stop to
think about
and that we are it's as a more
board of county commissioners on
the bottom page fourteen Mr
chairman may modify or rescind
proclamation within its thirty
day period if the energy
released component is less than
the nine ninety eight percent
also.
It's ninetieth percentile
governor.
Do they do it the governor does
it or the.
For this municipality some.
The governor doesn't do it so
then the the municipality of the
county does it and then then
it's you know maybe it rains or
whatever and they and they have
the authority to rescind it so
that's that's actually pretty
good but anyway just thought to
keep in mind
if and when this this one just
with the thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator anybody else
some of the committee when we
can have yep.
Yes.
Yeah I do I do yes I would not
indirect given I would just the
general the delay to consider
moving a no Representative
because I can't.
We shouldn't I don't know it's
up to you but I there are so
many issues I don't have the
same result reluctant to vote
for for a test until we see what
it is but if we want to move it
on the no REC might be an option
for us to consider that and
although like Tessa Senator.
So so Mister Mr chair for cement
Mr chair think maybe our staff
might have.
Some input or.
Motions yeah I know you do okay
we were still discussing I think
it will this vote on the motion.
So so Mister.
The second motion.
The past yes
Senator McKenna voted I mean
native a do pass and then we're
looking for a second for that.
Is there a second for the.
A second you know I prefer is a
no rec.
If you don't have to suck it is
not a requirement.
Yep okay.
You asked me and I gave an
answer is.
Thank you sit in the second okay
the any discussion of it
discussion I mean I I my own
view is I would prefer the no
wrecked because we haven't
really.
We're we're basically saying.
Getting a blank check yeah kind
of I.
Discussion thank you Mr chairman
center because I just I think
the gentleman here and you in
particular Center for do not
account for your communities try
to come up with some solution so
that to some of these tragedies
you don't occur again but if we
can throw the federal for
service in this bill that would
probably work thank you Mr
thanks.
And my comments on it is I do
trust.
Chairman yes but I I too I made
a motion for for passage verses
no Representative because I too
have a lot of confidence in the
Senator and and his subject
matter experts that they've
taken and a lot of the comments
and they will address them and
so I I really don't like using a
no record because to me that's
that's a negative towards the
bill and I think it's a it's a
good bill but just need some
some tweaking to address what my
colleague senator Maestas yes.
We can accept the.
Okay.
Secretary recall or any other
discussion.
Secretary call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle center Maestas.
Thankfully no.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman.
Center to the piano no.
And that with that you have a I
agree to it for.
For a report issues the other
day a do pass and you're going
to Judiciary thank you very much
Mr chairman members of the
committee I've taken notes we
will work on this between here
and Judiciary and again thank
you very much for the discussion
and for your confidence and and
there is food by the way you
guys have been sitting here all
that long is there still food.
The committee help yourself.
Thank you very much with that
the we've finished our agenda
for the night we did roll over
those to daylight savings time
bills and we also rolled over
Senator Lopez is built on the
rebuttable.
Presumption we have the there.
What was one eighty eight.
