Keeping their comments to the
point and and concise as much as
possible.
As much as we can okay second
we're not going to hear a couple
of bills at the request of the
Sanchez.
Senator compasses Bill of
emergency medical Medicaid
reimbursement if anybody's there
for that one.
It's going to be moved up into
oblivion.
Because then Senator Schmedes
bill on limiting health
reimbursement retro denials that
too will be work done over the
interim and brought back to life
next year.
Other than that we're ready to
go we're gonna start with the
senator less this because he
assures me this is a ten minute
at most presentation Senator
the Senate bill one sixteen.
Thank you Mr chairman Senate
bill three twenty two.
If we could move the committee
started twenty two yeah three
twenty two we could move the
committee so for discussion.
Senator.
I'd move it do not have the.
Twenty two.
The process.
Okay before I of the before I
wrap it up on a turnover to
match for witness Mr buddy Hosni
who went through up incredibly
particular situation when you
describe it to me I thought it
was.
Unlawful but apparently the law
supports what he went through
and that's that was the premise
the purpose of this bill Mr have
the peace of hello everyone
undergoing to tell my story real
quick I'll make a very long
story short as I can but I was
going through divorces introduce
yourself for everybody house me.
I think cause me.
I'm just going through a divorce
a started September twenty
nineteen.
was very long drawn out divorce
which lasted about six days in
court.
And then on March fifth my
divorce.
Pursue filings over.
About thirty days sorry about
ninety days on by with the
ruling from the from the judge.
And the about a week after that
my wife passed away from
overdose should have very to
fighting opioid addict and
hardrock holic.
So after that of the judges try
to divorce me twice which was
against New Mexico Lagos and
then came up with the ruling to
do a fifty fifty split for.
For the state so fifty percent I
want my children fifty percent
went to me.
Which was let me tell you very
difficult to pull off but I did.
And.
Is it still just a difficult it
was you know I just felt like I
got treated like a criminal when
my children and my wife to take
fifty percent of everything away
when they're gonna win the you
know I want kids want to percent
of the time but.
And then are gonna children very
busy right now funding for
school and everything else and
having to ask for money out of
the state which is still not
finalized after almost four
years now going through the
divorce so just no very very
hard and you know this is not
going to affect my outcome
changing this bill but hopefully
it'll help somebody in the
future.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman members
sold.
What Mr Garcia told me the story
I said.
I thought the judge did
something illegal I thought
there was something because it
just struck me as inherently
unjust the would be stripped of
half of his assets in and and
hindered half of his ability to
raise children and then and then
they're suggesting that he's a a
divorcee instead of a wood or.
and so this bill is to this is
to stop the abatement
This is to creating is that in a
criminal proceeding when the.
Our friendly most any other
proceeding when someone dies the
preceding ends.
Apparently New Mexico law The
divorce continues and somebody
just so I I this bill is to
abate divorce proceeding upon
death and with that will stand
for questions.
Okay to stop the proceedings so.
Thank you so look I'm not sure I
get the full picture so even
though
the kids are all your kids or
the kids for kids from an early
they're all your kids for but
because of this thing.
The kids to continue to live
with you for they have half the
estate then you have have the
state but they can't get theirs
until they turn twenty one or
something is that the a woman
correct something like that when
for the guardian of light on to
finish her.
Her ruling or whatever the two
thousand on and it's been months
and months so story on a.
I can't tell you how it's gonna
okay Representative let's let's
go to the do you want us to this
committee so it doesn't affect
any other child custody or any
other of of.
Spousal support determination of
parenting like the first bill
inadvertently did the strictly
deals with the dissolution of
marriage
thank you Mr division of the
estate correct.
All right is there anyone here
in the audience who wants to
speak in support of this bill.
Yes do you want to take them one
at
director come up and use the
Mike so the the zoom will pick
you up but if it is the.
Mr chair members of the
committee tera Hedrick I am here
on behalf of all families and
children and in hopes that there
is a justice between man and
woman.
Through this hardship and
there's a better way to handle
these complicated issues and I
appreciate you and listening to
this and I appreciate your
support thank you for your.
Is there anybody in the audience
opposed to this.
Is there anybody on the line for
this measure is it with members
of the committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
for the last.
I don't so that level of
practitioners of and what I
remembered was correct over
earlier it was about twenty
years by members.
About twenty.
there's so many.
Of people I for divorce and
then.
I think the kids were left that
the the because property so so
the reason this happens is just
for the price.
If you will thank you for
helping.
All of your property.
Property you probably won't be
in the process.
Percent the time is precious so
had
had the divorce not been filed.
And again I really necessarily
I'm sorry for your loss that had
divorced not the files of.
We're going all the property
because the divorce was filed
the court kind of is involved
yeah.
He did questions it even further
but he did tell me to transfer
you without ever want for the.
To handle this because normally
what happens when when this this
is explained to me if there's a
thank you you know there's about
what what should happen and the
court looks at all the facts and
circumstances that determines
whether they're going to justice
we should write it medical or
whether they should be
intervene and left the United
left the process the six.
The the.
I have reason is because.
Representative like this sounds
like of course.
And I'm sorry
what.
About
this let the judge take it.
Equitable circumstance of you
know what is going on here and
what's going on with
You know why did they I work
with.
How far.
Maybe that was just filed maybe
the judge would be more funds
businesses versus not dismissing
it there's.
And all we have all of the
evidence before the court or not
this is the other thing is
sometimes more with of that
settlement agreement for
presented but not.
Not far from the cares and then
everything.
And that's why we want to
change.
I they were not aware of this
bill that was not aware of.
And so I gave the number of we
have a process where they
analyze the bills they closed or
whatever.
It's very unlikely that they
would come up and take a
position on the field they were
responsible for pushing I
believe it was the.
With the internet that.
Changes of the automatically.
So that was from with the family
law section wanted lease four
years ago
and and I.
I do think it.
I'm looking at a shell on on
page three.
Line of line three shall not
abate.
About that the court may allow
the thousand eighty children you
do.
And these children need a father
the other questions.
And this is that will happen if
the court will have full Mr
chair I believe that's to
referring to marriage support
yes has if the court will have a
spouse or any children who need
more support as if the decedent
had survived
and so what that's exactly what
that what happens is you file of
a proceeding if you file a
motion
The Mr Sir Senator Lopez on
lines four and five.
shall not abate period the court
shall shall.
Conclude the proceedings as if
both parties had survived a
court may.
Allow.
you know marriage support
attention be modified but or and
child support but.
But that would but I don't
believe it what a deal with the.
The company that would go to the
spouse and I heard a state I
don't know Mr chair if if
there's anybody from the family
law section your family law
practitioners without was what
is explain to me how it works is
the court looks at all of the
circumstances they usually do
dissolve the marriage and I
think that that's maybe that's
the shell the bears is
dissolved.
But then what happens with the
property is up to the discretion
of the court and I think that's
appropriate and and I don't know
you know I have no idea what the
circumstances were that the
judge felt it necessary to put
the the property in a trust for
your kids has as I recall you're
your your witness told me that
he was able to use some of the
money that went to the kids for
their support and and all you
have to do is ask the judge for
that if it you know you just
also George I I cannot support
these children without money
from the there there state
I needed distribution and it's
really the whole purpose is to
look out for the kids.
And and that's the that's the
whole purpose and so I hesitate
to change that I feel more
comfortable with the family law
section we're here and made
recommendations but their
process of endorsing legislation
in two and a and speaking on it
isn't such I did speak to patina
McCracken about it has well and
she sent me their FIR which it
was actually on the first bill
that it had concerns to doctor
not expressed not following the
will of the parties who revert
divorcing because if you file
for divorce that's a big
expression of oil that you don't
want your state to go to thank
you know even though you don't
say it but if if you get your
divorce your state is not going
to go to your ex spouse.
And so that was what the team is
of this McCracken said service
but practice FIR mentioned.
and so they sent it to they sent
it but it went on and talked
about parentage and everything
else which was your your last
of.
Thank you so much thank you Mr
chairman Sir to vote no I I I I
appreciate the wisdom I think as
policy makers we should make
that much more clear because
when you look at page three
lines for through twelfth it's
it's it's very unclear and it
doesn't provide any guidance to
the court as to what things to
consider
Because it says the court shall
conclude the proceedings in
other words that the proceedings
I'll conclude the the the
decision of our Shelby ordered
and just as the court may allow
the spouse or any children of
the marriage support I don't
understand what that means if
someone's dead how can they get
married support if there's to
the children or small how.
It is make no sense that
language is very very anyway I
think that it's of that policy
makers to revisit Mr chairman
and we we appreciate the time
if you could meet with the the
family law section.
Of the of the bar that the in
between times and then.
We provide this and bring it
back no thank you Mr I will over
the summer only with them but
ultimately the family
practitioners can have opinions
but the legislature makes the
threat as right but it would be
good before you bring it back to
get their input as you get their
reasoning for their check out
the the staff analysis as well
because it it mentioned some
concerns AOC at about the bill
yes thank you Mr chairman very
much we sure will the strategies
thank you so much for coming up
sorry about your situation from
the from the government to
listen to my story.
Okay we'll move then to Senator
had a meal.
This.
Yes we're we're going to do are
you part of this too okay good.
Just part of this crew and we've
got some expert witnesses of boy
this is a high powered group.
The high powered.
Mr chair I love this committee I
just keep coming back.
A lot of me.
We're twenty four yes Mr chair
if you allow me to have each of
the teams from Albuquerque
academy sit with me there's for
in total you'd be two more
chairs for.
Which when we do we do in the
the menstrual products.
Okay I thought we were doing I'm
sorry yep all right.
So what that's working out Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
listening to house bill one
thirty four this is the
menstrual equity in schools
which addresses the period
poverty now period poverty
refers to the inability to
afford basic hygiene products
such as pads and tampons and
liners for the purpose of
managing menstrual bleeding
nation wide wanted for
administrators struggle to
afford menstrual products it's
important it's magnified for and
it's magnified by people of
color nearly twice the time
eighty four percent of female
students right here in New
Mexico attended title one
eligible school period poverty
in our state of the crisis for
education and health and so what
this bill does Mister president
of insure that in school and
public schools there's mental
products that are made available
for students now why am I
carrying this bill you might be
asking so I brought my immersed
with me I used to be a high
school cheer coach for fifteen
years and what happened is in
this versus what those student
athletes called it were
menstrual hygiene products no
questions asked you take what
you need now these young ladies
at the college of vintage bags
because it is a little old and
you'll notice that there's an
old Los Alamos National
Laboratory take on it and the
reason being is because you have
to take a bag at Los Alamos that
doesn't get blown up as a
suspicious package women from
Los Alamos National Laboratory
would ensure that drugs were
always in the bag so that
students could access it this is
important for rural New Mexicans
if you think of my students from
northern New Mexico north of
Espanola stores in their small
community close at six PM by the
time practice was over they
didn't have access to what they
needed but the numbers served of
the lifeline for them or any
members of the family and with
that I yield to my co sponsor
which is Representative Ortez
thank you Mr chairman of the
committee I really can't add
anything because I don't have a
nurse with me but but I will say
I want to give a quick.
A little update on how this all
happened these young women among
others came to me and
Representative Trujillo and
asked us to address this very
real issue in their schools and
all schools in New Mexico which
is that our young people don't
have access to the mental drugs
that they need that there is
shame and stigma related to
period period in two periods in
getting period products and they
wanted to know we could do about
it and so we're going on let's
to bill so we started working
with them and they drafted the
language they did all the work
and getting this bill to where
we are today and I just I want
to honor these young women for
their efforts they are
remarkable this I don't know if
you have talked with them but if
not you will soon they they
really understand this process
the meat this bill better
because of their work so with
that I'm gonna you'll just so
they can briefly make a comment
if you don't mind Mr chairman.
Please.
Good afternoon chair and members
of committee my name is Marley
Fisher and I'm one of the high
school students working on this
bill with senator Hotmail and
Representative Ortez so H. B.
one thirty four minutes free
equitable access to menstrual
products and all public
elementary middle and high
school bathrooms dispensers
would be installed in each of
these bathrooms and regularly
stocks just as toilet paper or
paper towels are funding is been
allocated from HB to to do so
but more than that this bill
provides equitable access to
health care to respect to the
dignity our students deserve
nationwide four and five
students have missed class due
to the inaccessibility of these
products in New Mexico as
senator how to me said eighty
four percent of the students
attend title one L. of eligible
eligible schools these are
statistics to hear and brush off
period poverty affects real
people real students some of
whom you'll hear from today
you'll hear that menstruation is
a source of shame of stigma that
it is a criminally misunderstood
biological function but you'll
also hear the by giving mention
it or something that is so
imperative for their health we
can change this narrative we are
here because we believe that
this access to menstrual
products is the beginning of a
new story seventeen other states
have passed bills that have been
successful ends in school
bathrooms together senators
begin add New Mexico to the list
for these reasons I strongly
urge you to support H. B. one
thirty four.
That we have over here
okay good evening Mr chairman
committee thank you so much for
Representative with thousand
Senator how to me for helping us
carry this bill it's really been
such a pleasure working the
human holding the button.
Well that the button to press
the button to keep it healthy
yep okay there go into okay well
my name is Miriam S. yes and I'm
one of the students who has been
working on H. B. one thirty four
AM as you will hear today this
bill will mandate Mr products
and public school restrooms
addressing this issue at the
intersection of public health
and education so this is a
national issue but because of
the make up of our New Mexican
community it is one that hits us
a little bit harder so many
people across Mexico don't have
access to suitable hygiene
products so family.
Other like this just so happens
with.
We have to understand the
changes in the physician that
has permeated arses.
So.
Is.
So.
Hi this is.
Working with.
Appropriate access will affect
all.
Thank you thank you Mr chan with
that will be ready to see if
there's anybody here in
opposition unless you want to
hear from the other to sell
serving the other two.
You can keep it for the.
Good afternoon chair and
committee my name is Norma Lee
and I'm another one of the
students that is working with
Representative Ortez and senator
how to meal on this initiative
in New Mexico were nearly thirty
percent of our children live
under the federal poverty line
period poverty is defined by the
impact and that impact today is
on the youth we know that you
Senators believe in New Mexico's
future so we ask you to believe
in New Mexico students we ask
you to believe that they are
worthy of sanitation and hygiene
period poverty is created by
economic and security but it is
perpetuated by shame whether a
stigma there's consequence here
students do not of choice we
live between purchasing these
hygiene Cespedes and other basic
goods between shame and
sanitation which we what we are
given and what we deserve today
we ask you to make a choice for
the students who have none
supporting H. B. one thirty four
is supporting New Mexico's.
Thank you Mr chairman
I will make this quick my name
is aphelion and I and another
high school that has been
working with Representative
Ortez and Senator how to me on
this when I first started my
period I didn't allow myself
bathroom breaks during the
school day I was too afraid to
other students would see me
bring a path into the bathroom
this is a mindset of many other
students across the state we
believe that our hygiene isn't
worth managing we believe that
this isn't part of our health
because what has society has
told us by passing this Senators
you're showing New Mexicans what
is part of their health and
you're allowing them to handle
it as part of their education
thank you.
Thank you all very much Mr chair
with that we'll see if there's
anybody in support of the bill
and you know if the questions
let's look at so the audience
first is there anyone here in
support of this bill.
Raise your hands okay did
anybody want to speak under your
hat view this content waving and
that's great.
Good anybody opposed to it.
Did you want to speak yep
Representative please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
in essence I do support this
bill.
But with the exception of not
having the M. supplied in the
boy's bathrooms at schools thank
you very much okay thank you
Representative we have two
people in line in support.
let's start with Emily will will
down.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I am
Emily will dollars to Mexico
which is for children and we are
in support of H. B. one thirty
four and thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward I think
there's not a lot more powerful
to be sad than what you've heard
from the students themselves
I'll just say that this is
something that has been led by
our students they came they
figured out how to work with our
legislators to bring this
forward to today so we ask that
you follow their lead and
support this bill today thank
you.
Very good thank you miss will
the and then we have Lorino a
lot and Jaga.
Good afternoon committee
chairman members of the
Education Committee my name is
Lana much about it now that I
live in Albuquerque and I'm a
junior Albuquerque high school I
fully support this bill email
you Mr health and it's always
seemed taboo topic I like many
other students with uterus is
not felt like this natural
process is recognized by those
who hold office
including the administration of
my on screen.
last year the administration
Albuquerque high school closed
all the restrooms in the entire
school act with incredibly
inconsiderate of student health
and needs using the bathroom
became inconvenience and the
cost of COVID nine ridge
students from restaurants on
school campus being able to use
the restroom and one needs it in
a subsidy especially for
students on their period need to
exchange pods or ten pounds in a
timely matter or risk serious
health concerns.
Alone should be how little my
screen administration cared
about menstrual health which is
why I am here asking you to
stand up for New Mexico's public
school students and our health
further the low income student
at title one school I witnessed
first hand the tangibility of
period poverty and how difficult
it can be it's not have concrete
access to drugs wondering if you
are reading through awareness
potter tampon will come from
should not be students being
concerned at school but it often
is for students to experience
with monthly cycle and in fact
Education and can even cause
lower attendance right I am here
as a female student to raise the
stigma of mental health and I'm
asking you to do the same I
voting in favor of house bill
one thirty four thank you very
good thank you misled in your is
there anyone in opposition to
the bill here.
And nobody online members of the
committee but you will you pass
we have a motion for a do pass
seconded by Senator tellement
questions from Senator Sedillo
Lopez and
Jemez the sensitive thank you
thank you so much for bringing
this bill sometimes it's the
simple things that can make such
a huge difference and so I just
want to thank each and everyone
of you for working on it and for
bringing such a profound thing
if it increases into attendance
that's hello is such an
educational thing it'll in Q.
increase health as well because
as you you know toxic shock
syndrome can happen if you don't
don't change so so I just and so
impressed with all of you all of
the speakers and with of course
the representatives and senators
for for having the courage to
bring it I wanted to speak a
little bit or else some
questions about the voice of the
boys bathroom issue.
confesses have you ever asked a
boy to go get you.
Products.
I've had to ask my father to go
to the grocery store to get
money and I think what I've
learned from that is that all
boys have women in their lives
if we don't begin to educate
them about how they should treat
those women how they should
respect periods and respect
drugs and we're doing them a
disservice and woman in their
lives the service down the line
right.
Can.
Mr chair that's amazing okay
that's good good answer that
this did you want to respond
beyond that.
Okay so anything else in.
I think it's really important
that these these of these
products also be invoice
bathrooms not only for Ford just
chill for.
For transgender voice for not
only for that but also so that
it normalizes it and so that you
know it's not such a big deal I
remember the first time Astroboy
friend to do that they're just
freaked out and.
And where did out and that's
that's it's a normal process of
life and it's something that we
should not stigmatize it's just
a natural thing and I'm so
impressed I can hardly wait to
vote yes for this bill and on
the floor to.
Senator Maestas.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you for our meal
Representative Ortez thank you
ladies I appreciate that that
was arguably the most articulate
presentations I've heard all
year so this very very
persuasive
I am very profoundly wait for
question
So it in the house the the
appropriation was was stripped
in the amendment Mr Chairman
center out of your
Representative Ortez rather Mr
chair Representative Senator
sorry Senator you no longer
representative of it's in the
budget there's a million dollars
right now in the budget on the
house I don't know what's
happening on the Senate side we
haven't seen your budget yet and
Mr chair Senator there's an
additional two million on the
Senate side.
It's new set it in or if it's
two days either two million in
total or an additional but it's
in total two million and I think
Mr chairman the up Senator
Representative the up just the.
I think there's kind of three
things one is just that the I
think it's fair and just to
subsidize this product for young
women and and and schools it's
also efficient to find them in
schools
But I have a question said you
guys brought up the topic
because I'm kind of weird it out
like centers within like in the
day
What percentage of a young young
women ten and under
Menstruate.
We don't have an exact number
because those things are of
course hard to calculate but we
can tell you that statistically
what we see in America as the
trend is that the age of
mensuration is becoming younger
and younger so the fiscal impact
for this bill is calculated
taking into account the average
age of menstruation which right
now is around ten to twelve we
also know that Latin excuse to
begin menstruation at a younger
age so in New Mexico there's a
higher concentration of
elementary school students that
do have a period thank you for
that Mr Chairman additionally
the because I know the the all
the hubbub is about the boy's
bathrooms there's also would
mandate in elementary school
bathrooms correct Mr chair
Senator so what the young lady's
left out on their.
In introducing the bill today is
that they implemented this that
Albuquerque academy where they
have these products the
menstrual products in elementary
bathrooms they walked into the
bathroom one day to find
stickies from students thanking
them all over the bathroom from
girls in elementary who thank
them for doing this for them and
so we do know that they're using
these drugs in the elementary
is.
And Mr Chairman said I mean I
think that answers might my next
question my question and feel
free to answer a few one of you
know extrapolate on it but why
is it important for a with this
bill to to incorporate
elementary school.
bathrooms.
What was a necessary why is it
important we think that
statement begins at a young age
and if we don't show our
elementary school students by
the Princeton are sorry.
Think that begins at a young age
if we don't show our elementary
school students from the
beginning of their education
that they are deserving of
hygiene necessities that period
drugs should be just as
normalized as toilet paper or
paper towels then we really
aren't solving the problem we
have to begin young because we
have to understand that that's
when society first start for
first starts telling people who
do have a period that that is
unnatural unhygienic dirty and
we think that that narrative is
incorrect and that we should
begin to correct it from when it
begins thank you so much for
that so I think so in addition
to to the subsidy which is just
in the the did the distribution
so to speak in the schools I
think the third prong might be
the most profound it's just the
education and the evolution of.
What what should should not be
weirded out but just a common.
You know part of the human
experience amongst all of us
thank you for bringing aboard.
Okay.
Other questions from the
committee.
Of go ahead.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator and representative
when I first heard about this
bill I was just so impressed so
glad that Saddam Mexico is going
to be added to the list of
states that do this for our
young people here in New Mexico
and it's so nice to see you Miss
Musaeus last time we saw each
other we work together in in
Congress women of Stanford's
office so it's it's wonderful to
see such a leap being an intern
and now you're a lawmaker so
this is fantastic
And this is this is really
important I remember going out
going to schools and
She's the dispensers you have to
put money in I guess she's yes
those are still like that
so that that was one some of us
didn't have change at a certain
time
and then the other frustrating
thing would be it was empty even
if you get the coins or whatever
and so having a dedicated
dedicate legislation and the
means to get them at all the
places you've indicated it's
just a huge when the education
piece is really worthy and
credible to everybody needs to
know about our how our bodies
work so way to go Bravo brava.
Thank you.
Thank you senator and that next
to hear from Senator gables
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Representative I had these great
ladies come to me this morning
and I was really with you for a
period but I'm also on school
board in I'm just trying to
understand because earlier said
that it's an education piece.
At home we're not educating our
daughters how to care for their
selves or is that something just
a school with with needing these
happens and facilities at school
are we not doing that at home
anymore Mr Mr chairman Senator
it is happening at home but what
I noticed in coaching is I have
a lot of grandparents raising
grandchildren and for some
reason those grandparents felt
uncomfortable having that
conversation and would say they
could learn that from school
nurse and so in those instances
the school nurse would come with
me as the chair coach to talk
about periods talk about the
hygiene aspect of it and so I
noticed a lot of grandparents
felt uncomfortable having the
conversation and turn to the
school to have that
conversation.
Think I Mr center within our
conversation this might be a
roll of.
Issue you know as far as the
metro has fear of hi for my
daughters and my granddaughter.
The dollar pick up their needs
don't have a problem with that
we've always had all I've got
referrals so I've never had the
need for someone else to teach
my daughters or my
granddaughters anything about
themselves it's just been a
regular discussion and I was
totally with these ladies into
Pullman boys bathrooms
expression in elementaries
because I don't want to causing
more confusion to our kids so
with that in this bill I'm gonna
have to vote no and I appreciate
what you're trying to do to give
corals I I just thinking through
Mr chairman in center the boys
bathrooms that the boys are
actually not going to use the
state let me take home I may
stop then exhaust pipe they
messed up and down the toilet so
it can expand and plug up the
commode I think boys are
different thing girls the girls
will look at these is necessity
the boys March so with that
being said I'll be in opposition
to the bill because that you
ladies didn't excellent
presentation but because of
those items let the doctor a no
vote thank you Mr thank you
senator and we have a motion and
a second.
Please call the roll Senator us
no ma'am Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
yes.
Senator McKenna yes Senators
metes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
I
I I.
I have a due pass Senator I will
congratulations thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee we will see you on
the floor.
Thank you so much.
Four six five one this.
Is that I want to.
With the five part right yeah hi
next up we have a house bill one
sixteen active duty National
Guard as state employees.
Welcome to the Senate.
Thank you senator
The committee I representative
Sarinana and I'm here with my
expert witness and edited
General at UF New Mexico
National Guard.
this is well this is an act the
gives adjutant general that
thirty to hire staff on a full
time or seasonal basis to serve
as an act in in the active duty
capacity it is the first step in
my product modernize our state
active duty system at with the
end goal of a full time Act
state active duty workforce
which is prepare for emergencies
state and is continually
assessing and mitigating
potential hazards in
collaboration with other state
local entities and that amended
for to general actually for
additional comments Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time and and being
cognizant of it I'll just add to
other notes to this all one is
this bill will allow us to spend
money in prevention rather than
response which most most
emergency experts will tell you
it's it's significantly more
profound to spend money
prevention that is in response
and the other thing it does is
it provides a force that would
be available in the event of
emergency we know whatever's
causing climate change climate
change is real and we felt those
effects last year having a
forces ready available to
respond it takes some of the the
burden off of our traditional
guardsmen who get brought on
state active duty leave their
families leave their employers
ought to go to this work so you
will have a couple full time
folks and they will have
seasonal folks that will come on
as the fire season and flood
season start so that they can be
available if I've got thirty
that are there that's thirty
more they don't have to call
away from their employer
with that will stand for
questions.
Okay thank you next we'll hear
from the audience anyone in
support of this up bill.
Anyone in the opposition.
Anyone on zoom yes or two they
want to be heard yes.
We have to and.
Supporters and zoom a Joan
Dickerson at least the.
So are you there Joan.
Mr chair members of the
committee John Dickerson with
the veterans and military
families caucus and we've had
the opportunity to discuss this
bill with Representative
Sariñana and we are firmly in
support we feel it would give
continuity to the effort to
prepare for and mitigate and
respond to any kind of disaster
in our state thank you very much
for the time because to
communicate my views.
Thank you for your comments and
next we have a lease a dial.
Are you there Lisa.
I guess Lisa has gone.
Okay now we turn to the
committee anyone wishing to.
You heard.
That's.
We have a motion and a do pass
from.
The NMAA.
I made a second from the.
Call the roll.
Please.
Senator Davis yes ma'am Senator
Hickey Senator Ingle center
Maestas.
Senator McKenna yes Senate
committees Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes Senator
Ortiz penal.
Okay graduate.
We can graduations
Representative a five OO vote
thank you thank you committee
thank.
Next up with house bill one
forty five.
Sir legislative scholarship
program.
New Mexico military institute.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
I'm here today presenting house
bill one forty five it has to do
with the General Mills
scholarship for the Stiller
school of the southwest New
Mexico military institute as you
all know there you're.
Of each one of us does get
legislative scholarship this is
four four year term what this
bill is required us to to have
happen is to include this to
make it a six year scholarship
so those students that have
completed their high school
career at the institute can
complete their first two years
of junior college there Mr
chairman I will stand for
questions at this time.
Okay thank you this because you
want your audience support of
this bill.
They wanted apposition.
Anyone and.
Zoom.
One zero one I will turn to the.
Committee anyone wishing to
speak Senator valgus David J. K.
but that's okay well Mr chair
and and and I know the anonymous
chair is not here on the ten
minute limit but also try to be
under ten minutes mysterious
Representative appreciate the
opportunity so just want to give
just a little bit of background
so I've given quite a few the
scholarships out in Lee County
do you have any reference to how
many successful graduates are
are from
name me I understand we've got
people all over the world in
really top top positions do you
have did they give you any
reference material not.
Mr Chairman at this time and
Representative go U. K. don't
have that information I do know
that Roger Starbuck was one of
still are graduates from New
Mexico military institute a lot
of these do kids that do get
appointments by our senators and
our representative Congress
people at they do prep at New
Mexico state before they go on
to any of the service academies
what we're hoping to do here
because of.
The fifth and sixth year cadets
that are going there.
It's a sometimes a hardship for
them to be able to find the
funds to be able to get that
tuition paid for everything else
paid for in the institute is
tipping get to take care of that
if that is included for our
legislative scholarships and I
don't have the numbers I note
right now that is to I believe
is right at eight hundred
students starting from the
freshman year going all the way
through the junior college here
years and
These young people that do
graduate from there have gone on
to do some remarkable things I
do know that but I don't know
the number this to this a like I
said.
The is just New Mexico military
institute of.
It's it's pretty distinct in our
state in our state because of
the four years plus the two
years that it encompasses Mr
Chairman representative at some
point I would be really good for
naming to go ahead and give us a
list of those just for
You know you look at our tourism
we're trying to bring people in
and show the value New Mexico I
think this is a jam the we need
to go ahead and position so
people know about it but I would
say this would be something good
for them they always do really
good gifts for us here in the
legislature it might be good to
have a little bit of history
with the notoriety of whose path
who's so I'll support your bill
because I know that in my area
of the state they use it in a
heard a lot of really good
things from our students so with
that are you and Mr chairman
representative guy a goes of.
Students from around that the
ten The New Mexico military
institute we have students here
from forty five states to the US
territories in thirty five
nations.
Mr I just wanted to clarify
she's called me Representative
place I'm not corrected because
I'm afraid or for.
And you should be to secure my
kids used to be my roommate and
some tech.
Sorry said not a problem.
And I apologize.
Thank you are you thank you
senator thanks we've sent by
this this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative so I'm not
commence is a good idea I like
to hear from the from the.
From the committee the.
Public.
The
Is your public comment Mr
empties and nobody of.
I have anyone on zoom okay I
misunderstood I thought is but
that the general was on soon I
think there is somebody else and
also just listening in.
Energy.
Yes.
Did it see if you does if you
wish to say a few words.
If admitted for their permission
Mr.
Okay.
This could result if you can
hear me.
That tell it.
Isn't out Mr chairman general is
this a good idea if we also if
you could be longer.
Please.
General in here you Mr chairman
Mr result you can hear me.
General crystal if you could
speak up we're having a hard
time understanding you may turn
up as I.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
general it's always great to
hear from you
The
The you you would write it we
say that we have to apply of.
You know we have to you know
give are nominated governor
nominees by July first of each
year but you want to strike July
first what's the reason for
that.
Thank you Mr chairman the the
the way the operation works now
is that nominations are open by
the individual legislators until
July first after that we started
using the scholarships in
districts where we did not get a
nomination.
What this removing it July first
will allow us to work earlier
with the candidates who have
applied and let them know that
they received a scholarship.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
general Representative build you
know
Approximately how many of these
up no scholarships are granted
each year to a new person or
rather how many people in the
school or.
Are scholarship recipients at
any given time.
Mister chairman Senator got it
right that time Senator my is
this what we did many you an and
correct me if I'm wrong here to
prove what we did a few years
back is up sometimes the
legislative scholarships would
not be filled out completely so
the law was changed with the
scholarships could be awarded
there's been a year some years
for I've got five applications
so I was trying to make sure
that somebody else gets that
that's how we go ahead and get
all of those provided
scholarships field and the the
institute does work to make sure
that they are field let's say
that you might not get any this
year and Senator Lopez might not
get one also but let's say this
Senator guy Ecosse might get
several of he can yield a would
you like to sponsor this young
girl or this young man that is
planning on to to do this to to
they do want all of those
provided scholarships field and
they work to get it done thank
you Mr chairman thank you
representative will not a great
program that so Richard Knowles
was us state Rep back in the
seventies his son as that was a
did great district where does
show back in the day as well
thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman he also he's did serve
here in the state legislature
for sixteen years from nineteen
eighty three to nineteen ninety
eight was also of.
He's served is a.
Cystic commander the first
cavalry cavalry division as
commander of the nine hundred
ninety six light into too big
creek brigaded yes force during
the Vietnam War as well and then
also up.
Roger Staubach to the second.
Second most famous quarterback
Committee me next to dig up on.
Thank thank you senator next to
have a Senator state Lopez you
have a question or comment yes
of.
How do how do students become
aware that they need to contact
us to get the nomination or do
are we supposed to reach out to
the schools I I'm not sure.
Mr chairman and senator that's a
very good question all of the
counselors throughout the high
schools in the state of New
Mexico Note the scholarship that
is available they can go to the
New Mexico military institute
website they can pull it up
online get all the applications
process going in everything they
do have to have a letter of
recommendation from a teacher
they do have to have a letter
letter of recommendation from a
community member they do have to
submit their all of their grades
up to that point did not have to
write a bio about themselves and
why they want to go what they
have done in their community and
these don't these are not
necessarily straight a students.
What this school does for those
kids that are.
Not highest honors route on a
real or anything like that it
helps builder of steam it helps
them.
Look understand the importance
of being able to study it opens
their minds and it's a wonderful
wonderful opportunity for these
kids thank you Mr chair I think
this is wonderful and of course
I supported I just don't
remember getting any
applications and and highland
high school is in my district
and I'm going to contact them
and see it because they have a
very strong ROTC program so why
am I not getting the why am I
not getting application so I
will definitely do that outreach
Mister sinister chairman I would
I would highly recommend Senator
that you do get all of you all
get into too with your schools
if you have not received an
application.
Thank you Mr chair at the thank
you ready for motion let me
know.
So what's the pleasure the
committee.
Will move second in a second.
please call the roll.
Senator Wirth yes I'd like to
explain my vote Senator Hickey
Senator Ingle.
Rolling your vote yes.
The center center this.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
smitteez Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Tallman yes center
to the building all.
Six
so.
Representative congratulations
of six oh vote to pass Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
good players into a less explain
my vote well I'm sorry.
Chairman representative the
reason I voted yes yes is I
think this is a perfect
opportunity when we should be
giving out of free education
because we can see the product
coming out and they do stay in
our state and we do receive our
return on our investment so that
is why you got a test not
because I'm afraid of you but
value to the state thank you Mr.
Thank you senator.
All next.
Next up with house bill to
force Smith so Smith Smith and I
is the state mineral with
Representative Armstrong.
Here is well.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee
House Bill two oh four is
suggesting that we have the
state mineral is Smith so night.
Minerals are the richest natural
resource in New Mexico mineral
wealth is among the richest of
the State.
I'm any state New Mexico in the
United States petroleum natural
graphite gas uranium potassium
coal copper gold zinc lead.
Many others come from the state.
What is unique about Smithson
night.
Is that it comes from.
Magdalene on New Mexico.
And it is
What it's the only of blues miss
unyte from the Kelly mines and
other minds of the Magdalene the
district is I'm among the most
unique worldwide.
No other state in the US has
anything like it.
I have a picture here sorry I'm
not wearing my jewelry because
Mr chairman members of the
committee
someone else was supposed to do
this for me but this is a
picture of Smith's and I.
And it's mind in my hometown of
Magdalene in New Mexico.
It's a turquoise color
And Mr chairman I I'll stand for
questions so I know there's
going to be a lot so.
Okay thank you do not have a
state mineral.
Thank you for your presentation
anyone wishing this will take
the audience first anyone in
support.
Gentleman you would like to
speak.
I'm sorry in April two.
And.
Yes my name is Carlton and I'm
actually here for another reason
but having heard this hi receive
two degrees for the New Mexico
City mining technology spent a
great deal of time poking around
in Kelly specifically and
specified this is a wonderful
idea New Mexico is right now
we're in the Smithsonian
Institution with the samples.
Will come here looking for those
people come to the state that so
this is a wonderful idea for
very unique mineral so and it's
zinc carbonate to be specific.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
support anyone wishing to speak
in opposition.
There is a one zoom known as
soon now turn to the Committee
anyone wishing to speak at.
We gotta do pass and a second
from.
Myself.
In other than the one on which.
I have a school we have a
question from Senator Sedillo.
I think it's just a technical
one we have a state of the state
No.
This what is the state of Roman
Rome.
The state aroma so with that
with that bill said V. so what
happens if they both pass is it
V. W. would we get it.
Mister chairman Senator I will I
will fix it if they both pass
I'm sure they probably will both
pass for for for.
It looks like there may be an
answer to the question Mr chair
Mr Chairman.
Whichever the upsides for.
And then all.
Thank you in my second again I
think it's a small one why does
it say back to Lync Magdalena
Smith and I.
Just because a Google in their
family there is a lot of
different specimens.
I because we just want Smith's
and I'd of course of it's the
Magdalene a Kelly mines but
Smithson night is the exact
mineral there's not us Magdalen
this agency might just dismiss
it might just because I see that
there are very many colors very
it's very dramatic
and a beautiful mineral I'm
happy to support this thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you.
There's a question yes Sir I'd
just be on.
So go ahead okay Mr Chairman
representative thank you Mr I
just a real brief so we have ten
minutes segment because the
anonymous chair the chart here
trying to keep things moving up
on the of it says New Mexico St
James turquoise according
national geographical Sanchez
survey site will we just go back
in and amend that is that how
that works Mr chairman Senator
The New Mexico Jim will state
turquoise this will be the New
Mexico mineral mineral yes Sir
last question then are there
cited others can go money or is
it exclusive to one or two major
British producers Mr chairman
it's only at the Kelly mines and
in and around Magdalena okay
they sell to the public Mr so
I'll take care of that later so
thank you I'm to Magdalena we
have we could use some tourism
thank you.
Thank you Sir Senator
interactive Center my own biases
thank you Mr chairman
Representative are fun the just.
Don't get mad the
Page three line nineteen.
Do we need to use the words of
the mineral.
Smith the night or can we just
say Smith and I.
Is adopted as the official
mineral of New Mexico.
I like it just the way it is
then Senator and distance to lay
the groundwork the mineral Smith
the night is the official
mineral that's right Mr chairman
on that point and could you
please just yes I like it the
way it is thank you okay can I
point can I amend up yeah please
please Smith the night could all
also referred to somebody who
works at the Smithsonian.
So I we should refer to the
mineral all right.
And I'm a for.
Wonder if we should say the
grant.
Blue grama grass is the official
grant not skipped so all right
cool then also
should we are.
Further define it or or that the
tourism department and the
schools and the level to spread
the word because it's do we want
to put in Z. and CO two three or
we want to say mineral form of
zinc carbon I do we want to.
Scientifically defined or or now
now we like it just the way it
is thank you Mr chairman and and
Mister chairman Senator
Representative Martin who is we
we as New Mexico tech.
Mining and technology mineral.
it's the myth that the exact.
New Mexico New Mexico minerals
and geology of New Mexico tech
is the one who wrote this bill
and that's the way they would
like it.
It would not be amended
substituted for not thank you.
New Mexico bureau of geology and
mineral resources.
The past.
We've been but
call me.
Okay we have first as I have a
quick question is any connection
to the Smithsonian institute in
this town I'm it Mr chairman
there the stone was named after
James Smithson.
who is best known for founding
donor of the Smithsonian
Institution so there is a
connection yes I was right so
we're right you are correct.
So
We have us for a motion and a
second so please call the roll.
Senator gave us yes ma'am
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle yes center Maestas
yes Senator McKenna
yes Senate committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes center to the
penal.
The.
So congratulations Senator do
pass thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Next up we have us House Bill
three fourteen.
Cannabis record expungement.
Representative Romero.
You ready.
We'll see thank you senator
A good afternoon sent us House
Bill three fourteen essentially
clarifies our intent from when
we legalize recreational
cannabis all as to what
automatic expungement means so
as we learned when we legalized
automatic did not mean instant
as we unpacked the data that the
administrative office of the
courts was a providing that we
could expunge about fourteen
thousand records automatically
those were the simple charges
and then some of the more
complicated ones that got us
we're basically anything from
being labeled as illicit
substances to otherwise are ones
that we're needing clarification
on and in partnership with the
courts with me is going to Jones
if if you would just introduce
yourself certainly thank you Mr
chair my name Selena Jones I'm
the general counsel with the
administrative office of the
courts.
And with that will stand for
questions.
Okay
anyone the audience's support of
this.
Gentleman in the back and.
Number two this back in the
side.
Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Douglas
carver I'm deputy director of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission and The New Mexico's
sentencing commissions
legislative committee supported
this bill unanimously in order
to help the courts better work
with the expungement process
thank you Mr.
Mr chairman of the committee
David how to me on the lobbyist
for the drug policy alliance in
the drug policy alliance
supports this clean up of a very
very critical important party
equity piece of legalization of
cannabis in New Mexico we think
the office of administrative
courts and the Supreme Court for
working with the sponsor to get
to a solution thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Dave Thompson I'm a
justice on the New Mexico
Supreme Court and we thank you
for your consideration and we're
here in support.
Thank you.
Thank you all and and that
position wishing to speak.
Hearing none we haven't won and
soon as no one has returned to
the district.
Thank you there then.
I think chairman committee
members my name is Ben Lewin Jr
the executive director New
Mexico cannabis chamber of
commerce with the statewide
organization supporting the
cannabis industry in the state
in strong support of this bill
when we initially passed the
cannabis regulation act the
enabling legislation to legalize
cannabis for adults at the same
time we passed an automatic
expungement bill and that bill
was and is as important as the
enabling legislation and we
stand in support of this very
thoughtful bill that provides
clean up for the expungement
component of legalizing cannabis
thank you.
Thank you bend the.
Having heard from the audience
and I'll turn to the committee
anyone wishing to speak.
Yes we have a due pass so we had
a second from Dr Hickey.
Please call the roll.
Senator Gallegos is Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Service this is Senator McKenna
yes Senate committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes senator
Clemente yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Congratulations systems
Representative do Pat appreciate
it thank you all.
Okay next up we have House Bill.
Three eighty nine.
No ID card fee for homeless
individuals.
Representative.
Laura.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee.
House Bill three eighty nine as
amended seeks to eliminate the I
do fees for X. individuals
experiencing homelessness the
reason we're asking for this is
to allow them greater access to
services potential job
opportunities and other other
societal benefits and with that
Mr chair I stand for questions.
We hear from the audience.
Anyone in the audience is
support of this.
During one of our positions.
Anyone and we have one person
and zoom.
Erica Sanchez are you there
Mexico.
Yes hi Mister chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Sanchez I'm with and I'm can an
organization that partners with
young people impacted by foster
care juvenile justice and
homelessness and we support
house bill three eighty nine we
see that accessing
identification documents is an
issue that most of the young
people we work with struggle and
lack of ID prevents them from
securing employment housing
banking and on and on so we need
to remove barriers to access in
the fee is a barrier to someone
in this position this bill will
help ensure that people
experiencing homelessness can
get an idea and can move forward
in other areas of their lives
thank you.
Thank you your comment.
Now we turn to the committee and
we have a.
First up is Center masses thank
you Mr mirrors a lot of thank
you.
Why the elaborate definition of
a homeless individual did you
consider just person declaring
themselves homeless and checking
a box of Mr chairman and senator
of the reason excuse me the
reason we we did that so they
could match of legislation that
was passed and signed into law
last year that allowed homeless
individuals to obtain their
pursuit to figure so we wanted
the definitions to match.
Thank you Mr.
And next we have this Senator
Sedillo Lopez I support this is
a great idea I just have.
The.
Mr chair and senator the the
should be able to get if they
have the documentation that the
need was the most important
document that they need to
server certificate if they have
that they would be eligible to
get it and I do pretty question
is the yeah the MBT can can
produce one for the.
Right and if they don't.
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator Representative
Senator if they don't have the
necessary documentation
executive coming back so what
happens with that good question
thank you of Senator Mr chair so
the the law that was signed into
law last year what allows him to
go through the Human Services
department so they can get their
birth certificate so there's a
process there already for that
so that's the first of that they
would have to take once we get
that person to get then they'll
be able to the MP to get that
processed perfect thank you I
think it's important to
publicize had it how to get this
done and that's also a challenge
is to publicize it but thank you
Mr chair I think it's a great
idea okay thank you Sir anyone
else wishing to speak.
There is no rule of that's a
pleasure the motion but I think
we have a motion and a second
legal practice Hickey motion
from Santo Domingo please call
the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
McKenna.
Senators maintenance center city
office yes senator Clemente yes
center to the piano.
Congratulations Representative
it six of the past thank you Mr
chair thank you members of the
committee.
Well you have a.
Are you ready with your house
bill five twelve yes Mr chairman
I am.
House Bill five twelve as as
amended combat with the house
government which isn't in your
purse Committee subsume for
House Bill five twelve.
In essence is asking that the
counties be allowed to dispose
of a property.
Of without having to go through
the
through the board of finance
this this bill is we what what
what we're trying to accomplish
here is municipalities do not
have to go to the board of
finance to dispose of property
and we're asking for the
counties be allowed to do the
same and with that Mr chair I
stand for questions.
Thank you for the presentation
will be honest anyone and
Support of this bill.
Anyone in opposition.
During one and still no one came
do the committee anyone wishing
to speak pass we have a.
To pass the second from.
Question no I just have
questions also okay thank second
from the Santo my **** to so we
have a question from the Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you and I I.
I don't see any.
In administering the I just
wondered if you saw on the FY
are the the issue of the entire
U nation plus and what's your
response to that Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
the the way the way it is the
way it is now
in addition to the counties not
being able to dispose of the
property they aren't allowed to
accept donations either.
So this this bill would Mister
chair and senator would remedy
that and they would be able to
accept donations and as well as
dispose of the property.
Mr chair what is the purpose of
going to the finance through
this process would what is what
is the purpose.
Mister chairman Senator that
that's a good question that's
what though we were trying to to
figure out why why the county in
only the counties were were
asked to go through the board of
finance and not necessarily Mr
chair and senator the
municipalities or the school
districts or for other
government entities so we don't
know why the the counties were
or were not included excluded
from that.
Mr chair and and Representative.
What concerns me a little bit
about this bill which is why I'm
not sort of jumping on the band
bandwagon is the department of
finance listed several reasons
to provide oversight to ensure
the public process is not
disposable low fair market value
And to ensure accuracy accuracy
and transparency.
it says that the the board of
finance reviews caught and led
to the correction of legal
concerns and we're property
transactions such as errors in
contracts and deeds.
And so and then and then they
they're concerned that the
definition of local public body
body in section thirteen yes
extend for but does not amend
this definition in other areas
of the statutes such as thirteen
dash three dash five
Is it is problematic so I just
you know.
With the first committee no
we're not you've already been
through the Mr Mr chair divided
into the house yeah without the
deterred Center yes.
So do you feel that the house
address these Mister chair
Mr chair and representative yes
you know up.
The house of government and
elections in India first
committee brought up several
issues with with with bill as a
result he was drafted so while
we went back upstairs we got a
redrafted to simplify the the
the bill and the request that it
was making okay.
Thank you Mr chairman that
helps.
Okay we have a.
We have a motion and a second.
And so please call the roll.
Senator Gallegos Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center Maestas
this year Senator McKenna yes
centers committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Ortiz penal.
Okay we have congratulations you
have a six oh do pass thank you
Mr chair thank you members the
committee.
Next up is house bill four
eleven.
Engineer and surveyor licensure.
With.
Representative Pettigrew.
Welcome to the Senate cage thank
you chairman.
Chairman today we're gonna talk
about how school for eleven.
Each of you hopefully got one of
the sheets passed out.
Perfect.
For those who can be quick and
easy that.
So chairman with me today is
very Valdez uses active director
for the P. PS four and Carlton
other board chair and thorough
and thorough and so with that.
This bill make some basic
changes to the bill actually not
basic changes expedited comedy
path reduces it administrative
burdens and increases of caller
ship Fund with that chairman if
with your thanks committee with
with your pleasure I'd like to
turn it over to our executive
director of the P. PS four.
Mr chair.
Senators the members of the
committee thank you so much for
excuse me I want to give your
name this very Valdez executive
director of the professional
engineer freshers that question
please use the microphone.
That the press one if the whole
continuously.
The researchers.
Hi tech operation.
He was chair members of the
committee I was privileged as I
am the executive director for
the junior serving board and all
keep this brief house bill four
eleven does make some changes to
the engineers are in practice
act as Representative per group
mentioned we do trying to clean
up some definitions also
fixing some language that was Mr
previous times and also to
create and expect expedite
pathway for serving and also
expand our scholarship fund to
include
assisting the university's
medical universities with the
funding to for equipment such as
drones things like this for
serving for whatever needs that
they may have with that I will
customer to Mr Tony under who is
our board chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Carl today
under I am the board chair for
the engineers and surveyors
I will also try to keep this
brief but just to say I've I've
had the pleasure of serving on
this board for eight years now
in effect.
It's all those eight years were
with member throw over here
former member throws the board
of who is a surveyor I am an
engineer myself one of the
challenges I think about being
on a professional licensure
board of any form is balancing
between looking out for the
profession but more so looking
out for the public and for me
it's been an education learning
what exactly that means frankly
you come in there from the
outside looking at the licensure
profession not as much thinking
about the public.
These changes I believe reflect
the needs of the public and
that's where we focused all of
this the last several changes
we've made over the years and
certainly this group so I
appreciate your time.
That gentleman we stand for
questions.
Okay anyone in the audience in
support of this bill.
Hey what opposition hearing
anyone as soon known as soon to
turn to the committee and the
committee member wishing to
comment.
Senator my Estes.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew gentleman to the I'm
just reading with as I can.
And I and that seems like the
first.
The first couple of the pages
just kind of clarifying
definitions which seems with
good.
And then of.
But this.
And on page nine it says you
know how do you become an
engineer is it.
Nine thirteen fourteen fifteen
it's just graduated from the
board approved for your
engineering curriculum.
And now you say you know
graduating from the board
approved engineering curricula
for years or more for.
Graduated from injuring master's
program so with that masters
program like some folks may not
have done the for your program
are you trying to just capture
more folks are what why is that.
I can you go to just study
biology for four years and then
go to a master's program in
engineering.
Mr chair and and senator the
short answer that snow but a
military give you the board
thank thank you.
Your services so this is also
this language.
Hopes those who are studying the
for their master's degree while
they're working so we include
them in the experience portion
of being license because the way
our our act reads now is that
there aren't able to
Include their experience while
they're going through our
masters program online or or
going to school while they're
working would also and
it also allows them as you
stated if the the first degree
was I don't know in our to our
needs and some other important
geography geology and receive a
master's degree and engineering
we can count that experience
after that master's degree
because it's now it's an
engineering and we compacts
rooms.
I'm not sure I.
Answered your question little
bit thank you Mr chairman thank
you gentlemen because I'm
because then my third or fourth
question was dealing with of the
work
Is this make it I think you're
my concern I I'm so familiar
with the survey statute because
it hasn't been changed in over
three decades
and folks who tried to change it
just get like drilled in
committee.
for because.
And I'm a lawyer.
I suppose it's not in my
interest for there to be more
lawyers maybe I don't know
And so to be a surveyor is that
is that is a pretty strenuous
rite of passage Mr chairman you
gotta have an education you got
to be accepted before you can
take the test and then and then
if you pass the test you may be
certified as a surveyor intern.
And this existing this gentleman
this isn't the bill and then on
page twenty on the top if
otherwise qualified you know
graduate the board approved then
you up.
You know the board approves you
and then you're considered for
certification of a surveyor and
then you shall have a specific
record of two years of combined
office and field board approved
serving experience obtained
under the direction of a
licensed professional service so
what you're saying is that it's
that because that someone's
getting their masters on page
nine they can.
Qualify for the.
For the work experience while
attending school on page twenty
or am I missing what you're
saying essentially right here's
my concern does this bill make
it easier or harder for people
to be certified engineers and
surveyors.
Because I want more engineers
and surveyors.
Mr chair Senator by Estes yes it
does he's.
And I can explain further but
specifically to your question
is.
In several ways if you could Mr
chairman gentleman named name
one or two because I because
there's up and it's not anyone's
fault I'm not planning any
fingers it's in New Mexico we.
Status quo ones the date
protectionism when's the date
because we're we've lived in one
of the you generations of
poverty so weak we hold on to
what we have instead of.
It was a not you guys necessary
but I for example we saw with
the liquor license built couple
years ago people in my opinion
Mr mentor or fighting for crumbs
instead of growing the pie.
To explain me if this goes the
pie of surveyor thank how does
this make it easier
that question Mr chairman is
this going to create more
surveyors and engineers are just
gonna create less I will speak
to the engineering side but I'd
like by my former colleague
number throw to speak to that Mr
chair Senator Maestas on the
engineering side what will make
this easier there's two issues
the first one that you actually
identified and there is cleaning
up something there's something
called engineer intern which is
a preliminary step towards
licensure if you read the
language the way it was
originally presented it said
after a bachelor's in
engineering you can become
certified and ensuring inter he
didn't say anything about a
masters or anything else so
technically you could never be
an engineer intern with a
masters which I can tell by the
expression you understand makes
no sense whatsoever.
We want to fix that that is in
there the part that that
That executive director of all
that's was talking about is that
the language in there was
antiquated also in terms of
experience to become a P. E. it
did not contemplate anything
about going to school while
after graduation with a
bachelor's and actually working
which is now commonplace so what
it did is it started the clock
if over every time with your
experience each time you got a
new degree so you get a
bachelor's degree in four years
of experience with you got a
master's whelp going to night
school after two years the clock
started over three which made no
sense again.
This language clarifies that the
clock starts when you get your
bachelor's you get a year of of
credit by completing a master's
so three years after bachelors
if you've been working you're
ready to go with licensure move
forward those are ways to the
makes it simpler.
on the serving side there's
actually several new wants in
here that are like member throw
to talk to because he is after
all survey here and frankly help
with some of this language while
on the board if I.
To just figure out Michael
button and all of that
thank you Mr members of the
committee
answer to your question Senator
Maestas I believe it does grow
the pop figure specifically and
one way is that we have a four
year degree that the programs
run out of New Mexico state I've
always been an ardent supporter
of that four year degree
requirement.
But we also have a comedy
provisions were surveyors and
other state jurisdictions try to
come to New Mexico and get
licensed in New Mexico
they are often precluded from
doing that because they do not
have that four year degree in
their background yet they have
been practicing in multiple
jurisdictions for a number of
years this bill will say that if
you have practice in another
state jurisdiction for fifteen
years the last five of which
have been without any
disciplinary action you can
apply for committee and if
everything else is in order the
other professions then you can
be granted a license to Mexico
this will grow the pie.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
John and and I I know you guys
you know aren't.
Go drop whatever but can you
show me where it says that.
The section four and section in
the deal section three and
eight.
So with regards to the engineer
it says that I believe on the
bottom of page fourteen.
As it relates to.
Surveyors.
I believe it's.
Talking about it and maybe on
twenty two.
Chairman and.
Senator.
This if you will if you go to
page twenty two.
it'll be that starting on item
number two and it'll define it
sections a through to do that a
little passes right thank you
the experts.
Sure Senator Maestas yes on page
twenty two line.
Thirteen we're talking we're
talking about the.
We are in that then what we have
on the engineering side.
Chairman and senator I want to
talk about this just for a
minute on the on the
on the practice side thank you.
So when I graduated from college
I got the I graduated from New
Mexico state with the from a
neighbor at twelve school.
And I took my engineering
internalizes I know we're
talking about serving but there
there's some commonality here
so.
They did that and then I
continued our work to work.
When it was time for me to
complete my application I had
completed complete application
with each of my experience
records.
Inside of that I had to list the
number of months and years that
I worked what engineer I worked
under and exactly what I did and
where I was where I had
responsible charge for the work.
And I went through that process
and then I was approved to take
my exam I took my exam I passed
my exam I got my license with
this changes in the company both
on the engineering side and
serving I would it allows for.
Is that with that experience you
don't complete the complete for.
You should be given to you they
communicate with the with the
other with with whatever state
you're our license and they
verify there's a verification
process that you have haven't
had any kind of complaint filed
against two ethics complaints
whatever it is and with that
then it reduces the amount of
time in the application process
that help no it does thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative I'm read I'm
reading twenty two now and as a
or and as a or so like under
current law.
You know if otherwise qualified
applicant may be licensed if the
applicant is currently licensed
as a survey or in another state.
By that in the and then it goes
to paragraphs to.
You know which is the new
language and then or you know so
you can do this or this or this
There's a movie there's a
national minister meant to do
away with licensure is.
What is the what he needed
government permission to to work
in a certain profession
obviously these type of
professions I would argue my
profession his profession need a
licensure system the
reciprocity is is tough for
professions the legal profession
went to reciprocity recently and
was a tough pill to swallow
because I see all these
billboards and Spanish and you
call them up and it's a lawyer
in Miami with the desk in
Albuquerque.
But
But we've been struggling trying
to get professionals to New
Mexico and so some of the laws
with past the last couple three
years basically save if you move
your profession and other state
and you move your phone you get
your license
this profession
in current law talks about on
the and engineer side on page
fourteen has been actively
license for continuous ten
years.
Immediately preceding the
application and then for that's
the engineer side and then on
the service side you say fifteen
years is that truly necessary
and I I guess my criticism is is
of the existing law not the bill
but I would just ask you guys to
revisit that
And out.
And why doesn't this bill kind
of remedy it further if in fact
this is going to create more
surveyors and engineers why does
that remedy it further.
Mr Birkhead Mr chair Senator
masters again I'll speak to the
engineering side of that there.
I don't know how tourney's
license in various states in the
US there are a variety of
approaches that the states have
taken the jurisdictions I should
say because it extends beyond
fifty states
some of those have pathways that
we would consider non standard
there is a national model
license law our our Act is
worked around that language so
that we tend to follow that if
anything we are more liberal
particularly with these pathways
that that introduced for
engineers a few years ago for
service propose now far more
liberal than what that national
law would would suggest so we're
trying to make that open the
hesitation with just a an open
door for example for licensure
is that you go to the state of
California you could license up
as an engineer with a high
school degree in six years.
So no college whatsoever.
you go to other states Texas
allows waiver of both exams with
Ph.D so you don't have to
actually test in anything in
fact you can be teacher and get
a pathway to a P. in several
states largely because in those
states they make it a
requirement for you to have a P.
E. to teach but then they give
you a method to get a PED
without actually going through
the process if it is a purely
open door people who are.
Realistically I'm qualified to
be doing this work.
Are going to walk through it the
process that we chose with this
with this practice is additional
practice that comes in looks at
it I believe in a way that
insurance company might look at
someone and says I can take that
risk I have seen your
demonstrated practice for a
period of time we have watched
it we've observed that you've
not yet you know.
Had a violation you have not had
a practice here that's going to
result in damage to property
human life it's such a we can
trust you now regardless of
whether you have that only that
high school degree regardless of
whether you pass the P. exam
you've had it and you've acted
responsibly we can accept you
with no further questions that's
the approach we tried to take it
because of that we do have a few
more years added on if someone
comes in that way notably if
they meet our basic requirements
which match the model law they
can come in much sooner than
that there is no restriction in
that regard but that's certainly
for engineering servings
generally that way but if if
member throat like.
Thank you Mr chairman just
briefly and I appreciate very
briefly
my colleague Mr tone and
articulated that quite well for
both serving.
Well I have the floor of the
school.
Why not taking up too little too
much time I enjoyed learning
about your guys profession and
and hope this does what it
purports to do
because.
and I'll check with NCSL just
for the fun of it if you like
how other states treat
vertically surveyors because we
have like.
Significantly low number of
surveyors for a profession that
has the opportunity to flourish
here New Mexico particularly in.
Certain parts of the state.
In the same incorrect what Mr
chairman and senator Maestas.
Servers are in short supply
everywhere again not to talk for
survey or sitting here but if
this is something that I've been
particularly keen to because
everybody talks about frankly
that the profession blowing
away.
I'm from Los crucis if that
excuse when reference time of
year
when it comes right down to it
if you look at New Mexico on a
gross domestic product basically
for population basically really
the only way we can kind of
normalize we are better served
than all of our surrounding
states there are states that are
better served than us meaning
more surveyors per million
population more surveyors per
billion GDP but we actually are
better served that is not the
state we are adequately served
which I think is really your
point
are we adequate thank you for
taking too much of the committee
sent the the numbers that I've
seen show up a dearth of
surveyors and and the vast
majority of our sixty five and
over but anyway we'll we'll talk
more thank you Mr like actors Mr
sentiments was unhappy to
provide that information to
study great thinking okay anyone
else wishing to speak.
We have a due process second
from.
But there's Senator Hickey
please call the roll.
Senator gave us Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle center my is
this Senator McKenna yes
Senators metes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman this
center to the penal.
Of you have to do that
congratulations to the six so do
pass.
Next up we have.
For for for for.
Four two four with Senator
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair B. Y. FTE
kinship care taker payment is.
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this should be a
short presentation but I
appreciate the indulgence of the
committee.
Senate bill four to four
actually was introduced back in
twenty fifteen.
And then again in twenty sixteen
and under the prior
administration there wasn't any
real interest in this but we
what we are attempting to do
with this Mr chair is
essentially
Provide funding for families
grandparents raising
grandchildren.
And that the program that's
modeled in this bill was
actually out of Washington DC.
And what they did it was a kind
of a a project just to kind of
preliminary to see what they
could do with their monies to
actually again help and provide
assistance for the grandparents
are can who are raising
grandchildren nieces nephews in
that particular area of our
country.
And Mr chair
As we know there are many
grandparents raising
grandchildren here in the state
of New Mexico we have a bill
that's gone through the
legislature is currently over in
the house right now
that we worked on with the
previous secretary of CYFD and
this is pretty is specifically
working with
A voluntary placement.
And voluntary placement
agreement so what that is is you
have to in order for a family to
receive assistance not just
monetarily but maybe with some
programmatic help for mental
health whatever the other case
maybe.
that the grandparents again we
have to contact the biological
parent the biological parent has
to sign off from some papers of
the child children instead of
being placed directly in CYFD
then are beginning to research
receive services but part of the
issues with that that I have
Mister chair members of the
committee is the fact that
Sometimes it's not in the best
interests of bringing that
parents back into that child's
life because of the issues of
whatever it may be that the
grandparents have a child could
cause of drugs abuse of whatever
else may be happening.
So that's one venue but this Mr
chair is actually I think
another route that we could take
the currently is no money in
house bill two but I believe
that we could start this
conversation again and I have
spoken with the secretary of
CYFD of Human Services
Department prior to his leaving
retiring and then of course with
the secretary hope from Lopez
from the Office of long term
care which works with our
seniors
and I know there's there's an
interest Mr chair and what this
bill again it is a simple bill
of course we have to find some
monies in which up to supply to
give it at least a an initial
project the of a pilot program
maybe in Rio Arriba county and
maybe Dona ana county someplace
just to kind of test it out and
see how this would work the
process itself Mr chair is
pretty much following what you
would have to do if you're
applying for ten if the
temporary assistance for needy
families but this is not.
you there's a certain limit of
income you have to show proof
that you have the child or
children within your care which
there's another paper process to
go through but again this would
be able to find some monetary
monies that are families do need
children are cheap.
so I I appreciate the
opportunity to present in front
of your your committee because
it was introduced late but I
believe Mr chair sometimes we do
these things during session just
released to kind of get
sometimes the administration's
attention and I believe this is
this is something that we could
try hopefully next session with
somebody's behind it so that we
can.
Begin to see how else we can
help these families who are I
called doing god's angels work
because they're actually
providing a home a place for
these children that is safe and
for that'll stand for questions
thank you for that presentation
on the audience's support of
this bill.
Go ahead.
Sure.
Come up to the Mike please.
And you have to.
We talk.
So.
Mr chairman and.
But anyway I was a kinship
guardian for eight years.
She was seven and a half.
And so
First I would like to say that
many kinship guardians are doing
an amazing job raising children
they didn't expect to have it on
these children are well adjusted
productive members of society
this doesn't apply to everyone
but.
This is the story is I condensed
it as much as possible you're
welcome to ask questions if you
need.
When she was a year and a half
old the child was taken from her
parents and her paternal
grandmother was granted Guard
kinship guardianship.
She was seven and a half grand
mother developed of health
condition that left her unable
to raise a child and I took over
the kinship guardianship.
When I took custody I was told
the girl had a learning
disability of some sort and she
had recently started receiving
social security disability
payments when she came into my
home she was behind in second
grade I had heard thoroughly
assessed and no learning
disability could be identified
according to the social security
office she was diagnosed with
anxiety not a learning
disability.
Children are taken from their
parents are not taken from their
parents until it has been
established with a great deal
certainty that it is in the best
in the child's best interest by
the time a child has been placed
in guardianship it is highly
likely a great deal of damage
has been done there can no
longer be any expectation of
involvement and or assistance on
the part of parents children
placed with other family members
have the same needs as other
children and should be given the
same kind of life as any other
child in a stable home food
security education medical care
we should also can participate
in the usual childhood lifestyle
sports music lessons birthday
parties and more guardians
taking custody of these children
are often the folder and on a
fixed income with their own
health issues and daily
struggles they may be caring for
the children of a child they
lost.
Because there is no other
financial assistance for kinship
guardians were often unable to
provide for a child particularly
a child that is been through
some severe challenges and reach
requires additional service
resources.
They may resort to other means
such as social security
disability this can lead to
greater problems for an already
struggling child eventually the
problem is too much to overcome
and the.
Cycle restart repeats with
another adult unable to function
in society.
Please address the situation by
providing financial assistance
and other resources to those who
need it I encourage you to
provide parenting classes and
case workers to address these
situations when necessary I also
suggest that any child getting
social security disability
payments be assessed.
Thank you for your comment.
Yes you have more
of a question the gist of it is
that one of the.
Where is that these people are
circumventing system or working
it or.
Is to actively disabled child
further.
Okay.
Thank you for your comments.
Anyone else wishing to speak and
the support of this bill.
Hey what opposition.
Hearing none we have a lot of
zoom I want to zoom.
And we'll turn to they'll the
committee.
Sen **** we have a due pass.
And we have this we have a
second from Senator McKenna and
we have a.
Question from the Senator
Sedillo this.
You never get that okay so I I
know that it's that is unlikely
to pass but I can't help myself
because this is just.
For.
What it is I think it takes
about a year to the status
rules.
What.
Nineteen.
Secretary showed that to to the
contraction I project.
Will make the images to your
budget if you want to use the
data.
So that's that's projections I
think this is a fabulous idea
really thank.
Kids.
You know if you just and and so
it's so unfair.
Yes in case we get financially
punished.
Is what.
But then I.
Really strengthening families
My.
Is
Did it just come to lay.
I'm Mr chair Senator it took a
and when you're in the
transition of of the of the
governor's staff and such I read
it was speaking with some
persons and again there was
interest but I think it was just
I I may have approached a little
bit too late for us to get into
the that the stream of monies
but I know that there is an
interest Mr chair Senator so I
know I'm going to continue to
work this and figure out maybe
based on your suggestion I've
we're going to find a way
because I know that especially
secretary hope from Lopez has a
very definitive interest in this
because I was one of the seniors
that her department works with
truly could utilized some of
these funds.
Eight million dollar budget.
If they're paying faster
parents.
Actually.
I want to thank you for.
Several of the.
I'm here.
We have this very second from us
Senator McKenna.
So anyone else wishing to speak
hearing none please call the
roll Senator gave us.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle center Maestas
Senator McKenna yes centers
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes senator Clemente yes center
to the penal.
congratulations Caesaria I do
pass thank you.
Sorry that you think is a
common.
Keep caring this forward it
really misses so much common
sense and it's better with the
family and if you're gonna pay
faster I mean why not pay the
family so thank you for bringing
it and I hope common sense
prevails next to yes thank you I
hopefully will be back in front
of you next session.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
for bringing this.
Forward thank you thank you.
So next we have.
Senator Gallegos.
With the Senate bill four ninety
seven procurement for certain
services and contracts.
Mr chair I have to expert
witnesses with me.
David Chavis from CS and Senator
so what GSD director currently.
We like the.
Mr more.
Thanks go ahead okay so we bring
to you Senate bill four ninety
seven one explain some problems
we've had a couple years ago we
had a procurement at one million
dollars per contract for
construction we moved it to four
million dollars and then COVID
hit this bill actually helped
every city county and school
district and state and what they
do is they go out for
procurement limits the cause of
the material increases I
actually wanted to hire someone
to my left here wanted to keep
it five million dollars which is
an increase for us but it's it
and it's justifiable because of
of the needs are in communities
and so I will let them introduce
themselves.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Anna
Silva I'm the director of
facilities management division
for the General Services
Department.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is David Chavez some the
executive director for
cooperative educational
services.
If you are you live.
Say more.
Mr chair members of the
committee all to stand for
questions.
Okay
no one in the audience to.
No one and zoom and now we turn
to the committee anyone wishing
to.
I speak as questions comments.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president
yes we do have a.
So I'm sorry to say that we need
to move for discussion yeah we
have a cell you are anyone want
to make make a motion hi I move
it do not Senate bill four
ninety seven and a do pass on
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill four died seven for
discussion purposes.
So we do have a.
The amendment
and Mr to tell you the decision
early on I move my numbers to a
very high numbers hoping that
she was not here.
But as I talk to the Department
because I wanted to get their
acceptance and clarity on what
their needs are and what's right
by the state so we adjusted all
the number.
The agency of those numbers.
Engine more because she was not
negotiable but because she had
good rationale behind so that's
the only reason for the sub as
we took her value numbers and
put him into the bill first what
I originally had.
Will improve thank you for that
explanation.
And senator of thank you have a
question.
the GSD and your vision support
this bill as this is the
automatic correction assuming
that you're Senator.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else.
The question we do have that
answered my question that I the
lower numbers great.
Thank you Mr president and I'll
just move it do that the second
really do pass those
from Senator Sedillo Lopez in
the second from Senator Hickey
please call the roll.
Senator Wirth is then Senator
Hickey Senator Ingle cinema is
this Senator McKenna.
Senators metes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
center to the penal.
Congradulations certifiable do
pass thank you thanks committee
thank you.
So this.
Senator.
Ortiz appear left and has never
came back Mr chair members
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino still in
the this committee if it's okay
with you all this bill were to
somehow we're when we are
meeting if ten o'clock for
mourners
and it's going to be we're gonna
hear a bunch for Morial's and
couple of these bills and in
room three to six all rural.
To see what else I can help yes
right now that is office.
Thank.
Okay thank you for that.
Okay I guess the list we have
any other comments.
