Right.
And we're gonna go a little bit
out of order this afternoon.
You're still on the agenda, but
we'll start with Senator
Sewell's.
Public office travel
reimbursement.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
This bill was introduced last
year. It made it all the way to
the house with no opposition,
but it's a 30 day session and
they just ran out of time, uh,
in New Mexico, we have two
different reimbursement systems.
uh, Somerset, one is set in
state law, which is the
reimbursement for private
airplane travel. The other is
federal law for the other
reimbursement areas. This law
just aligns them that all
reimbursement of public
officials will follow the state
law. It came about some that
everyone knows I fly a small.
airplane and more than once,
even though I circle on the
form, private airplane that I've
gotten a call that said, oh,
Senator, we overpaid you and I
have to write a check back to
correct all of it, cause
probably like the rest of you,
you just kind of get the check
and put them in. Uh, this just
makes it a lot easier on the
people that do reimbursements.
It has all of it follow the, the
federal reimbursement rates.
That's all it does.
OK, thank you, Senator.
Um
Let's go to the audience.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support of Senate Bill 15.
Anyone in opposition to Senate
Bill 52.
Is there anyone online?
So then we'll go to committee
questions or comments from
committee members.
Senator Pinto,
thank you, Madam, thank you,
Senator.
The, um
But we don't on our farms, will
it be changed there?
pretty uniform.
So I'm sorry, I can't hear you.
On the uh farms.
That little the airplane, cause
I don't think it says that on
there, just says, um, the, the,
the mileage.
Madame Chair and Senator, when
we fill out the forms, you
circle whether it's by
automobile or private plane or
public transportation, which
includes the people on which
Which be not voucher system,
which reimbursement system
they're supposed to look on and
what the rates are. It's
different for airplane than
others, um, and so.
That's where it comes, but it,
they have to look up the state
law for airplanes instead of the
federal law for the other things
and that's what causes the
confusion.
All right, so there is a motion
for a do pass from Senator
Pinto.
With a second from
The chair, but we're still open
for discussion on the bill. Are
there any other questions or
comments on the measure.
See none if you could call the
roll, please.
Senator Block
I
And her boon.
Yes.
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos.
No.
Senator Pinto
And Scott
Yes.
Sanerio Lopez.
Yes.
Yes Senator Hickey, Senator
Lopez, yes, you have a GP pass
motion, senator on Senate Bill
52. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for the consideration
of letting me go, go early. I
appreciate it very much. Thank
you. Oh, thank you.
Um, Senator.
Parami, if you would join us up
front, please.
This is Senate Bill 17.
Parole and parole board changes.
And what I'd like to mention for
members of the audience.
Um, I know I didn't start it
this way, um.
But
I am immunocompromised because
of some health issues.
I was hospitalized for 17 days
and I'm still on antibiotics.
Um, so I do ask, it's not
mandatory, but if you would
consider wearing a mask when you
are in the committee room.
Um, it's just, uh, of
consideration, and there are
some masks when you walk in.
So just a consideration, please
and thank you.
Senator Jaramillo, the floor is
yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
before you would Senate Bill 17,
the New Mexico Parole Board has
the authority to grant, deny,
and revoke parole and set
conditions to release, must be
equipped to make fair
evidence-based public safety
decisions. Now this bill would
improve the parole process for
the people appearing before the
parole board were crime victims
and for the public community at
large.
Now this bill, Madam Chair.
Follows the trends of other
states and professional
recommendations of advisory
bodies to modernize aspects of
the New Mexico Adult Parole
Board.
They're an outdated statues need
to be addressed to improve and
to clarify the parole process
for the people in prison
appearing before the parole
board.
Crime victims and for the
community as I said at large.
This bill does 4 major things
more important things.
One, it introduces
evidence-based practices and the
discretionary parole process. It
also modernizes the removal
process for a parole board
members.
With standard guard rails to
protect the political
independence of the board.
It expresses
expressly authorizes parole
board members to receive her DM
reimbursement for closed parole
board hearings and induces.
Considerate scheduling practices
by ensuring that hearings will
not be scheduled on the birth or
death of a homicide victim.
Joining me today are two expert
witnesses, but I'd like to yield
first to the house co-sponsor,
my good friend Representative
Nicole Chavez.
Uh, thank you and please welcome
our Representative Chavez to the
Senate. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative,
and I just want to point out the
two critical things that this
does for crime victims, it
protects the victims' rights to
provide and participate in a
statement to the board in a
parole hearing because that's
not currently in the victims
rights bill, and it ensures that
hearings, schedulings takes
place considering days that are
especially hard for victims
who've lost loved ones.
Meaning the birthday or the
death day, um, the bill
instructs the parole board to
avoid scheduling hearings on
these days in order to ensure
hearings are not unnecessarily
distressing to those impacted,
and in my instance, um, and it
was explained to me as I've been
working very hard for the last
year with all participants, um.
When my son's murderer, one of
his murderers, was going to be
released. They look at the day
of the case, the day of the
crime. Well to us victims,
that's the day of the death,
which is their angel vers. And
then he ended up, they were
going to release him on my son's
birthday, which they didn't even
take that into consideration. So
now they will be taking both the
day of the crime, which is the
anniversary of death and their
birthdays or any other special.
occasions for victims that were
taken to this crime. And then
the updated guidance to the
board on making decisions is
also an invitation.
For correction and the parole
board to provide updated
information to victims about the
information most helpful to the
boards as they make these
decisions, so including
conditions imposed that would
help them feel safe.
When the board can actually help
that individual in their
released, so based on maybe
where do I work, um, maybe where
does my daughter work is that
important that we might not want
that individual when they're
released to be in that area or
where do we live? Do we want
that individual to maybe stay
away from that 1 mile radius and
so they're very important things
that need to be included when
you're looking at releasing
somebody, especially if it's
somebody that's taken the life
of a.
Madam chair, we have two expert
witnesses with us today joining
me to the left is Roberta Cohen,
the director of the New Mexico
Adult and Parole Board and to my
right, Denali Wilson, a staff
attorney, ACLU New Mexico, and
with that we're ready to stand
for any questions and to hear
from those who might support or
oppose the bill.
Senator, did you want your
expert witnesses to say any
opening statements.
Sure. We'll have Denali Wilson,
if you can make a few
statements.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it's great to be with
you all this afternoon. My name
is Denali Wilson. I am a staff
attorney based in Las Cruces,
uh, at the American Civil
Liberties Union. Um, I also have
had the opportunity to work with
the board over the last years as
an advocate for people appearing
before the board for
consideration for parole, and
that was an opportunity to learn
about the process, um, and
opportunities that we may have
to improve that process.
This bill started primarily, um,
as a, an effort to restructure
the parole board's compensation.
I hope that committee members
may have questions about that
and the director Roberta Cohen
might be able to to to answer
those. Um, the board is a 15
member board. They are
non-salaried public officers
reimbursed under the mileage and
per diem Act. There are
responsible for granting,
denying, revoking parole, and
setting conditions. Um, I've
learned recently that a lot of
those members were 2030 hours a
week, and our compensated under
the mileage and per diem Act.
So, the bill does at this moment
make important clarifications,
but the compensation issue for
our board is one that deserves
continuing legislative attention
in future sessions.
Um, the board, as, as senator
Jaramillo said that the bill
achieves 4 incredibly important
goals. The first is to update
the guidance that the board
receives. Uh, we've learned in
this process that the statute
that guides the parole board in
making decisions has not been
updated since 1980 when it was
first introduced. And so we have
learned a tremendous amount
about public safety since that
time and what is relevant um to
risk in
those assessments of this, this,
uh,
The bill introduces that
evidence-based guidance in
addition to as as representative
Chavez mentioned the important
clarifications about the role
that victim statements play in
in decisions and in
deliberation.
The bill also makes important
changes to um another antiquated
part of the statute.
That, uh, is around the process
of removal of board members. So
this is a 15 member board,
they're all appointed by the
governor, um, and also removed
by the governor. There's an
important case in 2003, um,
under the Richard and Richardson
administration where the
governor then um had removed uh
a number of members from the
ethics commission.
And at that time, the courts
made incredibly clear that when
the legislature is silent,
they're conferring unrestricted
authority for the governor to
remove members at will, um, so
since then, when we write on
boards and commissions, we make
clear that if it's not the
legislature's intent to confer
unrestricted authority. Um,
there's guidelines in place, so
this bill creates those
guidelines. And I think the
other parts of this bill have
been accurately reflected by
others.
I'll pass it to Director Roberta
Cohen.
Good afternoon. Uh,
Senator Lopez.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um,
I am here today in full support
of Senate Bill 17.
The board has gone through a
numerous, uh, changes of board
members within the last year due
to the vacancy rate that we had.
So.
Taking a look at the.
Requirements that uh.
That initiate how we continue to
look at our board members and
ensure that we have enough board
members to produce the
requirements of educated and
talented individuals that
currently do sit on the board,
um, to make the decisions of
public safety out in the
community is very important.
We also have been working with
Miss Wilson within the last year
that I've been sitting as the
executive director, uh, we
understand the needs of the
victim notification process and.
Those are things that had.
looked at the board, uh, looked
at by the board, but, uh, having
that in the specific language of
this bill makes it essential for
us to work with the Department
of Corrections to ensure that
those notifications are being
made properly that those
individuals, uh, dates of birth
and um special dates of
anniversaries are taking in into
full consideration. And so with
that legislators, I, um, I'm
here today to, um.
And for any questions that you
may have, um, in regards to um
the parole board and what we do.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
OK. Is that all, Senator? Yes,
ma'am. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
So we'll now go to the audience
here.
Is there anyone here in support?
The Senate bill of
Senate Bill 17.
And we'll start over here,
please. If you could please
stand here and use the
microphone.
Introduce yourself and make your
statement.
Thank you, chair Committee. I'm
Diane McCash. Um, in the last 7
or 8 years, I've had the
opportunity to hear stories of
people who have served their 30
years, have shown themselves to
have changed, have successfully
engaged in programming and
education and have evolved far
from the circumstances that
brought them into prison with 30
years to serve. Nonetheless, the
parole request may be denied
based on the crime they
committed decades ago, something
that is impossible to change. SB
17
Instructs the parole board to
focus on risk and readiness for
release, as well as other
changes that could lead to a
more fair and balanced hearing.
These are things we can control.
There are things we can control
in our lives and things we
can't. One of the things a
person can control is their
choices and behaviors going
forward, holding a person beyond
the prescribed punishment of
incarceration for 30 years for
things that can't be changed, no
matter how much you wish you can
go back in time, disregarding
how the person has changed who
they've
shown themselves to be in the
several decades prior to their
parole eligibility makes no
sense to me. Please vote yes on
this bill.
Yes, madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Diana
Croson, and I think Diane McKash
just said everything I wanted to
say, so, um, but one thing is
that I know of a person
personally who has gone before
the parole board 3 times. He has
a job, he owns a house, he has
everything set up, and they've
denied him every time with no
reason.
And it's, you know, uh,
He actually sued him to ask him
why he was denied. I don't know
if he's gotten an answer back
yet. He was, um,
He won his lawsuit, but they
haven't answered him. So we, we
really do need and, and too,
there have been people on the
parole board that have been on
there for more than their
allotted time, cause they're
only supposed to serve 6 years.
So, thank you.
Anyone else in favor and
support?
Anyone in see none will go to
Zoom.
And I do have a Carlos Sante.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carla
Sontag, President and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We strongly support Senate Bill
17 and appreciate the sponsors
bringing it. This bill enhances
public safety, promotes
transparency, and protects the
rights of victims and their
families. It requires the parole
board to consider an inmate's
compliance with the rules,
education, vocational training,
rehabilitation and readiness to
reenter society by evaluating
these factors, the bill ensures
the parole is granted only to
those who
are a low risk to public safety
and reduce the likelihood of
reoffending.
We really appreciate the
sponsors working on this. We
think that this is really
necessary and it will be helpful
both to the victims and to
society as a whole that we have
these changes made to the law.
We also like the fact that the
parole board members can only be
removed by for cause, and that
the Supreme Court has
jurisdiction over that. For all
of these reasons, we urge you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Ms. Sante.
OK, so with that,
With public opinion of
suggestions, support will now go
to committee members.
And for committee members and
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Let me take you to page 2
starting on line 4.
And the sentences that concern
me are whether the inmate is
participated in or completed.
An educational vocational or
other program.
We're available
While confined and withered.
The inmate is demonstrated
maturity.
Rehabilitation.
In a fitness to enter society,
so
The very obvious question would
be, Madam Chair.
Factor and representative.
Why would we want somebody?
It hasn't demonstrated.
Those capabilities to reenter
society.
Madam Chair, we're going to
defer chart expert witness.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, I
want to make sure I understand
the question. You're, your
concern is that people who
haven't met these
qualifications, education,
rehabilitation.
Um, participation in a program
would have an opportunity to
release to be released, but the,
the focus of the bill is, is
exactly the opposite of that.
The people, the board is to
consider, um,
Whether somebody has
participated and taken advantage
of rehabilitative programs, and
that is
Indicative of their readiness
for release, and evidence of
their rehabilitation.
Oh, OK.
I'm you're an expert of plain
language.
says that they can be considered
for parole.
Whether
They have demonstrated these
other characteristics or not.
So
I'm not sure that I would like
to turn back into society.
And a
And the inmate that is
It has not been able to
demonstrate maturity,
rehabilitation, or a fitness.
To reenter society.
Am I reading that entirely
wrong?
So Madam Chair Representative,
we actually added this
information in because we felt
it was important for them to
look at if they were ready by.
Have they participated if
completed educational or
vocational or another program
where available.
So I guess I'm a little.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott.
I'm, I'm understanding the
question and concern, and I
don't think that you're reading
it incorrectly.
But what you should, but I want
the committee to know is that
the, the bill does not expand
parole eligibility. Parole
eligibility for people who are
serving a life sentence
continues to be that when
somebody is sentenced to life,
they have to serve 30 years.
Um, and you don't receive good
time on that, um, it's 30, 30
years flat.
And then the only thing that
this provision does, is it
clarifies that once that 30
years is up, which is already
happening, the board already
sees people at that 30 year mark
and makes a decision about
release. So, so nothing about
this bill changes process, but
it says during that, during that
consideration, we want the board
to focus on rehabilitation, what
programming you've done because
prior to these edits, the only.
The only guidance that the board
was given were the enumerated
factors starting with one,
right? And we know that there's,
there's much more that is
relevant to somebody's readiness
for parole, and it's part of
what the board
has, um, in recent years,
Really
Shifted their focus on, um, to
make sure that they're
questioning is about uh the 30
years that have gone by since
the time of the crime, right?
While somebody has been in the
custody of the Department of
Corrections. Have you availed
yourself to uh rehabilitative
programming. Have you gotten
your GED? Have you gotten other
education, you know, are you a
mentor to others and and these
things that we know both
demonstrate ins insights and
growth.
But I think that we're on the
same page and aligned.
Oh
Out of fear.
Representative and expert.
But I will let this go, but this
does give me
Grave concerns that
plain language of this paragraph
says
That a potential parolee.
Not fit to reenter society.
It'd still be considered.
For
And uh that gives me some
heartburn.
OK, let me.
Let me move on. I'm sure some
other folks have.
Have some questions.
But
I saw in our.
Financial impact report there
were concerns.
From the AOC and District
attorneys.
That the removal process for
these parole board members.
Was not according to the New
Mexico Constitution.
If we have addressed those
concerns?
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
it's my understanding. I looked
at the reports as well. I also
reached out to the authors of,
they were uploaded very late
last night, but I reached out to
the authors of the reports to
make sure I understand the
concerns and, and if there is
something that needs to be
addressed, that we address it by
judiciary, but
My understanding of um
Of the framing in the fiscal
impact reports is that right
now, the statute confers
governor authority for removal.
Um, which is
The the statute just refers to a
provision in the Constitution
that allows the governor to
remove appointments, but that
part of the constitution also
says, unless otherwise provided.
So what this bill does is it
otherwise provides. It says that
board members are to be removed,
uh, in
Instances of malfeasance or
neglect of duty, which still
preserves a significant
discretion for.
The governor to to create and
appoint the members that she
wants and to remove those that
she doesn't, um, if there is
neglect of duty.
But especially as we're
approaching the end of an
executive term.
This board is, is incredibly
large. There are 15 members, and
they're in charge of.
You know, really greasing the
wheels of our public safety
system and so if we had, you
know, in this, um, we talked.
In, in, um, these kinds of
things, thinking of it as like
future proofing, you know, so if
we have a governor who comes and
decides they want to clear house
and.
Create a new parole board right
now, as the statute says, that's
OK, right? That would be fully
authorized, and it would be
incredibly burdensome on our
public safety system if that
were to happen. So this just
clarifies that removal is
allowed and the governor has
has authority to remove parole
board members as they should,
um, but that that needs to be in
the absence of, um,
Uh, that needs to be when there
is evidence of malfeasance or or
neglect of duty.
Oh, you're an expert.
The pro described the process as
it exists right now, and as I
understand it, that is.
Those board members are
completely
Employed at the will of the
governor. Is that?
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
that, that is accurate. And so,
as, as it functions now, um, the
governor can and has removed uh
members of the parole board
without any process, um, and
what was of interest to um us as
advocates and sponsors is
updating this.
Uh, these provisions of law, and
since 2003 when our Supreme
Court, our state Supreme Court
made very clear in a question
around the Richard Richardson
administration, the
administration removed a number
of um ethics commission, um, or
ethics standards commission uh
members without
Without cause, um, and in
litigation that uh that followed
the state Supreme Court made
very clear that if the
legislature doesn't want that to
happen, they have to use this
authority. It's, it's not just
the governor's authority, it's
the legislature's authority
because the Constitution says
the governor can
The governor can remove unless
otherwise provided, and here is
the invitation to provide.
That's this body, making ma,
saying we want commission
members to be protected, unless,
of course, you know, there's
neglect to do to your
malfeasance.
So I chair an expert.
The process
If this piece of legislation
becomes law.
would require cause to remove.
Abort.
Is that accurate?
Madam Chair and Senator Scott.
It would require evidence of
malfeasance or neglect of duty.
And are those terms, Madam
Chair.
After those terms defined.
In this piece of legislation.
The Madam Chair and and Senator
Scott, they're not defined in
this legislation, but they are
defined in established law, I'd
be happy to provide that. I
don't have it available right
now. Um, but I will say that
the, the language that we relied
on was language from the state
ethics commission, um, statutory
language that was either updated
or created at that time, and I,
I believe 2019.
OK. And
Madam Pierre ex, there would be
a certain amount of due process
available.
Does that person that is.
Being removed from the position.
Would you describe that new
process.
Madame Chair and Senator, um, I
believe you can borrow.
I'm looking at the removal
process here.
And so I believe that what the
bill does.
Let's look at it together. OK,
so,
Um
The board itself or the governor
can initiate that removal
process and um I'm not sure, I
don't know, maybe Director Cohen
might have some historical
knowledge about how removals
have happened in the past, but I
imagine there, I mean, the board
is in close conversation with
the governor's office and so if
there's a problem with a member,
there may be just a, a, a
conversation, um.
And as it is now, the governor
can just make that decision
without any process.
Um
So there is uh an opportunity
for the parole board member to
have notice of a hearing and an
opportunity to be heard before
their removal. And so that's
just basic due process
protections and removal that,
um, we have again borrowed from
the State Ethics commission in
their drafting of similar
commission regulatory
legislation in 2019.
So I'm sure bottom line would
be.
This piece of legislation
becomes law, it would make it
more difficult.
To remove a board member.
And it currently is in the
event.
That the governor wanted that
board member.
Oh.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
it would provide guard rails for
and guidance for the removal
process.
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you, that's all for now.
Thank you. Um, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Bringing this important piece of
legislation forward, um, a
couple of questions. The first
is on page 2 line 2. You talk a
little bit about risk and
readiness assessment, but that
process looks like.
Yes, Madam Chair and Senator
Charlie. So the risk and
readiness, um, is provided by
the the the Department of
Corrections has a um.
Assessment that they use within
the facilities in itself, that
all of that information,
including the courses that
they've taken, the programs that
they've been available to them,
um, are all indicators that are
submitted to the parole board
members prior to their hearings
in that review, they took a look
at that documentation and in the
hearing of the process of that
individual inmate, they're able
to speak to them to clarify that
information and to determine
what.
Of those risk factors, do they
have available to them as well
when they release out into the
community.
So, you know, do they have a
home um available family
members, um, individuals that um
would support the individual in
their plan of supervision. Those
are all the things in regards to
the risk and needs of those
individuals to ensure.
that they don't recidivate. And
so those are those risk factors
that the board members take a
look at specifically, um.
And then again, once they get
out into the community, then
they do reassess those offenders
back out once they're out on
supervision to determine their
level that they'll be supervised
under.
Madam Chair, how often are those
updated?
The risk assessments. So the
Department of Corrections
currently, um, have, I believe
in the last year have gone
through their process of risk
analysis, um, that they've been
using for their particular, um,
so.
In the years that they needed to
use their the compass program
that they use. They needed a
year's amount to determine that
risk and so they've only gone
through the process within the
last year, um.
So it's, it's not something that
they go over continuously, um,
but it is, they had to gather
the information for the years of
time that they were able to
gather the that risk
information.
Um, Madam Chair, on page 2.
Um, I appreciate like that.
Um, I'm curious about the
notification victim's family.
What does that process look like
and I ask this out of curiosity.
Because the work that I have
done previously in the domestic
is released.
From a personal system, there is
not always adequate
notification. Yeah, so Madam
Chair, representative Charlie,
the process that the parole
board uses, um, is the 30 day
notification process. So once we
get notification of the offender
being scheduled on the docket
from the facilities, then we get
that list of those individuals
we send those out to with all
the victims' advocates that are
um, put together by the um
constituent services office and
victims constituent office.
From the Department of
Corrections, they gather all of
those victims' advocates and let
us know who they are, so we have
one created email listing as we
get that, we send that out to
them 30 days prior to the
hearing, so that they have
adequate time to find any
victims that may belong to those
particular cases, um, and so
those go specifically out to the
district attorney's office as
well as to the Attorney
General's office if those cases
have moved to the Attorney
General's office for
notification purposes. Once
they've made their notification
processes, then they.
notificate the New Mexico Adult
Parole Board indicating who
they've been able to make
contact with.
And then with constituent
services and the victim's
advocate's office with the
Department of Corrections. They
then contact us and let us know
what victim would like to
participate in those hearings,
whether they want to do written
statements if they want to do
confidential confidentiality
statements if they want to just
speak directly to the parole
board member, um, without being
part of the hearing in itself,
or if they want to participate
directly in the hearings and so
we make time and schedule those
inmates based on the
availability of those victims.
So that that way they're heard
and we're able to ensure that
those victim representatives,
um.
have a job
and they have a timeline that
they need to let their bosses
know, we're able to put a
timeline to say we'll hear this
particular offender at 11 a.m.
so then that way those just a
follow up question madam.
Or, what happens if you
The addresses and or post office
box people, um, you know, it's
hard to actually get a hold of a
victim for what happened.
So the New Mexico, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair Representative
Charlie, the, um,
The victim constituent services
office at the Department of
Corrections, they do a very good
diligence of looking for those
individuals as much as possible
if those individuals are unable
to be contacted and they don't
get a hold of him prior to the
hearing or to be participative.
We will take a look at those um
victim statements after, um,
because a lot of the times these
individuals are 120 days to the
door. And so that gives us the
opportunity to speak with.
those individuals and if for any
reason we may need to change
some of the conditions of
supervision. We can go back and
take a look at those, um, in
order to assist those victims in
those.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question, and
I just want to add that I can
vouch for that because um they
dropped the ball on letting me
know that my son's murder was
going to be paroled. And so I
had to do a lot of work with the
departments of corrections and
with the parole board and.
Um, the parole officers to
really drive those decisions and
have my input after the fact.
Unfortunately.
Um
Stronger attention again to page
two, Madam Chair, line 24.
You have stricken whether the
inmate is a habitual offender
and some of that criteria and
I'm wondering.
Um
What
Madam Chair and, and Senator
Charlie. That's a really great
question. And we had a lot of
conversations about what changes
needed to be made and what
language needed to be updated,
and really the the reason for
that change is that habitual
offender has a very specific
legal meaning within the
habitual offender, um, act, uh,
when it comes to um habitual
offender enhancements and when
the court can use previous
convictions to increase the
amount of time at sentencing.
And so we just wanted to clarify
that really what the board is
looking at is relevant criminal
history and not this narrow, uh,
legal term around habitual
offense.
Um, and then, Madam Chair, my
loss, this is it, I promise, um.
Um, senators Scott questions
earlier, I'm, um.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you.
Uh, thank you very much.
Of Senator Nava.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'd
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward, uh,
Senator Harrami Owen,
Representative Chavez, uh.
Thank you for sharing your story
and thank you for your courage
to stand before us and share all
of.
Or lived experience, which
absolutely matters, and I don't
think we see enough advocates
sitting in these places and
spaces, so I'm very proud to
have you as uh one of our
colleagues, uh, Madam Chair, I,
uh, do have, um.
Just gratitude for the bill
coming forward, um, to ensuring
a process that is respectful to
victims and their families, um,
and I do have a question of mild
suggestion, Madam Chair, and,
uh,
Senator and representative. I, I
understand clearly, um, that the
parole board, um, is an unpaid
parole board, right, volunteer.
But they are, um, they do
receive per diem and
compensation for their uh for
hearings, and I just was
wondering if we could modify or
just clarify that the board can
receive compensations for
meetings, hearings, and any
other board meeting activity,
reimbursable under the Act, just
to ensure that we're not leaving
anything out, um, so I'd like to
offer a friendly amendment, uh,
madam, uh, chair, and, um.
members
And this would be under section
3 line 17 and 18, I believe.
Senator, um, if you could tell
us what page?
Yes, uh, page 8, Madam chair.
Madam Chair, Senator, which line
are you looking at? Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator, I am looking
at line 17 and 18.
To essentially add um.
Any other reimbursable activity
under the Act.
So if we after.
Where it says meeting, adding a
comma.
Strike or and then after hearing
a, um, or any other reimbursable
activity under the act.
To ensure that we're not
excluding anyone.
Madam Chair, Senator.
We see that as a friendly
amendment.
OK, if I could ask just for
clarification again on page 8,
which is what line?
line 17 and 18, uh, Madam Chair.
OK, letter E.
1718.
So it would be.
After meeting.
Um, so striking or.
And then inserting a comma.
And then after hearing.
We would insert or any other
reimbursable activity under the
act.
OK.
Now, what I do ask um.
And I mentioned it on opening
day for when we organized. I do
like to have.
Amendments
Up to ledge council committee.
Um, to have the amendments
drafted.
Because it's much easier for our
committee secretary and us too
to keep track of how.
Um, amendments are done, but we
do them on here too just like we
did for the other amendment we
did.
Couple of days ago.
Fermenting, so.
Just a caution, um.
or
For future amendments, please,
OK? Just, it just helps us to
keep track of the amendment
process.
But we will go ahead and and do
this, but we need
Um
Just to make sure we go slow so
that our secretary can keep
track of it, as well as the rest
of us. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Happy to work with her, and yes,
absolutely. OK, but let's go
through this one more time. Yes.
So
After on line 17, after the word
meeting after the word meeting
comma.
Yes, at a comma,
striking or and line 18.
After the word hearing, you are
adding what?
Or any other reimbursable
activity under the Act.
Or any other?
Uh, or any, or any other
reimbursable or any other
reimburse.
Or any other reimbursable what
activity.
Under the Act.
All right. And then it continues
and shall receive no other
compensation.
A perquisite or allowance.
Is that correct?
So are you moving this
amendment?
I move this amendment there's
a motion for this amendment.
I will second it for purposes of
discussion. We'll go to the
sponsor.
Madam Chair, that's a friendly
amendment.
OK, so that's a friendly
amendment, right? We'll go to
the audience. Is there anyone in
the audience in support of this
amendment?
Anyone in opposition?
Going to Zoom, is there anyone
on Zoom?
No one on Zoom?
All right? Now we go to
committee members on the
amendment.
And Senator Blacker saw your
hand first and then Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
So
On, on this particular
amendment, um,
So enough and may maybe you
could answer this or or the
sponsor could answer it.
What, what do we have out there
now, especially with
legislators, because we get, we
get, um.
Per diem and, you know.
Lodging meals and incidentals if
I remember that correctly.
What other type of
Expense, it's because it's a
reimbursable what activity or
expense, I, I don't know why
we're using the word activity
versus expense, and what other
Reimbursable.
Activities or expenses are out
there that aren't covered
already and do we also use that
particular term that you had.
In other bills.
Um, out there because that that
that's new to me.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
I would defer to the experts.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, and, and
Senator Block. Thank you for the
question and I just want to
express gratitude to Senator
Nava for the attention to detail
because what we're intending to
do is to uh clarify that the
board can receive compensation
for meetings and hearings, which
is already practiced, and it has
been for a long time, so a lot
of what the board's activities
include per diem, the per diem
Act mostly anticipates board
meetings that are open meetings.
Um, subject to the Open Meetings
Act, but our parole board is
quite different from other
boards and and a lot of their
activity they do meet quarterly,
and those are their quarterly
meetings, but most of their
activity, these many long hours
that they spend are enclosed
here in time.
And it has long been the
practice that from indirective
from the AG and from DFA that
that is acceptable under the
Pertem Act. And we're just
codifying that practice. But why
I'm especially grateful for the
amendment, um, is that when
we're writing statute, when we
start to list things, um,
We listen to the exclusion of
things not listed. So if you
create a list, the determine
statutory construction is, you
know, anything listed as to the
exclusion of things not included
in that list. So that's why
whenever we're writing, we, we
often include a catch all that
says anything else compensable
under the Act. The only thing
that I can think of in this
moment and perhaps director
Cohen has other examples, but in
the many conversations that
we've had around.
compensation and the parole
board leading up to this bill,
um, the, the parole board spends
a lot of time outside of a
meeting and outside of a
hearing, preparing for those
hearings. So that means talking
to victims' families, it means
reviewing corrections files,
means a number of other things,
and
Under the per diem Act, if
They travel, say to the parole
office in their jurisdiction or
to the the main office here in
Santa Fe, that is, they can be
reimbursed for that cost. So if
there's travel associated with a
a non-meeting duty. I believe
it's section 8 of the Per diem
Act, um, that that that would be
one of these.
Non-curing meeting activities
that uh
It would be important to include
in this catch-all.
Thank you, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. So I wanna make sure I
understand you, so I'm going
back to my military time here on
like what we call TDY temporary
duty, so you travel on one day,
you go wherever you travel at
the end of the meeting, you
travel back, so there's 2 days
of travel, 4 days of meetings.
Theoretically
So what you're telling me then,
so I understand this is that a
board member can at his or her
discretion, travel.
Anywhere in a reasonable.
Reasonable activity.
And go get reimbursed for that
even though they were not.
Authorized to go down to that
parole board hearing. Is that
how I understand that?
What, what I'm trying to get at
is
You don't want people taking
advantage of this, not that it's
much money, but people would
take advantage of it because to
me,
If you're on this board,
You should be authorized to
travel, like for instance, state
legislators.
Well, I can't just go back home,
back and forth to Rio Rancho and
just rack up the mileage.
They give me 2 trips.
And that's it.
And I'm just trying to
understand.
Um, that, that piece here,
because there could be some
potential for abuse.
And I see your
12 6, like, yes, you agree.
Um, I, I'm, I'm concerned about
that. I'll, I'll support the
amendment, but I just want to
understand the process there
because there's, there's room
for
FWA Broadways and abuse and um
want to make sure we're being
good stewards and writing good
rules where they are solid
boundaries.
And I, I don't see it with this,
and that makes me a little bit
nervous.
Thank you.
OK, thank you, Senator, um, also
on the amendment, Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chan and um.
I don't think it, I think
there's a standard we go by.
Um, with some of this, and
that's why I'm like, I don't.
I have not.
We have task force, we have
other, um, a lot of other
boards even us that we don't,
yeah, we meet with constituents,
we do not get compensated. Um,
we go into other meetings, all
you get is per diem.
Um, the way it's written here.
I would double check that to
make sure we're not.
Opening the can of worms, that's
really gonna be open for a
plethora and then put us into a
budget.
Um, as far as being fair.
That's my question is, is this
something that we stand.
OK, thank you. Any other
questions on the amendment?
Senator Scott
Thank you Madam Chair.
Activities is very, very broad,
and I guess the question I have.
I would it be possible to make a
claim for per diem for.
Example making a phone call.
Or riding a letter.
Or doing something.
Outside of
The formal
Board review process.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
it's a really good question and
I've learned a lot about the per
diem Act in trying to to steward
this piece of legislation. And
what I've learned is the com
the, they're not really
compensable to reimbursable
activities, right? It's not
compensation are very narrow and
I'm, I'm sure as lawmakers
you're familiar with, with
those, um, with those
restrictions, so that the
examples that you gave writing a
letter, making a phone.
call absolutely not with or do
not fall within the the act, um,
and so the only example that I
can think of up here now is
these additional activities that
the board conducts, um, that
include the review of inmate
files, the conversations with
victims. Right now, those are
not.
Those are not activities that
the board, uh, receives any
Um
Reimbursement for, but in the
conversations that we've had in
trying to craft a solution to
the compensation crisis for lack
of a better word, around the
parole board and recruiting
members and making sure that we
retain members of guidance that
we received from the Attorney
General's office signals that um
if those are activities that are
occurring in a meeting setting
or in the office, then those
will become.
Um
Reimbursable. And so if the
board in the under the direction
of Director Cohen's structures,
workdays that they are able to
to do this detailed
conversations with victims and
review of inmate files, then,
um,
I think that that would be
something that falls under the
Per Dim Act, but my
Read as the
Um, suggested amendment was that
it ties it to the Per DMX. So if
it's, if it's not in the per
diem act, then it's not a
reimbursable a reimbursable
activity, and so, um, that's
part of my, my comfort with the.
suggestion.
But I guess Madam Chair and
expert, uh.
All of those activities that you
just described would occur.
In the context of a formal
Meeting setting.
That would
Otherwise be.
Mm
Suitable
Oh
Ord anyway.
So I guess the question.
Would be why the need for
This amendment when
We've, we've got to be at some
sort of formal gathering.
For per diem to
Madam Chair and and Senator
Scott, I, I really appreciate
the, the attention to this issue
because I think, I think it's an
important one. And I think
you're right that the example
that I gave on the fly might be
something that already fits
within meetings and hearings.
Um, but I would say though,
still in terms of statutory
construction, um, if the
legislature, uh, were to expand
per diem, I mean the, I think
there were amendments made to
the Per Dim Act as recently as
2022.
Um, maybe even more recently, if
the legislature were to expand,
reimbursable, um, reimbursable
activities.
If we create a list that doesn't
have a catch all, then the
parole board would be excluded
from those reimbursements.
OK, thank you. And we're still
on the amendment.
Um
Any other questions for a second
time, Senator Block. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Where we're splitting hairs
here, but I want to make sure
that we understand this. So you
said um.
That if you're reviewing
material,
You could be in your home.
That could
That could qualify as per diem
or not.
Could calling a family qualifies
as per diem on the phone.
So what, what would qualify as
per diem besides.
Traveling down to a
parole officer or something like
that. What, what, what else
would there be specifically here
that
That would require this
amendment.
Madam Chair and, um, and Senator
Block. I think I might want to
defer to uh.
Director Cohen here, but I think
we've covered the list of things
then I must have missed it
because I'm, I'm looking for
like A, B, C, D, E, all the way
down of other activities that
qualify for per diem, um, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Block, um, so
the parole board right now, the
current uh reimbursement that
they get is specifically for
their hearings and for the board
meetings that they attend. Those
are the only things that they
get paid for right now.
So in a matter of a week, we may
have parole board members who
are getting ready.
And like I said, there's.
15 of them right now, there's
probably about 12 of them that
serve because 2 of them right
now are shadowing. So in that
time frame, those individuals
may go and review.
The
40
TV hearings that they may have
for the following week.
But none of that time that
they're spending.
Reviewing those files is
compensatable or reimbursable
for that time that they're
there.
Um
All of that is done on their own
time, um, in review of they get
a phone call in the middle of
the day, of course, that the.
Department of Corrections victim
constituent office may call and
say, you know, we have.
So and so that needs to talk to
you because they don't wanna be
part of this hearing, so can you
make a time available for
yourself, um, to hear, uh, this
victim, the board member
themselves again, most of the
time it's all done while they're
at home.
And so none of that is
compensable time or reimbursable
time under the per diem, um, Act
for those individuals. So,
Those
That the board members, it's,
it's been a contention for board
members for years of, you know,
when they were previously uh uh.
A professional board and they
were getting paid, um, there
was, I believe 9 members at the
time, uh.
And they moved it directly from.
Uh, professional board to per
diem, uh, their time was
compensated daily for the work
that they did and now that time
is is not um reimbursable. So I
think what we're looking for
really is that time that they
need to review those word
minutes and review uh
documentation of hearings that
they previously had with these
offenders for them to be
reimbursed appropriately for
their time.
Um
So I think those are really
mainly the two things that that
our board members are looking at
is the time that the review
files and the time that they
spent in review and, and like I
said, many of these members are,
they are, um,
They're amazing, uh, you know,
the amount of work that these
individuals do is, you know, by
far.
Some of the
Meaningful work that that I've
ever seen, you know, working in
the Department of Corrections.
Um, the time that they spend to,
you know, review the
information, ensure that the
that the public safety and the
conditions that they're setting
for these individuals, you know,
are, are made so that these
individuals can succeed when
they get out into the community
is.
Um
Something that not a lot of
people are willing to do.
And I think as we move forward
into these board members and as
continue to find board members
if we don't start looking at the
The compensation and or the
reimbursements of these
individuals for the work that
they do.
Thank, thank you for that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So what you're
really saying then is this is
really some prework that they
have to go do because they can't
have that information at their
home. It's obviously private
information. So they're gonna
travel to the facility and do
their review. Is that fair to
say? Yes, sir, uh, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair, uh, representative
Locke, yes, that is correct.
They would be going to the
probation and parole offices
where they do the day to day
hearings and be able to review
that documentation.
And be reimbursed for that
time. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair, for that. That
would have been easier if you
said that I didn't lose 10
minutes of my life and I'll
never get back.
That makes sense now.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Any other questions on the
amendment. See no other
questions, Senator Scott.
For a second time.
OK, there's a motion to table
the.
No second is needed.
And there is no discussion.
So with that, um, we go to a
simple vote. If you could call
the vote on the table emotion
for Senator Nava's amendment.
Senator Block.
No.
inner.
boom.
No, OK, sorry. Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
And her over.
Senator Pinto
Senator Scott
Yes
Lopez, not to table.
And her hickey, Senor Lopez,
note to table.
Oh
So there's 6 yeses and 2 nos, so
we're still back on the
amendment.
see no further discussion if you
would call it all or the um
senator Nova's amendment.
Senator Block.
boon.
Senator Charlie.
And ours
And Nova.
Pinto
And Scott, oh.
Iserio Lopez, yes, and explain
my vote.
In her hickey
Center Lopez, yes.
Um, Senator Sidhil Lopez, to
explain your vote.
I didn't really have any
questions, but I really wanted
to compliment Representative
Chavez, um, for.
really the amazing advocate and
now representative, she's turned
into after suffering.
And sharing her personal story
with us and I um.
It's just, it just really admire
that and I I just.
Wanted to say that.
OK. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
Um, so we're still back on
questions on the bill itself.
And Senator Block, you're on the
list.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I want to thank the panel,
um, for this especially, uh, my
two good friends, Senator
Harramilo and Representative
Chavez.
Um
Sir Scott
Was, was focused on.
And then I think you, counselor,
um, talked about how this is
really focused.
On the governor not being able
to remove.
These, these members. But when
you look at the bill,
And the underscored material is
all new. We, we, we really
focused this bill on a lot of
the process.
Um, under the parole authority
and procedure.
Not necessarily toward removing.
Uh, the members of the board.
The governor.
So I just want to kind of touch
on that because I'm, I'm, I'm
good with the other part of the
bill, but I just wanna ask, uh,
Just a few things on this one.
How many, how many members or
how many inmates do we have
right now?
That are incarcerated for murder
in the state of New Mexico.
Madam Chair and Senator Black. I
don't have that exact number for
you. Um, there are over 400
individuals who are serving life
sentences, but not all are for
first degree murder.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. What is the percentage of
those that
Have, um, that are incarcerated
for.
Killing people
Uh, that, uh, are paroled.
Whether it's 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th
time, whatever it is. We know
what the percentage of those
murders are that are paroled?
After the 30 years.
Madam Chair and Senator Black,
that's a great question. We
don't have those figures for you
now. I, I'm OK they're not got
you. I just, just want to know
for my own education. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, I want to touch upon what
Senator Charlie said, cause I
think she brought up a great
point.
On the risk in readiness for
release.
And I don't see anything in here
cause you see the word
substantially, you see risk and
readiness. There's a lot of
subjectiveness here and, and
there's one thing I hate in
life, but one thing I found out
in my vast experience as a
senator of 3 weeks.
is that there's a lot of gray
area.
What type of this would be
probably for you, ma'am. What
type of formal risk.
Management framework.
So they do
To assign a score where there's
a cut line where you're like,
OK.
This person's ready to go or
this person.
And we don't want this person on
the street. What is there a
formalized risk management
framework, yes or no is fine, or
if it's subjective, that that's
a fine answer too, madam
chair uh Senator, uh.
block
um, there, the Department of
Corrections does use the compass
risk analysis form.
Um, in
The board, um, reviews that
documentation but does not use
that specifically for um
The
Risk assessment.
Requirement because the
Department of Correction also
reassesses those individuals
once they're out into the
community. So we can take a look
at what their risk was while
they're in there, and that is
the.
Information that they use in
terms of the.
The type of
Of programming that they've done
their maturity that they've had
while they've been in the commun
or in custody, so that is all
taken into consideration, uh,
the board itself does not have a
risk measurement that we use
right now.
Per se. I mean we don't, we
don't have one specifically for
the board, but we do take a look
at the risk assessment that is
provided by the Department of
Corrections while they're in
custody.
Thank you for that answer. Thank
you, Madam Chair. That.
That's disappointing cause I
think that is, that's critical
for to figure out if these
people deserve to be on the
street or not, that, that needs
to be looked at either through
legislation or something that's
unacceptable, not, not blaming
you. I like you, you're very
nice, but, uh, not blaming you
there.
You know, the other part here.
Um
Madam Chair is on on line 3 page
2, and, and this, and this is
um.
And I'm sorry, I forgot your
name, ma'am.
Roberta Owen, so Ms. Cohen, it
says as demonstrated by the
inmates substantially.
Complying with the rules of the
institution. I, I have no idea
what's substantially means.
Because or demonstrated maturity
on line 7, because once again,
my point is, those are
subjective scores from somebody
with no objectiveness at all.
Which
Doesn't give you a really good
risk analysis.
In my um thoughts there. The
other, the other piece that's
Senator Charlie mentioned and
man she is spot on because it
was my question.
Was line 24 was crossed out.
Because this bill is about
talking about the governors.
Appointments, but yet we crossed
out for some reason whether the
inmate is a habitual offender.
That scares me.
Because above that on section 3
on line 16, it says consider all
pertinent information.
But we crossed out
Something extremely critical of
an habitual offender.
I, that's, and I'm gonna make an
amendment on to put that back in
because that is extremely,
that's pertinent information to
me to if this person is a
habitual offender, I, we'll,
we'll talk about that. I
understand.
Where you're going.
Um
The other part on that is
consider all pertinent
information concerning the
inmate, including
On line 18, Alpha, the
circumstances of the offense,
including mitigating and
aggravating circumstances. What,
what, what does that mean to
you, uh, Ms. Cohen?
Madam Chair
Uh, Senator Block, the uh
information that's being
provided there.
Takes a look at the specific
circumstances of the individual
offense that the individual is
under.
In their current conviction for.
And so when the board members
take a look at that, they're
taking a look at.
What was done in there and does
that rise to the level of.
Of circumstances that.
Would
Make this offender
Not eligible for parole, even
though that's fine. I don't want
to filibuster. I just want
quick, quick answers, um,
because I'm sure.
Everyone wants to get out of
here. um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
And, and again, I, I got, I
think it was Senator Charlie.
Who who mentioned this point as
well, and she's spot on online,
I'm sorry, page 2, line 13.
Um, regarding before ordering
the patrol uh parole of an
inmate sentenced to life
imprisonment, the board shall.
Um, here from the family or
representative of the victim.
If the victim or family chooses
to participate, I mean, that's,
that's fusion. I understand
where she was going, where you
might not be able to find some
of these people, moved,
whatever. How much weight,
though?
Does the board put on if the
victim's family says.
I, I don't care how good of an
inmate this particular
character. I, I don't forgive
him or her. I, I don't want, I
don't want this person on the
street to do this to anyone
else. How much weight is put on,
put on the victim's family in
their, in their wishes.
Madam Chair
Senator Block, the board takes
all information into
consideration. It's not just one
facet of their decision making
tools that they use in, in
looking at that, they have to
look at everything in regards to
the offender and how they've
done while they've been in
custody. They do take all of the
information seriously from all
victims consideration when
taking a look at the readiness
of those individuals.
OK, thank you, thank you, madam,
uh, chair, uh, just going
forward to page 6 here.
It talks about the cost.
That the inmate will have for
parole.
Parole services.
Um
If it, what happens if a payment
is, is missed once, 25 times, 6
times, no payments, uh, does
that
Um
Does that trigger some type of
mechanism where
It's on the top of page 6, line
2. Does that trigger if the
person paroled.
Never pays
For these costs
Or
And they have to, they, they end
up back in uh.
That lovely place.
So Madam Chair, uh, senator.
They
Some of that is taken into
consideration, but the majority
of actual costs that
individuals, um, is dependent on
probation and parole, so they're
the ones that would write the
violations themselves. The board
does not see those um as often,
it may be something in a full
revocation where the offender
may have not paid that and they
would take that into
consideration and a full
revocation, but it's not a
technical violation that the
parole board that the parole
board would take into
consideration just for not
paying costs. Thank you.
Madam Chair.
Um, on page 8.
It said a parole may be granted,
denied, or revoked by a quorum
of 2 on a panel consisting of 3
parole board members. So those,
when they vote, is that, is that
secret ballot or is that uh
public?
It is executive, um.
Uh, so it is not allowable to
the public, uh, so there is a
vote sheet that the board does
use, but it is not accessible to
the public as to how the members
vote.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. The inmate is the inmate
aware of the parole board
members' names and uh any other
address stuff or how they voted.
Or the inmate's family or
acquaintances.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
uh, uh, Senator Black, no, um,
well, the, the board members,
um, identifiers, of course, if
They're on Google, they may be
admissible and you can look them
up, um, but in terms of
confidentiality, the information
that we provide in regards to
our board members, when they
represent themselves in the
hearings are, um,
Public, so they let them know
who they are and who's
representing during that hearing
time, but as far as information
to the public that is part of
our uh web that we're in the
process, Mr. the chair, Mr.
Anaya's information is there,
but the parole board members
were in the process right now of
adding who they are and what
representative area they're
from.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So the inmate will or
will not know how the parole
board members themselves voted.
They will not know. No. OK. All
right. Thank you for that.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
The other thing I
I, I had here, um, Madam Chairs,
I would, I would like
You know what? I'm gonna give
you an opportunity before I make
the amendment because I don't
want to do that without hearing
your thoughts. I, I think that's
fair. Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Senator Hermio and
Representative Chavez.
I'd rather talk to you than the
lawyer.
No
I think this habitual
information is critical. It's
definitely pertinent. Why, why
would you oppose taking that
out? So.
Senator Block, um, Madam Chair,
Senator Block. I thought it was
very important actually to keep
it in and um so I actually
argued it. Um, the habitual
offender language is not used,
so I actually made them if you
turn the page to page 3, line 1,
add the inmate's relevant
criminal history back into the
bill.
That terminates my question.
I agree with you 100%. So we
added it back in in a different
language. I'm sorry. So we added
it back in in a different
language.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair. Is
there a reason why that was just
rewarded that way.
Um, I, I, I'll ask the attorney
on that one.
Madam Chair and Senator Black,
habitual offender has a specific
legal meaning in sentencing
under the habitual offender Act,
so it relates to when a court
can, um, impose a habitual
offender enhancement. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the
last question, um, I guess back,
back to you, um.
As the attorney is, the
separation of powers on this,
this um particular amendment. I
know it's gonna go to judiciary
uh next.
Uh, I'm a little worried like
Senator Scott was talking about
in regards to
Um, violating curtailing,
truncating the governor's power
on this, and I was wondering,
did you happen to, when you were
going through this, did you
happen to talk maybe to um
The, uh, the AOC or the Attorney
General to get a legal read or
the governor's office to get a
legal read on this particular
portion of the bill.
Madam Chair and Senator Black,
um, we have talked to the
administrative office of the
courts, and uh we'll be in
discussion if they see any
changes that are necessary
before judiciary. I will
reiterate that our state Supreme
Court has made clear that this
is a legislative power. And so
the constitutional provision
that was flagged in your, um,
physical impact reports and
other analyses. What that says
is
The governor has power to
remove, unless otherwise stated.
The people who state that are
you all lovely people here. And
so if in legislation, it's a
shared power, it's a governor's
power and it's a legislative
power, and the courts have made
clear that the legislature is
empowered to limit the
circumstances under which a
governor can remove an
appointee, and, and they have
Um, I, I know it, it, it.
Seems like we're changing a lot,
but part of what this bill does
is it's, it's about
modernization. It's about how
would we write this bill if we
were acting with the information
we have now, that means updating
around what we've learned around
public safety and what's
relevant. It also means uh
writing bill and commission
language the way we would right
now and anytime this body
creates a new commission. They
include this language because it
was made clear from the state
Supreme Court after 2003 that,
that we should.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, because Senator Scott was
talking about the definitions,
and I know those are codified
statutes somewhere else. Can you
give me a couple examples of
where
Um, the governor may, may have
removed uh board members for me
is it Melfience and what was the
other word?
Madam Chair and Senator Black
malfeasance and neglect of duty
and I, I think Director Cohen
might have more accurate
information on this. My the of
the removals that I know, um,
under this executive term, those
have been in circumstances of
either mal malfeasance or
neglect of duty. Really, it's
just neglect of duty thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, but
what, what specific examples did
the governor has the governor
removed anybody?
Uh, for that.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, Senator
Block, yes, the uh, the chairman
of the board has had issues in
the past with previous board
members, um, where there was,
um, mitigating circumstances of
noncompliance, um, and board
members were have had to be
removed. Thank you, thank you,
ma'am. I have no idea what the
hell noncompliance means. I
mean, I mean what what what does
that mean? Why, why would they
removed?
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
uh, Senator Black, um, the
individuals in question, um,
there were.
Problems with um being able to
work executively with the
members of the executive team
within the parole board. So in
terms of their duties that they
were required to do and being
able to work with the executives
of the team that were at the
parole board at the time.
Was not working well.
And so,
There may have been more.
In line to, you know, the
discipline that had to be made
in regards to that.
That's information I don't know,
but those are the examples that
I've been able to see since I've
been here in regards to the
removal of, of one of the board.
Thank you, thank you. It just
sounds like lack of confidence
or something like that, which is
what I've seen in the military
with removers removal of
commanders.
Just to catch on, it sounds like
a catch-all thing with the
governor just got a
recommendation from somebody.
And said this person.
Boy, he, he's, he's a piece of
work, uh, or she's a piece of
work is very difficult to work
with or noncompliant to me means
you don't show up at any of this
stuff, you don't do, you don't
do any work and to me that's
kind of um abandoning your,
your, your duties as as a board
member that.
I thought that now, it sounds
like it's some personality
issue,
Senator.
Yes, in some instances, but
again.
The board being a voluntary
group and working again with the
administrative, there there has
to be a cohesiveness within the
office. I can understand when.
Parole board members and
executive staff don't work
together well. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm, I'm finished.
I just want to thank you both or
all four of you for being here,
um, especially you,
Representative Chavez, um, you
carry a lot of weight, uh, with
your, with your background and
um the
Tragic story of your family.
I want to thank all 4 of you for
putting up with my questions as
well as my fellow members and,
and chair.
But it's important that we get
this right. I want the public to
be able to understand this
because we're not letting people
out just for the heck of it.
Um, we are actually talking
about.
Separation of powers between the
governor and the legislative
branch, so.
Um, I appreciate uh your time
and your effort. I yield, madam.
Uh, thank you, Senator Black,
and what is the other committee
you sit on?
What, what, do you know what I
want to be on one with me or
we're on rules together. OK.
All right.
Um, and what I, the reason why I
ask, um, as you know, I said on
rolls for.
A lot of years.
And we actually get to see the
parole board when they come in
front of us.
And as you have more questions.
It'll be good, um, the
director's there.
And others to ask um for anybody
who's on the rules committee to
ask more.
A pertinent questions about a
lot of this information, so
you've already begun.
That inquiry
Um, because there'll be some new
parole board members that will
be coming before us, and you
already have a one up on some of
the information. Thank you,
ma'am. And then just a quick
question, just quick, um.
A lot of the changes when we
talk about malfeasance and all
the other.
Ways that someone can be
removed.
Um
Actually even began under
Governor Johnson.
I've been around a while. Um,
when Diane Danish at that time
challenged.
Her removal, uh, by Governor
Johnson.
Um, when she was at New Mexico
Tech.
On the board of Regents.
So subsequently over the years.
Via legislation, we have begun
to put in.
Um, through the legislature,
because that is our power to do
that.
That a governor can't just come
in and wipe out a board.
For whatever reason.
has to be
A justifiable reason, so you'll
see that as more legislation
comes in that needs to be
updated.
Which is what we're doing here.
And it'll it'll just be a
continuum.
But we've done it for a few
years.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Senator Sidil Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
All of my questions have been
answered.
All right, Senator Gallegos.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you all 4 of you, uh, I wanted
to start out by I really, really
want to be a, a yes vote, but I
still have a couple of
questions. You've done a great
job.
Miss Travis, you know, I've
followed you forever in your
plight. So I'll go back to page
213 where there's some
protections in there, and I know
that's gonna touch your heart
when this gets done right.
But I still have some questions
and I was gonna uh assist and
director and chair and Man
director earlier you guys were
talking about the removal of a
member.
Is there another avenue?
Have it reviewed, you, you know,
if, if, if there's
An issue that you as a director.
Don't feel that it was correct
or something went awry. Do you
have any other avenues to look
at the situation.
I'm sure, Madam Chair,
Senatoregos, uh, currently the
board does not have anything
specific in their administrative
roles or uh.
Rules specifically that have how
To be heard after, um,
notification has been made, so
at this time, no, we don't have
anything in rules.
Um, other than the notification
to the governor's office, um,
for that decision.
OK, and thank you for that man.
I think I'm getting to my last
question or maybe two parts of
the question, but I'm chairing
and director. So what I'd heard
earlier is the AOC.
was OK with how we're doing
this, is that correct?
Madam Chair and Senator
Gallegos, that was my read of
the fiscal impact report is that
They made some recommendations,
but we're happy with.
Um, the way that it was drafted
and recognized that it's in line
with the way that we draft
removal language reports and
commissions nowadays.
Well, Madam Chair and lady, I, I
guess the way I read this and
I'll read it for you in this
page 3, the FIR. It says AOC
raises concerns the legislature
may not have the authority to
grant original jurisdiction
powers, the Supreme Court.
And it goes back into and
explains an article.
63, but I guess my thing in
there, it to me it sounds like.
They've got a gray area that
they're concerned with.
And if you've had discussions
with them, I would love to hear
their thoughts and their
Decision on that because when we
received this in a packet.
Oh
We, we, I hope we all, we take
time to look through it.
Earlier, Miss Chavez and I were
talking, were friends.
And, and I had told her that I
have concern because I think
there's
Still, at this amendment but
another amendment needs to be
made to be able to offset what
the AOC is looking at.
And, and I don't have the
comfort even though we've had
great dialogue here today. I
still feel in me.
That there's a gray area that it
may come back to us as a
legislature.
To fix an unintended
consequences if it's here in
writing and we don't deal with
it.
And it was said earlier that you
can do in the judiciary.
That happens so when you get the
judiciary, you're gonna be
sacrificed, but.
I just don't like kicking the
can down the road, I think these
legislators are here in this
committee to be able to push out
the best legislation we can and
not push it to the judiciary. So
if you have any insight on that
section of the concern from AOC.
I'd love to learn that from you
so I can be a yes on this vote.
Madam Chair and Senator
Gallegos.
It may be
Aggregated in the analysis that
you're reading now, but in the
disaggregated AOC.
fiscal impact report. The
comment about original
jurisdiction isn't that the
legislature doesn't have
jurisdiction to confer. It's
that that that or doesn't have
power to confer that
jurisdiction. It's that that
jurisdiction already exists by
the Constitution, so it's just,
it's not that it's the
legislation is drafted is, um,
is in conflict and acting in
power that the legislature
doesn't have, it's that the
Supreme Court already has
original jurisdiction, so
My understanding of the
recommendation is that um that
it may be that the it that it's
unnecessary because that
jurisdiction for the Supreme
Court already exists in the
appointment.
But I are we're committed as um
advocates and sponsors to have
that conversation. I mentioned
that their analysis was not made
available online until late last
night, but we have reached out
to the administrative office of
the courts to understand what
their recommendations are and
make those changes if they're
necessary in judiciary.
Well, Madam chair and lady, and
I appreciate that, and I, I hope
as you go forward.
You'll consider it not coming
back to us later for unintended
consequences, but I just want to
read to you further down in the
next paragraph.
It it starts with uh.
Senate Bill 17's immediate
reference to the Supreme Court's
original jurisdiction after
establishing the opportunity to
be heard.
It is not clear if the bill.
Contemplates and
Establishing the opportunity to
be heard uh sorry about that. I
missed my life.
Uh, the bill.
Contemplates an evidentiary
hearings in court.
Which would be highly unusual.
So I just want to leave you that
with that.
Uh, I'm probably.
Probably, and I'll give you a
reason why and a vote yes uh you
had uh Carlos Sante.
I really enjoy consider a friend
every time her and I get into it
altercation, she wins.
Uh, because she puts a lot of
detail into research.
And so when I heard her.
Um, in favor it really brought.
Uh, question to me.
Um
I'm, I'm friends with both the.
The uh sponsors.
But it's, it's one of those
things that in the overall, I
might be missing something.
And I apologize if I am.
But from where I'm seated.
Just using that, it's highly
unusual.
You might be missing something.
Else.
And with that are you. Thank
you.
mentor.
OK, thank you, Senator Gallegos.
Any other questions? There's a
motion for a due pass from
Senator, said Lopez with a
second from Senator Nava.
And
Do you have any closing remarks?
Madam Chair, no
committee and thank you for the
comments and insight. We'll go
back and look at those
recommendations that you've
given, and we'll see you next
time.
Thank you. If you could call the
role, please.
Senator Block
Did you call my name? Yes,
Senator,
sorry, uh
I was on the beach again, man.
Hi.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Gallegos.
And nova.
And Pinto.
The nurse
No
Senator Lopez.
Yes, and another hickey, Senator
Lopez. Yes.
You have to do pass
recommendation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Have a good evening.
Good evening.
Uh, for those in the audience,
just an FYI Senate Bill 30 will
not be heard tonight.
Senator Stephanic asks that the
bill be rolled until Friday.
So if there's anybody either in
the audience or online if you
are waiting for Senate Bill 30.
Senator Stephanic asks that the
bill be rolled over until
Friday, so.
That bill will be rolled over
till Friday.
Um
And I know I asked um
And and just so everyone knows,
um.
We're still a little bit more
limited time, the chair likes to
leave somewhere around between
5:30 and 6 just because of my
medicinal things that I have to
take care of until I finish my
care, um, for my health issues.
So at this point, um,
I, I would say that we could
start Senate Bill 12.
But it doesn't mean that I don't
know if we'll finish it this
evening. So if we don't, then
that will be rolled over, um,
until Friday. And Senator.
Steinborne, I know your measure
is also Senate Bill 45, um.
If you would indulge me, I think
I'll just roll this over until
Friday just because of.
Um
Knowing may take some time.
You're welcome to wait and stay,
but I'm just offering that to
you at this point in time also.
So sanatoria Lopez on Senate
Bill 12.
Out of state telehealth
providers.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Sometimes you learn about a bill
because advocates come and they
tell you about a problem that
needs to be solved.
And sometimes, um.
You run on a platform and that's
why you bring bills.
And sometimes you get a bill.
Because a constituent.
Comes and tells you a story.
And that's, that's what happened
here. I don't have a ton of
advocates. I, I do know there
are people who support this
bill.
Um
Because first I'll tell you the
story.
For years, and I'm going to
protect her privacy.
Um
One of a constituents, someone,
uh uh uh resident of New Mexico
faced an uphill battle with her
health.
After two unsuccessful surgeries
in 2023 to treat an occluded
stent.
She was left with more questions
and answers. The hospitals where
she underwent these surgeries
lacked the state of the art
equipment necessary to safely
complete the procedure, but that
wasn't the worst part.
New Mexico's health care system
already stretched in couldn't
offer the advanced care she
desperately needed.
The solution seemed clear. Seek
a second opinion from top
medical institutions known for
their expertise, especially in
this area.
But when she reached out to UCLA
Health and Mayo Clinic, two of
the most respected healthcare
centers in the country, she was
told something shocking.
These institutions could not
offer a virtual second opinion
because New Mexico's telehealth
Act restricted their ability to
help patients outside their
state.
They even face legal
consequences for trying. I
believe you all received a copy
of a website, um, of was
something on a website on at
UCLA.
I called you, Celia, cause I
couldn't believe it.
The website says they will not
provide a second opinion to a
New Mexico resident. Why?
Because New Mexico has
telehealth regulations that were
written by the medical board
that makes it impossible for
them to come, um.
That it makes
for them to come to this thing
is bugging me. Is that better?
OK, it makes it impossible for
them to come, um, I mean to see
a patient in New Mexico.
Um, over.
Over echo or over any any kind
of screen, so she couldn't get a
second opinion, um.
And when she told me that I
couldn't believe it, so I called
UCLA.
You know, and here it is on the
website, they say.
They're not going to see
patients from New Mexico.
I happened to graduate from UCLA
and so I just couldn't believe
it. I said, look, uh, we're part
of the United States. What is
your problem? Um, and
And I'm just joking about the
part of the United States. They,
what they said was New Mexico's
telehealth regulations that were
passed by the medical board.
Uh, uh, that were passed by the
medical board.
Specifically say that they could
be sanctioned.
For providing this care if they
didn't get a telemedicine
license.
UCLA does not have time or
energy to to every to apply for
this license.
And they said New Mexico or what
they said was they cannot be
dealing with all of the various
requirements, but they said,
especially since COVID, that
other states.
We're fine with this. You you
notice on the website, it also
says that they're not going to
get payment from 3 states for
telehealth.
The reason that's important is
because there's a difference
between the question of whether.
The person is gonna be
reimbursed.
For the treatment
And whether the
Doctors in another state can
provide the treatment. Good.
Thank you. I don't know how to.
So
So that's important to
understand.
What I'm talking about is a New
Mexican who may not have the
resources and in many cases not
even the physical health to
travel to another jurisdiction
to get a second opinion.
And that second opinion could
mean that the person would
Uh, be able to.
Set their mind at ease.
Second opinion says your doctors
are doing everything that we
would do.
Or the second opinion could say,
well, this is what we would do,
but you'd need to come and be a
patient here, and the person
would have to make the decision
and also consult with their
insurance provider, but whether
they could go.
So
And I'll, I'll just go on with
her story. She's recently found
out that in addition to her
stent issues, she suffers from a
rare blood disorder that
complicates your treatment even
further.
She's been trying to access
genetic therapy, cutting edge
care that could only could
possibly be her only chance for
recovery, but the process is
agonizingly slow with no
facilities in New Mexico capable
of offering this kind of
therapy, she has been left
searching for a place that could
provide the care she deserved
this, um.
Issue
Of telehealth treatment.
It is not just about
convenience.
This is about people in New
Mexico having a chance for
literally survival.
People shouldn't have to risk
their months.
Their their lives or wait for
months because the care they
need exists out of their reach.
New Mexicans deserve access to
the best medical advice and
treatment options, no matter
where those doctors are located.
For a second opinion.
We're not asking.
For telehealth medicine.
Internationally or nationally
we're just asking for a second
opinion.
I want to explain um what the
medical board did after the
telehealth Act was passed.
They, they did a rulemaking
process and they created a a
tele telemedicine license.
And practicing medicine,
providing or consulting
recommending or treatment, I'm
citing there, uh, the, the
And Max, the administrative code
regulation that they passed.
Or treatment during a face to
face telehealth encounter online
using standard standard video
conferencing technology where
medical history and informed
blah blah blah, just goes on and
on.
Is a is.
Unprofessional or dishonorable
conduct, and this is just
unbelievable to me in.
Where we have learned so much
from COVID and the ability to do
that.
Um
Like as I said, I, I'll wait to
see because after I started
talking about this in interim
and some of you may have been in
legislative health and human
services. I started raising this
in interim and of course, not
only did the medical board reach
out to me and talk about this
and explain what they did, which
I really, really very much
appreciated.
Um
Patience came
And told me their stories about
how they couldn't get a second
opinion, uh, because they
couldn't because of this
barrier.
And so they couldn't reach
outside the state. Um, I also
want to reserve some time to
respond to. I've heard some
false things about this bill.
Uh, I've heard that, oh, this is
crazy, you might be seeing a
neur neurologist and then a
chiropractor will, um,
We'll give a second opinion, and
that would have to be paid for.
The thing that I want to make
clear is this is about the
practice of medicine. This is
not about the question of
whether it will be paid by an
insurance company. I just want
to extend the reach.
Of New Mexican patients.
To
To be able to um.
Excess access.
A second opinion.
And these are mostly asked for
in really, really dire cases
like our constituents, and she's
all of our constituents.
Um, with that, um,
Madam Chair, I'm through with my
presentation, as I said, I don't
have an expert because this
comes from people who care about
this issue. I don't have an
organized lobby group, uh,
behind me, and I don't have an
advocacy group behind me. I do
know that there are people who
support this and people and I
know the medical board um.
and then stood opposed.
OK, thank you, Senator and 00,
and I have an amendment. I'm
sorry. Thank you.
I, I
The other thing that happened
with this bill is I, I
appreciate that I um been going
back and forth. I have like two
things going on right now, um,
on, I, I do have an amendment,
uh, on page 3 between lines 3
and 4 insert number 24, a
dietician, and then renumber
accordingly because the other
thing that happened is this bill
doesn't only deal with the
telehealth issue, um, people, we
had some professions that we
left out, uh, last time, and
So you'll notice the bill adds
um social workers.
Um, and then it also I want to
amend it to our dieticians and
then the bill also um.
Uh talks about a certified peer
support worker and then any
other health professional who
has received a Medicaid provided
identification number and the
reason we did that was
discussions over legislative
health and human services
meetings this summer, you know,
with people saying me too, me
too, me too, and what we wanted
to be is his expansive, his
Medicaid with Medicaid being the
guardrail.
Medicaid uh authorization being
the guardrail, um, and so, and I
apologize, I forgot I'm so
focused on the other part, but
this is also a part, um, and I
ask that you amend it to include
dietitians so people can get out
of state second opinions about
from a dietitian.
OK, Senator. So are you gonna
move your amendment? Oh yes, I
moved the amendment and also I
needed to say, and not just the
second opinion, so dieticians in
Albuquerque can consult with a
dietician in, I mean, can
consult with a patient in Hobbs.
So they were inadvertently, I
think, inadvertently left out
and I think the social worker
was also issue was also an
oversight.
Um, at least I don't know, in my
opinion, I supported the
telehealth bill but um that's
what we're trying to do with
this bill.
OK, so back on your amendment.
You are doing on page 3.
Between lines 3 and 4 inserting
a dietician.
And then renumbering the
paragraphs accordingly. Is there
a second?
There's a second.
Um, in the audience, is there
anyone in favor or in opposition
to adding dietician.
Yes, please.
And if you would come up front,
please, and there's a
microphone.
So you could identify yourself
and make your statement. And
again, this is just on the
amendment of adding dietician.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Debbie Maestta's trainer, a
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Academy of Nutritionists and
dieticians, and we just want to
comment and thank the sponsors
for including our dieticians,
um, so we do stand in support of
the amendment and the bill.
Thank you. OK. Thank you. Is
there anyone else in support in
the audience?
Anyone in opposition.
Yes, please.
If you would stand and then
Just on the amendment. You have
to stand and use the microphone.
Yeah, hi, I'm, I'm Doctor Steve
Jaussy. I'm with the medical
board. One of the comments I
would have made, uh, if I had a
chance to talk is the fact that
this isn't just expanding.
The, the ability to practice
medicine without a license in
New Mexico. It's the ability for
like 25, 30 different
professions to practice in New
Mexico without a license.
I appreciate, thank you. And
then we'll go to Zoom.
And is it Carolyn?
Azus
I may have botched your name. I
so apologize, but
Carolyn, if you'd like to, and
again, this is just on the
amendment of adding dietician.
Senate Bill 12.
Yes, uh, thank you. I hope you
can hear me. Can you hear me?
OK, thank you. Um, I'm very glad
to be here and I would like to
support the amendment and the
bill, and I want to, when
appropriate comment on the bill.
Thank you.
OK, I appreciate, thank you.
And with that we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members just on the
amendment.
Are there any comments or
questions?
See none if you would call the
role on the amendment of adding
dieticians.
Senator Block.
Senator Boone. Yes.
Senator Charlie.
Gallegos
In Nova
Senor Pinto.
Center stop.
Yes.
Lopez.
Yes. Senator Hickey, Senor
Lopez. Yes.
You have an amended measure,
Senator.
And so with that, now we'll go
back on the bill as amended, and
we'll go to the audience, and
this is on the bill itself, OK,
as amended. Is there anyone in
the audience in support of
Senate Bill 12 as amended.
See no, is there anyone in
opposition to Senate Bill 12 as
amended.
So if you'd come forward and use
a microphone.
And make your identify yourself
and and.
your statement, please.
Hello, I'm Doctor Karen Carson,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing us to speak today, and
I am a pediatrician from
Rosville, New Mexico, and the
current chair. Um, first of all,
I'd like to acknowledge and
thank you, Senator Sidilia
Lopez, and all of you for
recognizing the need for better
healthcare access, especially in
our rural communities like mine.
We all want the best health care
available for our patients, our
families, and our friends.
And the New Mexico Medical Board
wants this too. We are not
advocates for practitioners. We
are a regulatory licensing
agency charged by you, the
legislator, legislature to
protect the people of New Mexico
from bad medical practices.
And we do this through
complaints, investigations, and
disciplinary actions on
licensure. This is why we are in
opposition to Senate Bill 12, as
it will allow the unlicensed
practice of medicine in New
Mexico, and the people who
possibly suffer harm from these
practices will have no recourse.
I'd like to have Dr. Jen Kusky,
our former medical director, to
further discuss our regulations.
All right. Thank you, Doctor
Carson.
Um
All right, where to begin.
Again, I'm, I'm Doctor Steve
Jankowsky. I've been with the
board for 15 years. I'm now
retired, so I'm becoming more of
a, a medical consumer than a
provider, but I want the
opportunity to talk about the
fact, first of all to reinforce
what Karen said is that the
mission of the medical board is
protection of the public.
protection of the public.
The fatal flaw with this
well-meaning bill is that allows
for the practice of medicine in
New Mexico without a license.
And I would say that there's
probably two sides to this
story. One is, I don't think
this is really needed, and I'll
explain why, and then I'll
explain why I think it's
dangerous, OK? Now the first
part, and I've got a little bit
notes.
bear with
Oh, and, and I have to say.
Uh, uh, Madam chairperson.
And senators.
So first of all,
I don't think it's needed, um, a
request for an out of state
opinion, second opinion, usually
involves the caregiver of the
patient.
Reaching out and talking to a
colleague. Like I can call a
buddy in.
You know, California, Colorado,
whatever, and say, hey, I have a
patient, this is the situation.
What do you think? Am I doing
the right thing? Am I on the
right track? Should I refer her
to you?
They can tell me what they
think. It doesn't create a
doctor-patient relationship with
the patient. They're not liable.
I'm liable because it's my
patient if I take that advice
and don't follow through.
The second thing is, usually a
second opinion isn't just a
tele, you know, looking at the
patient through the uh through a
screen. It involves sending
medical records.
Sending labs, sending the
information that the current
provider has, so it's not just,
you know, I'm gonna look at this
person as a second opinion, look
at you and go, oh yeah, you're
appropriate for our clinic. You
look like you've got X, Y, and
Z, and we're gonna treat you
with this.
It doesn't work that way.
That would be the practice of
medicine if I did that, however,
and I'd need a New Mexico
license to be able to do that.
An unlicensed doc.
From another license in another
state could visit with the
patient.
They could get onto
telemedicine, they can call him
on the phone and say, hey, this
is my clinic, this is what we
have to offer. Your doctor
thinks she has X, Y, and Z.
If you want to come see us,
you're gonna have to come out
and see us.
And that is often facilitated by
our medical system here.
For example, I did, you know,
meet with the, with the senator.
talk about her constituent.
Um, she believed that she had a
Presbyterian Medicaid.
Presbyterian Medicaid flies
people all over the country, the
specialty clinics. Yes, it's,
it's helpful to be able to do a
telemedicine visit.
But, uh, patients are gotten to
Colorado or Texas or whatever,
because yes, our state doesn't
have.
The resources that it needs.
Um
Finally, getting in New Mexico,
telemedicine license was
arranged through your
legislature. You guys did it.
Ahead of time, years ago.
And so we have one of the
easiest licenses to get, uh, for
telemedicine. We, 10% or more
than 10% of our licensees are
telemedicine licenses, but it's
not that hard.
And many of these doctors in
these clinics, these big
clinics, um,
They have licenses from states
all over the country.
And we know that because we can
see that. So it's not that hard
to get a telemedicine license.
And again, uh,
Senator Lopez referred to our
rigs.
What our rigs, our regs say that
you can do a face to face. We
want you to do a face to face.
It's considered unethical.
If I as a doctor in another
state, try to prescribe Viagra
to you, uh, through a
questionnaire.
That's unethical.
Looking face to face and talking
to someone with a medical
license is perfectly fine.
So
So that's, so I'm saying I, I
don't think it's really needed.
Also, if these doctors are going
to get paid for their second
opinion.
They're gonna have to sign up
for insurance.
They're gonna have to get a
Medicaid number.
Trough New Mexico, which I would
guess it's harder to get than a
license.
You know, uh, so it's, it's not
that they're gonna do it for
free.
You know, someone from the
clinic might call and say, hey,
let's arrange for you to come
out here, but, you know, you're
gonna get a high powered
neurosurgeon, you know, uh,
spending time on, on the video.
So,
Um, and I actually, you know,
coincidentally, I did talk to
Doctor C about this individual.
And I used to work for the
Presbyterian Health Plan and
said we should try to get her
connected with a care manager,
cause all the patients.
One of the wonderful things in
New Mexico does is have care
managers for all the patients
that are on Medicaid. So things
could have been done. So I'm,
I'm a little concerned. I, I
understand this person
struggling.
But
Uh, the problem.
Now the dangerous side. Um,
Most doctors are honorable.
Uh, and although I've learned a
lot of dishonorable ones, 15
years of being on the medical
board, uh, there's a lot of
shysters, you know, we've had
doctors that were willing to
write uh for uh
Um, vaccine exemptions, you
know, inappropriately for money.
Uh, we've had doctors recommend,
uh, kids go into hyperbaric
chambers to cure ADHD and
autism.
Uh, we've had to deal with those
kinds of docs. That's the kind
of doc that a second opinion.
I give that kind of second
opinion.
And if things don't go well, we
have new recourse because this
act allows them to practice in
New Mexico without a license.
And
But finally, I think there was
one more thing I want to say.
What's that?
Oh yeah, and our, our rigs do
allow for uh a doc without a
license to consult with.
A doctor with a New Mexico
license. And even to do a
telemedicine session with the
patient there.
As long as the patient's
provider is there because they
are the intermediary that we
held responsible for what this
unlicensed doctor is
recommending.
So thanks for
Bearing with me and my anxiety.
Public speaking, um, but Madam
Chair, I'm open to any questions
and I really appreciate this
opportunity to
Share our concerns with this
bill.
Well, thank you very much. Uh,
now we'll go to Zoom.
And in Zoom, I believe we do
have, um, this is in favor of
Senate Bill 12.
Would you have Denise Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Uh, I, I'm a Doctor Denise
Gonzalez, and I'm originally
from the colonia of Chamberrino
in Donana County. I've been
practicing pulmonary and
critical care medicine in New
Mexico since 2007, and
telemedicine.
10 years. I'm the medical
director over many specialties
that practice telemedicine
throughout New Mexico. We've
been able to recruit fully
virtual providers who live in
other states and care for
patients in New Mexico, all of
my over 120 providers are
licensed in New Mexico, whether
they live here or not.
This bill as presented is
compelling in its intent to
improve access to specialty
care.
However, as written, I cannot
support it. If we had some
clearly stated mechanisms for
second opinion referrals and
well-defined scope and duration
of care provided, we would be
better able to protect patients
from predatory practitioners.
This bill would eliminate a very
important layer of protection
vis a vis New Mexico medical
licensure and surely the
telemedicine license is very
expedited and very simple to
apply for.
The Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid and Hospital regulatory
bodies such as the Joint
Commission would actually
preclude the ability to perform
billable in facility
telemedicine services as those
agencies do require licensing in
the state in which the patient
is located.
For direct to consumer or in
your home telemedicine, I would
urge more language in a future
bill that would better protect
patients and increase access to
specialized care that may not
currently be available in New
Mexico. I thank you and
appreciate your time.
Uh thank you very much, doctor.
And we also have Carolyn.
A zoo
Again, my botching your name,
but Carolyn, did you wish to
make a statement on the full
bill of Senate Bill 12.
OK, sorry.
Not to use to uh Zoom. OK, my
name's Carolyn Houses. I'm a
member of the Navajo Nation in
Taos Pueblo, um, at times I have
assisted the patient that has
been mentioned.
With, uh, driving her to and fro
from her medical, many medical
appointments. I was there when
she um
At the conclusion of her
vascular
Thrombotomy to unblock the
occluded stent.
Um
Which failed
The doctor told her that she
didn't have the equipment to
help her.
And so therefore, she began to
see that uh
You know, and through her
research and whatever advocacy
for herself that she need to
seek out sources outside of New
Mexico because New Mexico did
not have the
Healthcare resources to help
her.
And so therefore, that is why
she is trying to um seek care.
By whatever means.
Um, to help her and
Many patients
In New Mexico, rural and in our
cities.
To get this type of care.
Um
For her, she is
Her health is challenged, very
challenged.
Long distance to go to outside,
out of state facilities would
Be very
Dangerous
Um
Also, the stress that would be
put on her.
Um
They're ranging of it all would
be very
Difficult
And so, I understand that she is
seeking this way. I think that
this is a very
Great solution.
Uh, to what is needed,
consultation.
Healthcare, second opinions.
And I understand the various
concerns that have been thus far
mentioned.
Perhaps amendments could be
made.
So that
Patients like her
will not be bound by geographic
boundaries, healthcare.
Should be provided for them.
We
This sounds like
Making them bound by staying
within the state.
And as we know, we do not have
Adequate healthcare.
Um, for a number of reasons.
And I certainly hope that you
will pass the Senate bill 12.
With amendments as needed.
To get this care for all of us.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Um, so with that,
Um
Senator, I, I hope you would
indulge me.
Um, but it's already 15 minutes
till 6.
And just because of my health
issues at this point, it ain't
gonna be for all session, but I
have a few things I need to deal
with.
Um
Let's roll this bill over till
Friday.
You will be first on the agenda
for Friday.
Um, because we're in the midst
of your presentation.
And we will not go back to
anything else. We'll just start
from the discussion on the bill.
Yes.
Yes.
You will have an opportunity,
but I just don't, just because
of the time and
The temporary health issues that
I'm dealing with at this point.
So we will, again,
Roll over your bill, you will be
first on the agenda for Friday.
Um, so we can continue this
discussion on Friday afternoon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
fine. I appreciate it. So we'll
stand.
adjourned until Friday
afternoon.
