Lopus is agreed to put it on
because I think both the house
responses are tied up on the
floor.
Thank you senator go ahead thank
you mister chair yes i'm
agreeing to put it on and if it
gets to the floor i'll also take
it on the floor this is a really
exciting pilot project for low
income workers that are emrolled
and work force development
programs and what's great about
it is so many times we offer all
these incentives to incentives
to big businesses we have leader
funds we hello have all this and
one of the barriers is
well one of the issues is we
don't often have the work force
necessary and we don't have the
training programs or workers to
make the jump and they face so
many bear barriers.
Such as lack of affordable child
care in the inadequate
transportation especially in
real communities lack of
computer computer and internet
access so this is really a great
idea and I was so excited I
heard about it earlier
couple months ago I heard about
this and I got very excited at
that of them and it's it's
something that we could pilot
here in the state of new mexico
and see if it works to get to
really help the work force
in the same way or at least a
small white
that we often help corporations
so
with that I I have hear my
seller the us who is the
director of of some web low
neither and I have worked with
my seller and previous projects
and all of their work is very
well researched very well done
I and I just haven't seen them
fail at anything they've tried
and also we have here amber
gallop who is a director of
adult education
who is here to answer any
questions h i'm sorry.
Hey day earn a wireless ped of
hud and she's here to answer any
questions we might have of of
the of the depart.
Yes i'd like to turn over
my seller the director of
someone I think you
tear with these if you know
members of the committee I just
wanted to offer a quick
description of what the bill
contains it would create a three
year pilot program within the
adult education division of dear
to provide recurring monetary
stipends too low income adult
workers who are in world
enrolled in time bound work
force integrated education
training programs and if you
have questions about that
misgalip is is probably the best
person those questions cause
this is a really exciting way to
enramp workers to more
traditional work force
development programs are in our
system and so depending on the
program design which they would
work with stay holders to
provide in the next year this
word and also depending on
regional cost of living
indicators that maximum amount
would be a thousand the maximum
man of time would be on a
monthly basis but it wouldn't
that's the upper limit but the
other maximum amount of time
would be one year which wouldn't
be able to get at least two
maybe two and a half some asked
hers of integrated education
trading programming for folks
who have a lot of financial
barriers and who in many cases
have to decide whether they work
two jobs to make ends meet or
maybe work one job and be
involved in an integrated
education and adult education
training program for the future.
Thank you and it's the only
thing I wanted to add is if you
look on page four of the bill
the prior priority industries
are feels are listed there and
again I told you some of us are
resteadies everything well
that's that was a different
identified by the new mexico
economic development department.
His sectors to build our
economy.
Did you want to say something I
am scared.
Come on up and use them.
I'll just add that I think
there's I want to be sure that
people understand what
integrated education and
training is it's a nationally
recognized adult education
specific model in which people
simultaneously and in the
context of a way earned their
high school diploma our high
school equivalency
or and or also improve their
english language proficiency
while simultaneously treat are
going to work force preparation
courses and then also are
training for an actual industry
recognize credential in new
mexico we have very specific
guidelines and requirements for
these programs are we have them
all online we have an
application that people go
through to approve so there are
high quality programs in a very
specific model that's different
than other ones
are floating around their
partnerships internships.
Okay good
let's go to the audience and see
is there anyone here who wants
to speak in support of this
program.
It is here so it is the program.
It is and I believe there is
translation simultaneous
translation on our zoom on the
zoom
with the magic of the.
Thank you.
Hi
members of the committee and a
chair my name is just selling
the rather I am with it central
but that he acts unit said there
were they just and here in
strong support of HB three o
three
central is a grass roots
organization based in alba kirki
and we have members who would
very much benefit from this
program as they are
members of our committee and
they participate a night economy
so much and many of them did not
have the privilege to be able to
have access to a higher
education so this program would
allow them to be able to
go and they're industry as well
as we are also very focused on
early childhood education we
have many
women of colorado would benefit
from this program and would be
able to
get a higher education specially
and child's care and we know
that many of our workers can't
afford to be able to take time
off work or work their two jobs
and still be able to go to
school so this program would
allow them to do that so I urge
you to police vote yesterday
thank you.
Anybody online.
Michelle gilbert.
Hi can you hear me.
Barely if you could pull the
mike a little closer and speak
up.
Sure thank you chair and members
of the committee my name is
michelle gilbert and i'm with
partnership for community action
a power building community
development organization that
has worked alongside community
in the areas of early childhood
education and economic equity
for over thirty years we are
pleased to show enthusiastic
support of the proposed pilot
which we see is a crucial
initiative in creating equitable
opportunity for workers with low
incomes in our state far too
often individuals faced in
financial hardships and counter
numerous barriers when seeking
to improve their skills and
employment prospects lack of
affordable child care
transportation challenges in
adequate support services and
low wages are just some of the
barriers they fees that hinder
their progress in perpetuate
cycles of poverty each be three
or three presents a solution by
creating this three year pilot
as much seller mentioned to
provide recurring monetary
stipends to low income workers
enrolled in time bound work
force training programs similar
programs across the country
including one recent pilot
program here in new mexico that
reached over three hundred
families across thirteen new
mexico counties have shown that
when individuals receive
economic support they are better
able to participate in and
successfully complete training
programs leading to increased
employment opportunities and
more stable work schedules so
investing in work for
development aligned with
priority growth sectors such as
early childhood education and
care is not just benefit
beneficial for individuals it's
also vital for our states
economic future mister chair
members of the committee by
prioritising these industries in
this part that we lay a
foundation for diverse and
inclusive economy thank you for
your time
thank you.
The committee.
I've got.
Yeah.
I I understand that it's three
years and I believe there's an
amendment.
There was amended in the yes.
That's good the appropriation
was strict.
Yes but there is
um there is money there's
page.
Two hundred and thirty eight of
them.
Of out house bill to there is
money in the higher education
department for this project
which is why I think this bill
has sold has sailed so fast
because.
To our delight there is money
for it and and.
Is that money from.
I don't believe so that that.
The.
So this aren't have to be.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah using.
So is this for people who
wouldn't got the eligible
pretend.
I believe so yes I mean or it's
some of them maybe some of them
may not.
Was not limited to people with
our citizen absolutely right.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Are usually at relation of what
they'll do but when i've seen
these before they present the
family presents a budget there
about what what's needed.
Then my last question is.
Or our places like.
I think went through or so most
well are they able to.
But it does program somehow
recruiting would they be able to
do any of the training or the
training has to be done at
community colleges.
I'm not sure about that.
It's still worried where we were
in we've been diabolically
possessed but it'll go in a way
visit your van would be able to
partner with our organizations
yes these are programs are run
out of adult education but some
of some publinity members and in
control members and others
people who are served by those
organizations are often our
students and we can partner to.
So you run them through adult
education
they are all but yes in fact we
have existing it programs all
over the state already i'm
serving by the end of this year
up to seven hundred people and
many of them are actually
members of some actually c.
Any other questions from anybody
else but so will the committee.
Senator myster chairman.
Seconded by senator tomorrow.
It's amazing how fast we go when
when we are and the last day
before the
when the very well we have
twenty four hours before the
session it's great but this this
bill is already cleared the
house or again this is the only
committee for all and hopefully
we can get this done.
Late tonight early tomorrow
morning.
The secretary will call the room
senator hiking senator hicky
votes yes center may as does
that manage those votes yes then
my cut ten center mechanic yes
center making a roads yes center
neither
is center city a lot because yes
then as you look at yes center
thomas yes senator man votes yes
senators if you know yes so
notice if you know votes yet.
So by up voted six in the
affirmative zero in the negative
you have a dupasses center and
marcella and so
we'll see you in the in the
unset on the senate floor
regulations
thank you thank you mister chair
thank you members of the
committee and that concludes I
think all of our work I can
imagine that will who does I
would not predict and forget any
other bill if we get in another
bill will we'll just schedule
the quick session in the senate
lounge or something
but right now the spinish is
