With the governor's public
safety advisor mister baker.
And he has an opening statement
on this built and then we'll be
happy to open up for
for a public comment.
Thank you senator mister chair
members of the committee my name
is benjamin baker and I advised
the governor of matters public
safety policy and i'm grateful
to be here with you this morning
to talk a little bit about
senate bill to a four.
And also I think the sponsor for
the introduction is legislation
are designed to protect
sensitive spaces within our
communities where children spend
their time.
Crimes shootings killings are
not a new phenomenon of mexico
parks and playgrounds I have
researched his topic and found
examples of fatal and unfail
shootings at parks and
playgrounds as defined incentive
bill to for in virtually every
corner of our state during the
course of the twenty seven years
that I have served in this state
is a law enforcement after I
have had the unfortunate
consequence of being a response
of officer to many of these
incidents.
But none were more important
than this summer when I got to
see this with my own eyes in
july while attending my son's
football practice I witnessed a
extreme use approach within five
feet of the children shoot an
injure another extreme youth
while ninety children occupied a
park for a full football
practice.
This park was adjacent to a
middle school in our most
popular county
and the reason why I mentioned
that testimony why I think it's
important it is after twenty
seven years there are very few
things that have not seen within
our community responding.
I was shocked and it shook me to
my core because they got to
explain to my twelve year old
why had been wrong in protecting
him and his little brother from
automobile accidents and fendel
overdoes.
When really what I should have
been protecting them from was
gunfire because as I have
learned in my research and
advocacy relative to making our
children more safe gunfire is
the most likely cause of people
in her eighteen steps in the
state of new mexico sadly will
not worry with any statistics
that I know that this committee
has heard many times although
i'm happy to provide them if
they come up in questions.
But our parks and playgrounds
have become all two frequent
locations for these shootings
turker.
This proposed legislation does
not fix the entirety of the
place where intersection of our
children and our places of
recreation and sports practice
in receptive firms rather it is
part every comprehensive
solution designed to reduce the
incidences of gun violence
within our state and
communities.
I will point out to the
committee and closing that it is
widely held that government
handles locations where
criminality occurs differently
based upon those locations
targeting specifically about
sensitive spaces and schools
this legislature has enacted
laws that handle the trafficking
of narcotics with in drug free
school zones as punishable as
first degree fell any crimes the
most significant that exist
within our statue book.
That has to do with their
proximity to our children who I
think I share with this
committee is concerned that
there are most precious resorts
her new mexico and there is
something that we're are worth
protecting in the places where
they practice their sports
recreate with their families and
gather with their peers while I
know that this bill is not
without controversy and I
respect the position of the
folks who will likely speak
against the bill related to how
this impacts their second
amendment writes.
I am grateful for the
opportunity to talk to you about
what I think is that the core in
the place where we do have
common ground with any other
folks will speak in favor or an
opposition which is protecting
our children from gun violence
is a priority in new mexico I
will stand for any questions
during the hearing today and I
am grateful for the
opportunities for this committee
thank you mister chair.
Thank you mister baker no did
you did you want to go ahead and
and explain the we won't be able
to vote on adopting the
amendment but i'd like you to
explain it if you can which
you're proposing.
Oh so you're not probably I
thought you were proposing
this is that twenty two eighty
ninety point one.
Senator neighborhood this retail
we get a quarm
no one else is willing to make
that amount this is when you
would you would support and how
would you feel about it if you
made that motion
we would.
Are our desire with the bill is
to limit them.
Okay for the audience in and for
people on the internet the
motion that we can't act on yet
proposes to add another.
Exception for who has forbidden
to have a fire arms on a
playground
and it would add that
somebody with a concealed carry
license or a federal fire room's
license or a federal fire room's
license e could also be
exempted from this the
restrictions of this bill.
Okay let's while we're waiting
let's go to the audience and
see.
Of course it it it might very
depending whether we have that
particular exception and but it
will just get a show of hands
how many people here are in
favor of this bill um.
How many people here are opposed
to this
okay
why don't you come up sir and
explain expressing and let us
know also if the exception that
that may be proposed when we
have a quarter will change your
views.
Can you hear me
excellent as you chair members
of the committee senator ivy
sotto mister baker
i'm doctor william fire eyes in
a retired computer scientist
here in santa fe
I stand to oppose this bill but
I am very interested to see what
you are going to do in the next
few minutes with this amendment
speed tool for makes permanent
at the governor's temporary
public health order from last
fall but as the governor herself
is reported crime is already
down time for a temporary order
has passed but this bill
enshrines the order and
penalizes us trained licensed
concealed carriers permanently I
ask you to either wrote down
this bill or consider an
exemption for legal concealed
carriers
mrperiod baker and I had a
discussion just a few minutes
ago and I suspect that we will
be carrying on a discussion like
this across the aisle as time
goes on and I appreciate you
listening to me so thank you
mister chairman members of the
committee center driving so and
mister baker
thank you doctor who else yes
ma'am
hi good morning the advarting
mister terror commanding members
tara mitchell with the national
rifle association respectively
and opposition to sunable two or
four
like the previous speaker were
interested to see the language
on an exemption for concealed
hang on licensees and are a
generally poses the creation of
gun freezones we feel that
criminals will ignore them and
law biting citizens will only be
disarmed in them i'm guessing
the high incidents of crime in
parks across the state that the
the
gentleman who laid out the bill
is speaking about involves
illegal possession of and we are
interested in preserving the
legal right to carry and possess
fires in at around parks
the ban in sp two or four
extends to parking lots that are
adjacent to.
A parks I don't know if this
committee was the one that
exempted firms and vehicles from
the ban on polling places but
that was something that was
included in five which did move
out of the senate there's also
no notice requirement in sp two
o four
as somebody who carries under
the authority of a texas license
while I am here because my my
license is
recognized reciprocal wise i'm
not always certain
what constitutes a public park
and whether that park is city
owned or county owned or private
or quasi public or private so
without a notice requirement the
spill could be problematic and
also this matter of the
constitutionality of a ban and
parks and play grounds as
currently being litigated and
appealed in the tenth circuit so
it may be premature for the
legislature to act in this realm
thank you for listening to me
thank you so what would it would
it affect your.
If we added the amendment
permitting concealed carry well
we would support the amendment
but not support the overall bill
still wouldn't support you right
now what I heard is they don't
like the belt they would they
would like it less but they
would they would deposit less if
it had the amendment but they
would still like it less yeah
it would be we can't really dial
down the approval
out there there it would be all
down in their disapproval a
little bit if we don't
okay whose next thank you.
All right good don't don't ask
him again that
good.
Good morning.
I am nancy bennett a forty five
year resident of santa fe and
i'm here to request an exemption
in this bill for those with a
studate concealed carry license
so I am delighted that at least
some of us are being recognized
as being already better
already.
Veteran.
And health background clearance
we've even been thinker printed
so we are not likely to be the
ones who are dangerous and it is
a right we don't even show guns
you don't know we have them
there are probably forty
thousand concealed carry
licensees in the state and we
don't make any trouble so I
appreciate your consideration of
this I do agree that any
restriction is.
Not welcome but the amendment is
definitely supported thank you.
And we now have a quarrel.
So now we're official and can
take action and do all sorts of
need things
that but we would like to hear
first from whoever is online
who's willing to speak.
Mr nate esky please.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee and they're
asking here and on behalf of
over seventeen hundred members
of the arrival of the pestial
club here in the albuquerque
area
the bill as unamended
pretty much duplicate an already
and joined the public health
order
that's hardly good setup for
passing was the amendment would
make it more paladable
specifically the zero nine zero
point one amendment
there's still a potential issue
with county outdoor recreational
areas and a potential hunting
overlap and counties that may
allow hunting in large county
parks.
Thank you.
Okay
okay so look and back send your
mechanic to have you been
senator never do you want to
move your amendment
thank you mister I would move a
minute number one to.
Senate bill two zero four.
And if you want me to explain it
I will be happy to please.
Uh
mr chair on page one.
Line twenty two strike the word
or and then we're adding a new
subsection three that provides
that considerable carry
licensees and federal farms
licensees would be included
within a with them the exception
and then you would renumber.
The uh.
Subsection three to subsection
four.
I'm.
And you've already said you'd be
neutral on this
that is that is cracked up
mister
well it's up to judgment of the
committee on this as as you
heard for the test money
every everybody who opposed to
bill did indicate though that
they would appreciate the.
Who weren't here for that part
of the public covent so
so we don't we're not going to
take a position on them on the
only man do you feel the same
way mister baker.
Mister share members the
committee no I do not we oppose.
Change relative to whom this
should apply to
from the perspective of of our
office and since you're asking I
appreciate the opportunity to
share that
exempting folks doesn't doesn't
hit the the same intent to
target that that the goal of the
legislation is designed to
reduce the intersection between
guns and our parks and
playgrounds and our children
respectfully and with all
consideration for all the points
raised we do not
members of the committee
discussion.
Of the amendment.
Senators said the olympics
thank you I apologize I was in
another committee
so I know this is repetitive but
it looks like just an exemption
for conceal carriers at what it
is the chairman and center civil
office that is that it's correct
it would simply add so in the
bill right we.
The bill
so the bill already has
exemptions for a piece of server
a security officer.
A member of the armed forces as
well as a preserve member of the
other.
So all of those people have
exemptions already.
So this would simply add an
exemption for someone who's gone
through the background check of
having a I could still carry our
federal hire license
whose who's a could so care
licensee or or federal firm
license
and mr chair so what's the
reason for exempting them as
well as the the memory comes
from a senator neighbor but but
what was what was expressed
around public comment if I could
just simply perfect
this does not armed but
what was expressed her in public
comment was that there are if I
if I if I got the numbers
correct are what were one of the
ladies expressed was that there
are price believed forty
thousand people in the mexico
were consilerary licensees who
have given their finger friends
and and that and that are and
that they're not the they're not
the concern in terms of of the
unlocked use of guns and parks.
They've been through training
and a background check and they
are allowed to carry their
concealed so you don't know
they're carrying them the irony
mister chair is concealed carry
wasn't something that existed in
the under the the bruin analysis
I think it's just a miss but the
the bruin analysis.
Hearkins back to
the founding for others days
which there were areas of firms
couldn't be care couldn't be
taken with concealed carrier was
not a thing
so it's just an interesting
amendment but okay thank you
thank you for explaining it
mister chairman I apologize for
the repetition absolutely I
think in in the founders day
musketts were very hard to carry
out
did you actually actually mister
german even even pistols back to
the day were a bit longer they
were tougher to carry in a
concealed fashion
so I would be I don't don't
don't try to touch it
if it's on don't try to touch it
at the time because it bites
back violently did you want to
come in
mr chairman a couple things that
have top codes were a lot longer
than two pitch
the the I think the real the
real purpose of this is if we
learned nothing from you of all
the taxes it is that.
You need immediate action when
one of these events is uh mister
baker explained happen
and if you don't have someone
there quickly whether it's a
peace officer or someone else
that can meet that
force
it will continue until that
forces there and and so the idea
that that you're interjecting
the potential for other people.
Who may be present.
That have that force available
should act as some deterrent and
certainly if someone is there
with a conceal carry license
that is trained that has gone
through the training
they will be there or they could
possibly be there a much quicker
than the local share of the
local police or other person and
authorize to be there so that
would be the argument for this
exception.
Thank you.
Thank you mister chairman
I don't know much about concert
carried but I heard you say
mister chairman they've had
background checks or
fingerprinted they have training
I I guess that correct.
They are with its
fifteen it's a fifteen hour
course that have to do every
four years.
Thank you mister senator mister
chair please were pressure every
two years
when other questions is.
Um.
Other none of us like to
admitted mister chairman
senator.
We do have emotional ups and
downs in our lives and someone
who has a concealed and carrying
may potentially
become very depressed
irrational would have you so
what i'm wondering is
senator when they have that
I think you mentioned tour four
year renewal
is there do they do another
background check to see if there
has been any mental
deterioration.
Mister the
the way the yes the the way that
the
the consiler care license works
it's a for your license.
Without two year renewal and in
terms of the training and the
shooting
so every four years they read
through the back.
I didn't do it.
Every four years they they read
through the background check
thank you senator and mister
chair one last question what is
a federal fire arms license see
how how do they differentiate
between that in a concert carry
not mischairman and center
hickey a federal farms licensee
as a person that is authorized
by the federal government to do
the background checks on guns
and they are the ones who are
who have been fed by the federal
government
in terms of hambling firearms
and and and being the ones to to
be dealers a firms
as well as
being being once who to
authorize transfers of a
firearms.
Been mr chairman and center of
the shouldn't save federal
firearms licensed sour.
I'm i'm just wondering is it is
this a federal officer or or the
license c really applies to
the person who selling and so
forth mister and senator hickey
the the licensee.
Is it someone who was authorized
by the federal government
again they've applied to the
federal government they have had
a background check
by the federal government
they're in good standing.
In order to be able to to have
that function.
Okay thank you mister chair
thank you senator.
Does the department of public
safety.
Or anybody fbi anybody keep
track of.
Gun crimes committed by
concealed carrie licensees.
Mister chair members the
committee that's it that's a
great question and I could tell
you having worked
in law enforcement new mexico
for a long time there is a
running total and today's total
is forty three thousand seven
hundred concealed carry permit
holders license to new mexico so
that estimations from earlier
were very close to being
correct.
And there are obviously numbers
of gun crimes committed ranging
from payments meters associated
with possession by folks who are
not allowed to home aside in the
first degree committed with firm
says the instrument I can only
point to you the instances that
we see and what we have seen
most recently for example up and
rearing the county as a
concealed carry permit holder
committing an alleged crime
during a protest or he had a
concealed carried license that's
correct
additionally I will tell you and
and not to to be disrespectful
to the committees are perception
and while I think in in theory
it is absolutely correct that
the specter of knowing that
there are those among us that
could potentially intervene I
point is back to black friday at
corner mall I didn't see a
concealed carry permit holder
intervening with that shooting
in progress in foreign and
thousands of people we start
with an off duty sheriff's
deputy running after that person
so the data that you're
specifically requesting I would
have to be crush referenced
against the list of contemporary
concealed carry permit olders
which of course is a moving
target or in the pun because of
the frequency with which one
must re up you don't just become
one in perpetuity to to send her
hikey's point i'm in the the
frequency graph that would be
violent crime committed or gun
crimes committed adjacent to
guns and so it's a very
difficult metric to be able to
conceptualize so since the
concealed carrier license has to
be renewed every two years or
four years every four years
somebody must be keeping track
so that when they apply for the
renewal
yesterday absolutely mister
chair members committee if if
the question is is a person
either allowed to continue to be
a concealed carry permanent or
if they have committed to from
the answer that questions no
that is being tracked we don't
we don't keep track of how many
licenses are denied because of a
prior then related to fence I
would seem to be the easiest way
to count that they would give us
some idea I mean the guy and
rear even they have been a
totally isolated case.
He sounded i'm not sure how he
ever managed to get a license
because he was
he had had a pattern earlier
strange behavior at a certainly
mister chairman members of the
committee I think I think that's
right and I raise that only is
that these are a couple things
that we've seen in in literally
the last couple of months here
in our community they're not
necessarily a comprehensive
understanding I think that the
vast majority and I would not
disagree with members who spoke
in the public or members of the
board our committee you have
spoken about the vast majority
of folks who who are in
possession of concealed carry
promoters are not committing
crime that is that is something
that I think is actually
actually
thank you mister baker anybody
else on the committee want to
discuss the amendment
is there any opposition of
senator mechanic go ahead.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator I too was in th.
Some of the dialogue
i'm not clear is the proposed
amendment is it friendly to you.
Thank you senator.
Senator hickey yes senator he
give out yes senate masters
center mccartin.
Yes.
Center mckenna no center michael
votes now sinner neighbor
senator neighborhoods yes
meetings centers that your
locust no center city all of us
want to know senator man there
it is a pino.
Of was told or I guess he just
have the okay yes.
Center city pinovod yes.
By a vote of for in favor two
against we have considered the
built have been amended and we
will now go to the committee for
just we've already gone to the
oh I
yeah we we we went to the
committee for both opposition
and those in favor so it members
that the committee is there is
there any discussion of the bill
is amended senator mechanic.
Oh thank you chairman and sandra
can folks hear me with my mask
on.
Thank you thank you senator.
So I voted against the amendment
chairman and senator
because I maintain.
The public health emergency that
this country house with firearms
is due to proliferation and
access.
And yes yesterday this is on the
washington post.
Two year old as fatally shot as
his mother looks on shocking a
community.
This happened in.
Maryland's langley park area.
Um.
So it turns out two year old boy
had been favorably wounded his
seventeen year old mother also
shot weld as a place plains
close police officer tried
desperately to recessitate her
son.
So what happened here there's
two folks.
Had a gun each.
They fired at each other and a
two year old so can't.
To as w.
And so there the other reason so
the reason why a chairman
senator I voted against the
amendment is.
Proliferation.
I don't care if it's concealed
if you're in a park you're
contributing to.
Mayham.
That we're finding in this
country every single day we look
at the gun violence artive the
numbers are staggery.
Absolutely staggering.
And i've set it before publicly
and when I say it again because
I I feel very important it's
very important to me.
I've lost seven family and
friends to fire arms
suicide murder suicide.
One of them in a different state
the rest right here new mexico.
Proliferation and access two of
them were teenagers.
This.
They had easy access.
The.
Whatever we can do as a
deliberative legislative body
here in our state we need to do
it and do it now.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator.
Thank you senator mechanic
senator neighbored
thank you mister chairman
senator.
The.
I am.
I have some concerns with the
bill
in light of the priority of
cases that had been handed down
and so.
We will
maybe briefly go through some of
those
no doubt the spring court has.
Affirmed that the second
amendment applies to the states.
Not withstanding our own
constitution
but that the second amendment
it is
going to be viewed in search
that the government action when
dealing with the rights reserved
under the people
are dealt with.
By the course it was in a very
strict fashion and what I mean
by that is a court is not going
to presume that the things that
we do here.
I presume to be lawful or in
line with the constitution
they're going to look very
carefully at any measure that
tries to restrict any right
under the constitution and
specifically
the the second amendment so
my concern with the bill in
light of recent cases of the us
supreme court.
Is that.
We have
case law that says the
individuals have the right to
carry
firearms for self defense
and that right is protected
to just by a regulation the
government.
May not simply say that the
regulation.
Advances and important public
issues
and we can all agree that that
you know play grounds and and
uh.
What was the other category uh
playgrounds and parks
for many instances particularly
when there's equipment there for
young children and that was
probably not a place that.
Guns are are an appropriate I I
might even even agree with that
but.
The fact of the matter is.
It really doesn't matter what I
think and it really doesn't
matter what
we think is a legislative body
on those issues the rights of
the people that are
important and so to justify any
regulation concerning this issue
we're going to have to make sure
that under brilliant that its
consistent with their historical
perspectives I believe center
city low pairs of brought up
that case earlier and it it's it
basically requires us to look at
some historical basis in order
to
begin to see if any government
are imposed restriction.
Complies with or is consistent
with the
rise it was reserved under the
people if you will on the bill
of right so.
Could you discuss maybe what
historical basis we have that
would support this type of
legislation uh mister senator.
Because.
There is no balance in tests
when it comes to the second
amendment.
There's barely and historical.
Look back.
To find an analogue not a.
Perfect fet
but now the situation.
Um.
B.
Though
I was hoping surrey was going to
give me an answer there I guess
not
but the.
But the fact that the matter is
that first well this issue has
been
upgraded
i'm being told that this bike is
not picking up i'm going oh
there there was an issue it's
been fixed
there was an issue
roger now okay
okay.
I'm.
So.
The.
So what are the things though
that I mean this issue with with
in the context of the public
health or has been briefed
extensively.
I've been read in front of two
different federal j.
Judge woodies and judge riggs.
Um.
Both judges first of all have
found.
That
that playgrounds is an
alligators.
Art to schools.
And which is a and historical.
Restriction of.
Of of guns.
That is acceptable and and both
of those were called out as a
sensitive place and and however
and in broadband.
Um.
Yeah.
Hello which called out.
Court houses and schools.
And uh.
I remember correctly and and
then bring
schools
in places.
Also court has anyway it's it's
there they're both called up
and so and so the.
The two judges however split.
On the question park.
Um what are the judges found
that there was that there was an
historical
analogue
of park.
The other federal judge found
that there wasn't.
So I I will acknowledge.
That that there will be some
controversy going forward not in
terms of playgrounds I don't
think that interest.
Course most playgrounds aren't
parked.
So so the so so that we we end
up.
First of all
we end up them with part of the
park at the very least about
over.
And and so this is something
that that that we need to
either.
Exclude the entire part.
If there's a playground.
Or we need to.
Figure out them how to exclude
the playground the rest of the
park is not excluded and how
does that work.
And and and the hotel kids
you're safe here but not there
and how do we explain to the
bullet whether where the vote
was.
And so and so that's where given
that given the split between the
federal judges.
We are we're bringing for this
this this bill that is
admittedly one where there's
going to have to be some
discussion.
Going forward in terms of the
applicability of the historical
analogues.
Both to play grounds and the
parks I think play grounds of
not as much.
Maybe a little bit more so
departs.
But it is I don't I don't think
it's a slam dunk on on on the
other part's issue in either
direction and that's something
that is going to have to be
followed up.
Well mister chairman senator.
I believe that if we are to
narrowly tailor.
Any legislation dealing with
this subject
it's incumbent upon us.
To try to keep it as narrow as
possible on when I see your
definition of park.
I believe it's rather expensive
and I believe that
if this saying we're to be
signed in the law that it would
likely be stricken down should
it ever make it all the way to
the supreme court because of the
expansive definition because I
think there are parks within
this state.
Where.
Anti may even occur today.
And yet there's no exception for
that the only exception is for.
Outdoor recreationary designated
and used as an outdoor shooting
range that to me does not
narrowly tailor this
budgetation.
To
that's consistent with the
rights reserved into the people
in the bill of rights.
And I think it's incoming upon
us.
To try to when we deal with this
subject matter make sure that we
are.
The.
Yeah.
Advancing no a very important
public interest.
And that it's consistent with
the line of cases that the
supreme court is handed down
and.
I
you know i'd i'm not sure I have
arguments about playground but
park.
Is certainly wide open.
And I think it it.
Jeopardizes the entire piece of
legislation because it's not.
As nearly tailored as I think it
has to be to pass the scrutiny
that it would be given should it
ever reach.
And so I you know I i'm opposed
to it
obviously and.
And can't uh condone it but
I would I would certainly push
back that
park here is problematic and.
The.
At least for that reason
probably a number of others that
that from a legal standpoint I
think is.
Very problematic so.
Thank you the second enough
amendment was adopted in
seventeen twenty ninety one as
you know and uhm.
The amendments were not applied
to the states until the
fourteenth amendment was a
ratified in eighteen sixty
eight.
So
mr chair.
Are you aware of
what.
Kinds of spaces.
Guns were not allowed in.
In either seventeen well I I
would say that the property
would be eighteen sixty one who
was applied to the state but
whatever in either of those
dates.
That's probably an issued for
the supreme court to deal with
in the future if they continue
on the bruin path.
The.
Who instead of resolving it.
Simply said there are those who
will who will argue and then
left it there.
Mm and so at the moment we don't
know.
If we're talking about seventy
ninety one eighteen sixty.
The.
That the those who are of the
more restrained.
Who take the more restraint
approach.
Focus more exclusively on
seventeen ninety one.
There were certainly many many
more restrictions on where guns
were allowed in eighteen sixty
eight and and that included a
lot more public places are in
eighteen sixty if eighteen sixty
eight.
Is the correct time.
Then parts ends up being a
fairly safe zone to to be able
to school.
If it ends up being seventy
ninety one it ends up being
frankly a much more difficult.
Um.
Argument to be able to be able
to continue because we didn't
have.
Public parks in the same way in
seventeen ninety one.
And it's a part of the problem
with the broader analogy is
we're trying to apply rules to
things that didn't exist in
seventy ninety one but that
exists today.
But the spring court has left us
with economical.
Mr chair has I have said justice
clearance thomas is really no
justice galian he was trying to
follow on on the footsteps
that were left why just escalate
by trying to make this.
Ridiculous argument that that's
what we needed to look for
honestly if we were talking
about musketts and whatever
whatever they carried I would
think of this but
we would be in a whole different
place honest those times do not
relate to these times where we
have such horrific circumstances
the proliferation of jet of
goings I believe that ultimately
the bruin analysis will fall I
don't know what's going to come
in instead of it but I think
under the bruin analysis this
is constitutional and is likely
to be upheld in the course has
has it goes up
I think that this is a
reasonable thing to do to
protect our children which I
think is one of the highest
values that we can have is a
legislature and.
You know I we could talk a lot
about the constitutionality but
I believe it is constitutional
certainly.
Has bruined evolves and reveals
it huge weaknesses.
Thank you mister chair.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you attorneys and the in the
senate
just start with i'd like to say
remember that history is written
by the victors and the
interpretations that come down
and i'm not sure who the victors
were back down but it's it's not
an iron clad set of facts
secondly
I would like to point out not in
any suddicious kind of way be
clear on that but the confidence
in the supreme court in this
country has plummeted absolutely
plummeted as they've come up
with these wild theories like
broad and that the textulous
relying and their own version of
of history
and so I I would hope that
archards.
Don't feel they have to follow.
Something we don't even know
exactly what the choice is
because of the history and what
were the other things going on
and you know I might say that
historically children.
You know half of children are
more died before the age of five
back.
And so you know if we don't have
that today we you know through
rescience and nutrition and and
you know children
I you know again i'm i'm gonna
be careful here but is it's not
like they didn't care about
their children but it was like.
They were used to the losses
were were not used to the losses
and so does that become a
historical fact.
Or interpretation that someone
throws in and my point is this I
I would like to revive.
The confidence in the supreme
court particularly as it goes
world with its critical
decisions coming up I mean it's
I mean they are they are the
last word into there's no trust
and then they're not al.
And they're creating chaos
in this decision in particular
to me.
Is is care so is i've tried to
follow decisions that textual
less the historical.
Bend history to my
interpretation
point view
I I view as I think some do the
constitution is the living
document in today and that's why
I you know maybe it's a little
crash but I want to come back
to.
This is living document today me
children we are able to preserve
their lives and this is really
critical and in the safety of
children I think is a much more
profound issue today because we
have the ability to to advance
that where is back in those days
it was it was difficult but
nonetheless.
I those of you who get involved
in framing arguments before the
courts and so forth.
You know the constitution is is
a great guide.
But it needs to apply to what is
important today.
And I fear I fear I fear.
That have some crazy decisions
come out of the supreme court
they'll find some sort of.
The.
Historical maybe made up reason
or male interpreted reason to
say well we were just fooling
about.
And and so it's it's okay for a
dictator.
I just i.
I'm of expressing my frustration
they were getting tied up in
these miniscure little
arguments.
When what is the most important.
Is is that before by one of my
colleagues are safety so
i'm just putting that out there
as a as you move forward with
this through the courts and time
will change hopefully maybe pro
democracy justice as well being
more pointed to the court and
and will have start having faith
back in the supreme court which
we don't today is a twenty eight
percent.
You know the most important
institution in the government
and they pay no heat.
The.
So i'm i'm sorry to get on that
soap box but it's just I I would
caution that we don't get
tripped up by a lot of these
nuances made up by
not highly credible justices.
Sorry thank you.
You know we were we were just.
These ones are.
But they are.
Well.
I do.
The.
One question apologize for being
in an out been in another
committee but.
Gonna go back along senator
neighbors.
Uhm questions are does this
applied to state parks it's just
municipalities and counties this
is this isn't having to estate
parks chairman and center
mccatch and we make loss for
other people.
Got it all right
thank you.
Sarah every set of mister
president.
I guess I just have one
question.
With this not allowing firearms
in those parks can you
guarantee.
The.
No criminal will bring a firm
into the park.
The chairman and federal
recuption the reason we make it
a crime.
Is so that we can deal with the
after.
In effect after someone
mr chairman said i'm accurate
and that's the reason we bank
anything.
A criminal act is so that we can
after the fact.
Put somebody in time up.
Okay.
Well this is not legislation I
obviously can support.
Who are.
Children so with that known for
the questions thank you.
Just say a at the risk of pretty
because man just say something
at the very india very quickly
just very quick with.
And that is
yesterday just very quickly.
My daughter's ten years old at
the end of every school day she
has a choice.
Of.
Of where she goes what are the
choices is to be what's called a
walker and water means she goes
across the street to the park.
That's extra school.
It plays there.
Until.
Her mother alright.
Pics were up or hangs out there
w.
I was want her to be able to go
there.
And enjoy playing there like a
child.
With the getting this of a
child.
And not ha.
Senator who give out yes center
my estas center mccatch and
serve my catch in votes now
center mechanic yes center
mechanic votes yes center
neighbor center neighborhood
votes now centers media's
senator city a lot best yes
center city a lot of results yes
senator man yes explain my vote
there are from and votes yes
center to the pinop yes and
explain my vote.
The.
Send your own vote of five.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you center for bringing us bill
forward now I voted yes but if
anybody thanks is going to put a
dent in the crime rate.
There sadly mistaken.
I just google the.
The fact how many is the billion
guns in the country in the world
the united states has forty six
percent otherwise we have half a
billion guns in the united
states.
Which is more than the twenty
five.
Tap countries combine.
This whole discussion is this
been
so.
All about faulty.
The distinctions.
You know think about that for a
minute.
Half a billion gun number we're
swimming in guns the rate is
nothing but a front for the gun
manufacturers who want to sell
as many.
Americans by fourteen million
guns a year.
A week with a nine states has
the highest
number of gun killings of my
modern industrialized countries
in the world we encarcerate more
people for capital any other
count modern industrialized
country in the world.
Also thing is ridiculous anyway
thanks as well as going to make.
A dent in the crime rate.
They're crazy we're just doing
is to make the public think
we're doing something.
Which we are what it's just a
baby.
Will live out all right thank
you senator center
you know on the circle of
sibhon.
Can you all hear me ok.
This until we hear a piercing
shriek right
which will expect in five four
three no committee great to be
with you again to mister
chairman when the last bills I
may have in front of you that
really seeks to kind of expand.
There put it options for new
mexicans in this case.
The study of source iben
mushrooms for therapeutic
medical uses this is a
bipartisan bell that i'm is
being consponsored with senator
brand of the chair of the health
committee in the house
representatives thompson and
representatives after you
the memorial colleagues asked
the department of health to do
two things study the therapy to
sorry study the afficacy of saw
siben for therapeutic purposes
and number two two evaluate what
our next steps needed in the
regulatory statutory framework
to be able to.
A incorporate print treatment
here in the state of new mexico.
I just want to say mister
chairman.
The society has been proven
applicatious in the treatment of
various mental until conditions
including major depressive
disorder the FDA has twice given
what they called aya.
Break through rake through
treatment status to several
providers for the use of it.
And up and now the va is also
studying it for use of ptsd
cell.
This can help people very
potentially and down and so what
we're trying to do in a
bipartisan ways as the
department helps to recognize.
That we want them to get going
to start looking at this and
without stand for questions.
Yeah.
And there are people.
Hey.
Of the committee my name is
emily peppen license clinton's
clinical social record and
speaking on behalf of the new
mexico behavior a health
providers alliance and
for the reasons brought forth in
the bell and many others we just
want to say that we whole heart
at least support this bill I
don't think we need to convince
anyone that there is a mental
health crisis going on in the
state of new mexico so please
consider this sorry not bell
memorial thank you.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is
attached to dollar blows a
member of sole trip located in
last cuses new mexico a research
and evidence based hilling
center I want to think the
sponsors were bringing this
memorial forward I am here today
and support of sm twelve files
over as shown tremendous
potential in treating mental
health struggles like the
pressure name anxiety research
has demonstrated its ability to
provoke long term positive
changes in mood behavior and
cognition I believe we must
embrace the power to transform
lives
and advancemental health care
let's start with sb twelve and
further research and potential
benefits and the and the
disadvantages thank you.
The.
Hello and i'm good morning
mister chair members open in
many my name is moneysucceed
back I am currently the standing
president of the on the board of
the new mexico psychedelic
science society I am also a
license like a therapist and
drug and alcohol counselor
working in addiction services
here in our state more than
anything I am a proud new
mexican family generations that
stem back to the beginning of
our state I am proud and
protected by birthday and our
people we are currently living
still living in a state of
emergency here maybe even more
so when it comes to substance
abutes you abuse disorders
addictions and mental health
crisis especially suicide the
dismost statistics continue to
show we as a board are comprised
of mental health practitioners
and dees in various license
partitioners in the field who
all share the same common
passion to support the findings
from current studies and even
our own state and in other
states that shows they could
eligibility therapy using source
i've been containing mushrooms
can provide help for our state
and that they are a putting
approach help for major
depressive disorders treatment
resistant impression substance
abuse disorders ptsd c pds cpdst
that have greatly affected our
first responders and veterans
thank you for your service for
which we do have studies
supporting this and end of life
distress with political car
again thanks to john's hopkins
i'm substantial work with their
cancer patience all of our
neighboring states especially
texas and arizona are doing
large extensive studies to
research what's that what this
looks like for their states
given our grim certificates we
face as a state especially now
with better all taking lives
every single day and suicide I
don't think that we can afford
to read the consequences of a
slow learning curb when it comes
to studying and obtaining data
of what this looks like for our
state
thank you so much for hearing
today.
Good morning mr chair senate
committee members senator jeff
steinborne my name is deborah
store and i'm a doctor of
medical science and a license
practicing physician associated
in last cruces and macau founder
and chief executive officer of
sole trip a second dollar
medicine nonprofit here in los
cruces I strongly support center
memorial twelve to study so
siben for their petitive
application my boring into the
world of society marshalls and
their ability to treat
depression suicidality was
appreciated during my undergrad
in nineteen ninety at the
university of colombia this is
where I play a place where so
similar comments is much from
actually an abundantly and I
witness first hand how well this
plant medicine works to
facilitate healing mood
disorders bass forward to the
last eight years as a medical
provider here and and in other
states.
I have worked with many patients
suffering with severe depression
ptsd I know our current
formulary of fda approved
psychotropics are not working
well nor is talk therapy alone
we need to revisit so simon that
was unfortunately demonized many
years ago I am dealt deeply into
the science and medical
application of society and
especially for existential
distress in end of life care
through my training where the
company called there so canada
and it's an organization works
with health canada to create a
dedicated program to support
one's right to u cell site in
through a special access program
this is a tiered system of well
trained prescribers and
facilitators who were better
through health care I I think
new mexico could adapt a similar
program but we need research to
support such programs new mexico
has a beautiful.
Mr.
Well I was just gonna say I I
have a constituent metals who
who.
Reached out to me and I and then
there's a.
Hello.
Am I ready to speak
okay I my name is lian meadows
i'm about member of soul trip
and i'm also consumer of mental
health treatment i'd like to
speak and support a senate mile
twelve I mister biber of
generational trauma and was
first suicidal at age nine.
I've struggled most of my life
that deprection anxiety and
complex post dramatic stress to
sort her the options for
pharmaceutical management for
mental health often take a long
time to work and have many set
it effects I try to have a dozen
medications and have had so many
side effects emotional numbness
double vision sexual disfunction
that I chose not to treat my
depression and live in a
substandard state recently I was
exposed to psychedelic medicine
with ketting me therapy it made
me feel more like engaged and
helped me to change my father
patterns and live a higher
quality life and feel so simon
work similarly to keep the mean
and will give patience more
options for mental health
treatment I strongly urge the
study of siliciton and your
support of senate memorial
twelve.
Thank you.
The.
The.
Hello.
Mr chair and other board
members.
My name is james brown and i'm a
foreign war better and.
And a pharmacist in the state of
new mexico as the board member
of an organization called.
The criminalization of
psychedelics in the mexico I am
in favor of esim twelve this
funding will help our veterans.
And other new mexicans deal with
health conditions such as ptsd
in depression.
I'm in favor of funding that
helps with projects.
There will help every new
mexican deal with our mental
health treatments.
As well as these conditions I
have experience in dealing with
prescription medications that
affect both of these conditions.
A new mexico.
We have always had a focus on
using natural polistic
medications and remedies as
supplementation or alternatives
to prescription medications
though siben is one option that
we need to look at.
Now was the time for veterans in
new mexicans to have another
option for the treatment of
these conditions.
I am in favor of passing a sim
twelve.
I am grateful to be able to
speak to you today about these
issues thank you for your time.
The.
Lol
my name is brenda berg I am a
license medical health counselor
here in new mexico I am the
president of the realization of
psychological new mexico
my hope is.
Hello can you hear me.
My.
Validate that it's something
that we want to pursue so but
i'm well in entertaining that
makes it strong as chairman.
Just a couple of comments thank
you mister chair and thank you
senator will bring this forward
this is a very important bill it
has the stick my associated with
it but john's hopkins has been
carrying out research for ten
years the university of new
mexico both in the department of
psychiatry as one of the leading
researchers as well as the
department of a family medicine
and to help them and together up
other.
Laws from other states and and
do a and and i'm glad the
department of health is involved
in this because they really want
to go around the state and take
the temperature and and learn
what's going on in some of the
other community so I did put
grow money into put a pulling
all this together so we can poll
bring a bill forward next year
that hopefully moves as very far
along for using these
revolutionary old treatments but
a rediscoverer for these
conditions and I know from
several people who have gone out
of the country to do this
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you mister senators.
It talks about the FDA.
Granted some
breakthrough therapy designation
but has the FDA engaged and any
studies on the subject.
Mr chair senator i'm not aware
of what the FDA has done to
result in them granting this
break through status
treatment for these providers so
I can't speak to that.
I would assume they did
something before giving that out
because the fda that's their job
but I can't speak to what it is.
Am chair and centers I mean.
Not no very much about this
subject but
is this
I call it drive this product
one of the.
Drugs that are illegal drugs to
disaster own is that why we're
bringing this
mister chair senator it is it is
federally in illegal drug just
like canada was by the way maybe
still is
by town but states are
decriminalizing at their started
with medical you said so I mean
similar similar.
The.
Well mr
senators.
If it's that thing if it's that
type of product shouldn't it be
studied at the federal level to
result in
maybe the use as a uh.
For you says they
drove it goes to the all the
tests that pharmaceutical
companies have to go through
stuff for what what makes this
different
equipment but yield the doctor
icky if he doesn't mind he seems
to have the information
thank you sanitar and thank you
senator for the question it is
being heavily studied at the
federal level that are many
studies funded by the
national institute of mental
health and there are several
studies being sponsored by the
va precisely because it is
having such a good outcome with
ptsd and then manage and all
these other conditions so there
is federal sponsorship for this
legislation and for the four
understanding more at the
federal level
chair.
Senators and probably center
hicky do do we have to
get with the department of
health have to get some federal
approval to engage in the study.
This.
Mister chair and and senators
no they they wouldn't it I mean
it if if they were if they were
doing.
Studies and people as they do a
john's hopkins with money
commissioned by the federal
government two johns apkins in
many other institutions in the
country yes they would and so
that's why I put some of my grow
money to the university where
they are already doing federally
sponsored and it's grants at the
university of new mexico to
study this so but studying it
further but what studying the
laws of other states is not
something that would put them in
any legal jeopardy and as well
as convening people around the
state to understand so that
could be a role of the
department of health and then
maybe if there are regulations
with what we want to do with any
bill we would pass
and again this other states are
passing these bills in the
context of the federal situation
I mean you you have to be able
to be licensed to
the federally by the.
From the federal drug
administration day fda thank you
so yeah this would not put
anyone in legal jeopardy as long
as the following the past that
they should power thank you mr
chairman
senators that that them raise
the issue of if you and am's
already conducting these studies
with maybe that'll approval
why do we want a commission the
department of health to engage
and studies that are already
being done by you and m I guess
the.
Real question is back to the
first question
why does it say department in
health and why doesn't it say u
n l.
This chair senator because we
are precisely looking for state
action the.
You and m cannot create a
therapiutic program per se a
statewide therapy medically used
program a sale seven in the same
way we did medical canada number
of years ago helped so many
people so they're just they play
different rules I think you and
m has a very important role here
clearly as research university
who can.
Partner with the state to make
these decisions but what we're
looking for as we're looking for
state action I think they affect
efcassie salad seven has been
proven to the point that quite
frankly the mexico should be
looking at that's practices of
not just organ colorado just did
there's several cities have
decriminalized at so
if I could jump in here senators
I think the the whereas close
which I hadn't read before
does explain there's a real role
for the health department to
establish the regulatory
framework I think that's the
crucial thing that led you and
them do the studies let john
have consider the studies but if
we're going to use it if if the
clinicians who say it's a
valuable going to use it they
need to do it under a regulatory
framework that doesn't get him
in the trouble
on mr
memorials and heath recitals
play very little in terms of
what a piece of
legislation or what a document
does the recitals are just help
you understand that the where it
is now therefore clause is is
the important clause in it
served the department health be
requested to study and evaluate
the afficacy of this product and
then it goes on to establish a
program so it seems to me that
the the first parties
specifically what u and m is
doing the second part is it is
the uh
maybe the department of health
responsibility
but.
It just seems to me that.
We're asking department health
to engage in the studies to
a valuate which it seems like
you and ems studying the effects
of it and seeing if it's a
factor or not and
so I you know it seems to me
that there needs to be a little
word smithing there to bring you
an american chair senator view
and it add the words in
partnership with UNM you know
that
make folks feel good.
We would entertain an amendment
like that that the until three
line thirteen
that the department of health.
In participant constant fee with
the right word i'll
collaboration in collaboration
are you good with that senator
yes sir.
Collaboration with the
university of the mexico yeah so
need to be
medical center or health science
just you you know
this to chip I think it is under
hicky I just want to ask you
feel like you and m would feel
like that was friendly
you and them is here but I would
tell them to do it
wow okay good
okay.
And they would.
Senator do you want to make that
motion yes i'd like to make that
motion in collaboration with the
university of new mexico and I
will second any opposition to
the motion to the amendment
seeing non the memorial has been
amended anything else senator
let's go ahead and so move we
have we have a motion already a
sediol office and telemet so the
secretary will call the
we just say there is no there
was no opposition yeah
so as amended well that's true
when we pass the original motion
it was not as amended so it's as
amended so.
Okay you still go with it.
I I moved that we p.
Cinema moral twelve
minutes told me you are still in
a second.
Secretary will call the rule of
senator yes senator hickey votes
yes senator masters center my
catch and said my catch and
votes yes then a mechanic yes
center mechanicals yes center
neighbor center neighborhood
votes yes meetings center city a
lot yes
yes senator thomas.
So tomorrow it's yes center it
is if you know yes no it is if
you know that yes
and of seven to zero vote you
have a dupass as amended thank
you senators
center nightmare listed your
bill next.
The.
The.
And then we'll do the the house
bill.
This is a senate bill two
thirty.
The.
We won't touch the desk
but it was sharing committee
this is an at bill two thirty
and we do have a slight
amendment that I have to give
credit to.
I have to give credit to the
committee analysts for.
Bringing that issue to my
attention and so we tried to
slightly I can make the wording.
I found out what's going on.
But anyway we do have an
amendment to make a slight
change to make it more
consistent with the flow of the
receiving section so.
Uh.
With I can explain the biller we
can go to the amendment first
whatever the pledge of the
committee is.
So we're on page.
Or.
Yes sir line eighteen.
What we're doing is adding the
word is for is just add in
is
okay
okay we're having the word is
because every preceding
paragraph starts with the
wording of the action be
consistent.
And then
as a result of that we are
striking the word is later down
in the paragraph and then we're
uh.
If inserting them or at the
proper place and in two places
both on page four and on page
nine.
So it's more.
Dramatical then it is
subsequent.
Well we've always been very keen
on grammar in this community so
I think that.
And i'd be happy to explain the
the overall yeah let's let let's
just this is great adopters
amendment anybody.
In opposition anybody want to
move the amendment well I guess
he's a move the amendments of a
good anybody know opposition to
it.
Seeing no opposition will
consider the bill the men did
and now tell us what it's all
about it.
Thank you mister chair and to my
left has doctor hanging racy
with the university of new
mexico to use my expert and
basically this is a bill to
assist
as I understand that the
university in the mexico to use.
Data.
That would help in some studies
and it will allow the university
to utilize
data currently confidential.
But it will be aggregated so it
is not data that will be
specifically tied to an
individual but it's aggregated
data and that's a result of the
federal statutes that that's
cited here and with that i'd ask
my expert maybe go into the
finer details of what we're
trying to do doctor welcome
hello.
Thank you mr chairman's and
members of the committee and
hang on the race i'm the interim
vice president of research for
health science center at the m.
And with your requesting is
simply maybe more like a
clarification and an amendment
because right now the data that
has been collected and has
mental health data cannot be
used for any kind of a research
because of the way bill is right
so this data is collected as
part of the standard of the care
but we cannot look back and look
for associations and look for
you know what might work for
certain patients but may not was
your asking is the amendment so
we can actually follow
everything else that is required
to regard to going through a
review of the ethic committee is
happened privacy data use
agreement and all and continue
doing research and the data that
has been collected as part of
its standard document for our
patience I would like to offer
an example of that we are part
of a network that is called
infant and matter non netflix
you're one of the five clinical
sites as part of this project
data were supposed to be
collected for mothers for
pregnant moms.
From year twenty fourteen to
twenty twenty one these pregnant
women were using opuate and the
intention for this project was
to learn about babies that are
warrant this morns and follow
them and have the data until the
age of six to learn about if the
any kind of issues that is
children with development.
Became sure any data with regard
to if they developed a bds or
asthma or any other condition
but if they ended up with eighty
eight if they ended up with
depression this is meant i'll
have data we cannot share with
so as a result of that again
these other centers is clink on
a site are showing all of their
details their publishing making
conclusion based on that all
patience and our children's are
left out so what you're asking
you is to give us permission to
share this data i'm contributed
to the research that is being
conducted because right now we
cannot do that.
E the language about.
All confidential information in
existence honor after july first
there will still leave you
unable to utilize previous
research.
Gather data so that's lost we're
just talking about in the future
what you might be able to do
is.
No all data is is all the day up
to th.
So message and committee I
believe it actually allows us to
use all the data available as
you speak also it is all
information in existence on so
it could be all your pester
correct so you wouldn't lose
that you would still be able to
okay understand it anybody here
and support this build besides
the union
and their love okay good good.
Thank you mr chairman of the
committee jason some registered
bodies for early on county
earlier counting as long being
concerned
the behaviour health code as it
relates to both the adult code
and the juvenile code because
you and m is a major service
provider at the metropolitan
detention center and at a number
of other other behavioral health
facilities like the cares campus
in order to know what that what
we're doing is right as it
relates to programming we have
to be able to evaluate the data
if we can evaluate the data we
can adjust the programming we
can't have discussions with u n
about what's working in what's
not working there are sufficient
protections are the internal
review board and other required
requirements to comply with
hipper the de identification of
this information they're all
really important protections
that protect the identity and
the information of the
individual but if we deaggregate
it then we can make really
important decisions about what's
working what's not how we can
adjust where we move funding and
as a result of that we can
actually offer better behavioral
whole services and burning a
county which quite frankly is
one of the direct foundational
costs of public safety issues in
our community mbc is the largest
behaviour whole facility in the
state and we need to be able to
offer great services there you
are n is taken over those
health care services and so this
is going to be a critical
component of making sure that
they do it right moving forward
with us as a partner thank you
great thank you.
The.
Well mister charing committee
and ranking geology and work
with doctor racy at UNM health
sciences and we stand in very
strong support of this because
of she gave one anecdotal story
there hundreds of those types of
stories where we need the state
of for the amazing research that
our researchers are doing at the
university thank you chair thank
you
make did you want to say that
you're just
anybody online
thank you very question you're
amending both the children's
code and the adult
non mental health card okay so
this will apply to to research
being done in conjunction with
juvenile
members of the committee or any
opposition from anybody.
Should check that.
Okay senator hickey senator in
senator city look as we have a
motion for a dupless.
Seconded by senator cutching
discussion
I think this is great I I thank
you for bringing it this is
really really important the fire
I I don't know if you read it
mister chair but.
Because we're talking about data
that already exists.
You're kind of worried about at
least without home it's the word
and the nonimising it
I think that there's a concern
I concerned that somebody could
find out their data.
Was used and so see where d.
Um requested about a provision
for animalization I was looking
for it and I didn't see it
would you accept that as a
friendly amendment.
Mr chair.
Yes
mister chairman and senator city
look as thank you for the
question this is actually a
process that is standard for any
kind of research when we look at
exics and data we have to go
through the human human research
yes research protection exactly
as a result of the only shared
the identified data and if there
are rare conditions for example
they do not allow doors data to
be shared again i'm talking in
general but that is always a
process for any kind of its
study as we are speaking of when
we have to look at the data from
previous years I mr chair I
recognize that you and them has
that all those procalls I have
been through that
and it is very very careful but
I did I just wonder if the bill
shouldn't have it for because
unit was not the only one that
could be there could be seeking
this data and
at least something that requires
that level of protection for the
data before it's released you
know because I I do have
confidence that you and m would
not businesses data and would go
to the human subject human
subject research protocols
but
do we have that covered on page
live in a nothing in the code
limits the confidentiality right
support federal statute and
regulation I think we're covered
that's mr mr chair I believe
that that he above protection
which is is just hipper i'm i'm
talking about data for example
if they're.
And this is hypothetical if they
are using data dealing with.
Let's say native americans in a
certain area of all the cookie
the population could be so small
that
you know you and and protects
against that.
And I I don't believe that this
this necessarily does um.
I mean I I think it's a really
really good idea I just I just
know how sensitive this data can
be.
Um in I dealt with this if you
were called mister chair when I
did that date that data the
protective act the sensitive
information protection act of
you know cover do you have an
amendment you want to propose
and I I haven't written it down
but I could I wanted to explore
this issue we could might maybe
do it at the for the next
committee where does it go after
this mister chair judiciary
I don't want to hold this back
because time is so limited so
i'm not going to make that
suggestion
I will tell you I start only
suggest you think about it for
the next committee more than
we've been able to think about
it in these few seconds and just
determine whether you think.
Other than you and m because
there this is open to other
research projects whether you
might want to have that little
guard rail in um.
And then I just feel much better
about about voting for it on the
floor.
Mr chair is that okay mister
chairman and yes definitely yes
I didn't and also again the last
sentence it's also refers to
happen so again we can within
that parameter if something
needs to be and that's been can
certainly consider but it does
mention that it has to be
respectful of the hip privacy of
the patience but as you
really say that that hipper
protects the medical information
with the data will also contain
non medical information and if
it's not.
Just as an example of another
another group to be protected
might be immigrants.
So that that's why i'm seeing
making this suggestion thank you
mister chair.
Any other discussion on the bill
seeing none will go to a vote
the secretary will call the role
senator hickey yes senator he
give us yes senator my husband's
center in my catch and senate my
catch involves yes and a
mechanic yes center mechanic
votes yes center neighborhood
senator neighborhood votes yes
centers that you love is yes
about yes senator man center
tell me involves yes sanities if
you know yes is it penalty.
Senator owner seven to zero vote
you have a dupass thank you
and members will go now to to
house bill thirty three.
As amended the prescription drug
price transparency
represent have heard and welcome
to the committee and senator
stephenics you're your
copresenting this great.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee i'm representative
ahead in your with my cold
sponsor senator the family and
along with a two of the
expert witnesses here with us
today and I will let him
introduce themselves when they
come to speed before you as the
house appropriation and finance
committee substitute as amended
for a house bill thirty three
which creates the prescription
drug price transparency act to
increase transparency in the
prescription drug supply chain
the bill before requires
manufacturers health insurers
pharmacy benefit managers are
too annually report prescription
drug prices and trans to the
office of superintendent of
insurance.
The bill also includes
confidentiality provisions
throughout the bill to protect
data reported by the entities to
the secretary to the office of
of the superintendent.
Mr
mr chair I will ask my my.
Expert gabby repairer to provide
you with some additional
information that would be
helpful as you consider this
bill.
Mister chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
cabrala repairer director policy
and communications with health
action mexico
this bill is pretty simple and
concept it's requiring each
entity in the supplied chain for
prescription drugs to report to
osi i'm certain data to give us
an indication of what the cost
drivers are why prescription
drug prices are rising here
after a year
and osi will compile that data
into an annual report for the
legislature in the public and
also hold an annual public
hearing.
Uh barbara.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name sparper webber
of the executive director of
health action new mexico but
also stand for for you
representing the new mexico
consumers for affordable
prescriptions it's a
prescription at a coalition of
about thirty organizations we
then meeting on this issue of
drug pricing
for about four years it is clear
to us that many people in new
mexico in fact forty four
percent of people in new mexico
have reported that they either
didn't fill a prescription
recently or that they are rating
the medications they have so it
means that these people are not
getting the medic the control
that they have to manage their
condition their chronic
condition or post accident post
procedure whatever it is that
requires it
and
so we can really say that have
the population forty four
percent in new mexico really
doesn't have full excess to
health care because they can
afford their medications
last year medications went up
forty
forty two thousand forty two
hundred and sixty medications
were in price last year and over
half of a more
more than the rate of inflation
just to give you an example the
resupance which is her
behavioral health medication
that many people have used for
decades last year in july when
at fifty seven percent.
Another medication that was very
it's often used by a
for but nine prostate disease
already costs five hundred
dollars prescription and a last
year they raised it up almost
five hundred percent so we meet
they raised it five hundred
percent over five hundred
dollars that's correct so it's
not what twenty five thousand
dollars gone up for a very
highly so we need to understand
what is i'm sorry
five of twenty four increase be
twenty five hundred.
Okay so I guess it's twenty five
oh nine twenty five thousand is
relatively inexpensive
so
we want to see what can be done
in new mexico actually in our
healthcare system the one area
that has always been variable
has been the drugs companies
setting the prices and raising
the prices and it's
unsustainable not only for our
health care but for a healthcare
system is the never one driver
cost driver for premiums and for
the health care system so we
hope you will consider this
transparency bill as terry cole
testified in one of the
committees on this bill
from the chamber of commerce
transparency is foundational to
all business.
The.
Appropriation.
One hundred thousand.
Very good will this go to the
ideas and see if there is
anybody in the audience here in
favor of this bill wow.
Anybody opposed to the bill.
Okay well let's start with that
will do j d will do mister moore
will we'll get everybody that
don't take to each time because
if it's a good bill we want to
get it out
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee i'm jd
bolington speaking on behalf of
the greater album kirky chamber
of commerce which is pleased to
stand and support this bill
alongside with so many other
people on the room and and
sponsors costs keep rising for
new mexico residents and
prescription drugs are no
exception and it is clear has
been noted we do need more
transparency as consumers and as
providers so patients can get
the treatments they needed a
fair price so we are to the
committee to support this
legislation for both patients
and it and providers.
Good morning mrperiod chair and
members of this hard work in
committee
my name is to redocent and I am
a volunteer advocate for a rp
and a retired nurse and I speak
for two hundred and forty
thousand members of the a r p
who are very concerned about the
rising cost of prescriptions one
of my best friends and a
volunteer with a a r p lives
with ms met multiple scorosis
and heard medications cost
ninety three thousand dollars a
year in canada the same
medications cost twenty three
thousand dollars it's a
significant difference.
And you can imagine trying to
pay for that year after year for
fifty years or so and she still
chugging along.
Anyway.
We recognize that the a lot of
the population can't afford
their drugs and therefore they
have to choose between food and
or taking their medications so
we appreciate your support on
house bill thirty three this is
very much needed because if you
can't afford your medications
you can't get better.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is more i'm a
registered lobbyist for
america's health insurance plans
national treat association for
health insurers and we stand in
support of house bill thirty
three it's important to note
that a hip and its members are
trying to provide effective
health coverage to folks at a
reasonable price at the
frustration for a hip and its
members in this space is a
pharmaceutical manufacturer set
the price they do so without any
parameters are oversight they
just set the price and then we
try to adjust to that and
provide coverage for it it's
notable that drugs are drug
coverage is becoming the largest
spend for a it's the largest
part of our premium dollar it's
at twenty two percent for our
members some actually experience
higher percentages there so drug
pricing is a definite problem
and I would know mrperiod
chairman members of the
committee when you look to the
bill and specifically section
five you will note that there
are requirements on health
insurers we are coming forward
we are agreeing to those
additional requirements
regulatory reporting
requirements because of the
frustration related to drug
price increases we stand
strongly and support of house
bill thirty three.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee i'm the irinaki
was speaking on behalf of the
superintendent of the insurance
we would like to think the
sponsor in advocates for
bringing forward this
legislation the complexity of
our prescription drugs the plane
obscours how each component of
the chain contributes to the
final price this legislation
takes the comprehensive look
across the entire supply chain
which is unnecessary for step to
addressing sky rocket in
prescription drug costs think
the again to the sponsor and for
bringing forward this important
transparency bill.
Hello mr chair and members of
the committee my name is emily
peppen license clinical social
worker
what's wrong with me it's okay
okay license clinical social
worker in the state of new
mexico I represent the new
mexico behavior a health
providers alliance and in the
interest I have transparency and
for the reasons put forward by
the sponsors and many others
we fully support this bill thank
you.
The.
Thank you mr chair and.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is erica sanchez and i'm with
new mexico center on long
poverty we stand in supportive
house thirty three because we
believe that health care as a
human right and making
prescription drugs affordable is
crucial to ensuring that new
mexicans have access to the care
they need so for all of the
reasons already mentioned today
we ask you to please vote in
favor of how spell thirty three
thank you.
The.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee of bill
jordan with new mexico voices
for children and I want to think
the sponsors and all of the
members of the coalition who
have brought this bill today as
someone who seems to keep adding
prescriptions to my own
countertile and and who looks at
the prices it is shocking that
what we're paying in comparison
to what other countries pay the
first step in bring it down drug
prices is transparency and
pricing and we earn your support
thank you.
Thank you chairman and thank you
for bringing this bill senators
and representatives and experts
this is a very very important
first step
and
I have one clarification in
terms of and i'm willing and
need coaching from those who
have been here for a while
and the page
eight I think it's sixteen
i'm sorry i'm page seventeen
there is an appropriation there
it was strapped okay i'm sorry I
miss that
it's it's in the hospital to for
a hundred thousand thank you
perfect.
And and I believe that that will
get started but if you look at
the the amount of data and so
forth I urge you to come back
next year earlier over this
summer
so we can get it in the house
bill to and not have it and
injured
probably what will be and
necessary cost to really collect
analyze distribute the
information and make sense of it
I also
urge you
I have sent some of you a paper
that I commission and
the the I put it in the
vanacular the tricks the sliding
and many other maneuvers by the
pharmacy benefit managers go far
beyond just the rebates and will
need to put that into
legislation to look at that and
then also look at how we foul
some other states who are
definitely getting lower costs
in their prescriptions but it's
it's deep it's rather dance but
it's detailed in that bill so
i'm glad that they were starting
this thank you representative
heard in for bringing it forward
it really well we will bring
down the cost of drugs but it's
it's going to be a slock it's
gonna be a hard one
and the other day I just
because of
some of the things that happen I
I have an article and I think I
sent it to
miss webber about how the.
Could be consulting companies.
Etcetera
white well well
in their way a large number of
them consult both.
With various employers.
Two.
Get lower drug prices from the
pbms and then they consult with
the pbm's and how to get around
the consultant they did for the
employers it is absolutely
horrific.
And that kind of activity
needs to and another thing that
we need to start to put into our
state legislation that
consultants have to be much more
ethical in their practices and
feel very interested i'll send
you a copy of that paper it is
rather starling so thank you I
just want to be sure if we were
seeing this as a first step in
the necessary step and in time
working with the health care
authority.
Somehow with osi will get this
together so.
Thank you mister chair
I was just looking to the fire
and just I wanted to double
check that you you to care of
this oversight apparently said
that the
the language defining a
manufacturer is an entity
license to manufacturer
distribute prescription jugs
pursuant to the pharmacy act
they said that it could it lead
to a compliment complicated into
play between federal state
statutes and regulations did you
did you take care of this in any
amendments are in the substitute
I am just with not sure how it
was taken care of mr chair
senator in our most recent
conversation with osi they said
the definition was okay so we
had left it great perfect and
then I had to smile because the
attorney general says it os I
might not have statutory thirty
this gives them statutory
authority this is a great bill
this this is the a great bill in
i'm delighted to support it
you do realize the the attorney
general is now under literally
changed his name to the minister
of justice not the
I just made me laugh I I don't
know who they have doing these.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you.
Senator and representative
bringing this bill forward you
know couple years ago I was in a
room committee meeting uh where
the ppm is the big farm
insurance companies all
testified about the price of
drugs it was almost historical
the pbm's blame big farmer and
insurance companies big farmer
blame pbm's.
Shares companies and insurance
companies blame big farmer and
pv
so.
This may be a dump question
we're going to ask me so how
will publish those in all this
information lower drug prices.
Thank you mister chair and
senator i'm going to take the
lead on this since we pass the
health care of authority
department just without the
department the health care
authority the issue is to
do combined purchasing and if in
fact we find that the specific
prices of pharmaceuticals are
across the entire range by the
ocean osi that was just the
health care authority in making
their decisions in terms of
purchasing so I think it's going
to go hand.
Thank you for that a bob
anything I just want to have one
comment to that they're twenty
two states that have passed
prescription drug transparency
and we researched all of them
consulted with them and a good
sense and
put the best things in our bill
but the one thing that what's
found with the more robust
states that we put in this bill
was that it act as as a
deterrent for the high
escalating prices so if you see
that it's a ten percent in our
bill they have to report at ten
percent then they will come in
at nine point ninety nine
percent but it keeps some from
going to fifty seven percent so
that's one known
factor in ringing down cost
for that answer it's all I have
mister chair.
Thank you I had a quick question
before we go to emotion the bill
refers to the penalties that is
the osa can impose for companies
that fail to cooperate with this
are those listed in section
fifty nine a one eighteen what
are those penalties you have any
idea of what what we can do to
them if they cover it mister
chair the penalty and the
insurance code is five thousand
dollars per day per violation up
to ten thousand dollars per day
per violation for a wilful
violation
and osi said that can be
interpreted also to be in if
they failed to report in a
single drug in many aspects of
that drug that they can escalate
that even for their own so these
aren't just slips on the rest
these could a a course for.
Pharmaceutical companies these
are slips on the but
it's the they still amount to
something and and it would get
enough to to get them to
cooperate you think.
The.
Mr chair according to us how
they feel confident that they
could escalate those violations
at the point where to force
compliance here
I just wanna.
On that point
I was just gonna say that the
senator starting both I think it
was steinbern
jeff standard.
On the floor of the senate the
other day said something that
the.
I think it was jeff.
Fifty five percent of all
television advertising.
Is now pharmaceutical fifty five
percent of all the advertising I
thought the lawyers were fifty
five percent but it turns out
that it's it's it's
pharmaceutical
that was sharking.
Anywhere tells you what we've
become did you want to come in
on the earlier come
yes mister chair thank you very
much I I would like to note
it and in the form of a question
and then I will follow with
clarification.
The five ten thousand dollars a
day is it just for one entity
that had had makes several or is
it each instance of non
reporting and a drug category.
Mrperiod terry senator is it is
each instance so a single
manufacturer on the same day can
get you know as whole slew of
violations against them
thank you at mister charlie
thank you for that answer that's
really important I want to point
out that just
so that you know this is there
is precedent elena
charged one of their health
plans there for a mental health
parity violation is similar it
was five hundred thousand
dollars when it's five hundred
thousand dollars that that's not
quite still decimal dust but it
gets their attention and I want
to encourage the department to
make the case and you know when
you're talking to three four
five million dollars then then
then they'll listen and and
that's kind of what's required I
also just have a point of
clarity so that everyone's on
the same page senator tommon
noted the circular firing squad
that we all sat through in an
interim committee a couple years
ago I think it was
representative thompson who
identified that phrase
and what we found amazing were
the pbm's health insurers
shooting each other when in fact
the three largest pbm's of
account for ninety percent are
owned by the three largest
insurance companies so when
you're doing this it is it its
insurance company and again it
may come back that there is a
violation of the insurance
company and their subsidiary pbm
so said a five million dollars
you could be talking ten million
dollars which gets attention and
and I bring this up having lived
in corporate it's only when you
get to the big numbers that they
start to pay attention so I
encourage that as we go forward
and emboy with that subsidise a
lot more research and data
collection thank you and frank
frank murier analysis the
penalties currently in the in
the statute it's five thousand
dollars per current.
The.
And if it's wilful and malicious
then motivated simply by greed
it's ten thousand dollars.
The.
I love the idea of it every day
if you could sneak that into the
statute next year that might be
that might start getting their
attention every day they don't
complain it it adds another but
that's that's not in this bill
and we were just talking about
it now what's the committee
we have emotion for a do pass
seconded by several people
including tomorrow.
Yeah.
The secretary will call the rule
senator hickey
senator he give us yes center
may has done senator mccatchen
my party votes yes center
mechanic yes
my car votes yes said her
neighbor senator never votes yes
centers meetings center city of
yes etcetera city yes center
thomas yes said i'm on votes yes
senators if you know yes and you
ever do pass on a seven to zero
vote seven in the affirmative
zero the negative to excuse and
will go now to send it to where
is.
For mister care when you're
ready i'll come in for senator
pinto there'll be real ill be
next it'll be next
yeah
the commission
all good if you have to go I
think we still maintain a
quarter.
Senator.
The.
Sending memorial five to see why
restructuring the way of
derestructuring test worse to.
And it's only great.
Which means we go fast
I will be.
Faster than that I normally
which is already fast mister
chair.
May proceed mister chair.
All right thank you mister chair
center memorial five.
Makes a request at the lfc task
force to support enhanced the
restructuring of the children
youth and families department
this task force will be made up
of twelve members and a point a
person appointed by the governor
speaker of the house minority
floor leader of the house.
Senate protem the minority
florida leader of the senate
chief justice of the supreme
court a member of the camera
settlement
a member representing service
providers a member representing
foster families a youth
representative and a member
representing juvenile justice
stakeholders with that mister
chair I will go it and close and
take any questions and just to
say that we all know the issues
I were dealing with the cyfd and
this is just really another tool
to get to
some solutions and some answers
on how we can make this
department better but most of
all a look out for kids thank
you mister chair
I would comment that it is
the car said commentary that the
only way legislation we may be
able to get through this year as
a senate memorial calling for
the creation of a task force.
To study the issue but.
We
we should not quive all over
whatever we can get to anybody
in the early instant support of
this even the social workers are
in support of this good
are you related to earning.
Yes is your father oh good.
Good that he's bringing a for
social workers
anybody else in favor of this
anybody online
this is not attracted a great
deal of attention but.
The.
Could be very important to me a
members of the committee.
Senator city alope.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Your mike is okay
I don't want to repeat all that
but.
Um they are just the bottom line
is I do have confidence in the
director to work with this tel
force to do which you can do to
move the agency forward into
improve an enhance its function
in order to practice protect our
our children so
I strongly support this I signed
on to it and I a urge my
colleagues to support it thank
you mister chair thank you
senator neighbor
thank you mister care
I do support it I
think i've mentioned several
times in our meetings past the
twenty some days that.
See why
is
as the secretary said a crisis
and
we need to know what this body
needs to do.
To.
We about fundamental change
within that department I think
this is a a first deal and I
really like
on page four.
Lines twenty two through a page
five line one
does that calling for us to
examine
the
administration aspects of it and
to.
Determined whether or not the
structure we have in the
statutes
is the structure that needs to
be there for the agency to do
its work and i've argued several
times that I think the mission
of that agency is too brought
and that we need to break it.
Up a little bit maybe two or
three parts and house.
Somebody primarily focused on
abuse and neglect of what we
need to do to keep our children
from being abused neglected and
frankly sim some instances
killed because of the actions or
inactions of the agency and
again
I would advocate strongly that
we have at least that aspect put
the best interest on the child
as a paramount goal of that that
agency so I hope that this is
the first step in bringing about
some fundamental changes
and I hope I really hope that
the secretary
approved last week and the
department and frankly the
entire executive branch of
government will take this very
seriously and will help us craft
legislation.
To accomplish the goals that I
think we all want and that is an
effective agency that that err
unfortunately is having to step
in to very
difficult situations but to give
them the tools necessary to deal
with that and their children so
thank you for bringing this
memorial in and I certainly
support it thank you.
Thank you senator neighborhood
senator mechanic followed by
senator mccutchen.
Oh thank you chairman thank you
senator hope I am going to.
Opposed this memorial for the
same reasons that I explained in
rules earlier.
We just confirmed secretary
cosados
and she's been acting in the
position I think since or was it
november no she started actually
earlier than that okay as an
interim as an interest
nonetheless as.
Um.
Because she was not confirmed.
I don't think.
We have allowed her and her team
enough time.
The.
To really get a sense of.
Their entire environment and see
yfd.
Erned.
I like to remind um
you i'd like to remind the.
The committee.
That it's my understanding cyfd
was not consulted on this.
And in fact they wrote on the
fire
under significant issues they
work outlined in this sm has
already been undertaken or is
currently being conducted.
The work outlined in this esim
would be duplicative of these
previous and current efforts.
So what i've learned in
organization development which
is the study of.
Group dynamics and how
organizations do well.
Is you do not add a level of.
Management.
Without buying from all the
players.
And here we clearly do not have
buy an.
Or contributions from the
secretary.
Consequently.
I think gold achievement is
questionable.
The.
This is something
we can consider next year.
But until we give their
secretary and her team a chance
to achieve what they want to.
I see yfd and their clients and
their families I think this is
premature thank you thank you
senator mechanic senator
mccurtchen thirty
mister chair thank you so much
for you said it and senator pope
i'm gonna support the measure
but I would like memorial to be
memorial to us in an ah and
showing of our complete their
election this session in doing
actually something meaning
meaningful for c y fd.
We have had multiple bills
they've either not got calls are
they've been very and
uhm you know we've confirmed a
new new director down there I
guess reconfirmed it's the same
it's the same one or not doing
anything that's meaningful i'm
going to support this but not
got a task force to look at task
forces I mean it's such it's
something
but the boy we are
we are playing checking with c
wady right now and the kids are
the ones that are that are
losing every day I don't know
why it would ever be artists and
issue at all but you know we've
had measures come up to move
bills forward yesterday with it
yesterday your day before yes
yesterday voted down don't know
why we wouldn't try to do tried
you something commend you for
doing something said both but
voice you're not enough this
memorial is memorial to us in a
complete election of our duty to
see why if dnr and our duties
there thank you thank you
senator for the second time
senators of the eleventh
thank you I I had not seen the
fire
end it's unfortunate they I i'm
glad to unfortunate I am glad
that they see this is a
duplication of things they're
already doing that that's
heartening to me and I also
think that it's important that
it's a memorial at this point to
really express.
Or
appreciation for everybody who
works at see why after
if they've been still
domoralised by all of the
attacks and this is sort of a
middle ground and an ice I don't
I don't believe that'll make the
department less effective I
believe that this tells forth
can make them more effective and
can can we can work together
like I say i'm heartened that
they say we're already doing
this thought fantastic that
speaks well output of potential.
Fixes to the department thank
you mister chair and thank you
for laying me speak twice with
civil of the committee to pope
did you want to respond you know
I thanks for the comments from
the committee members.
Just response to center mechanic
I I agree with some of your
points but I would say that I
don't believe this would be
counterproductive I look at this
is almost having outside people
looked with in an organization
and how do we better it how do
we reform it
and I think this is one of the
tools that we can do that
setting recution you know I
agree with you in a lot of ways
there's things that we could be
doing and I signed under some of
their legislation that we tried
to do do something as well.
Um but.
You know we got to get it right
for what we're doing here we
have to find a way to better the
organization.
But also not.
You know attacked your
organization where people are
working there are not doing
their jobs as well and that's
not to say anyone here's doing
that but I think this is a
start.
We definitely need to do more.
And I don't believe this would
be counterproductive and I think
it would be helpful in the end.
Thank you mister what's the will
of the committee
we have emotioned from senator
mccutchin for dupas seconded by
senator neighbor.
Secretary will call the rule
senator hiki senator he give out
yes senator my assessor
mccatchen served my car to
involves yes center mechanic no
mechanic votes now senator
neighbor center neighborhood was
yes
center city a lot of this yes
that you'll offer what's yes
senator man center it is if you
know yes if you not votes yes.
Own a vote of five in the
affirmative one in the negative
you have a due pass.
Thank you missed you go to her
floor from because
we're good senate less bill
furnitures the phonics is going
to put on.
Um.
Said it built three o seven.
For
for senator pinto and I need to
find it wherever it is you have
a committee sub from your
committee yeah is the committee
has to be passed out
there doesn't we have it.
Where is it
you know as an emergency bill
just the title of emergency
bills so they in the back summer
thanks everybody have a copy and
looks at all about the center of
fintel apologizes trying to
travel from up the highway
to get here
apparently the snow is quite bad
so this bill mr chair members of
the committee has to do with
creating a substance in alcohol
abuse test force to study in
develop a comprehensive approach
to address substance and alcohol
abuse but it also involves
canabas and as you know senator
pinto is very concerned about
addiction and alcohol use on the
never honest and throughout the
gallop area and her district so
she is proposing this this test
works would have nine members
with at least one member of an
indian nation triber
someone with expertise and
medical and behaviour sciences
somebody who can look at the
whole bradgeographical
representation of our state not
consistent more than four
members of the same political
party.
I think the timing might be a
little tight the test for shabby
appointed by july one two
thousand twenty four and report
out in by november one so i'm
not quite sure
the test were shall make
recommendations to create
innovative policies of
prevention study health
disparities and treatment of a
disparities a person's addicted
to alcohol in substance abuse
and the health effects of the
legalization of recreational
canobus.
And whether legalization has led
to increase canaba's addiction
or increased addiction to other
substances.
To collect an analyzed data and
make recommendations to our
legislative body so I would.
Stanford discussion since it's
not really my.
Again cheese okay thank you
well as I said this was this
bill just to try to summarise
what I said no i'm not going to
do it and just in summarize this
bill was was introduced after we
watched the house bill
that would have raised the
alcohol tax in order to raise a
half this much money that we
needed for treatment as we
watched it flame out and so this
will keep the conversation going
thank you mister.
Thank you senators to the
olympic senator neighbor thank
you mister chair I was just
wondering when it's the last
time we had a test force to
study alcohol abuse surely this
is not the first one
as many studies as we do around
here there has to be a prior
studies somewhere mister chair I
did one thirty years ago but I
think that is quite outdated and
that bill was to actually look
at all the different state
agencies that we see any of the
money for alcohol and substance
abuse and we found that there
could be fourteen agencies and
or department
that received those moneys but
that I don't know what's
happened since then and senator
t sixteen might know more
yeah
you know mr chairman my my
comment is with one thing we do
pretty well appears is a tall
for a lot of studies and then
it doesn't seem like is center
circle move the needle
on a lot of things
you know if.
Yes
we want to deal with some of
these things
studies are great but we we have
to to deal with the underlying
issues I I i'm not i'm not
opposed to it by yes I kind of
like uh.
Finding out whether or not uh
the legalization had any effect
on increased canabas I mean
that's something we ought to
know
there and collecting some some
data on substance abuse
generally but uh you know
we do a lot of studies and then.
We like some follow up on
occasion so all support it that
uh I just wondered if we done
this recently but if it's thirty
years ago then we may need to
update it certainly the canada's
part of this is important thank
you
anybody else let's see whether
the committee.
So the second.
Seconded by senator mckenna.
I would just note that I wish
she identities a memorial.
Which is you know.
Not a whole lot more effective
than a test words but.
That I would have a chance of
getting all the way through the
senate at least I don't know if
this has a this late in the
session.
Very unlikely but it doesn't
mean that we can address it and
I and I would hope that during
the interim.
The health and human services
committee can can make a real
effort to do this incentives to
fantastic you could let senator
find that's that's
and if I could see it's a pledge
but it's an issue I will i'll
try to get through uh to to get
to thank you i've taken notes on
your comments.
Secretary will call the role
senator to give out yes center
my stars center in my car
my catch involves yes center
mechanic yes senator mckenna
votes yes center neighbor center
neighborhoods yes center is
meetings centers at your locust
yes
that's yes then I told me that
it is if you know.
Yes.
Six.
On a six to zero vote you have a
due passed in senators to the
eleventh to explain her vote I
agree this is way too little and
way too late
it would have been nice to even
if heard the tax brow in the
senate but we didn't
and so it's just a a
disappointing um half measure to
try to keep the conversation
going thank you let me ask what
we have that we haven't gotten
to get anything
we have one bill that came over.
Thank you
thank you senator.
House bill ninety eight
what's it about.
Oh accounts for disabled
eligibility that's that's that
build it expands the
we have a savings account
building this expense the age I
think for those who can qualify
for it.
It's currently the twenty sixth
of your disabled by the time
you're twenty six it's a special
problem to state treasurer runs
and this would expand it forty
six something like that so we
don't even what i'm getting
around to say is we don't have
any need to meet tomorrow we
want me tomorrow we'll have a
regular meeting monday if we're
still not tight up on the floor
till we hours of the morning on
monday so just just tentatively
plan a very short look like it's
not going to be lengthy agenda
for monday.
And thank you all for coming in
on a saturday morning and doing
the people's work you've been
