To roll that over so is it won't
be heard to have you here for
one eleven that will not be here
today his other bill will be
today the the non controversial
psychologist prescribing Act.
Good so we have another non
controversial bills here Senator
built seven and could go ahead
sorry we you you we had some
meetings entering interim and
came up with some amendments and
chair members of the committee
after we left
the committee a rural health
care of rural health
stakeholders met with the
governor's office and the
sponsor to review the input and
questions from the health of
public affairs committee members
and as well as provide their
suggestions to clarify in
approve Senate bill seven
leading to these amendments and
brief the amendments make it
clear that in addition to
covering operating losses for
new rural health services the
rural health care delivery fund
is to cover losses arising from
provider and facility start up
costs which are now defined in
the bill additional languages
included about how applications
will be prioritized and how
grant awards will be reconciled
to audited operating losses at
the close of the grant period
the definition of health care
services has been expanded to
include dental services and
medical and behavioral health
ground transportation services
the references to and definition
of newly constructed are deleted
Senator drafting improvements
are made as well so Mr chair
there is an analysis that was
done on the amendments the
amendments are point two two
four five two three point two.
And I can either go over them in
context or not.
I think we would like to just go
ahead and go through them with
you if you don't mind certainly
we can catch up Mr chair members
of the committee on page one
line thirteen after losses
insert and start up costs.
It was brought to my attention
Mr chair that if the amendments
are adopted then a
bill with the amendments in
context will be printed but they
don't do that in advance so
that's not part of the rules
Legislative Council yep on page
two the next change number two.
Page two line seven after losses
in search including rural health
care provider or rural health
care facility start up costs.
On page two line ten.
Strike newly constructed.
On number four is on page two
line eleven.
Strike the first occurrence of
facility and insert and lose
their of provider.
Moving to page three.
So this is number five on your
amendment she on page three line
four strike the semi colon in
after and insert can be
confirmed as having been
delivered through review of
claims.
In on page three between lines
four and five insert the
following new paragraph number
five grant award amounts shall
be reconciled by the department
to audited operating losses
after the close of the grant
period.
Then we re number the succeeding
paragraphs accordingly.
Turning the page on the
amendments number eight.
On page three line seven.
Strake the period in the search
in lieu there of semi colon and.
Number nine on page three
between line seven and eight
insert the following new
paragraph.
Seven.
In prioritizing grant awards the
department shall consider the
health needs of the state and
the locality.
Number ten.
On page three line eleven.
After the comma stricter mender
of the line and strike line
twelve in its entirety.
And insert in lieu thereof.
Including reasonable direct
expenses but not including
general overhead and management
fees paid to a parent
corporation.
Number eleven on page three line
seventeen before behavioral
insert dental.
Number twelve on page three.
Line eighteen.
Before the semi colon insert.
And for medical or behavioral
health ground transportation.
Number thirteen.
On page three straight lines
nineteen and twenty in their
entirety.
Number fourteen.
Remember the succeeding
paragraphs accordingly.
Number fifteen.
On page four line nine.
Drake.
And is located in answered in
lieu thereof or programmatic
Services.
Number sixteen page four line
eleven.
Strike end.
Number seventeen.
Page four line thirteen before
for.
Insert licensed by the
appropriate board.
A medical or behavioral health
ground transportation licensed
by the public regulation
commission.
Number eighteen.
On page four.
Lines fifteen and sixteen strake
and is located.
And insert in lieu thereof.
For programmatic Services.
Number nineteen.
On page four line eighteen.
Strike the period and insert in
lieu there of and.
Number twenty on page four.
When lines eighteen and nineteen
insert the following new
paragraph.
Eight.
Start up costs means the
planning development and
operation of rural health care
services including legal fees
accounting fees costs associated
with leasing equipment a
location or property.
Depreciation of equipment costs
and staffing costs.
Start up costs does not mean the
construction or purchase of land
or buildings.
And that is the end of the
amendment.
Good.
You are do you have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
Session.
Six.
The judges.
No we're just gonna talk about
now we just we just have with
the movie the amendment has
been.
You want to digest it before you
us to question we usually just
ask questions and then we figure
out what it was about leisure
centre.
We we we you gonna change our
usual procedure no I I I think.
Absolutely at feel free to to
slow down anytime you need to
and ask any questions you need
to so we have amendment and a
second from Senator McKenna so
let's discuss this ammendment
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
thank you for that because of
the threats that the.
So first of all Mr chair Senator
if you look at your analysis the
first two paragraphs written by
your analyst described what are
in the amendments.
And if you have specific
questions that of the acting
secretary of Human Services
Kerry are me ho is here to
answer them the next.
So my question is about.
All of.
Is it.
So Mr chair Senator thank you
for the question I'm going to
defer to the ethics of two.
Mr chair Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes I think that agency would
anticipate to enroll making I
know that was discussed in the
pre prior hearing and so I think
that the agency would set out
criteria are more details
criteria for how applications
would be a prioritize through
will.
Mr chair Senator when these it's
it's not
I'm friendly but most state
agencies promulgate rules to
carry out the act so whether we
tell him to in the law that's
correct so
Mr chair Senator
They have to carry out the
business to be able to report
back on the use of the funds it
cetera so they will create rules
but it's entirely up to the
committee.
I just so we are hearing bill
now I can.
if it's sort of stuck with me
that.
The.
It is are you just looking at my
phone.
Resources Senator Goodrich
you're gorgeous do you go to
Judiciary now we go to Senate
finance Mr chair Senator.
so.
For this.
Three thousand.
Right so.
Thank.
Good thank anything else Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
The questions.
Thank you senator.
Of anybody else Senator Gallegos
of you come up with a question
or two.
We're still working on to recant
let me just quote well you're
reviewing it and.
Checking it over is the thrust
of
numbers fifteen and eighteen
each of them you that in that
phrase or programmatic Services
is the thrust of that to cover
services provided by an agency
located in Dona Ana but serving
somebody in Katrin or something
like that is at the point of
that Mr chair I believe so but
I'm going to defer to this
acting secretary Mr chair good
question and that does give some
flexibility I prepared the way
that the bill was written
previously required on the
expansion to be it of with the
provider or facility that was
actually located in the county
and this would allow for example
in Irvine provider or facility
to expand a service you know
including like a mobile service
that would serve our rural
community that would not be
actually housed in the community
the expanded service would be
serving the community and and
the audit.
It's been a long time since I
don't with the thought it's into
that that an audit of the
organization could pick out
which of the losses was due to
the expanded service in that
area you they would be able to
tell that.
yes Mr chair we would
potentially make some
requirements around have
reporting would occur you have
to especial reporting to rather
than plowing it in the Human
Services Department does review
hospital cost reports now so we
would be adding some additional
layer for other providers but
it's definitely something that
we do today but thank you.
Anybody of Senator gave us.
Mr Chairman still not completed
but I did have one of Madam
chair on page two line can we
take up newly constructed of can
you explain to me why you took
that out that sounds to me like
that you're gonna go ahead and
do it anything that's already in
existence.
Mr chair Senator that became an
issue in this committee
discussion last time but I'll
defer again to the acting
secretary Mr chair actually will
of Mister Clark Mister Clark.
Mr chair and Committee members
there's much discussion about
whether or not the term newly
constructed was needed.
Given that at the end when you
see one of the amendments says
that the cost of land and
building is not included so the
newly constructed or an existing
facility both need to
practitioners no longer need to
carp about a specific so newly
constructed facility would
qualify just not for the
building components as it was
previously perceive.
Thank you for that Mr all
continue building the committee
so thank you thank you senator
anybody else.
But we're running out of time
Senator goes.
We're it is what it is what it
is.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
This.
We had a second already I think.
We already we already had the we
already had them all for
discussion okay so Senator
McKenna okay senator McCain of
this weird we're just voting on
the amendment it is there any
opposition to the amendment as
it's been presented to us
Senator I will just because I'm
not well well let's go ahead and
take a roll call vote the.
On the amendment Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator my Estes yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator meetings.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Tolman yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes we have an amended
so we the bill has been amended
is there any further discussion
on the bill we already took
public comments so we're not
going to go back there again.
Anybody nobody I I move it to
pass.
What good is a motion for a do
pass seconded by Senator Hickey
question from senator told me.
A page for it says you may use
up to three hundred thousand
dollars each year from the fund.
The the impact report it says.
You know.
Fiscal year twenty for fiscal
year twenty five what should
specify the page for that is for
those two specific fiscal year.
Well it doesn't revert Senator
did you want to respond to that
have Mr chair I'm going to defer
to our acting secretary.
Mr chair Senator toman you know
because the bill sort of does it
at the fund itself doesn't
revert major partition is that
the Human Services department
can use up to three hundred
fifty thousand dollars per year
to serve well the existence of
the fund is there to administer
the funded that that amount
actually gets matched with some
additional federal Medicaid
funds for the.
Mr chair.
I don't want to make a big deal
but it.
Kind of vague the table.
The point here is going.
This is says each year or
whatever one of the part of the
years.
It it it does say subsequent
fiscal years.
Mr chair Senator Tom in the the
language in the bill actually
says for expenditure in fiscal
year twenty twenty four and
subsequent fiscal years to carry
out the purposes of the fund my
interpretation is that that
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars also is for each year's
so we will until we spent at all
subsequent fiscal years yeah but
that's talking about the two
hundred thousand so so two
hundred million.
Two hundred million thank you I
don't get.
Zero six.
To.
That's talking about the two
hundred million questions.
But the three hundred fifty
million thousand.
That one is thousand thousand.
The thousands okay
the way I read it the way I read
it is uses two hundred million
dollars.
You can spend three hundred
fifty thousand each year
administering it as long as
there's money in the fund that
you have inspected the when you
run out that last year you have
to decide really going to give
up that last three fifty has
been through so until then no
problem so Mr chair on page four
line twenty two.
As the acting secretary
indicated it says in fiscal year
twenty twenty four and
subsequent fiscal years to carry
out the purposes of the fund so
subsequent fiscal years is
indefinite it's long is the
funds last.
Okay you could not.
Mr chairman for nobody else
concern Committee.
Thank.
I'm not a bill writers so maybe
the this is the way the right.
I'm done okay thank you so
you're do you are do not touch
that you're not done with the
Senator Gallegos.
Mr thank you and Senator I just
Google a question so if I
understand right what we're
gonna do is when you have these
pro of the funds out after
their.
after HSD gives about who's
monitoring this is it we have an
agent here is that your agency
Mr chair.
So Mr chair Senator I'm gonna
ask the acting secretary of
Human Services Department to
answer that Mr chair Senator get
Senator Gallegos yes it's not
questions yes and there's
language in the bill that
actually requires the Human
Services department to do a
claims review to make sure that
the services are actually
delivered.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
Madam chair of my next question
then goes to the providers how
are they held accountable for
the use of these funds Mr chair
Mr chair Senator
acting secretary Kerry me hope
Mr chair Senator guy a goes we
would continue to monitor them
and as the language in the bill
indicates we would use
Reconcile the grant expenditures
against actual losses actual
operating losses at the end of
the grant period to make sure
that those the grant actually
covered in actual loss.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
chair in Ag sector is so I like
the idea of the due to rural
healthcare bill of there's a lot
of controversy right now on the
abortion clinic school in Los
crucis does this target portion
clinics in rural New Mexico.
Providing of funding for
abortion clinics rural Mr chair
Senator it was not my intention
or the governor's intention for
that it really was to continue
the services out in rural
communities so they are not shut
down but I would let the acting
secretary into them Mr chair
Senator Gallegos I agree fully
with us Senator Stefanics that's
not the intention of this bill
this bill is really intended and
we would anticipate seeing a
greater expansion in primary
care regular primary care
services in behavioral health
specifically particularly for
providers that really would like
to expand the services but just
don't have the capacity to do
that so I think that's where we
would anticipate seeing the most
growth thank you for that Mr
chairman chairman and acting
secretary surely can't we've got
hospital we're trying to
position for mental health hub
and that's really good and it's
needed but I know there's a
difference between rural and
metro and so I just wanted to
ask that question because
there's a tendency that they
want to use things of pro the
reason stated so with that are
you thank you and just to follow
up on that then the the
amendments didn't tamper with
that ladies this is still for
rural counties with populations
under a hundred thousand.
That's correct.
What's the population Lea County
notice and for.
Mr Judy I've been told you are
you going well and we're just
till recently the Hobbs now is
larger than Roger so we think
that we're closed now I have Lea
and Eddy counties so I would say
in the general area we've got up
if it's professional county so
you would be just Senator I
think you're still good for a
laugh thank you thank you still
the oil boom ends and then you
know.
And and so those are money
thanks for.
Anybody else.
Seeing none we have a motion and
a second no further discussion
the secretary will call the roll
Senator guy Ecosse no ma'am.
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
table Senator Myers.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
meetings.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Thomas yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Yes.
That's that's meant that
Seven one now and one excuse by
a vote of seven in the
affirmative one of the negative
in one excuse you have to do
pest Senator on your amended
bill thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you for all the extra work
you all put in on thanks and I
have the next bill yes we do we
will go now to Senator
Stefanics bill and pharmacists
and PTA's as health care P. R.
actions with peer.
He is no P. R..
This health care should be a
capital C..
The.
P. Garcia practitioners.
Well I see it shouldn't be it
shouldn't be it should be there
should be no peace and no space
yes.
Thank you.
So Mister chair members of the
committee
this bill for those of you who
have been on this committee and
in the Senate we actually pass
this bill already in the Senate.
This is gone through two
committees and the Senate floor
two house committees and never
was voted on in the help on the
house floor so we think it's
important enough to bring it
back with me today I have a
lease a long who is a of.
A P. eight physician's assistant
and Gail Tinker the head of the
New Mexico association of
pharmacists and this bill would
in fact include the physicians'
assistants and pharmacists in
the definitions of health care
providers so they are not caught
up in the protections from the
non compete clause and so Mr
chair I'd like for each of them
to make a very brief statement
if you allow.
Please Missler hi I'm Lisa
longterm certified physician
assistant and I'm here to
support you but I would ask you
to use the handheld like and
hold it up close and and because
it will get you won't get picked
up I think okay okay hi I'm Lisa
long I'm a certified physician
assistant and I'm here to speak
on behalf of myself as well as
the New Mexico Academy of
physician assistants in support
of Senate bill one oh six
I've personally been impacted by
this because I'm bound under
contract that has a non compete
I've decided to change employers
and I now must set out from
practicing in New Mexico for two
years I did leave the state for
a year I practiced outside of
New Mexico and now I'm back and
I would love to serve the people
of New Mexico that's why I
became a physician assistant I'm
in New Mexico native
so I really hope this gets
passed I've heard other
physician assistants are coming
to New Mexico because of the
sorts of contracts and some are
leaving because they're under
the the same type of contract.
Thank you thank you Mr checker.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm Dale Tinker I
represent New Mexico pharmacists
Association as you all know I'm
not a practitioner of any sort
but I work for the pharmacists
and and
I can tell you that more and
more they're they're becoming
contracts that have non competes
and I think the end result of
that is it pushes them out of
our community one we have a
tremendous shortage of providers
so like
miss long said
she left the state in order to
deal with it I think pharmacists
do that as well they have non
compete clauses as well so
encourage you to adopt this bill
and and with that
I'm open for any questions you
may have thank you Mr chairman
very good thank you both let's
go to the audience who in the
audience is you just raise your
hand to give us some idea who's
who in the audience is here in
support of this bill.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to the bill.
Who does these things to you who
writes these non compete clauses
I guess hospitals.
The hospital chains and wills.
Mr chair I would let our experts
speak to.
Mr Chairman M. in the case of
pharmacists it is
pharmacy owners community
pharmacies mostly chains I don't
know if they're non compete
clauses with independents but
they they ought to be able to
switch then at the problem is
you have to leave town if
there's with non compete the
reason I ask the questions
because last year the same thing
nobody stood up to oppose it but
they sure didn't want to change
them.
So in my
Mr chair in my experience it's
large corporations that own
medical practices all right.
So anybody on the zoom want to
anybody in the audience wants to
speak about this you don't have
to but if you'd like to say a
few words please come up and use
the Mike those of use support.
Yes come up please.
You have to put down.
Thank.
So I'm also a physician
assistant and I just don't want
to be in a position where I have
to leave the state because I'm
in need of New Mexicans and I'd
like to stay here and expand
care not have to leave or sit
out for two years in order to
practice medicine and community
issues of I'm so sorry my name
is amber Lynn and you are
positions I am just thank you
very much thank you.
Anybody else seeing none members
of the committee.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you US senators to phonics
and and experts this is the bane
of my existence in my past
and.
Trying to get recipe book could
move freely and I believe the
department of labor is now
considering an executive order
to ban these for everything I
mean all people all situation
saying that people ought to be
able to move in that's non
competitive and anti
it.
it is it's it's it's a component
of monopolizing and so thank you
for doing this and on behalf of
all physicians who have suffered
under this I bought to express
the there thanks as well and and
and and state then as a former
physician executive if if if I
and and fireman I say this of my
colleagues if we can create the
environment that you want to
work and then you should be able
to leave and and that includes
compensation as well as the work
environment what have you and
and vice versa so I think this
is a tremendous step forward I
do believe that some states do
retain itself.
One time New Mexico is going to
be out competing other states in
this area so I thank you very
much thank you for the
opportunity to speak Mr chair
thank you senator Senator
Schmedes.
Mr chair Senator
I
Have a question on.
What we're still maybe missing
in this bill that's subsection a
section to.
So.
My understanding is that if if
this bill goes through as it is
a physician assistant physician
podiatrist nurse midwife
pharmacists.
If they are a a partner director
shareholder of the of the health
care little little tiny mom pop
practice they're still going to
be held to non compete clauses
that your understanding.
Mr chair Senator I'm not going
to
Back to that I think I would
have to leave that to the
attorneys.
Mr chair Sir I I I know a
physician personally who this
happened to
recently and the only reason he
was bound by noncompete was
because he was a part owner of a
practice so I I do know this is
happening and I am wanting I'm
bringing this up because I'm
wondering if this bill goes far
enough to support the intent of
the legislation.
And let me back let me let me
add a secondary question and
this is kind of personal
question if if people don't
answer that but I'm wondering if
the witnesses in the room are
part owners of prices and if
this bill would actually not
have in in fact helped their
situation are they purely
employees and so that helps you
or are you a once again a a
partner director of the a
practice where as this bill is
not gonna help you if that's the
case.
Chair Senator I would let my
expert witnesses yes to that.
Mr Senator I am not a partner
I'm an employee I don't believe
this bill would benefit me
because it's not retroactive so
would help PTA's in the future
but I'm still going to have to
wait the remaining eleven months
but I would like to get it
passed for everyone else.
Mr Mr chair Centers committee
For pharmacies and and we have
gone through some sales of
independent pharmacies in the
last few years
I think it might help the
pharmacist owner but it still is
it still would.
The noncompete usually goes to
you will not start a new
pharmacy.
So doesn't doesn't generally go
to whether they can be employed
by another's pharmacy or not but
they couldn't couldn't start a
new pharmacy wants they so
there's two who are provided
so in that regard it doesn't
solve that problem
but I think is for the
individual pharmacist to be in
place somewhere else I think
they they would it would apply
to that.
Mr chair Senator I I absolutely
support the bill I I'm just like
once again wanting to know any
if that would create problems
for you then it's kind of like
well we can help.
Health practitioners their
employees we can just help them
and that's good right we need to
help these folks so that it's
it's a good direction but you
know once again I think
If I I would love to see a
strike subsection a I really
really would the once again I'm
not gonna that motion I I bring
it up just because I think
Kalich you Senator it was saying
I mean we we should be all
encompassing these non compete
clauses why does it matter that
you owned one percent of your
little local pharmacy and now
all of a sudden the big out of
state corporation that buys you
out is going to hold you to non
compete clause just because you
on one percent of your small
your small business I think
that's wrong and I think it
should change I support the bill
but I I I encourage the sponsor
to to look at that this other
provision that that we could be
doing a lot more and and once
again this is for health care
access so let's not box out
anybody thank you Mr chair so
can I respond I am happy to
discuss this further with my
expert witnesses and see if they
believe that this would assist
us and then I believe we're
going on to Judiciary and what
I'm trying to look it up right
now.
and I'd be happy.
To pursue the conversation and
then to discuss it with some of
the attorneys on that committee.
Right or or a separate bill you
could you could do your own bill
that would deal specifically
with that fees that might have
some legs and it just seems to
me that wouldn't you just
dissolve the preface to person
practice okay we dissolve the
I'm leaving so I would like to
dissolve the partnership and
then you would be free it
wouldn't.
Mr chairman you could be without
income for a while I mean if
you're not or you have to kind
of.
You know I mean you have to go
through a pretty big transition
if you're running your business
as a owner part owner you gotta
find it someone to buy you out
on this is just to avoid a non
compete to go work for someone
else it seems like it they're in
a big barrier still but I guess
not not insurmountable but.
Yeah that so we have possible
solution to it Senator Gallegos
with anything else centers me
thank you Senator Gallegos
you're next yes thank you Mr
chair do you mind if I get it
as rivers Center Hickey he made
a statement earlier that I was
really interested in Serik you
talk about important health to
neighbors Act.
Department health yes.
Department labor Alaskans
Department health sorry so
department labor doing an
executive order in I'm sure like
with Senator smitteez that this
has to be broader and bigger do
you happen to know how many
businesses this does to to see
that someone is held back from
going to another job for the
sake of anything it it just in
your case then it's sad that you
can't just go down the street
and go back to work but I
wondered if you had any insight
because you seem to know quite a
bit of what the department labor
was to.
Mr chairman and senator guy goes
time flattered that you think I
know something about law
the Act I don't in detail I
have I I can trying to remember
where I heard it being discussed
that the department of labor
nationally looked at the looked
at non competes as anti
competitive behavior
and that they should be
eliminated in order to allow
businesses as they can gather
assets in terms of of money
buying other come whatever that
if they can get people easily as
well out because people really
are the greatest asset over
almost any business and their
talents and experiences I can't
tell you where it is in as they
go through their regulations
that that that have to issue a
regulation and that I comment
period but I know it is in
discussion under the current
administration department of
labor but I can't tell you all
the details on but I think that
is the name that we just stop
this across the board any anyone
in the country in any and any
business entity thank you for
partnering Mr chair I've heard
about it in engineering or
engineering firms to hold you to
this and it just looks like to
me for having a hard time
getting employees anyway this is
just a stumbling block for them
so with that all yield thank you
madam chair Mister thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez.
thank thank you Mr chair do you
know why physician assistants
and pharmacists were omitted was
it just an oversight.
So Mr chair Senator I believe so
when the definition of health
care practitioners came about it
is possible and I'd have to look
back in statute for how old this
is says fifteen I'm I don't know
whether the physician's
assistants maybe had their same
a sorties at that time as they
do now but I couldn't give you a
definitive answer I think it's a
good idea to include them and I
think it's really good public
policy encourages more people
Work in our state and to stay in
our state
may allow some people to leave
but that's you know that it
should be up to people's choice
so thank you Mr chair that's all
I have thank you when you're
ready for motion.
I think we're ready promotion
noted Senator McKenna I'm sorry.
Thank you thank you chairman
thank you senator define X. and
pardon my poor memory I can't
remember your
expert witnesses name is long
and Dale G. says okay very good
yeah I'm curious we on page
three we have an emergency
clause.
And I'm I'm a little stumped
Madam of the chairman and
senator and Lisa.
you said that you if this goes
through you have to wait still
another eleven months because of
the price.
Because of the the effective
date is that what that.
Could you explain to me in
prayer those on the watching of
the webcam why you have to wait
another eleven months.
So when I read I is your chance
Mr chair Senator I'm sorry and
choose my place is just so the
zoom will pick you up Mr chair
and senator when I read the
proposed bill I I interpreted it
as from the state for contracts
that are enforced from the state
forward but correct me if I'm
wrong.
If if it will void my contract
then I will gladly start working
tomorrow.
Okay
Chairman and senator in the
state yes.
Do we have the means to make
this retroactive to Sunday I
mean why is we have such
talented.
Health care providers New Mexico
is the interest of them why
can't we make this retroactive.
And I don't know who can answer
that on chairman Senator the
former law professor will ensure
that there is a there's a
concept of INTERFET interference
with private contracts that
could that you cannot do so
retroactively the reason you can
do a prospect of Lee is because
these contracts there's a
another doctor to avoid is
against public policy so the the
legislature has the power to say
these these types of contracts
are void has against our our
policy to that makes sense and
so so you don't want to.
So you don't want to interfere
with existing contracts we don't
we don't have the power to do
that but we can avoid contracts
in the future that interfere
with our public policy.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator thank you we set and
thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
I tried.
Thank you okay.
Anything else what's the will
the committee.
For
the motion Senator Hickey moves
Senator Tallman seconds.
And the secretary will call the
roll Senator I ago.
Senator Hickey yes to Senator
Ingle.
slide please Senator my Estes
yes Senator McKenna yes consider
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator two C. Pena yes you have
a land line zero vote you have
to do yes thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you senator next we'll go
to
Senator.
Thank you I thought he was here.
What probably went back to
finance.
Okay we'll hold off will will
let him go for Senator yeah.
Because I'm here you are.
You'll do this fast by the time
could you get there you can be
all wrapped up.
Okay let's do your one of seven.
Custody hearings within seventy
two hours one is of the very
much Mr chairman members of the
committee also New Mexico law
right now provides that when a
law enforcement officer takes a
child into emergency custody
that the hearing before judge
has happened within ten days.
this would move that hearing
time up to it would have to
happen within seventy two hours
but actually actually like to
strike the senator is back at
three days just make clear
because works looting weekends
and holidays it would just be
more clear that way that's an
amendment to the ten here yes
Sir.
On page two yeah page to strike
seventy two hours and for three
days.
It's on page two lines to.
Strike seventy two hours insert
three days Mr.
Okay in the and so but
If you look around the country
at at other states most of the
states do it senator the last
some of them do it within four
hours within twenty four hours
within forty eight hours
what what often happens in New
Mexico is not because of
resource constraints that CYFD
has because the police officer
takes the child into custody
then turned the child over to
see what the.
CYFD doesn't have the resources
to get to the tenth day.
So that they give the child
back.
And then whereas if we did it
within seventy two hours the
counterintuitive is and actually
you'll actually get to the
hearing you'll actually get to a
judge looking at whether not
this child with that there's
probably costs that this child
serving in the home or not this
is not the final hearing it's
simply the probable cause
hearing with that might not so
it's possible is here the vast
us to be concise.
Yes Sir Mr chairman members
you're welcome thank you thank
you Mr chair I think in the case
we can say in the case of James
Dunkley Cruz the wrist thirteen
cases in which a law enforcement
officer visited that home and
never once did he get to go
before a judge and so we are
simply trying to follow best
practices here in making sure
that our children have an
opportunity where the judge
could potentially set eyes on
how child within a reasonable
time in an effort to make sure
that horrific child abuse cases
like that never happen again
I would it would be Abbas have
questions let's start with the
amendment to the somebody want
to move the amendment.
Senator so you start losing
amendment seconded by Senator
Gallegos.
This yes updates to strike
seventy two hours answer through
this line to.
So quick.
That's concise.
Any discussion on the amendment
any.
Opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none will consider the
bills have been amended is there
anyone here from CYFD.
Yes what's the what's the
department's view on this.
Come up and use the Mike please
so that the zoom will pick you
up.
Okay.
Can you hear me Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Jennifer arch let and I do work
for the children youth and
families department I am one of
the W..
and action stand in opposition
of Senate bill one oh seven.
I do worry that seventy two
hours is not enough time to do
our diligence to complete
investigation to properly serve
and assess the please
it's not enough time for.
To actually provide service to
the families for them to seek
and obtain council.
for this legal proceeding.
it's also not enough time to.
For our investigators to develop
a quality initial assessment
plan that truly serves the
family and the best interests of
the child.
if it's sure into seventy two
hours investigator not only has
to complete the investigation
meet with the families
type of their affidavit.
Develop the initial assessment
plan.
But we just do not have the
current FTE and the resources to
get it done within that short
amount of time.
In order to provide good quality
work and diligent efforts the
department would require an
additional fifty legal staff
full time employees an
additional seventy five
investigators this is
essentially is a unfunded
mandate as there's no
appropriation for this
fifty legal staff seventy five
investigators would essentially
be around.
Excuse me.
Seven million dollars needed for
the department to do this.
I would worry that we would that
this would cause rushed
investigations inadequate
affidavits inadequate counsel
for families including the
children right children get to
the service and provided a GA L.
ore youth attorney.
And this could lead to losing
court hearings.
Requiring the unexpected return
or the at an anticipated return
of the child to a potentially
abuse abusive and neglectful
environment.
It could also increase the
appeals that we receive and this
would.
This could ultimately allow
children to linger in the system
without permanency.
So with that information
provided we stand in opposition.
Thank you very much Mr.
Okay let's go to the audience
and well.
Did you want to respond to that
coming from CYFD is have the
Senators okay I'll be I'll be
happy to actuals Liquitex
covered for so that I can very
quickly to okay anybody in the
audience here in support of this
bill just raise your hand and
indicate.
Okay go ahead of you will start
with you Maryland and then we'll
go to you then.
My name is Maryland back the
executive director of New Mexico
tech network we stand strongly
in support of this legislation
forty one other states have
figured out how to do this to
get the hearing time down to
under seventy two hours and and
we feel we are currently eight
hi Alkire on our short stay
rates are short term place it
right it's a revolving.
Cases like James Dudley crews
have thirteen separate times for
law enforcement effort judicial
oversight to see eyes on that
child and we failed there's a
wrongful death we strongly stand
in support of thank you.
Thank you Maryland yes yes hi I
am a senior citizen who worked
can you identify yourself I'm
sorry Pamela Marshall Pecos to
Mexico senior citizen retired
who worked in this state in
CYFD child abuse and neglect as
both an investigator and a case
worker and that's a mental
health counselor in the state in
private practice.
Too much bureaucracy.
I support this
other states do it needs to be
done I hear the arguments.
Posing it and they do exist the
state needs to do better.
Across the board at CYFD on
behalf of our children and our
families I support this bill
thank you thank you Pamela that
but I do collected to ask if
there is anyone here from the
administrative office of the
courts.
The the various.
Okay who is in opposition to
this bill if you could raise
your hands.
Yes well we are here if you
have.
Thanks.
Still in this Representative you
other agents anybody as soon
either way.
Okay so what's your response
Senators thank you so just out
by way of response to the to the
department's position.
there's a there's a fundamental
illogic to what the department
of state in terms of resource
allocation.
and that is that they're saying
it's gonna take fifty people.
To write the reports that have
to be written anyway.
These reports written anyway.
The only reason it would take.
Are you know we are we're used
to say this right departments if
they if they want something to
happen think it's a student
within the budget if they don't
my god it's going to take
millions of millions of dollars
it's impossible for us to comply
but the fact of the matter is
they don't need to complete
their investigation they don't
need to meet with the family.
This is a probable cause
hearing.
That's all it is a problem
because hearing how do you know
this if you look on at the bill
page two.
Line twelve at the custody
hearing the court shall return
legal cost to the child to the
child's parent guardian or
custodian unless probable costs
exist to believe.
This time to complete their
investigation after that.
Okay when a person is arrested
by a police officer.
We require a judge.
To establish probable cause
within forty eight hours after
custody commences.
And by the way according to the
court rule on that that includes
Saturdays Sundays and holidays.
So so if you if you're an adult
if you get arrested.
Forty eight hours regardless of
whether it's a Saturday Sunday
or holiday if you're a child you
may be in danger.
We're asking three days three
business days.
I don't think that's
unreasonable.
Did you want to respond to
Senator Mr chairman I would
agree completely I think that
the agencies the agencies fear
that this would cause additional
resources is just simply not in
the bill we're not asking for
completion of of the
investigation in fact they could
continue that investigation
we're just making certain that a
judge sets eyes on the child
within a reasonable time and
again that what happens of date
right now.
With the ten days there were
turning the children to the home
before a judge ever gets
involved and then they never
filed the petition.
So no judge ever looked at these
cases however.
We've had cases where children
have been removed returned
remove other cops chairman suit
lefty removed by the cops.
Chairman CYFD.
Eight team times and no judge is
however put eyes on that case.
That's what we're trying to.
Thank you let's go to the
committee.
Questions from the committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
this bill this bill has a lot of
appeal to me because
It seems to me that when they re
they remove a child.
The same evidence that they used
to remove the child should be
available with it still
available within seventy two
hours and has
As Senator Ivy Soto points out
it's a probable cause hearing so
it's not the final decision but
I
I was a supervisor in our
clinical law program and we
representative of.
Parents and the ones that were
the most heartbreaking with
parents who were
we just did not understand the
system and they were like you in
one case I'll never forget
immigrants.
Who really their X. this is an
awful case but it they were
accused of making their child
fat.
And that child was away for
months.
And it was just a terrible case
and I just felt like if.
I just feel like that the judge.
Should review the evidence
quickly because.
We should not be taking away
children.
From their parents home without
a review of that is this
probable cause or not
So I don't at this the but I am
I will say Mr chair I am very
torn because when the department
says they can't do it are we
going to be creating chaos in
the department and making it
making it worse so I'd like I
said this bill this bill has
appealed to me and I guess I
don't understand and I wish I
could answer get that question
answered why if they took the
child away based on something
why don't they have that
evidence ready within seventy
two hours what what's the
problem they should taking a cut
a child weight and then looking
for evidence.
The state the kid with the dues
the it's at the request of the
department and and and and in
conjunction with the department
of syllabus not all how does it
well lot of times also cops the
cops will go to a home and they
will see a situation and they
will act immediately there but
that they would left the child
over to the department but but
but center city office is
exactly right it's it's not a
question the department ready up
your point question the police
officers and either going up to
the hearing or reading writing
the report of what they saw and
that is all available within
that Ford said that that seventy
two hours the again it with the
family as a longer term process.
So I guess I but I I really
would I don't want to cause
chaos in the department and so I
would like to have more answers
to the questions.
That's more than just we will
need this this much it will cost
this much I'd I'd like to know
more about the process and why
at a probable cause hearing
which is standard for probable
cause is extremely low.
Why why they're able not able to
do that within seventy two hours
I I'd really like to understand
that better Mr chair and
unfortunately we don't have
we're I don't know perhaps if
you will permit if we could ask
the representative from the
department to go into more
details about what work would
this would work deserve.
Apple seed.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
so a judge actually does review
our affidavit the judge actually
does lay eyes on the case within
forty eight hours so when a law
enforcement officer gives us
that initial capacity let's at
two o'clock in the morning on a
Friday.
Early morning.
We have forty eight hours to
write an affidavit and the judge
looks over the affidavit and
sometimes the judge doesn't sign
the affidavit because maybe they
do not provide probable cause
but if they do that is when they
sign that what I was mentioning
about just being worried about
the rest process
I do worry about like cookie
cutter assessment plans
treatment plans for parents
because we would only have to
have this amount of time to turn
those around
I would worry about
actually having more short
stairs because of this because
of the rush process and a judge
ordering
To keep the child into custody
before we're able to find
factors are provide support to
the family to mitigate the
concerns that brought their
children into CYFD is attention
in the first place so I hope
that answers your question if
not I am still available.
Thank you Mr chair but that
process Miss Mister chairman
correct me if I'm wrong is not
delineated has what happens at a
custody hearing what happens at
a custody hearing is that the
judge has to fight that the
department shall keep custody of
that child and then the rest of
the treatment plans and
everything come into place later
so the child goes into the
foster home a treatment plan is
developed to of.
As I recall.
That that required a lot of
negotiation with the parents and
understanding what the parents
are going through
and when they didn't have
council it was really really
hard and and something that I
think should take take time
because the department should
learn about the cultural
contexts the what whether drugs
or alcohol all of their firearms
all kinds of things.
And so I guess that's not what
have I understood but correct me
if I'm wrong happens at the
initial hearing.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
We have to develop what we call
initial assessment plan with the
family prior to the ten day
custody hearing or if we moved
it up the custody hearing.
that assessment is tailored to
the families needs for instance
we would say we would like you
to attend a domestic violence
creating a substance abuse
assessment
it's very tailored using our own
interviews our own assessments
we come up with that plan.
That's that's at the ten day
hearing they do not get the
actual service plan the
treatment plan that says you
must go to substance abuse
services you must complete
twelve sessions of domestic
violence classes except a until
after the education hearing
which is about sixty days later.
Thank you Mr chair I guess what
I'm suggesting is
I would feel a lot more
comfortable supporting this if
the departments if you have a
conversation with the department
and maybe even if there was a
compromise for the department
had a different understanding of
this hearing because it's it
sounds like the ten day hearing
or the custody hearing is a
they're calling it requires a
lot more than just the
verification that this child is
properly taken and that's what
concerns me is inappropriate
removal of children.
And and if I understood I would
I understand that Senator
Diamond and Senator Ivey so
they're trying to do is verify
that that initial decision was
correct and that a judge would
verify that which would change
the practice within CYFD all
that would all of that then the
hearing would just be probable
cause this is the evidence we
had this is why we took the
child and it was a good decision
or where they drop it and say
you know what this this was a
new angry parent that called on
the other side in the
misunderstanding and we need to
drop it so that the child
wouldn't be away from the parent
for ten days so I but I would
feel much more comfortable if
there was some shared
understanding because I feel
like there's a difference in
what's expected this ten day
hearing by the department and
what of the senators are trying
to do.
Mr chair.
And we have somebody else from
CYFD wanted to speak.
Thirty more children youth and
families of Mr chairman members
of the committee up members of
the administrative office of the
courts our intent finance right
now so if you're looking for an
opinion from the court maybe we
can hold this over and get get
their opinion on this as well.
that has somebody told them that
we would like them to come I've
read it.
Okay.
Might my feeling is that it's
the court's going to being
burdened.
In addition so we we probably
want a role that will.
Just set it aside for a little
while till we hear from the
administrative office of the
court and do you mind waiting
for just a little while we'll
take Senator Padilla is bill and
then see if anybody from AOC
shows up you have to Sir
district great Senator Padilla
you're here now.
Thank you so for those on zoom
we're moving now to of the
financial crimes against
vulnerable adults.
Thank you Mr chair.
Taking with diverse but.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I do have
Before you Senate bill one
eighteen financial crimes
against vulnerable adults I do
have to experts so that I'm
gonna have state just a few
remarks after introduced the
legislation we have Ellen like
Sir she is of counsel for the
senior citizens law office and
was one of the driving up the
individuals trying to work with
us to bring this legislation
forward retrieve attempted now
twice Mr chairman and also have
Kevin Graham who is one of our
chief drafters on this for much
of his twenty fifth seven years
of legal it is legal career
Kevin graph serves a prosecutor
working in both Kansas in New
Mexico in the offices of
Attorney General's for both the
Free State in the office of the
thirteenth judicial district
attorney here in New Mexico and
has a wealth of experience in
financial into with financial
institutions financial
institutional crime and and has
also served a number of other
roles related to the the
vulnerable does we're gonna talk
about today Mr chairman Senate
bill one eighteen and I do have
a senator Peter Wirth are
Majority Leader is is our co
sponsor if he's able to join us
today he will he's the
co sponsor on on this bill and
the next one I believe that
you're going to hear which is
the the US civil bill as well
but essentially we're trying to
do and and you may recall Mr
chairman we did present this
bill in the interim and and got
a lot of very good feedback
but essentially prevents the
financial abuse of elders and
adults with disabilities
essentially New Mexico elders
are vulnerable in many cases you
don't even realize that you're
in it until you're actually this
is actually happening to you in
terms of elders in fiscal year
two thousand twenty two
financial exploitation
Representative thirty four
percent of New Mexicos adult
protective services referrals of
which thirty one percent were
actually substantiated cases now
what when this occurs Mr
chairman that's really only one
of forty four incidents of this
matter that that are actually
reported and thirty one percent
of those were were were caught
so by marks were found to be.
The reasonable so essentially
twenty six hundred crimes in New
Mexico occur in this area but a
very small portion actually
we're we're seeking to bring
some some real teeth to the law
here estimates of elder
financial exploitation total
more than three point four
billion dollars a year Mr
chairman and older adults living
in rural areas are even more
susceptible to this type of a
crime so those are our elders on
the other side of the of the
equation are adults living with
disabilities according to the
National Institute on disability
fourteen point five percent of
New Mexicans aged eighteen to
sixty four have some sort of a
disability adults living with a
disability are at a higher risk
of exploitation and adults
living without a disability
simply because they have the
need and adults with
disabilities may have difficulty
communicating so therefore
causing some of this as well so
what is the of the legislation
actually do and it does
criminalize a failure to use the
financial resources bye bye
failure to use the financial
resources of an adult who is
older disabled or vulnerable to
provide care went under a duty
to do so and also criminalizes
depriving this using or taking
the property of other financial
or other financial resources of
an adult who is older disabled
or vulnerable for the benefit of
someone else the does
criminalize any person who
intentionally uses undue
influence deceit trickery
harassment arrests force
compulsion or coercion to
acquire and possess control of
those that the property of the
of these individuals if it
induces adult who's older
disabled or vulnerable against
their will to perform services
for other for another's profit
or establish a fiduciary
responsibility with an adult who
is older disabled or vulnerable
so but bottom line is you know
you don't like I mentioned
before really even realize that
you're in this and it's
happening to you because your in
a lot of cases very dependent on
individuals to help you this way
and so we do have some laws on
the books right now that just
aren't cutting it are doing it
so we want to make sure that we
increase the level of penalty
that way I'm gonna ask
Ellen later to say a few words
and then I'm gonna have our
other expert witness Mr Graham
as well.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
I thought the Medical Center the
senior citizens long office to
use the my care.
Representative close your mouth
and we can pick it up it really.
So I am the co founder the
seats.
Senior citizens law office and
we serve central New Mexico
seniors where the bulk of the
population lives
and I co founded SLO in nineteen
eighty three and I am now of
counsel I was the a co executive
director and then executive
director on we have seen over
the years incredibly egregious
cases of financial exploitation
and we're not talking about
really wealthy people
one of the cases that I
highlight is a gentleman who had
sixty thousand dollars in
savings socially isolated
diminished capacity he was
picked up by a woman at a senior
center who essentially exploited
him and he spent his whole sixty
thousand dollars on a promise of
a relationship and she it turns
out we talked to adult
protective services this woman
has done this to two or three
others so he was the third
Gentleman who this happened to
again he had diminished capacity
socially isolated and there was
really no pool no vehicle to do
anything on because it fits the
of because he was a poor witness
so I'm gonna let Kevin cram talk
about the the particulars of the
the criminal bill but for both
the criminal bill and civil bill
it really I realize that the
burden shifts to the perpetrator
of the crime or the the civil
exploitation.
Thank you and Mr Graham if you
want to start with that if not
we can probably pick.
Sure.
Excuse me get a free Mr chair
members the committee Hey my
name is Kevin Graham some of you
know me or work with no
legislation and working with
regulation licensing department
for the last several years and
are currently serves acting
general counsel for RLD but
before that I spent the group
best major my career as a front
line prosecutor attorney
general's offices and just
returns offices here in New
Mexico I have been personally in
the position of being the
prosecutor who sits there and
looks and report from law
enforcement or across the table
from a victim's family and just
had to take the position under
current law saying this is
unfortunately a civil matter I'm
sorry after for you internet
yeah I see what is happening
here but it's not something that
is do is office was law
enforcement we can take action
on.
Unfortunately that has become
far too common scenario under
current law are there are
situations where we might be
able to apply some current laws
for violations of that nature
yes and unfortunately I would
have to say that it has become
too easy for our prosecutors and
law enforcement to look at those
types of scenarios and just say
you know it's know what is
bleeding I don't have a dead
body I don't have a serious
Welker I'm going on here and
this is going to take time and
effort and if the Legislature
wanted to be that important that
it on something make this clear
that's correct.
Esterly Aussie the situation in
this truly what these do crimes
little bit interviews by this
task force in requests for
sponsors of have now brought
food for you our segment to
address their meant to show our
prosecutors and cops that when
we have these types of victims
being impacted by these types of
actions that it really is a
crime that needs the time for
investigation and needs
prosecution and so what we do
have a tempted to do was to
identify crimes based off of
some other states Florida
Californians mothers that make
it clear here are elements of a
crime that we can to find for
you that you can recognize and
you can take action on it's not
just a civil offense in one of
the first things after I joined
the RLD in twenty seventeen I
was counsel for financial
institutions division when we
discovered that doesn't states
life management Trust Company
had been embezzling from a
taking advantage of its clients
that was a horrific situation
the drove home to me just how
often and how easy these things
can happen and I will tell you
on a personal level I have a
twenty one year old daughter who
has a number of physical and
cognitive disabilities I know
guardianship for my daughter as
a vulnerable there adult so does
the strike home for me you bet.
But does it as a prosecutor and
someone who still sees that it
depends part is who I am as a
regulator to prosecutors in the
state we need action to clarify
these crimes and to be able to
be meaningful sentencing on
these grounds when they come up
so that I be happy to take
questions thank you Mr chairman
thank you for allowing us to
give you that link the
introduction I'm not a very very
good stuff but I also want to
just wrap up our introduction
was letting you know that there
were there was a task force that
came together that addressed and
and and from essentially I'm not
going to redo the entire list
but but we had New Mexico
district to district courts
aging long term service
department the AG's office
auditor District Attorney
Association all the way down the
A. R. P. and you may hear from
them today I think there are
some folks here from the
disability rights New Mexico the
office of guardianship
Association elder law attorneys
New Mexico real estate attorneys
credit unions all the folks that
might touch this in any way
shape or form or brought
together and help to craft this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman.
Very good thank you senator up
let's go to the audience and see
if there's anyone here who wants
to speak in support of this yes
the director.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Alice limit
quite executive director of the
developmental disabilities
council thank you senator for
bringing this bill we just we
serve on a task force that
crafted this legislation both
Senate bill one eighteen and one
nineteen the criminal and civil
of bills they are two sides of
the really important point were
no matter what kinds of
oversight mechanisms we put into
place to indirectly deal with
this issue whether it's in
guardianship and powers of
attorney what have you we aren't
going to see this kind of thing
stop until we directly address
it through that what these bills
are trying to do and so we
really strong support this bill
and we hope that the members of
this committee out for for two
passed today thank you.
Thank you thank you yes ma'am.
Please come up and use the
microphone if there's anybody
else wants to speak if you'd get
ready to come up and use the
Mike that we could get cut from
a kind of a the line there.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is mia Touche
I'm the president of the New
Mexico trial lawyers association
I'm here in strong support of
this bill and the companion bill
sadly this is a very common
occurrence we see in our
practice financial exploitation
of our most vulnerable citizens
is happening far too often we
stand in strong support of any
means by which we can deter this
action thank you thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee T. on the only
advocacy director for a a RP New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of this bill we
understand that the alarming
statistics the Senator Padilla
mentioned optimal aren't quite
the the whole spectrum of what
gets reported and so in fact
there's a disproportionate
amount of of cases that are out
there that this happens to but
people don't necessarily come
forward to report in fact twelve
percent of the of their of older
Americans Representative of
people in the state and this
nation but alarmingly at thirty
percent of those are victims of
consumer fraud crimes in the
nation so with that I think
forty one other states also have
tougher penalties to fight some
of this going on and with that
we average you to pass this bill
thank you thank you.
Is that.
We
have a.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's marina top
you can see no I'm an attorney
that's been practicing for over
thirteen years I'm asking you to
support both SB one one eight in
SB one one nine you know we all
have family members that are
have aging parents we have aging
on uncles and aunts of perhaps a
family member that or a friend
that has a disability
we all know that their family
members out there or even
members of community there are
vulnerable as a practitioner
that has done a state planning
adult guardianship and
conservatorship so unfortunately
too many cases have been coming
to me with these undue influence
cases and so I've seen where an
aging parent that has many
children that one sibling.
Was persuaded by that one
sibling to change their do to
change their will I've seen an
attorney where he persuaded his
aging aunt to change her will
there's been realtors there's
been so many different
circumstances and yet this is an
important mechanism both on the
civil and and on the criminal
and the procedures are very
important I've dealt with law
enforcement the police need this
in statute in order for them to
have certain certain procedural
guidelines for them to follow in
order to enforce the law and
then the same on the civil and
and I also wanted to thank the
committee also for supporting
the Senate bill that was heard
on Friday the supported
decisions act thank you thank
you.
Senator or cheesy piano members
of the committee on Meredith
Meijin speaking on have on
behalf of American Association
of university women and I want
to thank the sponsor all the
people who worked on this bill
and on one nineteen and I I
really appreciate the testimony
from the experts unfortunately
these kinds of scams can happen
to anybody it's not just
vulnerable you know adults it's
frankly it happens to any age my
husband almost one first you
know a scam and you know he's
got a PhD in very bright I I
honestly think the only thing
that I would ask for improvement
is to cover all crimes like this
it's this is a wonderful start
and as as I think T. just said
forty one states have it it's
time for New Mexico to have
these criminal charges and also
the civil charges in the one
nineteen so thank you very very
much for everybody for working
on.
Thank you Mr maken.
May please chair and leasing
gentleman of the committee my
name is Chris Lori I am a public
policy officer with arc of New
Mexico we all at the arc of New
Mexico Representative people
with the end of it with uh and
to intellectual and
developmental disabilities at
all ages before I went to the
arc of New Mexico two years ago
I was a prosecutor in the state
of Colorado for thirty years I
was in economic crimes
prosecutor in the eighteenth
judicial district which is the
south Denver area as well as the
fourth judicial district my job
was to investigate and charge
and bring to trial and hold
accountable people who did these
exact crimes we had a priest in
Colorado springs who had a woman
signed over one point five
million dollar personal property
that was our home and to thwart
it's going to errors in going to
and stat to him and said excuse
me and then we also have another
case in which we have the
retired Air Force colonel from
the airforce academy who's being
fleeced and having is pension
payments re directed from his
Wells Fargo account and going
directly into these landscapers
accounts they're taking care of
his property they were taking
care of his property was
hoarders of disaster and so the
by us being able to prosecute
them with these being at risk
adult crimes at the increased
penalty by two levels of felony
it required it that it was a
presumptive that prison would be
served and most cases jurists
were imposing present after
being a prosecutor for those
years I was appointed to the
bench for seven years seven and
a half years and and Cortez
Colorado and I can tell you that
unilaterally have.
Are at the state's judicial
conferences people were in favor
of imposing the strictest of
punishment in these cases these
are cases are very difficult to
prove because you're taking
advantage of people who are
disadvantage and so we stand the
strong support of one eighteen
and then the civil recourse
that's available on one nineteen
thank you very much and thank
you Senator Padilla thank you
Sir.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you my name's Dana
Middleton and I'm here today as
a citizen but also with regards
to the next.
Women the Santa Fe chapter and
just the fact that most of us
Santa Fe chapter are now you
know older adults at a lot of
women who live alone and are
faced with problems about wheels
and what we need to do to
safeguard our selves and our
lives as we get older so I'm in
favor of this bill as I'm sure
everybody in my chapter is in
favor of it and I just like to
say that I went through
something very similar to what
has been said with my mother
before she passed it boy was I
lucky to get to California in
time to save my mother a lot of
problems can't not to mention
the money I would have received
so it's serious thank you so
much thank you now before we go
to the zoom we will check to see
if there's anybody here in
opposition to this bill.
madam secretary.
You're in support I assume.
Thank you Mr chair yes we are in
support of this bill adult
protective services last year
alone investigated fifty six
cases of exploitation you know
with that with the growing
number that we continue to see
we got them extra training and
support however the you know the
current process in action does
have flaws in a big part of that
is not having a lot of the
statutory authority to move
forward in a lot of these cases
go criminally or so and it's
really important for seniors
with the community Care facility
to have dignity and choice part
of that choice is being able to
have litigation even if it's a
civil litigation on their own so
we're and we're strong
supporters of this bill and I
just want to remind everyone by
twenty thirty we will have the
fourth highest populate.
Yeah in the state of New Mexico
sixty individuals sixty and
older we need to put these laws
in place now.
Thank you madam secretary yes
Sir.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Tommy
Hernandez I am the public policy
director for the Alzheimer's
association here in New Mexico
we stand in strong support and
certainly thank the sponsor and
all stakeholders involved and is
very meaningful and well past
due bill for those who are
living with Alzheimer's disease
or some other form of dementia
here in the state saying that
they are vulnerable to financial
exploitation is certainly an
understatement we stand strong
support we ultimately want to
see this bills enactment and
passage and so therefore we
respectfully urge the committee
to motion to pass thank you
thank you now let's go to the
zoom and a first job Sherri
Dotson with a.
A. R. P..
Okay now I can and the sorry Mr
chair and members of the
committee my name is three dots
and I am a volunteer advocate
with a a RP and I'm still amazed
at how many emails I get that
are scams that fill up my email
box and also my phone and I'm
I'm very much in support of this
bill and hope you do pass it
thank you thank you Jim Jackson.
You must have gotten up how
about Patsy Romero.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Patsy Romero all I am the co
chair of the National Alliance
on mental illness legislative
committee and nami stands in
full support of this legislation
and also just be one nineteen
for civil recourse you know Mr
chair I'm also the CEO of a
something might be Alameda
though and we provide
intermediate care for adults
with intellectual disabilities
and I can tell you there are
numerous cases that we have
worked on in partnership with
adult protective services where
guardians and other folks are
exploiting of financially adults
with intellectual disabilities
and often times adult protective
services hands are tied because
of the state they don't have the
current statutory authority to
be able you know to prosecute so
it's it's it's a big problem I'm
not just for the elderly but Mr
chairman members of the
committee it is also a problem
for.
Flexible just.
But thank you.
And includes support thank you.
Thank you Patsy
That concludes the testimony
from zoom members of the
committee.
Any any questions or comments or
motion from the Mr chairman I
just have one comment just want
to recognize Phillies rail who
also the time to work on this
legislation thank thank you.
Members of the committee Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
As.
Thank you Mr chair
I was actually looking but I
couldn't find some emails of
stories I got from constituents
just horror stories about the
greed of individuals would take
advantage of of people in the
circumstance but I think we got
enough of a of a perspective so
I really think this idea is
important what I don't
understand is why the dust are
prosecuting now under the fraud
statutes which is intentional ms
Representative misappropriation
or taking if anything of value
that belongs to another by means
of fraudulent conduct practices
representations so the note the
the comments port port point out
that there's an overlap and I'm
saying isn't that a simpler case
and having to prove that that
individual was disabled all of
the stuff you have to prove here
thank you Mr chairman cinnamon
asked Mr Gramm to comment on
this.
Senator I I alluded to in
opening comments at one of the
issues here the the fraud
statute potentially insulin's
cases could be utilized the
embezzlement statute could in
some cases be lost another one
that that I know I've looked at
is forgery statute depending on
the type of action with a second
place the real difficulty that I
see that that comes up here is.
In part because of the
relationships that are there
it's a very messy type of
situation usually for law
enforcement when they walk in
you called by a neighbor perhaps
a bank teller or someone else
who sees something amiss report
but if it's a family member or a
like a neighbor who is making a
report many many of these cases
what comes up very early on is
that you have a situation like
on described of multiple you
know it children of the the
person is being victimized or
close friends or or church
members of the sort of thing who
have been involved with them and
know them.
Very quickly it becomes just
messy for law enforcement to
figure out and one of the issues
they look at is well this is
only money we're talking about
in most cases and that's how
they see it and part of what is
needed here really is education
because for so many of the
people who were victimized in
this way it becomes not just
about money we we we hear well
sixty thousand dollars was
stolen what does that really
mean for that person who is
elderly and is relying on
probably social security maybe
Medicare Medicaid benefits to
help them what was that sixty
thousand dollars going to do for
them for the rest of their life
was it going to do things like
you know it by the mini
wheelchair or fix something the
Medicaid wouldn't pay for was
going to pay for some medication
perhaps Medicaid was going to
pay for was going to make sure
that the of the tax bill on
their house got paid so they
didn't lose their home.
Law enforcement generally it
just doesn't see that impact
with these types of cases
reported in in part I I really
believe there is a situation
where they think you know if
this was serious enough if it
really was supposed to be a
crime that we're supposed to be
handling verses you know just
another civil matter for
somebody to go to see their
attorney about would make it a
felony and we make it a clear
crime and so Marcus Montoya the
district eighth district DA
several employees from attorney
general's office myself we
really tried to look at the and
we look to some other states and
we didn't make this up but we
try to look at okay when you
have those kinds of facts will
the we will law enforcement
recognize and prosecutors
recognize it and then go
prosecute these cases.
Senator.
Thank you I I think that
What I like about this bill is
it adds restitution to the power
of the thing
And it's it's a talk about
consents not a defense to to
that so I think I think it's got
some really strong strong points
and I support for the comp the
concept
I'm not good as he changes be
made here but I I suggest before
you get to Judiciary you look at
the concept of what may be
adequate consideration is
Maybe negotiated consideration
or or something because then
you're gonna get into litigation
about if there was an exchange
of something whether that was
adequate and open the door so
I'm just suggesting maybe
Maybe tight tighten it up and
then it says consent consent is
not a defense
consent to what you know because
some of these people can be
drawn on so I just think a
little bit more
specificity
would would help it I think
Judiciary which is probably next
up will help you tighten it up
and it's just a good idea to go
in
Going a little bit ready and
then might find appointment
point has to do with the
difficulty of bringing these
cases but I defer to you have to
Mr chair to the prosecutors here
because it looks like you have
to financial exploitation adult.
You have to show.
I'm just looking at three page
eight you have to show that it
adult is vulnerable and
disabled.
And then you have to show
intentionally for the person's
own profit or advantage.
For the profiter than someone
else by temporarily or for
firmly depriving you have to
show intent.
and then the deprivation you
have to show what that what the
deprivation looks like.
And then you have to get into
this whole issue of adequate con
consideration where some of
these and I was that's why I was
looking for the scam case of
this particular one that he told
me about as I recall with
somebody pretended to be his
girlfriend.
And that's very common with a
lonely elderly people that kind
of that kind of thing and and
and then you get into messy
issues was with our family
members sometimes a family
member will move in and do this
and so the consideration might
be taking care of the elderly
individual or so I I just of I
just want to point out that the
this case is not easy case to
make because there's a lot of
elements I always think of these
elements you have to prove in
the court and it doesn't
necessarily make it easier and I
would like it to be easier to go
after these guys at the front
statute seems really
straightforward and easy that's
why I asked Mr Chairman why.
Why these cases were being
brought by the dust and I
appreciate what you said
but those are just suggestions
of a support the statute I would
hope that these are taken into
care before you get to Judiciary
or his or Judiciary will
probably address up or ask you
to address some of thank you
thanks.
What else.
What's the will of the
committee.
We have a motion for a due pass
from Senator till.
I have a question.
Yep the second seconded.
For you have a question a
discussion discussion yes we
have a second from Senators.
We're Deasy Pino seconded.
Thank you Mr thank you Sir for
the at all try to be quick up
and and let's talk some more but
I.
I agree it's it's tough to
explain but up there certain
things on the books that just
don't rise to a priority.
that's why sometimes we put
things as a felony that price
should be a misdemeanor just to
heighten the sense of of of a
priority with regards to the
police the dust that the the
judges
but there's some magic words in
here that I think you're
fantastic that that don't exist
in in current law that's.
and that's for example and on
page four paragraphs three with
the worst evidence evidence that
a person took control title or
use of property without adequate
consideration in other words an
old person could sign sign
updated given land given to a
car given house and.
They pay for it and that is
prime aphasia case boom guilty
you know if the state can prove
that somebody receive proper
with property without adequate
consideration and that and then
on top of page five consent of
an adult who is vulnerable or
disabled is not a valid defense
because that that's going to
happen well they they consented
date signed you know they gave
me the house what's up
so anyway this is really good
language to to create a
commission is a couple things to
think about Mr Chairman etcetera
but the of the the just the word
smithing
Adult who is vulnerable adult
who is disabled you may want to
just column vulnerable adult
disabled adult
you know and then
And then also
And then also a second we felony
for a second or subsequent
offense that's probably.
That's probably up appropriate
because you know a serial
scammer needs but.
You know the kind of my
philosophy is you you pay your
debt and then you get sentenced
accordingly given your Comeaux
history the second time but but
it but no big deal on that and
then also.
With regards to
On this page six line nineteen
Mr chairman center for the why
does it just talk about state
law enforcement agencies.
Would it would it I don't want
to mess things up but would it
mess things up if we were to say
state.
And local law enforcement
agencies COVID including the
attorney general's office DA's
office like the local police
station.
Is a part of this as well thank
you Mr chairman and senator
Wirth pointed out that I page
six if you look at line twenty
do have and local law
enforcement able fantastic
fantastic thank you thank you
and then also lastly Mr chairman
there by the on the
The of the last couple aligns
you know someone who is a.
Who is convicted shall be
sentenced to pay restitution.
That's.
Kind of a given and that's also
an argument to stay out of
prison because of some of the
presented to pay rest I need to
work and pay restitution so it's
it's good just works it just
works in mysterious ways in the
courtroom I think it's a given
to pay restitution what.
What we may want to think about
is that they returned title to
all property take it you know
stuff like that that is just you
know court order boom you go to
N. B. do you go to your real
estate company or whatever you
just return property that way
but there's a lot of but if
someone were to get indicted on
this there's a lot of even
though the you know the
uniformed jury instructions
gonna be tricky.
I think prosecutors will find
their niche and and have a lot
of leverage on folks like this
so that so that particular
victims never harmed again thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr all
very good suggestions thank.
Any other discussion.
Secretary called the roll
Senator guy Ecosse.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
The Maestas yes Micaela yes
Senator.
Senator Sedillo Lopez VS Center
fallen.
Senator two thank you yes
congratulations Senator you have
a by the.
Eight.
Thank you one excuse.
Senator Wirth don't go away.
The still grow a we have a your
financial exploitation Act.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for a.
Hearing this.
I thank you for hearing the
bills back to back because again
you've got a civil remedy which
this bill is and you just heard
the criminal remedy and I think
a lot of the underlying purpose
for both bills
Is is the same so that's a good
thing what Senator doing is the
lead sponsor of Senate bill one
nineteen she's putting a bill on
right now Senate judiciary and I
was happy to sign on to both of
these bills.
because of the of my own
experience practicing law in
this area let me just say I have
primarily been focused on what
happens after someone dies and
you've got undue influence and
there's a whole set of.
Rules in the probate code in law
on that issue but this bill is
designed to deal with
exploitation that occurs when
someone is still alive and what
are the sensible remedies that
are available when that happened
so what the bill does it would
allow and eligible adults
attorney in fact.
A conservator or a temporary
can server to file a civil cause
of action this creates a new
civil cause of action against a
person who is suspected of
financially exploiting an
eligible adults and that term is
defined term on the remedies
that.
Are allowed under this bill are
chairman of the property.
Stopping are joining a
transaction which is injunctive
relief returning profit receive
from a transaction seeking
compensatory damages for a
transaction for voiding for
rescinding a transaction.
One of the really important
civil.
Standards that's in this bill
that's different.
Than what existed after someone
is is is no longer with us in
the probate code is that this
requires a preponderance of
evidence a preponderance of
evidence is a tipping the scales
versus clear and convincing
evidence which is in the probate
code which is a much harder
thing to prove up it's kind of
an abiding conviction that the
scales of justice go completely
one direction and that's a hard
thing.
Roof when this occurs well
someone is alive and you're
trying to stop that from
occurring the standard here is
preponderance of the evidence it
does have provision in here for
punitive damages and goes
through the scenarios where
those are allowed and then it
does something that I'm sure
will discuss twenty in the
Judiciary Committee it has a
provision that if a plaintiff
prevails against the defendants
on a financial exploitation
claimed the plaintiff shall
recover reasonable attorneys
fees and costs while pursuing
that relief often times in civil
matters it's a statutory
provision that allows attorney's
fees that actually drives cases
to getting resolved
unfortunately it's very
expensive to go into the civil
system and I think where an
individual or a conservator or
someone who is representing
someone who has been taken
advantage of is able to show
what's happened having that
attorney's fee provision.
Is positive but it's a little
different than what we call the
American rule which doesn't
provide for attorney's fees but
in situations like this I do
believe in attorney's fee award
is justified so I'm happy to
yield to my experts if they'd
like to add anything else to
that but it's a perfect follow
up to the criminal overlay and I
really appreciate the focus on
this because unfortunately it's
happening more and more and
again having a way to stop this
in its tracks before there's an
absolute.
Financial crisis is which is
what results for that individual
for that individual family I
think is a really good thing so
I would you'll to my experts
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you so much Senator Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Felice rail I'm an
attorney in Albuquerque New
Mexico in private practice and I
my practice area and the sizes
elder law I handle multiple
financial exploitation cases it
doesn't really make any good
economic sense for me to do that
but I do it because it's the
right thing I turn down more
cases and I accept because I
think in some situations the
money's just gone and that's why
I think Senate bill one fifteen
is so important because that's
it Senate bill one no no Senate
bill one eighteen which the
committee just heard that's why
the both bills are so important
right it's so when I say I say
I'm so sorry I don't think it
makes any money to any sense to
send to spend throw good money
after bad so I turned down a lot
of cases and the cases I do
accept I usually do it or at a
reduced fee why because I don't
want to take money from people
who've just had money stolen
and I feel bad doing that and I
want to tell you about a couple
of the most significant
obstacles when I accept these
cases in I sometimes it's a
housekeeper that does it in one
case it was a church deacon or
pastor in another case it was a
granddaughter who had a
substance abuse problem and the
reality is is that I can almost
never recover a hundred percent
of the money that was stolen or
the assets that were taken
sometimes I can recover about
fifty percent and inevitably
when we go in front of the judge
or we're trying to negotiate a
resolution the answer at the
door the first thing that my
opponent will say or you know
the lawyer hired with stolen
money will tell me is Felice you
realize that your burden of
proof is clear and convincing
evidence which is an extremely
high burden of proof.
And what that tells me is not
that I can't prove my case but
they intend to make it very
expensive for me to prove my
case and it's very challenging
and it kills me to think that I
have to put on a trial take a K.
shaped K. all the way through
trial in order to recover funds
on behalf of my client who is
already a victim and that's why
the fee shifting provision is
also really important because
that changes the incentives and
encourages and earlier
resolution of these cases and
and it it increases the
potential penalty it and I think
that's really important because
you really want to emphasize
early resolution of of of these
cases you want to give someone
it and he sent it to give back
what they've taken anyway thank
you so very much.
Thank you did you want to say
anything more under.
I know you miss that let's go to
the audience and is there anyone
here and if you spoke on the
last bill you don't need to to
to speak again but if there's
somebody who didn't speak on the
last bill but who or who did
that has a new a new point to
make that would be fine to
anybody want let's see get slide
show events is here in support
of this bill.
Okay good anybody here in
opposition to this bill.
Anybody want to speak anybody
feels.
Say something.
Jim Jackson wants to speak on
soon.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jim Jackson here
for disability rights New Mexico
I'll be brief I would want to
note that this kind of situation
can affect people with a wide
range of disabilities whether
it's a brain injury mental
illness developmental disability
physical disability and so on.
And while there has been some
attention to those folks who
have some resources the.
Or property that can be taken
advantage of of this bill would
be really helpful even for
people whose only income maybe
is SSI couldn't typically four
to bring a legal case but this
attorney's fees provision in
this will make the playing field
much more even for those
individuals or their
representatives and of the
adding this other really
important tool to the tool kit
is available to both prevent or
remediate the situations is
really helpful and our
organization stands in strong
support thank you.
And we also have Ellen pines.
Hello thank you Mr yes sorry it
took me a moment to get unmuted
Ellen pints on behalf of the
disability coalition I actually
had my hand up on the last bill
and didn't get to speak so I
will speak very briefly on this
one up for the reasons stated by
the Sanchez and experts on both
bills as well as all the
commenters on both bills the
disability coalition stance in
support of SB one eighteen and
one nine thank you great thank
you.
And with that we'll go to the
committee for questions or
discussion or.
Motion yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you Mr chair I love this
bill I think.
I I'd like the other one but I
really love this bill because of
the ability to get things back
what's good about the other one
is even if the individuals dot
dead you can prosecute somebody
for that and this one is to
preserve the life you know to
help somebody with the quality
of life when they're in this
circumstance I just have one
question
and I think it's I think it's a
need to be explained to me on
page four when it talks about
the suit says eligible adults so
that's the individual being
exploited and attorney in fact
or conservative been granted
financial part by the court or
temporary conserver acting for
behalf as an eligible adult so
to me that that's a process that
I stepped so I was just thinking
of like parents to see their
children are being exploited or
maybe a child seeing their
parent being exploited we'll
have to go through the temporary
conservative should process was
that intentional is there a
reason
that you that you want somebody
to have to go through that
process instead of just bringing
the lawsuit on behalf of a child
preventive care.
So am I and again I I think I
think it's an issue of.
Of the standing to do so and
this and if I remember correctly
I mean this bill is some for for
folks are over eighteen so you
know so obviously there was a
child and it would be
appropriate for a parent but in
that situation that's right if
it's an adult child over
eighteen that I think I think
the way this is drafted it
really is a it puts it through
that process of needing to have
service and service yeah is that
one also required to get to
court action.
If I may respond most of the
work I did actually was on that
criminal go but but it's based
on my experience practicing I
think that that's there is that
provision is important taken a
standing but I also believe that
rule seventeen D. of the New
Mexico rules allowing for a
guardian ad litem would also be
it unavailable option.
Because they've been they've
been granted financial powers by
the court yes exactly.
I mean I can see it one thing I
was just thinking of fees
because in so many well this
does of I guess I'm answer my
own question because this does
have attorney's fees so attorney
would be involved let's just
thinking you know the hassle of
getting a conservatorship and
getting that appointment process
if we could go for standing more
broadly in a bill such as this
this is thinking along those
lines but I really love the idea
that reasonable I know when
you're gonna talk about this
that reasonable attorney's fees
would be granted I think that's
really important to the strength
and power of this bill
And but part of what happens if
that provision get struck I just
think you want to make this bill
is easy as possible turn your my
consent thank you I just think
you want to make this bill has
easy as possible
for the process of and that's
why it's just suggest you do
they'd actually have to do the
conservatorship thank but I
think of I understand that
there's a protection there
because you don't want somebody
to be exploited by somebody
bringing a lawsuit to do a
transaction that they they did
and so that that it's just it
may be required but that's I
just wanted to hear a little bit
about that
but I like I said I love the
idea of reasonable attorney's
fees because you will then get
better representation and
representation period.
So that they can go to my
question and that is this the
way it reads notes is been
granted financial a conservative
who's been granted financial
powers by the court.
For a temporary conservative
acting on behalf of an eligible
adult doesn't say anything about
a court action there do you have
to be.
Maybe a temporary conservative
by the court were these
guardians it later more I mean
is this kind of an informal
conservative that you're talking
about here.
So Mister chair where we need to
look at the issue there's we
actually did a couple years ago
we did change the the law to
allow guardians under some
scenarios to bring financial
actions to make it easier
because because they used to be
again the server was the
financial person the guardian
took care of the all health care
decisions and so I actually
think we need to look at exactly
that because.
To get a conservatorship.
Now in the last couple years
thanks to us Senator whites bill
and the work that's been done in
that area I mean there's a whole
bunch of hurdles you go through
to do all that but it's a court
process absolutely at the core
process the there's do you want
to comment on that century just
saying you're next that was a
saliva okay this could but that
was your okay Senator and and
and and Mr trouble that's my
point is because because there's
so many hurdles.
you know attorney would be very
very helpful and I guess I
answered my own question because
there are attorney fees and and
so they can go through they'll
jump through those hoops also do
work because of these people or
elderly and sometimes of jumping
those who takes time but
I think looking at it makes
sense is all in and you might
want to just think about it for
Judiciary Montoya so you lawyers
they understand this but I don't
know what an attorney in fact is
is that different from.
Ellen no Senator in fact is so
Mr chairman and members of the
committee use the my calendar
will pick you up.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and attorney in fact
is an agent in a power of
attorney so it's always possible
that somebody with diminished
capacity still has the enough
capacity to execute a power of
attorney
so we and and many seniors
actually at and do you have
powers of attorney many people
with disability over the age of
eighteen now are required to
have guardians and conservators
appointed on their behalf to
make their decisions so I think
that it's pretty inclusive it's
not totally inclusive.
Thank you Mr chair and then
maybe after that the supporter
bill gets passed we might see
how that works is if we want to
bring them in has somebody to
move that should possibly thank
you Mr chair this Justin area
was curious about and wanted to
understand can I just follow up
I think it's a really important
point though that the attorney
in fact of course does not
involve a court that someone
coming to me to me eight four
coming to Philly's and it's
something that everyone should
do and and I think what you're
gonna see a lot situations like
this is as you start someone
comes in doesn't a state plan
clearly as capacity to do it
attorney in fact and then they
start having diminished capacity
and all of a sudden they've
already designated the person to
act and you don't need to go to
court unless someone challenges
that so that's a that's a just
an important lesson that's there
as well and they have every
right to bring that actions.
Thank you Mr chairman to anybody
else but so will the committee.
I move the path well you just
debated so.
Okay ladies yep this go and
seconded by Senator Tallman.
Secretary will call the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
Senator my assistance yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
metes yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Thomas yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes thank.
By Nate two of two zero vote
with one member excuse you have
a do pass on that one ninety I
thank you Senator.
Senator Diamond and Senator Ivey
Soto we'll go back to your bill
now.
Sorry about that that that's
when we have somebody here from
the AOC.
And the chairman thank you for
getting back to within seventy
two hours yes they were never in
Senate finance but I'm sure we
do a better job County for kids
in the courts.
I'm sorry.
Their HFC.
Mr Chairman as I get
Representative yes they want to
yield the.
Silliness Jones is here for a
good silly answers so she is a
see can.
You're welcome thank you.
We use the Mike.
so when I said eight oh see you
thought I said HM FC.
Yes a good so she's trying to
get up to speed okay.
Mr chairman what why we visit I
do want to just make one
correction it was stated by CYFD
the judge must sign an affidavit
with twenty four hours I think I
think that they are confusing
proposed legislation this
legislative seats session but
that is not in statute and so
right now we judge never stats
eyes on an affidavit or a child
but there's no information is
going before judges in statute
today.
And up and the other thing Mr
chairman I would just point out
that was raised by Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Are just the people helped under
this is the collect.
Right this section here is
talking about the probable
cause.
The very next section law is
adjudicatory hearings.
And the judicature hearing and
be in a collective use
proceeding shall be commenced
within sixty days after data
service on the respondent and
that is actually where it says
in statute as as you pointed out
because because you're familiar
with this right prior to the
Judy could toward hearing the
parties to the hearing health
a management meeting and attempt
to settle issues and develop a
proposed treatment plan but
that's the sixty day here.
After probably causes but I.
So you're you're you're spot on
that.
Mr Chairman Senate.
I believe we wanted to go see I
don't know yes we we were hoping
that the AOC could could help us
figure out if this bill as it's
written would produce an
inordinate burden on the court.
Good afternoon you wanna use a
Mike so people can pick it up on
the zoom and introduce
yourselves in.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members the committee I'm Selena
Jones with the administrative
office of the courts and we have
taken a look at this bill with
us today those chief judge
Arrieta from the third judicial
District Court and I've just
consulted with him briefly he
actually hears these cases and
has several issues that I think
would be of particular use for
the committee and considering
what the impact of the shortened
period of time is Mr Mr chair
and.
Representative those are the
sentence in its right place
right is so the.
Women are standard but just put
just come up and use the Mike so
they can be picked up on the you
can sit on this chair over here
if you'd prefer jobs are
actually rather sit in that
chair.
And then when you speak just
well that.
I have I apologize folks for the
top coat I wasn't sure that I
was ever going to be dragged
into a committee to provide
testimony but here I am
I am chief judge manual Audi at
the from the third judicial
District Court on Los crucis we
have a lot of work to deals with
abuse and neglect
guardianships can kinship
guardianship so on and so forth.
We are one of the lucky courts
and that we've got one judge
designated to do this particular
type of fort in addition to
other related work.
so overseeing this one
particular docket I have a
number of concerns that I've got
first let me say that when it
comes to children it's important
to take quick action protective
action there's no question about
that.
as I looked that Senate bill one
oh seven have a few concerns
that I'd like to voice and
that's to make sure that we as
judges are able to do a good job
and what is before us.
The bill one of seven changes
the custody hearing from ten
days to three days seventy two
hours and it would ensure the
language to projects three days
right
just as in administrators in
individual in charge of making
sure the stock it is working
there's a number of concerns
that I've got the first is with
respect to the schedule of
judges
there's jurisdictions are not as
fortunate as we are that have a
designated judge that may have
judges who do criminal law also
doing this so if they're in a
criminal trial and it's a five
day criminal trial in just three
days we've got a problem.
in my case the judge that is
designated as trials juvenile
felony trials does a few other
types of trials so those three
days are somewhat problematic
one of the things I've concern
is that if there is an absent
parent who is alleged to be
neglectful or abusive if that
absent parent is not available
three days may not be sufficient
notice so we're gonna have a
problem with that usually with
the ten days we're able to get
notice whether it's by
publication substitutes service
you name it we can get shaped.
the seventy two hour period is a
little bit of a concern for me
is it is a judge I would like to
get the most information that I
can about this child this family
and the circumstances that would
mean interviews interviews with
parents with witnesses
interviews with schools so on
and so forth seventy two hours
is a little tight on that
We have a little bit of a
concern to I think it's
subsection G..
That at the conclusion of a
custody hearing the court may
order the respondent for the
child alleged to be neglect or
abuse to undergo appropriate
diagnostic examinations I said
at the very beginning of said
again I'm just not sure that
with three days will be able to
get enough information to make
good diagnostic terminations on
what this child and his or her
family needs.
As I said earlier.
I'm not saying this is a bad
bill I think anything we can do
for children as quick as I can
to protect them is good.
I just like the committee
chairman committee members
to consider that there could be
some inherent issues in here in
terms of notice preparation you
can probably will be worked a
little bit
but if we do it in the three day
notice this can be some problems
scheduling with the court this
can be a bit of problems
scheduling in way that everybody
gets the information that they
need to make good determinations
on these situations and I'll
stand for questions thank you.
Did you want to make commenters
or I think we should point out
in the bill though there is a
for I date grace period and
there in which the court can
extended by five days should
they need to for first in order
so that isn't allowed in there
and also we're just here focused
on the probable cost portion of
this to get this this case
before a judge within the
seventy two hours just for the
probable cause of this really
simply what we're doing is we
are trying to move these CYFD
removals to the top of the list
before a judge to finally get
them off the bottom of every
other listed there on in New
Mexico.
And and the.
I'd I will refrain from saying
anything at all critical about
tragedy of tough while he was
sitting next to.
But I but I will note that
somehow
in Delaware they're able to do
this in four hours.
In Florida they do this in
twenty four hours.
Are in Alabama against we I
guess we off to compete at the
bottom of Senator less.
Are they do it within seventy
two hours in a Mississippi.
Are who we also compete with
they do within twenty four
hours.
so somehow.
All of these other
jurisdictions.
you know California doesn't
within forty judicial hours
we're talking three to three
business days right so.
Our system with the two thirds
of what we're saying and and so
somehow all of these other
jurisdictions have figured out
how to present probably because.
Before a judge and provide a
judge.
With them.
Seventy two hours or less than
seventy two hours.
In order to make that initial
probable cause determination
because remember we are
disrupting the home will take
the child out of home.
Right and and the question is do
we have probable costs on doing
on disrupted the home do we have
a problem because.
Not to be able to do this and
and what the judge needs to
determine.
Right is one of five six.
Is there probable cause.
To believe that the child is
suffering from an illness or
injury and the parent guardian
or custodian is not providing
adequate care.
More is a problem because of the
child is in immediate danger
from the child's surroundings
and remove for these
surroundings is necessary for
the child safety or will be.
Not a final determination.
Probably cost.
Is there probable cause that the
child will be subject to injury
by others and not placed in the
custody of the department.
Is a problem because there's
been an abandonment of the child
by the parent guardian or
custodian or finally is there
probable cause that the parent
guardian custodian is not able
or willing to provide adequate
supervision and care for the
child.
Those are the that's a question
for the judge.
And and so so at that point then
if there is if the child was
removed.
Up to the Department they've
done investigation front.
The child was removed by law
enforcement then they have the
opportunity to witness something
that so shocked their
conscience.
They said we have to take
committed action.
So so that's that's what we're
referring to here and and while
I appreciate the docket issue of
the Courts the the courts you
know frankly they're they're
judged that does.
Senator is right now on the ten
day time frame Representative
twenty they hearing he finds
time to do this here.
So so so you know this is these
are administrative.
Burdens.
That need to be managed in order
to protect our children.
And and and for me I'm gonna
side of the front side of the
children.
Judge did you want to respond
yes I'd like to respond and I
have to be careful because I
know he's done a lot of work for
us to the county.
if it's a probable cause hearing
okay I know what a probable
cause hearing it's very
truncated it's very narrow is a
probable causes this child has
been abused or neglected period.
If it's a custody hearing as a
judge I read a custody hearing
much wider you know you look at
five different aspects of the
custody you know religion Health
residents so on so forth
so maybe if the language would
be cleared up if there's a place
for the probable cause to maybe
accept affidavits is post
witnesses I think.
The the Representative center
next to me knows what we're
talking about that can be
streamlined and that would be a
lot easier but a custody hearing
is an evidentiary hearing you
bring your witnesses everybody
testifies the issues are wide
open let's let's let's have an
evidentiary hearing in custody.
So hopefully we're talking the
same language yes so and and
that distributed your honor so
the the custody hearing as
you're saying that.
Is the adjudicatory hearing and
that is a sixty day hearing
under the law and we are not
messing with that at all because
you do need your time to make
sure that that you can be
careful decision at that point.
That the that helps a lot I sure
would like to see it cleared up
a little bit so that this is a
problem because hearing we can
have witnesses by affidavit
those type things
will visit on.
Thank you all right let's go to
the we went to the audience
let's go to the committee
Senator Tallman your first
Senator Sedillo Lopez who said.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Diamond
singing a sobering this bill
forward.
is we all know the tagline for
the city of Sierra Santa Fe
these to live in San Antonio.
Is a city different.
What is about the state of New
Mexico that we can't do with
other states is and that is they
conduct these hearings within
three days.
Mr chairman and senator Tom and
I think that is an amazingly
insightful question and you're
absolutely right.
If
you have an answer I don't.
Anybody in the room that has an
answer.
That's it for today.
Judges are busy here I'm not
sure.
Maybe less staffed.
Miss miss miss would you do you
have any questions we.
Senator do you have another
question no thank you Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you I think that
Listening to what the judge had
to say I think there is what I
was referring to last time a
fundamental difference in what's
expected at this hearing because
of the language on page two at
the custody hearing.
I'm wondering if you would also
consider changing that language
to at the initial hearing or at
the probable cause hearing or
because people understand what a
probable cause hearing and I'm
not sure Mr chair but that maybe
that could bring in with the
judge was concerned about
affidavits I mean I see this.
It is my understanding.
If if we're looking at has a
probable cause hearing it's
we're just verifying that the
initial decision which is
usually taken by one individual
the police officer who decides
to remove the kid and then
proceeded to CYFD custody that
that decision was correct.
Or not.
Attendees is a long time in the
life of a child away from his
family if it was wrongfully
taken
but if they're doing the full
blown.
Evidentiary of process I can see
how disruptive that would be so
I guess what I'm suggesting is
maybe what you might want to
consider
of what the judge is saying
maybe talk with CYFD and to
ensure that this is just verify
the initial decision was correct
because what happened ten days
into it the kid is totally
traumatized and upset and then
needs treatment so then they're
talking about treatment and then
the parents are traumatized and
it's that and they need
treatment and so it its down the
path of even if the I just never
forget that case involving
immigrants they were doing all
the stuff and they didn't do
anything wrong.
There was no reason to have
taken that child in the first
place
and and that's the case of the
right now they say that cases
make bad law I understand that
but I am really really torn with
this because of the disruption
to CYFD so my suggestion would
be to make it clear what this
first hearing is and it's just
verify the initial decision was
correct and not after ten days
we're out there are you coming
up with the treatment assessment
of the entire family.
you know a lot of work has gone
into it by ten days.
Well in Mr chairman and.
Senator Sedillo Lopez if I may I
think I think if we were to do
that and by the way I will also
note that unlike the
adjudicatory hearing.
right you will see at the bottom
page for an existing language
H..
The rules of evidence shall not
apply right and and and what's
the standard for a probable
cause hearing and that is not
standard for the ultimate
hearing right and so
it's so I think I think at that
point then you know if we were
to retitled this a probable
cause here which have no
problems doing
and and for my cursory glance we
may be able to do it just in the
section.
And then and then and then we
will review and make sure we
didn't miss anything from other
sections if so we will add that
at the next hearing but but I
think I think that will actually
Mr chairman and answers to
deliver some election very
helpful because what that will
do that is is that will help
with the court rulemaking
process because the court
rulemaking process does what to
do with probable cause hearings
where they do things affidavit
they do things that expedited
manner that cetera right itself
and so absolutely and so Mr
chairman if we were to do that
what we would be talking about
is page one outlined twenty one.
The.
just write the word custody
insert probable cause.
At.
The
Page two line line is too strict
custody insert probable cause.
line ten strike costly insert
probable cause I'm trying to
sound like Senator Stefanics
Page three line one strike
costly answer probably because.
There's at least one more place
now to replace is page three
line twenty three straight
costly answer public because.
Page
three four line ten thank you
on services.
Frank street that's a probable
cause
And then the final one would be.
I think that's it actually.
To do the work on page four
twenty three.
Page four line twenty three.
yes thank you thank you one
twenty three straight costly as
Republicans.
And and in fact in fact I think
that would also clarify
precisely the the confusion I
think that we just heard from
judge Judy up off about well if
you want me to actually
determine custody that's one
thing that I'm looking at
probably because no that's
different and so I think that's
extremely helpful.
To remove that amendment.
yes.
It
has yes secretary that the
minutes been moved and seconded.
There are are thank god this
December what okay let's go
through it again so page one
line twenty one.
Page two.
What what is the line into the
office line nine nine intend
nine and then to I need to.
And then actually let's let's
have the committee secretary has
all of them you gotta have the
other legislative.
Okay on page two you headlines
line until cage because he'd
probably costs on lines on page
three line one.
See the problem will cost in
line twenty three.
Probable cause.
Requesting custody
right Representative and then
online on page four line for.
changing custody to probable no
that was no not that hello okay
not that not so not going to
take money ten ten line twenty
three I paid for okay for in
twenty three and twenty three
point four
there was always with one.
Nine
nine at nine.
This call.
Thank you that's.
Thank you senator all of okay
gotta have it any discussion of
this I think it does clear up a
lot of the.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Will consider the bills have
been amended taking that into
account anything else senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Mr chair I I will be honest I I
ET this is a profound shift in
what happens at these the
process of removing children.
I.
Would like to hear more from the
department I actually think that
it's a good shift because then
the trauma of separation would
only be for three days as
opposed attendees
but I do know that a lot of work
goes into it with a ten day
hearings and so I'd like to hear
more from the department which
of.
So one point Mr chair and
toward.
You are here now right now we're
I just I was expressing I'm not
sure how I'm gonna vote on this
if the department had had to.
I'd be interested in their
opinion about this change did
you want to weigh in on this now
is it Mike.
Thank you Mr.
Thanks for remembering my name.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
I don't mean to argue or to get
into a battle of but it is true
that a judge has to review our
affidavits within forty eight
hours that is happening now it's
happened for the past twelve
years that I've worked with the
children youth and families
department I remember spending
late nights writing those
affidavits so the judge the
children's court judge does
provide that oversight they have
to review the affidavit they
have to sign off on it and there
has been times where the judge
does not agree that there is
probable cause or enough to
remove that child so if that
does happen in within the forty
eight hours we do have to
Dismissed that child back home.
if the judge does sign it we
retain custody of the child and
we move forward with that ten
day hearing within those ten
days yes the affidavit has been
right and but within those ten
days there's a lot of work to be
done to prepare for that hearing
they worry if we rush it we
might be sending children home
that shouldn't be sent home.
putting them in a dangerous
situation.
there is a lot of work to be
done meeting with the families
holding what we call an ice pack
at CYFD we like to talk and
acronyms all the time but it
stands for initial assessment
planning conference and we meet
with the parents.
The care givers that might be
mom dad grandma grandpa and T.
whoever's taking care of the
child.
And there their attorneys so
they are provided attorneys to
sit with us at that table to
create that initial assessment
plan
so a lot does would have to be
squeezed in to the seventy two
hours or these three days and I
do worry that it won't be
effective it won't be impactful
and it and it would do more harm
than good absolutely understand
that we.
should not be taking kids into
custody that shouldn't be taken
into custody I absolutely
understand the trauma that these
children experience the children
the youth the parents
and to avoid any unnecessary
trauma the department slows down
take a takes a breather and make
sure that we do do due diligence
and all the efforts that we need
to do to make sure that we are
in fact making the best
decision.
Mr chair within within the ten
days if you decide that maybe
the child shouldn't have been
taken to voluntarily dismiss.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes there has been times that we
do dismissed the child home
prior to the forty eight hours
prior to the ten day prior to
the sixty day that that can
happen.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
the extra information that's
helpful I just if it sounds to
me like maybe there's I mean is
there in the law now that forty
eight hour.
At the David and there is that
just a practice the department
is adopted I I am not as
articulate or eloquently spoke
and but I believe that's the law
that's what that's what we do.
Can you provide that to us in
statute but I will get that
information
I I don't believe there there
yes I think that that's what
they do instead of a probable
cause hearing test.
The judge would feel
uncomfortable at the ten day.
Hearing I I'm I don't know is
that maybe there's a judicial
rule or local real I'm not sure.
Is that politics for not having
that information here but I will
work to get that for you all
that would be crucial I think
let's go on to the rest of the
committee and get all the other
questions that senator
committees you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
I'll be a really upfront honest
with you I I don't like where
this conversation is going where
I would like to hear the
conversation going between the
legislative branch judicial
branch and the executive branch
is this is what other states are
doing we clearly have we have
the highest rate of aces we have
the highest highest rate of
repeat maltreatment of children.
The we're that we're the
conversation should be going is
we need to be doing what these
other states are doing and
speeded up and I need to hear
from the judicial the executive
branch.
Us us the legislative branch how
can we can you give us the tools
to get this done I need you all
to just ask us we want to do
this it's gonna be better for
the children now give us the
resources to just get it done
that that's but I haven't heard
that and so it's concern I don't
know why that is but I I would
like that conversation be going
that way in I mean to paraphrase
Nelson Mandela I think we all
respect he said the you you
can't really judges society's
soul better than how we treat
our children.
And if we can't get these I mean
I I hear some practical.
hurdles I get that this
practical hurdles come and ask
us for the tools and.
I'm just one out of forty two
but I will get outside on the on
the budget or whatever else the
money I'll I'll give you my
approval for that.
So that I mean this is what I
think we need to do I I don't I
don't know how else to say it.
You know we look at the the
judicial branch and where are
these children going to go for
justice that they don't come the
legislature just that'll come to
the executive branch for justice
in our system of government we
go to the judicial branch to
achieve justice for anybody
including these children.
And I think that's what the
heart of this bill is we're at
we're talking about time frames
and well it but we're really
talking about children's lives
in what this bill is doing from
my standpoint is we've got a ten
day window.
and we some of the three day
window but we have the the what
whatever call that the grace
period so we take three plus
five is eight and we're we're
kind of our two days is such a
big deal once again highest ace
rate in the country highest
repeat mode can we not just get
better two days and can these
other brands the governor just
come ask us for help and we'll
just give it to you I don't know
what else we're doing in this
legislative session if if we
can't take care of this issue we
have no business talking about
any of these other bills on here
today if we can't take care of
child abuse and neglect I mean
it's it's I don't know what else
can be the top of the list and
so I think Mandall was right
when he said that so I don't
really have a lot of technical
questions about the bill except
that I'm
unless I'm missing something I
it's it's it's just been a
little strange to hear how this
conversation's going I think we
should all get together and say
let's just let's just do and get
it done this seems very
reasonable to me and I I I
definitely
I agree with with the concerns
about you know disrupting
families but if we're having a
revolving door of short stays in
for number one short stays in
the country with these revolving
door such as a separate and you
can see is the tick mark on
these kids ace ace ace ace ace
and if this is going to slow
down and bring them into the
judicial system we're gonna
receive once again three receive
justice then I'm I'm all for
nothing we should you know kind
of keep going on this and all
talk together I we should be
able to come up with the I think
it's not even it's beyond
bipartisan I think it's you know
in inner
you know branch of government I
think we should all have the
same the same hard to think we
do and I think we should be able
to get it done so thank Mr thank
Senator Schmedes Gregg.
Thank you Mr chairman centers in
I was just going to check
because if I count this right
this bill has been Ivey Soto
twice today just just.
Thank you Mr Senators up my real
question is and there's some
really good comments about five
days the grace period but
nothing in this bill would stop
the investigation going forward
the three days just to get the
probable cause hearing not to
stop CYFD is that correct Mr
chairman and senator I guess
that is correct effect if if
CYFD decided that they're going
to need a lot more time and that
the child was not in immediate
danger then under the law and
under this bill they can return
the child to the home as they
continue their investigation.
However if return the child to
the home is going to put that
child in danger.
Then first of all we need a
judge to review that decision.
And and second of all then we
need to make sure like like like
that's this is that's the part
that we're talking about right
if we're talking about an issue
that that may require some kind
removal but not an exigent
removal.
Nothing stops the department
from taking their time to do
that and I think a lot of people
say that they take the time to
do that.
Thank you for that and and
actually I've had a text from
all on investigator and I
thought the first conversation
was pretty harsh you know
supporters there timeline but
now that you guys have clarified
you know just a problem because
these and the five day grace
period it makes it easier for me
because you know just talked a
constituent about what they do
in daily basis but I do
appreciate for all the
discussion you had in the
clarification can be really
helpful as we go forward with
that you Mr thank you Senator
Gallegos Senator Maestas thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator Dianne and Senator Ivey
Soto I want to thank you Mr
chairman and others.
I've never seen a committee
like.
Do everything it can to to to
harness opposition voices.
The bill but I think it's I
think it's just I think it's the
is it was it was leadership and
it was and it boasted it frankly
bolsters the credibility of the
bill if in fact it moves forward
which I believe it should I'm
just persuaded by what other
states do you know when I
completely up.
Completely up of empathize and
have tremendous respect for the
leadership of two FTE and and
and the thought of doing
something different and the
thought of of more work but I.
At the department simply lost
credibility with me with with
regard to its FY are.
And fifty additional lawyers to
implement this bill I mean if if
if someone has a case coming
across their desk once a day.
I'd rather have three files in
on my desk rather than the ten.
You know and so deadlines are
liberating deadlines are
liberating and so if once if and
when this deadline is imposed I
believe that that there's you
know there's gonna be some.
Some institutional just means
that that need to be made and
and and the growing pains are
dealt with by asking for a five
day continuance in also so it's
like do we put a five day
deadline.
The bill's sponsors decided to
put a three day deadline.
With the put possibility of five
day continuance in my mind
hopefully in a couple three
years that five day continuance
either goes away in fact or or
or in statute the I was confused
Mr and Senators diamond center I
was up there with the rest of
the custody hearing.
the initial custody hearing
determining probable cause the
subsequent custody hearing
determining custody and and the
up because I don't have this the
next action in front of me as
you did but I think the
amendment made by.
My colleague here Senator Lopez
I think solve that problem the
key is.
Mr chairman centers on bottom
page for the rules of evidence
shall not apply.
in other words officers of the
court can make to make
presentations the officer can
make presentations families to
make presentations and that that
evidence is wait given the the
way it deserves
And and and if I may please Mr
David's affidavits could be
accepted if the rules of
evidence for plan.
Yes and and can off topic Mr
chairman we should put that in
the constitution and the bill
reform that could have saved us
five years of growing pains just
doesn't but so
the
But I think I think go we need
to move in this direction
because it real quick Mr centers
so officer goes to a house
domestic violence someone's
arrested the other person is not
the biological parent or the
guardian that child is taken by
the police officer correct.
Mr chairman and Services that is
that is correct yes and so
there's situations where the
officers not making a judgment
call the officers to has no
choice but to take a child into
custody turned over to CYFD ten
days would be on just in that
situation the person you know
could could be released a day or
two after the arrest and and B.
and B. at the hearing and you
know so we got I think on the
flip side the the the children
that don't need to be in custody
ten days they're they're only in
custody three so that's a that's
a relief fund over stressed
Department
and then and then the the the
road to the custody hearing
takes a turn earlier in the
process instead of this.
The people being in limbo for
ten days you know so it it's an
adjustment but it's an
adjustment I need to be made I
don't.
Maybe I'll have an of the
proposed language change between
now on the floor but I don't I
don't see one now I think these
members to care of it senator
sure will work on it as well
but I appreciate you bringing it
forward it's a.
It is a big.
A big change it's a big change
but it's a the forty hour
probable cause is is is is the
cultural norm of the court this
would be the statutory
requirement of the court and I
have confidence in the court and
to have to to get it done thank
you Mr thank you secretary
what's the will of the
committee.
Senator McKenna please.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Senators
this may have been covered when
I stepped out briefly and if it
is please forgive me but I am
curious chairman Senators and
Yes I can't pardon my play
quieter.
I'm curious on on page two and
we've talked about this a bit
one five and six the court may
grant one continuance that does
not exceed five days.
does the AOC still feel
uncomfortable with that
extension.
Is is over here.
Know that there may be reasons
for continuing.
Okay.
okay so that's that's a yes so
all right.
All right thank you chairman
thank you senators.
We have a motion.
Senator Gallegos moved to do
fescue seconded by Senator
Maestas.
And the secretary will call the
roll Senator guy Aigles is.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator by Estes yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator smitteez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'm gonna move this through yes
I'm not sure vote for it on the
floor but and.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes if we have
more congratulations senators
you have by nine zero motion by
the the account the the defense
motion Mr chairman members the
committee I've as amended as
amended has about it and I
really do want to thank you all
for the thoughtful conversation
this is exactly what a hearing
should be for that is to say but
what about this but what about
that make sure that we've
consider these things and and so
thank you all very much.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
both the Senator Hamblen here
please.
Hello for another non
controversial issues.
If we get the guns.
In the course.
I will read those bills yes.
Senate bill one sixteen.
Hello Mister chair and committee
thank you very much for this
opportunity today I come to you
today because I think like most
of us heartbroken and I'm tired
about Holdren being killed and
people being killed.
we just recently had an active
shooter drill here at the state
capitol teachers have those
unemployed asus.
We are all aware and well aware
that there are parents who lost
their children spouses who've
lost their partners.
People who lost their husbands
and wives kids who've lost
teachers and the list goes on.
The passing of someone you love
via any type of death is
difficult and traumatic the
death of someone because been
automatic firearm or semi
automatic firearm or firearm
capable of accepting a large
capacity feeding devices life
altering and devastating
devastating because we know our
society can and should do
something to keep these weapons
out of the hands of people who
intend to do harm.
The problem is that semi
automatic rifles are the weapon
of choice for mass shooters
because of the high efficient
effectively Saudi and we're
seeing an increasing number of
mass shootings by those under
twenty one for example in two
thousand twelve in sandy hook
Connecticut twenty six were dead
two injured when a twenty year
old person shot and killed
twenty six people two thousand
eighteen in parkland Florida
seventeen people were dead
seventeen injured a nineteen
year old opened fire on students
and staff at Marjory Stoneman
Douglas high school in twenty
twenty two in buffalo New York
ten we're dead three are injured
as an eighteen year old live
stream part of the attack on
social media before that social
media service shut it down.
In twenty twenty two and you've
all the Texas twenty one we're
dead eighteen are injured as an
eighteen year old gunman
wielding an A. R. fifteen style
rifle killed nineteen children
and two teachers at rob
elementary school in the fall
the Texas it was the deadliest
school shooting since twenty
children and six adults were
killed at sandy hook elementary
in two thousand twelve ten years
before and.
So how Senate bill sixteen
addresses this issue is that it
establishes a minimum age of
twenty one to purchase or
possess an automatic firearm
semi automatic firearm or
firearm capable of accepting a
large capacity feeding device in
New Mexico you can purchase
these types of mass assault
weapons at eighteen and get you
have to be twenty one to
purchase a handgun.
There is a discrepancy there for
me.
One thing I'd like to point out
Mr chairman committee is that
the Senate bill sixteen includes
exceptions such as someone under
the age of twenty one who
attends a hunter safety course
or other firearm safety course.
Using the automatic or semi
automatic firearm for target
shooting engages in organized
competition using these firearms
engages in legal hunting or
trapping activities.
Is on private property or under
the supervision of a parent
grandparent or legal guardian.
One thing to keep in mind this
bill does not apply to law
enforcement officers or active
duty or reserve members of the
armed forces.
And so at this point I would
like to mention that the
supporters for this bill or
Everytown for gun safety and as
well as the Giffords law center
to prevent gun violence my
experts today Is Maranda School
who's co president of New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
we do have an attorney from the
attorney general's office but he
is over in the house right now
for H. B. line and so at this
point I look forward to the
discussion from the committee
and chair and I appreciate the
time great thank you senator.
This will be good to see you the
did you want to say anything
about the bill yes definitely
chair members of the committee
my and she said that we are also
for the bill obviously so
raising the age to possess or
purchase semiautomatic firearms
to twenty one it's into a harm
reduction model and works
towards prevention studies show
that a heightened risk of gun
violence under the age of twenty
one as this age group is more
prone to impulsiveness and poor
judgment because the prefrontal
cortex is not fully developed at
the age of nineteen by twenty
one there's more cognitive
maturity which allows for an
increase in critical thinking
what you would want when you
came to somebody holding a semi
automatic firearm people under
the age of twenty five are also
more likely to make impulsive
decisions no history
demonstrates that higher age
requirements for certain risky
activities can minimize harm to
young people look at drunk
driving when the drinking ages
range from eighteen to twenty
one there were fewer car
accidents caused by drunk
drivers this is simply with this
bill would do
in terms of firearm possession
nine millimeter handguns are
also the guns most commonly used
in crimes including crimes of
passion thank the young nineteen
year old was at a party and he
is drunk and he doesn't like the
way somebody looked at his
girlfriend and he's to ten kills
that person we see it over and
over in New Mexico I can tell
you right now that the norm for
parties talking to you this age
are having guns at these parties
and I think we all see it every
night on the local news
sentiment semi automatic rifles
are also as on this Senator
Hamblen said the weapon of
choice for mass shooters because
the high because of the high end
effectively vality we saw this
in the past four major mass
shootings and many of those were
the minute they turn eighteen or
nineteen whatever this the
statue isn't in the state they
go on buying a R. fifteen to
shoot up a school.
we just saw this last week a
seventeen year old here in Santa
Fe.
Was found riddled with bullets.
Buy an assault weapon.
And the suspects were nineteen
and twenty three.
I don't know how old they were
with the two children that we we
lost in Albuquerque on Saturday
those bodies rules are riddled
with bullets.
passing SPC one sixteen is
simply another tool in our
toolbox to help keep our
community safe from gun violence
thank you very much.
Mr chair if I can have
ultimately this is not a bill to
remove guns from people this is
a bill to make sure that those
who intend to do harm to
themselves or other people.
Have to go through a little bit
have to have a little bit more
parameters in terms of accessing
those weapons so that they can't
continue to hurt people.
Thank you senator let's go to
the audience and we get a show
of hands first how many people
here are in support of this
bill.
and then you just get an idea
how many are here in opposition
to this bill.
Similar number I think what
we're gonna do is take.
five or six from each group
rather than to go through it all
and we're getting some on on
soon as well so do you have a
list of the ones that are going
to speak in or do you have.
Mr chair I do know that there
are some folks who are online
but I leave it at your
discretion as to who speaks
today out let's start with the
ones in the artist raise your
hands those who want to speak on
this bill in favor of it.
Okay well let's let's start with
you Sir and then we'll we'll
just see how far we go but I am
going to stop after six at the
most.
Mr chair that come up and use
the Mike so the the zoom will
pick it up please.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
Sperber McQueen I'm a volunteer
with retake our democracy a
statewide citizen advocacy
network we support this bill for
the reasons that have already
been laid out.
Thank you.
Anybody else want to speak yes
of.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that I Meredith make
chan I'm speaking on behalf of
the legal women voters of New
Mexico and American Association
of university women and we are
in strong support of this
legislation thank Senator
appropriate fourth and Maranda
from for her relentless advocacy
force gun safety
we have other laws that keep
young children home from getting
guns until they're twenty one
and why we have the ability for
people and there's no age on
some of the firearms that are
mentioned in this bill and it we
really do need these protections
The every day I think our hearts
are going out to all of the
victims victims family and one
thing we're hearing in the
schools is students don't feel
safe and part of it is that they
have vicarious trauma when
they're hearing about what's
going on not just in our state
but across the country we've
just got to do this it's long
overdue and we're strong support
legislation thank you very much
thank you.
Yeah hi.
Senator Ortiz if you have to
push the button down it looked
at.
Working.
All that I can speak really
allowed the zoom okay I'm sorry
is it working thanks I forgot
my.
Okay
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino members of
the committee I am speaking the
authority to do so hi state your
age your cell Pamela Marshall
sorry because New Mexico I'm
speaking as a citizen that's
appalled and devastated by
what's been happening with the
gun killings but also as I told
you before of mental health
therapist in private practice
and the social workers child
abuse and neglect in the state
and there are a number of
developmental emotional and the
cognitive milestones that are
impacting the support of this
bill that children at and
anybody under the age of twenty
five in fact even older than
twenty one sorry are are dealing
with one of those to so this I'm
sure the although which is
impulse control the development
of impulse control yes it's
different for two year old it is
for an eighteen or twenty year
old but it's still a factor the
development of a sense of right
and wrong which involves some
ethical on variables the
development of cognitive
ability and the experience to
look at all the options
available to one in the
situation and what the
The R..
Probable outcomes of choosing
any one of those options are
that takes some intellectual
capability and a lot of
experience to develop.
And another factor that is
really relative that supports
this bill is a W. formation
which is largely the work of
adolescence.
They try on a lot of the down of
these they are easily influenced
by others around them.
And they're not really clear who
they are.
All of these factors and there
are others affect their
cognitive and emotional
development which this bill
support do I think that by the
age of twenty one everybody has.
Adequately develop these
abilities no I think twenty five
would be better but this is a
good start in the right
direction do I think this will
solve all of our.
Herbal and horrific killings in
gun violence no but I think this
is an important piece of the
framework that we need to put in
place quickly.
and I appreciate your time the
thank you ma'am.
Who else of the let's get this
gentleman in the front row and
then we'll get to you.
Hi Jerry Brown Keogh and count
the chair of the graduate
professional students
association at UNM.
And I I don't plan on speaking
but when I heard only one
shooting was mentioned from New
Mexico there's been more within
the last year I can six two
right off the top of my mind and
I just came here to observe so
the first one was in Las Vegas a
high school kid shot and killed
another person that case is
still ongoing so I don't want to
make any declarations about it
right now along with an MSU
basketball player which that one
was determined self defense shot
and killed to I mean shop until
one you and students not I don't
have any opinion on the basis or
anything that I want to mention
but.
These are also active
confinements are occurring with
people of my age I'm twenty five
so seeing that happen in my
demographic is incredibly sad
especially since like the kids
affect kids from UNM was a
leader and a black organization
on campus up in you know what to
help keep guns out of
incompetent people sense thank
you and then we'll take one more
comment to in support of the
bill.
Thank you Dana Middleton from
the national organization for
women here and I want to say our
support completely for this bill
we have lots of instances in
domestic violence and I think
somehow this is logical and I.
it's a start have to start
somewhere and just two twenty
one is going to be brilliant and
it will help and it won't way
from hunters and people can get
a gun in the state thank you so
much thank you now let's go to
the audience for those who are
opposed to this bill could you
raise your hand or body was you
for pick up the might
alternative Joshua James
Lawrence former I can it it's
burning of Bernalillo county
sheriff.
senators chair you'll have one
obligation that's the
constitution you do not have the
right to interpret it as you
please as you want interpret
counts constitution you have to
go the bill of rights in no time
ever do you have the right to
violate any of we the people's
bill of rights the second
amendment shall not be infringed
our forefathers knew very well
what Tierney looks like we have
whether you're eighteen or
twenty one or older we all have
the right to defend ourselves
eighteen you have the right to
go to war given the right to
join the military I'd say that
we should start with their
education like many countries
that a lot of people in the
state like to use for health
care and other things our
children and Sweden and
Switzerland and whatnot in
schools starting in kindergarten
learn how to utilize in respect
to a weapon a gun the people are
the economic there's no such
thing as an assault weapon at
all
And the any time you pass a bill
that violates our bill of rights
it's absolutely an act of
treason thank you thank you Sir
who else wants to speak on a in
a position to this bill yes
ma'am.
And if there are others you
might start coming up so it
should be in position to grab
the Mike.
Mr chairman members and Sanchez
I thank you for the opportunity
to speak today and opposition
against this bill
none of us.
Want to see children injured
none of us want to continue to
see gun violence
However as I heard legislators
state today bad scenarios make
bad bills and that's what this
bill is it's a bad bill in
response to bad scenario.
As I go through it there is
number of issues that I see
throughout the bill
and
the over riding with the second
amendment infringement if you
guys will just join me on page
three line twenty one twenty two
unlawful to knowingly sell or
transfer ownership of an
automatic firearm in many parts
of our state grandparents leave
their firearms to their children
they bequeath them that right
there would make it illegal for
them to do that that would that
would be the family the executor
would would be guilty of a
misdemeanor because they're
transferring the ownership
A section do
we're making exceptions for
peace officers but we're not
covering private security
officers.
So anyone who works private
security who's between the ages
of eighteen and twenty one of
this bill is about committing a
misdemeanor if they're caring if
they're carrying a semi
automatic firearm which in case
you didn't know.
According to the ATF eighty five
percent of pistols manufactured
in twenty eighteen we're on
we're semi automatic pistols and
twenty seventeen half of all
rifles were that doesn't count
the semi automatic shotguns and
in our state.
New Mexico state university's
four H. shooting sports program
almost all the firearms that
they allow to provide for the
kids to use so that they can
practice or semi automatic
firearms.
So now we're killing our youth
shooting sports.
I don't
going further on.
I this large capacity feeding
device definition is a misnomer
sense of the majority of
Magazines that come standard
standard issue magazines hold
fifteen to thirty rounds.
Now it is the compact pistol it
the whole fifteen to thirty on
average so saying automatically
illegal for them to for to
possess it if it's more than ten
is limiting extremely limiting
their ability to right to bear
arms okay I'm also an issue that
I have on page two.
Is that
Onlinedmv of.
Sorry.
Section four line thirteen
participating in our practices
for performance
a lot of section ten eleven
state yet and the competition
but it doesn't allow for
practices and again in my County
I'm in Lincoln County
we have no ranges for shot gun.
We only have pistol and rifle
ranges so we're on private lands
when we're practicing you
shooting sports and one twenty
four twenty five of that same
page state we thank you my
Anyone eighteen to twenty one.
For younger would have to be on
private property under the
control of the person's parent
grandparent or legal guardian
will once my child eighteen he
doesn't have a legal guardian
he's an adult and before then I
don't own the property that we
should on it's not under my
control I can't rent it it's
it's somebody else's property
that does not belong to our
family.
The fact that this bill starts
off with.
The right to put they want to
increase the age on purchasing
but also not just purchasing but
possessing the possession is the
problem the the senator here she
said this bill is designed to
prevent those individuals who
intend to do harm individuals
who intend to do harm are not
going to care about what the law
says.
This wall the way it is this
bill if it were to become law
would only be designed.
Unintentionally I'm sure out of
good intentions I'm sure but it
would effectively be infringing
on our citizens rights and could
you introduce yourself ma'am and
I apologize I realize that
halfway through and I didn't
want to stop the train of
thought my name is Jennifer gray
thank you very much thank you
thank you for the.
Thank you.
I am going to cut it off after
six so you Mr Chairman can you
hear me yes thank you Tiffany
Rivera registered lobbyists for
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau and director of
government affairs I appreciate
the Sanchez work on the bill and
really the spirit of protecting
our communities we all deserve
to feel safe however I do stand
in a respectful opposition.
Firearms play a large role in
the customs culture and everyday
lives of rural residents all
rural residents are often raise
utilizing farms is an essential
tool for hunting working and
personal protection.
Residents often carry firearms
as a means of protection not
only for themselves but for
their families and livestock we
acknowledge that there are
exemptions provided in the bill
however there are many issues
that still remain outstanding
first this bill contains no
grandfather language to protect
those under twenty one if passed
this bill would immediately
criminalize many young farm
owners who prior to the
enactment we're legally allowed
to possess their farms next
there is no exemption that
addresses a firearm transfers to
minors and those under twenty
one due to the death or
inheritance.
All echo many of the statements
that my
Jen Jennifer mentioned before
and for these reasons we stand
and respectful opposition thank
you thank you.
Chair excuse me one day chair
Senators I am here standing in
opposition of this bill as a
former.
I'm sorry Ramona goals be as of
former
Officer in the United States
Army reserves I helped train
young men to go over in battle
they were eighteen years old
they were willing to lay their
life down for you.
I am up practitioner have been a
practitioner of medicine.
And what I have found is that
it.
Mental illness is something that
we need to address anger
management is something we need
to address but by limiting the
rights of other people because
of the small because of the a
minority or because of a smaller
group is not the answer laws are
not broken by law abiding
citizens laws are broken by
people who practice criminally
thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Taylor
reckons on behalf of New Mexico
cattle growers in New Mexico oil
growers and we stand opposed to
SB one sixteen from a real
perspective there is no general
exception for minors possessing
firearms for self defense
defense of property or defense
of livestock the only exception
made occurs on private property
under the control or supervision
of the minor's parent
grandparent or legal guardian.
Farming and ranching or
occupations that start young and
require a high degree of self
discipline and responsibility
producers of all ages in New
Mexico Prof and livestock on a
variety of plants from public to
private and often when their
time in Braun to neighbors
during times of harvester
livestock works.
Under this bill a minor
conducting farmer ranch work on
a neighboring properties for
land that is not private also
not under the constant
supervision of a relative would
not be able to carry a firearm
for protection against predators
nor trust passers.
Farms are to use respectfully
and purposefully in rural New
Mexico and this bill stance to
take that tool from us thank you
thank you and this will be the
last comment against the bill
number six.
The.
Mr.
Mr chairman members of the
committee sorry at terra Mitch
the New Mexico state director
for the national rifle
association testifying in
opposition to this bill
we heard the the advocate the
lead advocate here called for
passage of this so that it could
be a tool in the toolbox of
keeping communities safer.
The New Mexico legislature back
in twenty nineteen passed a tool
already it was called universal
background checks it was
something that we were told was
designed to keep firearms out of
the hands of the wrong people.
We have no idea how this tool.
Has been enforced implemented
all we know is that crime has
gone up in New Mexico.
There's another tool that gun
control advocates suspect
successfully fought for the
federal level that many of you
may not know about that is also
supposed to keep guns out of the
hands of the wrong people when
in eighteen to twenty year old
under federal law now goes to
purchase a firearm.
There's a defector three to ten
day waiting period on that
purchase during which time FBI
is supposed to.
Do an enhanced background check.
On state juvenile records in the
state where the eighteen to
twenty year old lives.
An FBI is to contact the law
enforcement agency in the
jurisdiction that the eighteen
to twenty year old lips so we
have to tools in the toolbox so
to speak.
That are supposed to be making
us safer supposed to ensure that
people between the age of
eighteen and twenty.
Are lawfully purchasing firearms
but the tool that's being
proposed here today.
Outright deny is eighteen to
twenty year olds their
constitutional right to own and
purchase firearms to possess and
purchase firearms.
This is an unconstitutional pool
I always look are there are
there are laws on the books that
can and should be enforced
before we pass another
restrictive measure.
And there are and if they're not
working should really ask
yourself do we need to pass
another law that won't be
enforced and won't work thank
you.
Thank you and I'm afraid we
won't take any comments from
soon because we've already
exceeded our.
Our numbers on each side of the
issue.
did you want to respond to
anything you've heard to Senator
so Mister I go to the committee
then questions comments from
discussions in the committee.
Senator committees.
The
thank Mister chairman Senator
For your presentation I have a
couple questions on the bill.
The the first thing that stood
out to me was actually the the
family part you know supervision
of parents grandparents.
and you know well I hope we can
at least agree that this this
bill is putting a restriction on
constitutional right
you know hopefully in.
Seems to be public redefine
so if you disagree please please
tell me in the in the discussion
here but so we're we're
stretching this right
But then we have an exception
for being supervised by a parent
grandparent or legal guardian.
Mr chair Senator what happens
if.
That individual that twenty year
old does not have a living
parent or grandparent.
Mr chair before in committee
before I answer that question
given that there were people
that were on zoom is there any
way we could ask for a show of
hands before I answer Senator
should meetings we have the ones
is signed up okay you do have
that as we have the.
This is one sixteen so we have
Brian dina bavor Jake of the
hill Gloria lamer Regina Griego
and Peggy Neff signed up in
support of it and we have in
opposition Ellery Tucker
Williams and Nate eski thank you
Mr chair presheaf that and then
to answer question Mr chair and
and senator I'm gonna go ahead
and turn it over to Maranda to
address that issue chair members
of the committee with us that we
wanted at the twenty general
secretary was going to be here
but he's not but I spoke to
about the we actually disagree
that if you use the Mike of more
ended we're not picking you up
at all
a check chair members of the
committee we actually disagree
that it goes against the second
amendment is is already in place
that it's nineteen I that limit
is already in place it's already
lost so what we are doing is
raising the age to twenty one.
Mr chair Senator I'm not saying
that you said it was again
second I'm paying I'm saying
this puts a restriction or
constraint on a constitutional
right I I've been around long
enough that I know it's just
it's hard we ideologically
disagree it's hard to just fine
and it really helps
for more fruitful debate and
respect to the public if we can
just kind of get some kind of
common ground so no no no trick
questions or anything I just
seems I mean this is
constitutional right to bear
arms and we're we're
constraining right we're we're
constraining the number of
people that that can barely ours
so I mean I I I'm I'm just
assuming we agree on that and if
we don't I'm not saying you you
said it was against the second
amendment I'm not saying that
what I'm saying we're
constraining or restricting I'll
choose any verb that you are
comfortable with
to act on that constitutional
right so is is that okay coming.
Members of the committee and
wanted the syntax of a but we
are simply
making it so that young people
whose brains are not fully
developed do not have access to
semi automatic rifles that's
what we're doing again that does
not include hunting shooting
sports and all the other things
are listed in the bill.
Mr chair Senator I I can we can
talk about court cases are
several public courts that and I
didn't really want to get into
this but that have just said
that you can't restrict sale to
eighteen to twenty one year olds
for some Americans have rifles
you can't restrict concealed
carry it's such a such a for
this eighteen to twenty one age
group so.
I'm.
I guess Mr chair and senator I
mean are you are you
disagreeing.
With me that we're restricting
constitutional right I'm trying
to move forward here I just I'm
not I'm a little surprised to
tell the truth I just want to
make sure on the same page.
Mr chair Senator I I don't
believe we are restricting the
constitutional right I think
when we're talking about
legislation that is happening
right now there are cases all
over the country who are
discussing the second amendment
and understand that I think at
this point what we are looking
at is how we can make New Mexico
a safe place for young people
from people who are deciding to
do harm to others with these
high high magazine weapons.
Okay Mr chair and senator.
Maybe I should move on but it it
seems very clear to me that you
know in this bill it says that
just for example.
Unlawful for a person to a this
young young person to
possess a semi automatic
firearm.
I guess you're saying right now
they don't have a constitutional
right to do that but I'll just
move on I'm I'm coming from the
standpoint that a nineteen year
old in this country has a
constitutional right to possess
a semi automatic nine millimeter
Glock.
that's really not a
controversial statement I don't
know I mean you can disagree if
they should have it but the the
case laws.
Beyond overwhelmingly clear at
this point I guess I mean
especially with recent Scotus
you know so I'm.
I don't know I guess we'll just
move on I'm I'm that's okay look
at I'm.
Mr Mister chairman Senator but
back to the the parent
grandparent issue
The I.
When we are restricting
someone's right to bear arms.
We have an exception here that
they can do so.
under this sort of familial
supervision.
But I I would urge extreme
caution when we are singling
people out that have up the
parent parent and grandparents
that are living
And and and and say well here
you are further restricted.
Because you do not have parents
or grandparents are living where
as you have parents and
grandparents who are living so
you have this extra
privilege or extra way to
exercise your constitutional
right.
Very very please it please.
Exercise extreme caution with
that I would just say it that
way.
Mister Mister chairman Senator.
I had some questions on the
reservist.
section of the bill on page
three.
I'd like to see how this would
kind of play out so.
If a nineteen year old goes to.
Capellas or buys a firearm
online I don't know.
It and they are of reserves of
some kind and in the nineteen
year old twenty year old that's
not a reserves you know because
a capellas and once it by far
far can you describe how this
bill would.
How that would actually play
out.
Chair Mister chairman Senator
committee up when you go into
the army reserves as a child who
was a army army brat so to speak
my father was active duty
military they're receiving
training.
To use with these weapons they
are going through boot camp they
are receiving the training on
how to effectively handle the
weapons how to safely use them
how to effectively discharge
them where somebody who's not in
this it reserves or in the
service for law enforcement are
not getting that training so
that's that's the the point of
that that distinction there Mr
chair Senator okay Mister Mr
chair and senator thank you
that's what I thought I'd I want
to ask
So they've they reserve the
training they've they've they
have the training have receive
the training
but then they let's say they
decide to get out there twenty
in the they get out there no
longer active duty their no
longer a reserve member they
receive the training though so
if if the the crux of this is to
receive the training we have a
person now that has received
that training but they no longer
qualify under the bill.
Is that is that intentional or
is there another could there be
another change to the bill to
allow this the person that has
received the training to still
possess and purchased such a
firearm.
Mr chairman and committee that
is correct if I'm wrong you may
know this but I think when you
in list into the reserve it's at
least a minimum of four years my
correct so if somebody were to
enlist into the National Guard
there there until they're twenty
two.
At a minimum unless they decide
to re up so there have to be
some pretty remarkable
circumstances for somebody to
leave the army reserves at
twenty after only being in for
two years.
Mr chair Senator I can give you
an example you can have a an
injury or something like that
and have an honorable discharge
so that was just as one example
there remarkable circumstance
yeah yeah medically so Mr chair
Senator yeah it's it's
remarkable the once again I I'm
trying to extreme caution we're
restricting or narrowing a
constitutional right we have to
I mean obviously I mean that you
know I heard a lot of opposition
to build big bills to be
controversial
and you know these sorts of
things I think have to be Taylor
very very carefully and so and
of course the courts are going
to create that too right and and
potentially grant injunctive
relief for or look at those
sorts of things I mean I mean
that that's sort of an argument
could be presented in court
effect if I already said it's
highly likely are Attorney
General even said in the FIR
that this is likely to be
litigated so you know I'm just
I'm just I'm just being
practical from us to you know
standpoint from what I've seen
FIR the.
I'm chair members of the
committee in terms of the F. by
our and the second amendment
issues that is happening almost
every single gun violence
prevention bill because of
what's going on its Supreme
Court it doesn't necessarily
have to do with this bill it's
what every what's happening in
terms I my guess is the age of
nineteen is going to be
litigated by our U. S. Supreme
Court right everything's going
there because that's what the
that the environment of the
Supreme Court is right now thank
you.
Mr chair Senator so I I guess
I'll just.
You know that's.
yeah I I did I did have one one
last thing
Is is kind of what would happen
in the the three years so like
let's say this bill is passed
and then you have someone who's
eighteen in the nineteen twenty
twenty one and then the next
people that are coming into
eighteen
that this has already been in
place for say three years okay
the students thank
it seems very difficult for a
person with these exceptions to.
To possess a firearm if they
can't purchase it so
could you talk about that is it
just the fact that people are
gonna be loaning guns for short
term use under these
exceptions is that how it would
work.
It chair members of the
committee it's my understanding
that the possession is when
you're hunting or.
Dissipating and shooting sports
in the list that we have that's
what the definition of the
possession is.
Mr chair Senator but but those
eight those are all the state
young people takes too long say
eighteen to twenty one for
eighteen to twenty the the young
people that would be utilizing
these exceptions would not be
allowed.
To purchase such a weapon for
use is that correct.
Chair members of the committee
eighteen year olds right now New
Mexico by law cannot purchase a
firearm they can possess a but
they can't purchase it.
For semi automatics it's
nineteen right now.
So with that let's let's use it
Mr chair Senator to the the
twenty year old let's see the
twenty year old for example how
would.
If they can't.
If they're no longer gonna be
able to purchase how would they
get such a firearm to Mexico
participate in these.
Except.
Chair members of the committee
the same way that they are now.
So under there so for instance
let's say there's a seventeen
year olds in ROTC he is he or
she can possess a firearm under
the the because they're good the
guardians they're allowing them
to do that that's already that's
already happening that makes
sense Mr chair Sir no I'm just
trying to make sure I understand
it's not a not a trick question
I
I'm I'm just trying to see how
this would would play out
So.
I think that that concludes my
my question I I just I'm still a
little.
My back to my first question I
in I may just ask again maybe I
wasn't clear but are are you
saying that.
Right now a twenty year old does
not have a constitutional right
to purchase and or possess a
semi automatic firearm.
No the right right now the law
stands in nineteen that's a
rating chair members the
committee sorry that's why we're
raising it to twenty one.
Right so Mr chair Senator does
a.
Does a twenty year old right now
have a constitutional right to
possess a.
Semi automatic pistol.
Chair members of the committee
yes right now a twenty rules can
possess a semi automatic handgun
or pistol.
Okay thank okay and so Mr chair
Senator I I I I like I said I I
think it right now they they
have the constitutional right I
think we all please I think we
all agree on that
But this bill it says that it's
unlawful for anyone under twenty
one to purchase semi automatic
firearm in this is unlawful for
them to to possess
except in in certain
circumstances so I once again I
I think make just making the
statement we still disagree
somehow and like I said I'm not
going to believe the point but
we we are restricting
constitutional right so I just
want to make that point I think
it's we have to be very careful
and do that we have to be
careful gauging what what the
reason for it is this is the
reason for it we all agree on we
want less gun violence right so
that's that's nice that we have
you know something comment is
there some of these contentious
bills we we actually don't have
much in common which is makes it
even more tough right but at
least we have kind of that that
the common goal and I'm not
gonna get off in the some of the
other ideas and proposals for
doing that just really looking
at this bill so that's all I
have thing for the discussion
thank you Mr thank you senator
Senator Maestas you're next.
Thanks to borrow your thank you
for.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Senator an upgrade discussion
Preciado.
Well folks are saying but I
You know we have to do what we
can to
To prevent gun violence you know
within the confines of the
constitution which is very hard
because our state constitution
as you know is even more
restrictive on governmental
regulations than the federal
constitution so I think this is
great conversation half because
this this is this is
constitutional.
And why do we know that we know
that because currently an
eighteen year old cannot
purchase a pistol.
Have to be nineteen.
you know the folks who are going
to bring this to court I suppose
could could have brought that to
court but maybe they chose not
to for fear of losing that court
case I don't know that's that's
a speculative but but it's just
peculiar how things work
nineteen was the drinking age
and then the federal government
says you know we gotta do
somebody W. I. and and and
restricted federal highway funds
until the states but to to
twenty one.
cigarettes were eighteen to last
year we bumped it to twenty one.
cannabis we we bumped up from
nobody.
Tell folks twenty one obviously
I'll call is not in the bill of
rights but it existed two
thousand years before the bill
of rights I would suggest it's
an inalienable right
So we so we've done things.
To create good public policy
even though it's a bummer for
those who.
Of who who enjoyed that aspect
of life or who want to enjoy
that particular aspect of life
but it's.
It's really we all just have to
give a little you know we ought
to get a little I was talking to
Mister chairman please.
My wife through a sorority party
and that was the husband's work
hanging out trying to figure out
how to enjoy herself so.
And two other guys were gone
good they've love guns and they
knew everything about gun and so
I had the opportunity to just
listen to all for a couple hours
and.
And they are they were staunch
second amendment they had
multiple weapons they knew
everything about weapons and
they it was fun to them it was
fun to shoot a weapon.
and they have no problem with
this bill was interesting I
thought yeah that's reasonable
that there was reasonable to
them
and so so I think it's some to
consider when I saw this bill on
the docket I thought it was all
weapons till twenty one.
You know and then I'm reading
the pin on a frankly I was
looking I was I was kind of.
Thought I was gonna read the
bill Mr chairman and let all can
do that and that's not good old
like the sucks to have to take
that out.
But when I read it it wasn't all
weapons it wasn't all weapons of
and and it mirrors of good law
that's currently in statute with
regards to possession of weapons
and so.
and it has multiple exceptions
do.
Parents can actually you can
actually have a wind if you're
fifty years old you get of a
wine at dinner with your parents
and that's not against the law.
and so in this if this bill were
to become law Mister chairman
Senator put up.
I take my.
Could could that take is ten
year old to the driving range
and shoot shoot these types of
weapons not at the driving range
all right.
Is golfers would be real no I'm
center for that have welcome to
give their okay now under the if
this bill would become law Mr
could could that take is it is
ten year old son and daughter to
a to a shooting range and few
and shoot these types of
prohibited weapons.
Chair members of the committee
yes that would be fine that
would be lawful and if you.
Kind of gave your whole family
alright lunch to defend
themselves could any of those
children
grab a firearm to defend
themselves in in the in the
confines of that private
property their own home in their
own propped their extended
property even a ranch.
Chair members of the committee
that is correct.
And so no one would and so
Mister chairman
Senator Hamblen could a would
someone be prohibited from being
public service eight or a police
officer if they're under twenty
one with this bill.
Chairman of the committee that
is also correct that they would
they would not be for a website
that they would be able to
because that okay is there an
incentive because they receive
the training in terms of Penn
state and then if an eighteen
year old want to join the
military.
and happen to be stationed here
New Mexico would this prohibit
them from from serving in the
military and and carrying these
weapons not Mister chair tender
No.
And so someone could even speak
become a member the active
reserve or the New Mexico
National Guard at the age of
eighteen and with this prevent
them from doing that if that was
their dream could they join the
National Guard and carry these
weapons of thirty two Mr chair
Senator absolutely no.
I feel like I'm being that
position but no absolutely
absolutely that's alright I wish
they would be able to they would
be able yeah thus item into a
discount on a point but I
appreciate the
And I think that of.
You know to sell or transfer
weapons is important I think you
could transfer those weapons of.
And hold them in trust until the
person turns twenty one I mean
that's that's not difficult to
do.
I know that that the ten rounds
are consider of consumer you you
got up.
Cut off somewhere I mean could
someone could a nineteen year
old because I need to know can't
the nineteen year old walk into
a gun store and buy a six
shooter revolvers.
Mr chair Senator yes or or a or
a hunting rifle single shot
hunting Mr chair Senator yes yes
I mean what I would consider of
Mr chair Senators maybe I know
all of our bills become law
ninety days after.
they're signed up believe you
may want to put a even though
this isn't you may want to put a
July first date just so folks
know.
And then I know that this this
will be tucked away in our
criminal code but it's not
really criminalizing stuff it's
it's just a store owners.
Our young people they just they
just won't.
The store owner won't sell it I
don't think the in person would
even try you know after July
first you know just be up it'll
be a normal business seitel
norm.
They have to be twenty one to to
purchase these these types of
weapons which and you could
still.
You know you could still enjoy
these weapons and and up in all
these legal matters.
so my point is Mr I think I
think this hits the a really
good reasonable spot with
regards to
individual liberties and and the
safety the committee but.
You know the state of the state
we won't know the stats there's
not gonna be a news article
saying the school was shot up
yesterday.
You know but on the margin on
the margin we we we all need to
do all we can to to diminish
these types of activities I
think this is a step in the
right direction thank you Mr
thanks in.
Thank you senators so we go now
to Senator Sedillo Lopez and
followed by Senator gave us.
Thank you Mr chair
I think of Senator my S. is
really made the point that no
constitutional right is is the
absolute not a single one the
first amendment that also says
that you know and nope shall is
always a balance and certainly a
three year old or nine year old
has different constitutional
rights with regard to the first
amendment then then a twenty one
year old a person so I I thought
to think that this is a really
good balance and.
And I I'm obviously going to
support it have one little
technical questions just and not
that you fix it here but maybe
on the way to Judiciary on page
three when a person is being
supervised by.
A parent.
You're referring what what is
the intent that person's parent
or is the intent any parent that
is there to supervise any kid
that was there because if you
intend that person's parent you
might want to say that or if you
intend a parent with training or
whatever whatever it is Center
you're referring to line one
line one okay yeah that makes
sense yeah it's that just the
only the only thing but I am I'm
happy to support this and I
think it will enhance
consent and safety in our state
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Gallegos.
Mr thank you Sir appreciate the
the dialogue I was going to ask
you someone sent me an email.
Just now they're on to speak and
didn't get on but there a guide
and they hire eighteen year old
and be a younger rating old
twenties the two actually guides
Mister chairman Senator would
the be out most of the time
they're up like pickles
wilderness places outdoors for a
hunting trip would they be held
as criminal if they're out there
without their parents they're
guarding their grandparents on a
job trying to do the job to
guide people because they would
have a rifle I would have
capacity.
Chair members of the committee
for one the state wouldn't have
to do with those they can still
go possessed a hunting rifle own
hunting rifle by hunting rifle
also that sounds like what
they're talking about is
actually up I hate that the
legal hunting trip that the
wrong which I think upon us
mistaken is to line eighteen as
a result of that yeah thanks to
line eighteen and eighteen chair
Senators another question on
seven of.
But if Hughes is here she is not
actually hunting they have it
for protection Mr chair Senator
they may have semiautomatic in
the way I read it there's no
exception now if if he's working
for here she is working with
that not qualify different from
a legal hunt because they're not
the Lujan there the guy.
Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair Senator I'm I'm not
real clear on what you're can do
you mind repeating the questions
out so typically and and I've
never had to hire a guide the
typically you go out in the
wilderness Mr chair Senator and
you pay someone to go with you
in order to get you into the
middle that'll you're gonna have
that eighteen to twenty year old
maybe carrying a semiautomatic
for their protection not have a
grandparent parent or guardian
round they may be doing this but
the group of hunters that they
will have some kind of fire arm
for protection would that not
make that eighteen to twenty
year old criminal because it's
they're not engaging in a legal
hunt or trapping they're doing
it as a business they're being
paid for that service and I'm
just wondering if that can be it
needs to be cleared to be able
to protect those are working in
the industry Huntingdonshire Mr.
What the situation is the
The chair members of the
committee I think Senator that
the exemption still applies I
think they would still be okay
if they're illegal hunting
activity and they're carrying a
gun and they have to protect
themselves from maternal bear
coming at them and they shoot
that bear they I don't I don't
think that that I'm just trying
to get my head around what
you're saying but I think and I
think I appreciate I appreciate
the the point but I I'm just
trying to.
Not attorney but I don't think
that would be an issue the way
this laws written the madam
chair Mister chairman Senator so
my brother's legal guide in
Colorado and if you were to go
up and let's say taken help out
of fear for his life fishing
game would not take that lightly
that be a penalty form of
extreme penalty rate he loses
guiding license it loses rifle
it loses vehicle and the up to
ten I think it's eight years
update yours if you lose the
opportunity to hire so to me the
fish wildlife is looking at it
different than you are because
you're saying that and if he
does not have a license is okay
because he's engaging in legal
hot he's not he would not have a
license to kill and help up
there a tear a dog Kyle when
he's up there he's to support
his hunters and he's there to
protect them and himself and
there can't.
Of I just think that that line
eighteen of creates a problem
important I'd like you to think
through that I know of Sir
Maestas said personal and made
statement that might clear some
stuff for you get Judiciary I
just think that's a really hard
hit Mr chairman Senator another
question is brought up and if I
understood right that a young
person could protect himself on
the ranch of for self defense
with that their parent their in
in line twenty fourth page two I
look at it is you have to have
your parent grandparent
relieving guardian.
To be supervised by the parent
grandparent Lee Gardner so if
the child is home alone.
In that same bear comes up and
he fears for his life if you
pulled a firearm he's not
supervised if the robbers some
comes in to take cattle horses
to damage whatever it is if you
grab that farm Hoesen his
approval in this bill.
And I'm wondering if there's
clarification on that because I
didn't read that in a page two
one twenty four item seven.
This.
Mr chair Senator so addressing
this is in essence if they pull
their their weapons or semi
automatic weapon in self defense
and a parent is not there so
thinking when I was a kid I had
the opportunity to stay at home
well my mom worked as a single
parent and so if in my home.
A private property somebody came
in and I am just wanted to
clarify to make sure that your
question and if I used a semi
automatic weapons to defend
myself and my home even though
my parent wasn't there in
essence I wasn't under the
supervision of a parent my fresh
care center exactly okay because
in seven he gives you the point
of time that you can be with
that far.
And if you're by yourself you
don't have parent grandparent or
legal car.
Chair members of the committee I
we will look into that it's my
understanding that if you're
protecting yourself in your home
under any circumstance so do
would not that nineteen of not
become a criminal thank we will
look we will look into that in
center at because if I see it in
writing all have more.
Comfort and when it happens a
child eighteen to twenty or
nineteen twenty has actual route
if you're talking self defense
you want someone fifteen sixteen
to twenty the would be doing the
right thing for the right
reasons would have protections I
do have Mister chairman Senator
an expert witness question early
on in your testimony you talked
about brains not being fully
developed what age would you
think could brain is fully
developed my wife still
complains about money.
And so I'm just trying to get
her number for that.
Chair members of the committee
money is not no that the public
would common knowledge is that
we have at the age of twenty
five for males and it's a little
bit earlier for females Mr chair
Senator an expert witness that
confuses me because we allow
them to vote.
but but thank you for that my
next question
In the bill Mister chairman
Senator I didn't see you know
when you're not grandfathering
knew it and if they have a farm
already I didn't see a purchase
for that arm or ability to
transfer that are so for
instance if my granddaughter had
a farm in falls into this
category seventeen so she had
that she would have to transfer
to make and she doesn't so don't
have scary all she doesn't have
a farm but she had and she has
to go through a process to
transfer that to me and or sell
it to me but there's no where in
here to talk about that are we
assuming that Mister chairman
Senator that the government will
just come pick him up and
removed from.
Chair members of the committee
no the government will not come
up and and then remove them from
you don't waste Mr chair and
senator and I thank you for the
assumption that they're not so I
I know what the I I there again
I think that it needs to be in
writing for clarification we've
done some really good work here
today on some other bills to
clarify something I hope you
guys take that to heart because
I think that's gonna be one of
things people are gonna be
looking at is that our
government in state New Mexico
does not after this is done go
to my granddaughters house to
pick up her farm and I said
earlier she did not have one.
My next question is Mr Chairman
center is earlier is talked
about of the New Mexico state so
New Mexico's state and MSU
having a shooting support
program.
If they do have a twenty year
old.
In that program so that make in
it and M. S. you liable for
this.
And how why not Mr chairman and
and senator on page two line ten
it says engaged in an organized
competition involving the use of
an automatic or semi automatic
firearms so that is an exemption
that is clearly right there on
line ten Mr chair Senator ROTC
would be in the same format if
they're in a organized program
so FFA any of those that have
organizations in their they
would be exempt absolutely and
I'll thank you for that
The next thing I had and and
this just a comment Mr and all
have a question up in some of
the study that we had just
research it showed that eighty
three percent of the military
enlistees for twenty years or
younger and
Sir should Maddie's had brought
up Mr and etcetera that if they
got hold for medical discharge
of they they according to you
they would it be on COVID but
when they come home eighteen
twenty or nineteen twenty year
old and they come home to go
hunting or shooting even though
there Montoya they still are
protected it's here in New
Mexico when they come on
vacation or anything else.
If they're still active duty Mr
chair Senator Woods still active
duty yes absolutely okay thank
you for that and I'm almost on
Mr up.
Our next question Mr is we
talked the other day how we live
our constitution have a lot of
respect for in New Mexico state
constitution Mr chair Senator on
page five section six talked
about right to bear arms.
No were in there did I see the
web page nineteen and I'd love
to give this to you to keep I
got it highlighted and I'm
wondering well Mr chair and
senator and
gentle lady he made a comment
that is already in the
constitution at nineteen.
We failed to put it in.
So we might even talk to the.
Drafters of the constitution US.
Because it's not in our New
Mexico state constitution so I
just want to bring that party Mr
my final question Mr Senator is
I'm looking in your in your bill
and if you could tell me where
your bill you show me where this
bill would actually motivate.
The.
Criminals that have guns.
To give up their rights to give
up their you're talking hello
that roughly twenty years below
which I'm on school boarding
Eunice and we've done a lot to
protect our kids.
Because they're not going to
stop because the people that are
willing.
And able to give up their
firearms.
Our live what law abiding so I
was wondering if your bill if
you have a place in here that
would motivate.
The young criminals to give
theirs up.
I did not see the bill Mr chair
Senator.
Mr chair Senator in committee I
think that's that's kind of out
of the wheel house of this
particular bill there are
communities that have gone by
back programs and I believe my
colleague.
Senator souls I think you're
going to be in my correct in
this is going to be a pushing
forward with legislation to to
incentivize that but and Mr
Chairman Serra appreciate the
book come by and buy back idea
there's nothing in here to
motivate.
Liminal to become law abiding
and that's my theory you were
making criminals out of law
abiding citizens you're not
stopping the gun violence was
that all you Mr thank you.
Thank you senator finally we
have Senator McKenna.
I think chairman thank you
Senator Hamblen.
For it Representative
presentation and Maranda.
For being the expert witness
this afternoon
I heard something from one of
our.
Public members miss Jennifer
gray I think it was who
mentioned something about this
her concern for being a security
officer and had hands having
possessive of one of these
weapons
with I'm curious is is that.
vocation covered in on page
three.
Section B..
again I I see peace officer but
I don't see security officer she
specifically mentioned security
officer.
Chair members of the committee
are concerns a private security
guards are not trained like law
enforcement is trained
I'd looked actually did a lot of
research on the training of
security guards in New Mexico
and I don't feel safe in a lot
of places where they are because
they actually haven't done the
training and that's what the
situation is.
Right thank you chairman thank
you senator thank you Maranda
okay so so that's why we
specifically have peace officer
there because in their training
you feel satisfied the center
field satisfied that they're
getting the requisite training
for handling such a weapon.
Okay thank you thank you
chairman thank you senator.
The other discussion seeing none
what's the will of the
committee.
Have a motion for a do pass for
the second from.
Senator Tom.
And the secretary will call the
roll.
Excuse me CENIC I hate us no
ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
nope Center bias Center McKenna
yes Senator sweeties no Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator Thomas
yes explain my vote Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Tallman to explain his vote.
Thank you Mr chair and
I don't know why everybody's
getting so excited about this
bill is it's not trans.
The
vast majority of the gun
killings in this country are
committed by people for twenty
one years old.
States we're obsessed with guns
I'll tell you why I get.
Hundreds and hundreds of emails.
About guns and we have a
education crisis in this state
we have a climate crisis we have
we have a health crisis we don't
have enough doctors we don't
have a lot of people can't
afford the drugs in the we don't
have they can't see a doctor we
have a child abuse into I get
emails about that not very many.
I find that very very troubling
that we're so obsessed with guns
that nobody cares about all
these other important issues.
I find very troubling this
country is in trouble thank you
Mr.
Mr chair what.
Thank you.
And via voted in the affirmative
three in the negative you're
bill passes and moves on to the
next hearing thank you very
thank you committee for a lively
discussion and our final bill of
the day is Senator souls Bill on
prescribing psychologists
practice act.
You wonder how the western
everyone without automatic
right.
No history.
Could
the city right here.
Good.
This is us.
Trees.
Senator souls did you wanna
explain your your your plan for
the day.
Yes thank you and that is yes.
For the number two are going to
come and join me and some for
the for the committee as we're
going through with this bill as
a number of moving parts to it
and there are a couple of things
that have some technical fixes
we were trying to get those
amendments ready but there is a
back up in the drafting up
stairs we're not able to get
those amendments but we would
like to do is present the bill
have discussion about the bill
and then bring it back with the
technical fixes and we can talk
about with some of those are the
they truly I don't think they
change the basic content of the
bill but they make a couple of
areas where it could have been
students used as to what
happened with it of this bill
and let me give a little bit of
very brief background.
I think this is just for clarity
we're dealing with one seventeen
now.
One eleven has been rolled over
to Wednesday yes.
I'm growth I do J. B. psychology
and in the back of the book it's
got a time line of all
everything that's happened in
psychology and one of the pieces
in there that I very probably
pointed out to my students is
New Mexico was the first state
in the country to allow
prescribing psychologists
psychologists that are trained
in all of the psychological side
but then also have specific
medical type of training to
prescribe the various drugs that
are needed for behavioral health
New Mexico is a leader in the
country in this and has been for
a while I have with me Dr Joe
the last kiss who is a
prescribing psychologist she
came to New Mexico I believe
from California and was actually
faculty at New Mexico state as
part of the prescribing
psychologists program to train
additional ones there she's had
extensive training in all of the
medications for the psychotropic
drugs that might be prescribed
there her training is not on all
of the other drugs that a
medical doctor would be
prescribing and has no interest
in learning or doing any of that
what this particular bill does
and I'll I'll be quiet and let
my experts explain very briefly
but it expands if it changes who
the supervision is for
prescribing psychologies and
psychologist in New Mexico as
you all know very well we have
the incredible shortage of
behavioral health providers in
the state this allows for an
expansion of behavioral health
in those particular areas where
there's a shortage of
psychiatrists
and makes a provides for better
health within the state in
particularly in that in that
behavioral health areas but let
me introduce you to Dr Joe
Velasquez who can do talk about
the specifics of why this bill
is needed right thank you
senator was plus this or doctor
of us thank you I want to thank
the chair and committee for
allowing me to appear before you
today.
I am doctor job loss because I
am a prescribing psychologist
and the president of the
professional body a prescribing
psychologist here in New Mexico
New Mexico prescribing
psychologists have provided safe
and effective services primarily
rural and underserved
communities communities across
the state with roughly ninety
five percent of their services
to Medicaid recipients or to the
indigent the goal of SB one
seventeen is to reasonably is
beyond expand the scope of
practice of prescribing
psychologists to reflect the
current standards of care for
the mentally ill.
To allow improved access to the
services and to bring the
regulation of prescribing
psychology under the new that
New Mexico board of medicine.
Senate bill one seventeen
expands the scope of practice
for prescribing psychologists in
three ways number one.
Supervisor phone number to
administer injectables number
three define the scope of
practice for prescribing
psychologists as treating mental
illness within the standard of
practice of psychiatry.
We are aware that our profession
more than not involves the
practice of psychiatric
medication management our
current regulatory authority the
board of psychologist examiners
does not possess the expertise
in the practice of medicine and
for this reason the board of
medicine is the appropriate
regulatory body for our
profession Senate bill one
seventeen is a result of the
collaborative effort by the New
Mexico Medical Board and the
price of prescribing
psychologists association Senate
bill one seventeen is about the
reasonable expansion of our
scope under inappropriate and
expert regulatory authority for
which we now respectfully
request your support.
And I'm available for questions
if you have any but let's go to
the audience that there seem to
be some attentive listeners.
And so those of you who well
let's just take anybody wants to
speak on this bill one or ask
questions yes Mr Martinez.
Gentleman I'm.
Health services.
Just with first stab.
We are struggling as are all the
other behavioral health
providers.
Access.
Should be for the population
with.
Strong support this bill thank
you Larry.
Dr Sali.
would you like me is a micro it
would be good yeah the the the
of the Center right Larry
projects really well so I didn't
ask him.
Senator hatch Mr chairman
members of the committee I think
I'm and my name is Alvin soleil
may be dangerous to hand a
microphone to retired professor
at this time of day but I'll try
to keep this very brief I
certainly understand the
frustration that I'm hearing
here I think the frustration
stems stems from regulation a
licensed in apartment and having
been on licensing boards for
over a decade I can understand
that that.
I am a retired social work
professor I'm still my license
is still active social works the
largest profession in the mental
health field I wish we would
have heard about this and maybe
you to talk to some social
workers but social workers and
and by the way I help work on
this bill when it first came out
in the early two thousands
because I see it so needed for
rural areas and so important and
I think it's amazing that it's
grown to over ninety
practitioners I believe and
about a third of them are
working in rural areas but it
puts social workers and a and a
difficult position because
psychiatrists would call social
workers on a rural communities
and say I can't get out there in
Albuquerque what should I
prescribed for your client for
this patient and that of course
is beyond the scope of social
work but it was practical it's
kind of the box we are in what I
am hearing from others that were
just heard about this other
psychologists that weren't
consulted before today is that
one of the the concerns they
have is that this may not solve
the problem and the then the
problem has to do with
supervision and we have the same
problem with the social work
board of examiners and the
chairman I have discusses a
number of times I think there
are some other options available
maybe if you all would like to
sit down at some point we could
discuss those but by leaving R.
LD as I understand this does
does option may not be available
but I think that it would be
helpful this is a very complex
process it sounds simple but
having worked with licensing for
our like I said over a decade I
can tell you it's not always
easy in their implementation
thank you chair fit thank you
doctor.
Anybody else.
Yes please come on up.
You might as well come up and
get in line to be ready to speak
you have anybody economy.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Jason Thompson I'm the
adjuster of this for the
psychiatric medical association
of New Mexico first of just want
to thanks much appreciate the
sponsor and Linda on the work on
these issues and appreciate you
know talk with me and hearing us
out on this I have some folks on
the zoom that will probably
speak more technically to this
but they do have to share some
concerns around some of the
expansions related to the bill
particularly around the long
acting injectable medications
and around the Advisory Council
mainly what type of ways or
input that psychiatrist will be
able to continue to have in
terms of speed further scope
expansions in education and
training so this want to make
sure that they have their
concerns heard there and also
that and the bigger picture what
this these types of things maybe
due to ultimately hinder are any
recruitment and retaining of.
Positions in general and
psychiatrists be able to want to
come here practice you have but
those reasons will is is the one
you're thinking of the the only
one who signed up on them so
those two the other three.
I think it was I was those two
to four Stephen Jen Jen crew
ski.
Now he's with the medical yes
the other I don't think any of
the people you're talking about
of the lists Christina sewer.
Possibly in the neck arenella.
Because in Britain as a guest
amount number that he still has
time you could still set of.
Okay well those are my statement
of there's any technical
questions that I can answer I'm
happy to relate to them and get
back to everybody here thanks to
some thank you.
You have to hold it yes good
afternoon Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Sandra Frank
and I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico Medical Board
nice to see you all again we are
in support of this measure the
medical board is probably the
expertise that this sport this
entity needs in terms of
prescribing we have for
investigators and nineteen staff
members all of whom are looking
at health care and regulating
medical providers including
physicians and hopefully
prescribing psychologist in the
near future and I'm simply here
to answer any questions you
might have about the medical
board but the Medical Board is
in full support and and would be
willing to take on this
responsibility it this week
absolutely would what we have
seen in New Mexico is unequal
regulation of health care
practitioners and we have seen
that the psychology board they
are experts in psychology but
not in prescribing so they
approached us and asked if we
would be an entity that would
regulate them because of our
expertise and we we absolutely
would be willing to do so we did
ask them to push their
the the renewal date back
because we do their renewal date
for psychologists is July one
but we renew about eleven
thousand people already a third
of them every year in July so
we've asked that they push their
renewal back to either December
or January but we can do this
we're we're already thinking
about the regulations that we
would need to put in place to
help make this happen.
Very good thank you yes Jason
did you still there's a few act
that are often weaving in the
chat room if they were to there
are no with okay he'll get a
minor is.
Have a doctor mall the limited
and.
Okay if I don't have the names
yet but the given to me to and
and etcetera I'd like to point
out that one of the things she
commented about pushing back the
start date is one of those
technical fixes so that they
have time to promulgate the
rules without telling are
prescribing psychologist
currently that they can't do
anything for six months while
they wait for those rules to be
promulgated and and I just want
to be clear about something that
the doctor Mrs Frank said
Did the psychology board also
endorses measure.
I don't speak for you so.
Mr chair and they looked at the
issue they they brought it to
them and there wasn't opposition
I don't know if they were in
support but they did not oppose
as far as I know okay well we'll
we'll find out now when we go to
zoom thank you
now under zoom via the magic of
the internet Dr Stephen genco
ski.
Hi.
The R. F. student could have a
good evening now dot Mr chairman
senators so I'm Dr Steve
Jankowski I'm a medical doctor
and I'm double boarded in
addictions in psychiatry or
trained at UNM I was an
associate professor UNM for many
years.
Currently I work as medical
director for the Medicaid
program at a local well known
health plan and
I'm also a member of the Medical
Board I've been on the medical
board since two thousand nine
and I'm supportive of the bill
and to be Frank twenty years ago
I would throw myself in front of
the prescribing psychologists
trained because I thought it was
absolutely crazy no pun intended
for psychologists be prescribing
trucks it just didn't make any
sense I think I I think all
psychiatrists would essentially
agree with me on that and
frankly what's happened is you
know they've been doing it now
for twenty years and they're
doing a good job and I can
partially say that because of my
current job I I handle quality
complaints I I handle medication
appeals Nathan opportune to see
their work and it's good and
they're doing a good job they're
working in rural areas and
underserved areas they're
serving folks like.
Their leader said ninety five
percent are taking Medicaid so
I'm I I I'm supportive of this
expansion.
The other thing that I was
impressed by is they came to us
on the medical board and asked
to work with us and they've been
extremely collaborative they've
been in discussions with us
around this to your question
about the psychology board
which I think Mr Chairman asked
I did speak to the president of
the psychology board and he was
in support of this so one of
that reflective of the entire
board but I did have a personal
conversation with them.
So the final thing I'd like to
say is the medical board voted
unanimously to support this bill
and all the elements that are
currently in.
And I I stand like miss Sandra
Frank with the here to answer
any questions you might have
thanks for this opportunity
great thanks doctor.
The next we have a Christina
sewer.
So.
Everyone good evening my name is
for students our I am a
psychiatrist and medical doctor
here in New Mexico I am
currently associate professor at
the university of New Mexico and
I'm also the program director
for the residency here
psychiatry residency and I'm
double boarded in general
psychiatry and child a lesson
psychiatry.
so Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
giving us the opportunity to
speak and I'm here on behalf of
the psychiatric medical
association in New Mexico New
Mexico and speaking in
opposition of the bill certainly
respect the bill's sponsor and
proponents position on the
matter I think what we wanted to
draw attention to with this
expansion is primarily focused
on patient safety and the
concerns
with the proposed legislature
that are allowing first driving
psychologist to practice at the
same level psychiatrists but
without the same level of
medical training so when we
think about what it takes to
become a psychiatrist and
medical experience rates for
years of psychiatric residency
it's four years of medical
school four years of psychiatric
residency that includes time
with medicine neurology and a
lot of psychiatry and then for
people to do fellowships
additional time so it is natural
investment in education in both
psychiatry psych psychological
approaches and also medical
safety
We really honor that
psychologists are very important
part of our mental health team
in the state and do a tremendous
amount of work as mentioned
specially rural areas and other
areas that the health care is
very valued but we are concerned
about the proposed expansions of
scope of practice especially for
long injectable long acting
injectable injectable
medications where there can be
more concerned about monitoring.
As well as the definition of
prescribing psychologists to
include treating mental illness
consistent with the standards of
practice for the profession of
psychiatry
and some concern about moving
psychologists under the board of
medicine's purview in terms of
giving patients the security
that prescribing psychologists
or equivalently medically
trained.
I work with many patients who
are pretty desperate for mental
health care for themselves for
their families for their
children and I think we
certainly due diligence to be
doing the best that we can in
terms of providing them safe
and.
Medically.
Confident psychiatric care.
So again we encourage opposition
of the legislation but support
other ways to increase access to
care such as the collaborative
care model thank you so much for
your time.
Thank you doctor so our doctor
Dan Mathews.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dan
Matthews I am a licensed
psychologist
I have previously banned the
legislative chair for the psych
Association and have recently
stepped down as rules here for
the board of psychologist
examiners but I am not
representing either of those
groups
I mainly a person who's been a
kind of a nerd about licensing
of psychologists for a very long
time and I have some real clear
thoughts about this bill I am
the it does the bill propose
three things it transfers the
the
prescribing psychologists over
to the the Medical Board it
expands up of practice but also
has a statement about training
a psychologist that I'm strongly
opposed to Act of the come back
to that in general I am very
much in favor of transferring to
the medical board I always
thought that prescribing
psychology is a practice the
practice of medicine and I
really think that that the
medical board would be better
off handling that but the the
one aspect I'd like it to ask
you to take a look at
page seven lines one through
six.
Yeah in which it states that
well if you look at the previous
pages psychologist may apply to
the board for prescribing
psychologists licensed the
application should be made on
form approved by the board of a
company by evidence aspect to
the board that the applicant
here's the language that I think
is problematic has completed a
doctoral program in psychology
from the president's situation
of higher education or
professional school or if the
program is not twelve at the
time the applications graduation
that the program needs to
professional standards determine
acceptable by the board I am
hoping that the sponsor would be
willing to strike that language
because the next language says
that the person holds a current
license to practice psychology
in New Mexico and to hold a
Lysons in New Mexico requires
that you have a PhD but even
more than that it requires that
you have a PhD from a doctoral
program that is accredited by
nationally recognized
accrediting body in the border
psychologist examiners is been
very clear over the years that
they are not in a position to a
credit drive programs and we
really don't want people from
sub standard programs to be
coming into New Mexico to
practice psychology for instance
completely online programs or
others
so if that language were struck
I would be very much in favor of
this bill
I would also doctors our talked
about the expansion of practice
I'm just a colleges which means
that I don't know enough to make
decisions about what is the
practices psychiatry and
injectable medications I think
the medical board would do well
to
to deal with those so if the if
the bill were simply stripped
down and became transfer the
practice of prescribing
psychology to the medical board
let the.
Medical Board consider those
expansions in the future I'd
like it better but the most
important thing I think is that
the more that the legislature
not create a new standard of
education for prescribing
psychologists that is different
from ending conflict with the
prescribing requirements that
the board psychologists
examiners is set up thank you
very much Mr chair members of
the committee.
Thank you Dan and and what you
need to know is that the sponsor
has been vigorously agreeing
with you about changing that
section of the bill so I think
you'll see an amendment to that
effect on Wednesday.
In which case I will support the
bill thank you Mr chairman
Sanchez.
Up next we have Molly what.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak
my name is Dr with I am at
third year psychiatry residents
in the state of New Mexico for
seeing my education here
I've grown up in New Mexico and
my mom my mom is a psychiatric
nurse in New Mexico so I and I
have kind of a very long view
history of
mental health care in New Mexico
and trying to get enough
providers I certainly understand
that this is a a huge concern
both recruiting and entertaining
providers here in New Mexico
I might my biggest concern about
this particular piece of bill is
is the ability for site
psychologists prescribing
psychologists to supervise
each other at which which does
mean that there's no actual
medical medically trained
medical provider
Two years ago I would not have
considered this a large concern
but the past two years of a
medical residency has certainly
given me highs and I do think
these are medications that are
Specifically the long acting
injectables
Our our medications be taken
carefully and and with
appropriate like medical.
Infrastructure in place I
appreciate
The position that are ones and
trying to get providers to
Mexico.
There are other
Ways that we can kind of
stretch and expands the ability
for psychiatrists and other
providers to see people
In order to expand access to
care I would can I would
strongly consider that
we think of those things first
Those are my thoughts on this
bill thank you so much for your
work that you all are doing to
us make sure that.
Good thank you doctor with and
finally we have the right impact
of the chat I recognize that
that test psychologist do you
have the ability to prescribe
all of these medications
and I recognize that this is not
going to be changing any of the
amounts that they are
prescribing
I just do you want to take care
with the language efforts up of
providing at the level of
psychiatrist thank you.
Thank you and then our final of
zoom participant.
Our final divertissement is make
out in LA welcome next.
Thank you so much.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I'm actually was
logged on as a stopgap for my
wonderful psychiatrist who are
able to make it today I'd very
much appreciate it we had a
couple more lined up but the
date they had patients to see
and and and got busy so I just
want to echo what they said and
like I said I was here is a back
up if they couldn't make it to
oppose this bill the two
psychiatrists to very much
appreciate the work of
psychologist and very much my
work collaboratively with all
different.
Health care providers and I
think
R. two presenters.
Are trying to make clear that
these concerns come from the
standpoint of what's best for
New Mexico New Mexicans and also
some alternative ways to try to
to fill this need or
appropriately thank you.
Yes did you have a comment with.
Thank you Mr chair members
my name is David last kiss I am
the CEO of I'm not mad are ex to
in Los crucis we have nine
prescribing psychologist in the
last fifty five years we have
over fifty five thousand visits
at our facility we do patient
I'm give you number order then
not lot of our heroes this you
know the from the medical side
this is the actually what
they're doing so we have nine
providers we have over fifty
five thousand visits we serve
basically anything north of
Albuquerque of south sorry south
disfigure and
We have patients from kids on up
to geriatrics.
Some of by some of our doctors
have M. D.'s PH dis some have
nurse practitioners prescribing
psychologists on top I'm gonna
have to three four degrees and
they're not twenty one they're
not.
Twenty eight they're not thirty.
The forty to forty five or fifty
there sixty they have dealt with
severe mental illness population
for decades.
And they know how to handle the
severe mental illness these are
not amateurs going into the game
a prescribing they know their
medications and the integrate by
law with the PC piece.
So.
I am very thankful Los crucis is
very thankful of our clinic.
This is the people who speak the
loudest who need needs thank you
thank you and it turns out there
is one more.
The person on the on the zoom
that wants to speak Dr Courtney
John Courtney.
greetings and thank you very
much for the opportunity to
speak with you all I
appreciated.
my name is Dr John Courtney and
I am a prescribing psychologist
I am also the associate director
of psychiatry Presbyterian
medical service.
Before coming to New Mexico I
was a prescribing psychologist
in Louisiana where in two
thousand and ten the board of
sort of the practice of medical
psychology prescribes psychology
was moved underneath the medical
board.
Of prescribes ecology has
operated under Medical Board now
for thirteen years very
successfully considers it to be
a significant improvement over
when we were supervised or
regulated primarily by the
Louisiana state board thanks
Senator Steinborn a call.
thanks to drive with recognizing
that we can actually already
prescribed a long acting
injectable medications that's
true.
Of what we're wanting to be able
to do is to add to our current
ability to administer them
because there is often the case
in rural communities where
patients with severe needs I
usually means us psychotic
disorders.
Can't get the medication unless
they have a person that's
available to to both prescribe
and administer medication.
aside from that I think we've
already mentioned fact that
we're in agreement with a doctor
Matthews regarding the removal
of that one section and I think
that's going forward in the
technical amendment.
Again I'm here if there are any
additional questions thank you
very much thank you doctor
Courtney.
So do you want us to ask you
questions or.
At this point are you ready to
take all these comments and run
with it or do you want to hear
anything else maybe you're
losing your committee quickly
here is a final kind of realize
Mr chair I think we pretty well
covered everything that clearly
prescribing psychologists have
been doing this for many years
very successfully there are no
differences in the outcomes of
patients from prescribing
psychologist to psychiatrists
there is not a risk to public
health because a prescribing
psychologist an impact because
they are more available in many
cases and many communities and
psychiatrists they actually fill
a need for public health it is
not met other places if you'd
like to know the technical fixes
as one that it was talked about
that is specifically one of the
ones to fix so that there is no
doubt that people from outside
that have been under training
would be able to get a license
in New Mexico as a result of
that we recognize that a one
make sure there's not there's
dual track of where you were
trained and we actually have
that as one of the strikeouts
that we have Linda Segal is here
who's been working on the actual
drafting and trying to get the
amendments ready but all of them
are that sort of thing or more
minor than that as far as making
sure that there is no doubt as
to what the intent of of the
bill is it doesn't fundamentally
change any pieces of the bill
one quick question for you
what's a prescribing
psychologist with conditions.
But I couldn't tell exactly what
the I would have meant Mr chair
I would turn to my experts who
can tell you more than you would
like to know about that now
trying caution or not to.
So we are postdoctoral we go for
a post doctoral master's so in
order in the state of New Mexico
in order for us to even to even
apply for you know towards
becoming a prescribing
psychologist we have to have our
doctor then we go on to post
doctoral master's and then once
we get our post doctoral masters
then we're going to have a
conditional licensing period and
that period is two years long
and and then during that two
year period we can be supervised
by M. D. studios doctors and
nursing and and that's and and
before that there's another
period of time it's shorter it's
one hundred four hundred which
means one hundred patients for a
total of four hundred hours that
particular piece that that's the
practicum peas that particular
piece is only supervised by
entities and deals.
Okay got to.
Thank you thank you any other
questions for them well we will
be a check the thought was we
were just.
They're the issues here figure
out what what we would recommend
in the way of amendments or
changes and then vote on it only
on Wednesday Dr Hickey Dr
Senator Hickey.
Whatever.
I thank you for bringing this
bill forward I I do want to say
one very positive thing that's
practical and common sense so
many patients and and under some
some very severe mental health
illnesses
will stop taking their medicine.
And when that happens then they
they deteriorate the long acting
injectables are an answer to
that and critically important
and it's prescribing the same
drugs I want to point out to my
physician colleagues on the
phone and understand that they
they're looking at patient
safety but these drugs are
already being prescribed but it
takes care of these gaps which
are really important when you
hear my mental health parity but
you won't hear unfortunates
going to tax and finance but
when you hear about my mental
health parity
there the first some of the
instances in which mixing some
of the drugs and particularly
injectables could get difficult
I'm sure that the health plans
are going to be looking at that
and some prior authorization way
likely and I did not for mental
health stop them from prior off
on mental illness I am asking
him to completely stop prior off
on substance use because those
are critical moments to be
entered into so I want to
recognize that I would make the
suggestion I did make it to
Senator souls earlier Mr chair
that I'd like to see the
Advisory Council have more than
one psychiatrist on it that then
that gets to do just like
tonight people can't get to
meetings what have you I think
having to plus four or whatever
but I would like to have to of
psychiatrists on that Advisory
Council it is very worth the
bill thank you very much Mr
chairman and thank you for
bringing this forward this is
will be an important addition
and I wish I knew what my
colleagues alternatives work for
getting access to approved
without this so thank you
because anybody else any other
questions or suggestions thank
you senator this is this is a
useful of approach I think is.
Thank you for hearing is this
evening and we will get the
amendments and hopefully we
expect to be back on Wednesday
for a very short hearing just to
to talk about the specifics that
we change to make sure that that
didn't cause any consternation
for anyone and then go for a
vote if that works for your
committee and then we'll hear
your your other bill that on
Wednesday as well if we have
that ready but we've got so we
were yeah that's got a little
bit other pieces that are
getting worked out so if it's
alright I'll let you know when
we're ready again with this much
time possible great thank you
thank you so much doctor thank
you Linda.
He didn't say a lot Linda I'm
not your.
They give you a chance.
